BACKGROUND
over the last decade, there has been a growing appreciation for the multifaceted roles played by regulatory rnas in organisms ranging from bacteria to mammals. in bacteria, regulatory non-coding rnas  come in many forms, and can impact protein function, transcription initiation, mrna stability and translation initiation/elongation  <cit> . independent ncrna transcripts can be broadly divided into two categories: cis-antisense rnas  and trans-encoded small rnas   <cit> . asrnas are expressed from the strand opposite their target protein-coding gene, and can negatively or positively impact transcription, translation or mrna stability  <cit> . in contrast, most srnas, which typically range in size from 40– <dig> nucleotides, are expressed from intergenic regions. while a small subset of characterized srnas affect protein function , the majority of srnas studied to date target one or more mrnas, influencing transcript stability or translation  <cit> . a notable difference between asrnas and srnas is that asrnas share complete complementarity with their mrna targets, whereas the trans-encoded srnas have much shorter complementary regions, and different sequences within a srna may bind different mrna targets. ncrna-mediated regulation has been implicated in a multitude of cellular processes, including stress responses  <cit> , quorum sensing  <cit>  and pathogenicity  <cit> .

the ncrna potential of bacteria has been explored most thoroughly in escherichia coli <cit>  but in recent years, technological advances in the form of tiling microarrays  <cit>  and rna sequencing  <cit>  have begun to reveal the extent - and the complexity - of ncrnas in a wide range of bacteria.

the non-coding rna capacity of streptomyces bacteria is expected to be extensive. the streptomycetes are predominantly soil-dwelling bacteria, and as such must have the means of coping with diverse environmental stresses. they also have a large chromosome , and a complex life cycle that involves progression through distinct developmental and metabolic stages - processes that are subject to multi-level regulation. during growth on solid culture, the streptomyces life cycle begins with spore germination and hyphal outgrowth. hyphal tip extension and branching ensue, leading to the formation of an intricate network of vegetative hyphae known as the vegetative mycelium. from these vegetative cells emerge reproductive structures that extend into the air and are termed aerial hyphae. the aerial hyphae then undergo synchronous septation and chromosome segregation, subdividing them into prespore compartments that ultimately develop into chains of dormant exospores  <cit> . most streptomycetes grow vegetatively in liquid culture, although several species including streptomyces venezuelae, sporulate under these conditions. along with their morphological complexity, the streptomycetes are best known for their ability to produce a vast array of secondary metabolites having medical and agricultural importance, including the majority of naturally synthesized antibiotics. secondary metabolism is co-ordinately regulated with development, initiating during the transition from vegetative to aerial growth ; in liquid culture, secondary metabolism initiates during entry into stationary phase  <cit>  for the majority of  streptomycetes.

we were interested in exploring the ncrna potential of streptomyces bacteria throughout the course of their developmental and metabolic cycles. a series of initial investigations had confirmed the existence of ncrnas in these bacteria  <cit> , and this ncrna repertoire was expanded considerably by an early rna sequencing study undertaken by suess and colleagues  <cit> , who identified many asrnas and srnas in the model species streptomyces coelicolor. this pioneering study focused on rna expression at a single time point during s. coelicolor growth in liquid culture. to gain a more comprehensive view of the ncrna potential of streptomyces bacteria, we undertook a comparative genomics investigation into the transcriptomes of three evolutionarily divergent streptomyces species  <cit>  – s. coelicolor, streptomyces avermitilis, and s. venezuelae - using rna harvested at distinct metabolic and developmental stages. s. coelicolor and s. venezuelae represent classic and emerging model species, respectively, while s. avermitilis has been well studied in part due to its production of avermectin, a commercially important insecticidal and anti-parasitic compound. we identified dozens of new conserved srnas and asrnas, including a distinct group of asrnas termed ‘cutornas’ that resulted from overlap of the 3′ ends of convergently transcribed mrnas . we also detected an abundance of unique ncrnas, including many that featured prominently in secondary metabolic biosynthetic clusters.

RESULTS
to probe the ncrna potential of s. avermitilis, s. coelicolor and s. venezuelae, we performed rna-seq using species-specific rna pools. each species was grown on the same medium , so as to effectively compare their rna profiles, with the only difference being that s. avermitilis and s. coelicolor were grown on mym agar, while s. venezuelae, which sporulates in liquid culture, was grown in liquid mym. for each species, rna was isolated from cells at major developmental stages ; spores). the rna samples for each species were then pooled and used to generate two libraries for sequencing: one enriched for full-length transcripts, and a second enriched for shorter transcripts .

antisense rnas are abundant in the streptomycetes, and are largely species-specific
previous rna-seq analyses in diverse bacterial species have revealed extensive asrna expression  <cit> . consistent with these observations, we detected abundant asrnas in all three streptomyces species:  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> asrnas were identified in s. coelicolor, s. venezuelae and s. avermitilis, respectively. these asrnas could be further subdivided into three categories, on the basis of their coverage profiles and their genomic context:  asrnas expressed from a dedicated promoter within a protein-coding gene ;  asrnas that arose from the overlap of 3′ untranslated regions  from convergently oriented genes, an rna species that we have termed ‘cutorna’ ; and  asrnas that resulted from divergent transcription, where promoters of divergently expressed genes overlapped .

asrnas expressed on the strand opposite that of a protein-encoding gene , did not comprise a majority of the asrnas identified here, with fewer than  <dig> identified in any of the three species. as has been observed for comparative analyses conducted in other bacteria  <cit> , the majority of the  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  asrnas identified were species specific . we considered the possibility that this species specificity resulted from asrna association with coding sequences confined to a single species. this turned out not to be the case:  <dig> broadly conserved genes  were associated with asrnas in at least one species, but only  <dig>  of these genes exhibited antisense expression in all three species . this level of asrna conservation is slightly less than that reported for e. coli and salmonella, where ~14% of antisense transcripts were conserved between species  <cit> . within bacteria, the regulatory impact of apparently unique asrnas encoded opposite conserved open reading frames remains to be elucidated.

of the  <dig> conserved asrnas we identified, the most striking was found opposite the nuo gene cluster. these nuo genes direct the expression of nadh:quinone oxidoreductase, an enzyme complex found in archaea, bacteria, and within eukaryotic mitochondria and chloroplasts  <cit> . this multi-protein complex, also known as complex i, is a key player in the respiratory transport chain  <cit> . many bacteria encode a 14-subunit  version of complex i; however, some groups have retained an ancestral 11-subunit form that lacks the ‘n-module’ subunits nuoe, nuof and nuog, while others have a 12-membered complex lacking only nuoe and nuof  <cit> . it is within the n-module-encoding region that we identified one of the most highly expressed and conserved asrnas. transcription of the asrna began within the coding region of nuof and continued through the coding region of nuoe , with the asrna extending for up to  <dig>  nucleotides in s. coelicolor and s. avermitilis; a shorter asrna was observed in s. venezuelae. an intriguing possibility is that the asrna provides a checkpoint in complex i assembly, down-regulating the expression of n-module-encoding genes until the rest of the complex has been synthesized/assembled. in order for such regulation to occur, both sense and antisense transcripts would need to be coordinately expressed. to test this, we conducted semi-quantitative rt-pcr experiments, and found that both sense and antisense transcripts were expressed at the same time , supporting a possible regulatory role for this asrna.

streptomyces species also possess an additional copy of many of the complex i genes  encoded from a disparate chromosomal location. like the standard nuo gene cluster, these genes are organized contiguously  and our data suggest that they are expressed as a single operon. while this second cluster lacked the n-module-encoding genes, it was associated with a second conserved asrna extending from nuom <dig> to nuol <dig>  . both nuom <dig> and nuol <dig> encode antiporter-like proteins  <cit> . in the cyanobacterium synechocystis, different antiporter subunits can be incorporated into complex i for different tasks related to photosynthesis  <cit> . the presence of additional nuol and nuom genes in streptomyces genomes means there is the potential for analogous differential incorporation of these gene products into complex i, and this incorporation could be controlled by conserved asrna activity. as for the nuoef-associated asrna, semi-quantitative rt-pcr revealed similar expression patterns for both nuol <dig> and its cognate asrna, although the latter appeared to be expressed at lower levels relative to the mrna . intriguingly, an asrna has been reported opposite the nuom homologue in rat mitochondria  <cit> , raising the possibility that this asrna arose before the evolution of eukaryotes, over 2-billion years ago.

in addition to the conserved asrnas associated with the nuo gene clusters, we also identified conserved asrnas associated with the genes targeted by the lysogenic phage ϕbt <dig>  <cit>  and ϕc <dig>  <cit> , although for the ϕc31-targeted genes, only the s. venezuelae-associated sequence met the relatively stringent cut-off we used in assigning asrna designations. ϕbt <dig> integrates into the coding sequence of an integral membrane protein-encoding gene , while ϕc <dig> targets the coding sequence of a conserved pirin-like protein . an asrna encompassed the ϕbt <dig> integration site in all three streptomyces species , while for the ϕc31-associated genes, the asrna was found immediately adjacent to the phage integration site . there are a number of intriguing functional possibilities that could be ascribed to these asrnas. they may simply act to control their associated protein coding genes, or they may contribute to a novel phage resistance mechanism, perhaps minimizing phage integration by sequestering these regions into transcriptionally active complexes. alternatively, phage integration at these sites may be the result of positive selective pressure, as ϕc <dig>  and presumably ϕbt <dig>  integrate in an antisense orientation such that the integrase promoter is separated from its coding sequence  <cit> . as integrase activity is required for phage excision, a productive infection could only be achieved with the assistance of an endogenous  promoter. for ϕbt <dig>  such a promoter could obviously be provided by the asrna ; for ϕc <dig>  the asrna promoter may well lie upstream of the integration site, but asrna transcript levels were more abundant downstream of this region .

‘cutornas’ are a common and well-conserved phenomenon in streptomyces species
in addition to the class  asrnas, we also identified a second major class of asrnas in all three streptomyces species, termed ‘cutornas’, for convergent untranslated overlapping rnas. these rnas arose from the expression of convergent genes, whereby the transcription of one or both genes extended beyond its respective coding sequence into the downstream coding regions . whilst we identified only  <dig> conserved asrnas, there were  <dig> cutorna pairs conserved in s. avermitilis, s. coelicolor and s. venezuelae . we examined the genetic organization of these  <dig> gene pairs in other streptomycetes, and found this organization to be highly conserved. for example, in streptomyces scabies and streptomyces griseus, a convergent configuration was observed for 19/ <dig>  and 18/ <dig>  gene pairs. we extended our analyses to include more diverse actinobacteria, but found many of the genes involved were streptomyces-specific; only the wbla-sco <dig> gene pair was conserved and convergently arranged in the more distantly related frankia alni, thermobifida fusca, and mycobacterium tuberculosis. in m. tuberculosis, ‘antisense rnas’ to both genes have been previously reported  <cit> , suggesting broad cutorna conservation across the actinobacteria for this gene pair.

given the extent of its conservation, we sought to further investigate the expression of the wbla and sco <dig> cutorna. wbla encodes a transcription factor that impacts both antibiotic production and aerial morphogenesis in s. coelicolor <cit> , while sco <dig> encodes a putative ion-transporting atpase. our rna-seq data revealed that the 3′ utr of wbla covered the entire coding region of the downstream atpase-encoding gene in both s. coelicolor  and s. avermitilis , extending more than  <dig>  kb beyond the wbla translation stop site. in s. venezuelae, wbla transcripts extended ~ <dig> nucleotides beyond the wbla coding sequence, well into the downstream coding sequence . while the atpase-encoding gene was expressed at much lower levels than wbla, its 3′ utr still extended into wbla. semi-quantitative rt-pcr analyses were conducted to follow the expression of these genes. we found each gene and its corresponding 3′ utr, was expressed throughout development . this suggested that, as for the asrnas examined here, there is the potential for base pairing of these convergent transcripts, with possible downstream regulatory implications.

outside of the wbla-associated cutorna, m. tuberculosis has previously been shown to have abundant asrnas arising from the transcriptional read-through of convergently transcribed genes  <cit> . a similar phenomenon has also been noted in the more distantly-related  bacterium bacillus subtilis <cit> , suggesting that cutornas may be widespread in bacteria. studies in b. subtilis have also revealed intriguing correlations between flexible transcription termination and growth conditions  <cit> . it will be interesting to see whether cutorna occurrence in the streptomycetes is similarly impacted by different growth conditions.

there are a number of different scenarios by which cutornas could function in the cell. simultaneous expression of cutorna gene pairs could lead to altered stability of one or both transcripts. this is supported by an analysis of recently published data comparing gene expression in wild type and rnase iii deficient strains of s. coelicolor <cit>  , which revealed that one gene in each of seven different cutorna pairs was significantly impacted by the loss of rnase iii . cutornas could also serve to ‘tether’ the convergently expressed mrnas such that their protein products are produced in close proximity. this would imply a functional correlation between the convergent genes and their resulting products. currently, there is no experimental evidence supporting related functions for any of the conserved cutorna gene pairs, as the majority of these genes have not been characterized. it is worth noting, however, that cutornas were abundant in the species-specific secondary metabolic gene clusters, where they were shared between genes with obvious functional relationships .

in e. coli, cutorna-like transcription is thought to be deleterious, and it has been proposed that the rho transcription termination factor acts to prevent such asrna expression  <cit> . rho activity can be inhibited by the antibiotic bicyclomycin, and studies in a close relative of s. coelicolor, streptomyces lividans, have revealed that bicyclomycin has no effect on colony growth  <cit> , suggesting that the loss of rho activity is not detrimental to the streptomycetes. this may imply that streptomyces tolerate convergent transcription better than e. coli, or it may mean that they invoke other, as yet unknown means of dealing with transcriptional conflicts caused by convergent transcription.

of the remaining asrnas identified, very few were the result of divergent expression from overlapping promoters  . instead, much of the antisense transcription we detected could not be readily categorized . this was largely due to the lack of defined transcription start/stop sites and uneven transcript coverage, which made definitive classification challenging. it is conceivable that many of these transcripts were processed shortly after generation, possibly in conjunction with their corresponding sense transcripts, and consequently full-length asrnas failed to accumulate. the idea that rapid processing masks the full extent of antisense transcription has been supported by findings in staphylococcus aureus, where full length asrnas were detected only following rnase iii depletion  <cit> . the number of genes with associated asrnas in streptomyces may therefore be much higher than reported here.

expanding the streptomyces srna landscape: conservation and organization of new srnas
to expand the existing library of srnas in s. coelicolor, and to begin to understand the distribution of srnas in different streptomyces species, we endeavoured to mine our rna-seq data for unannotated srna genes within the intergenic regions of s. coelicolor, s. avermitilis and s. venezuelae . new srnas were given a designation that consisted of a species reference, followed by a number corresponding to that of its right flanking protein-coding gene  . we identified  <dig> srnas in s. coelicolor, of which  <dig> were novel, bringing the total number of confirmed srnas in s. coelicolor to  <dig>  interestingly, we detected greater numbers of srnas in s. avermitilis and s. venezuelae:  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, of which fewer than  <dig> in each species were homologous to previously identified srnas from s. coelicolor. we also observed  <dig> of  <dig> previously confirmed srnas from s. coelicolor <cit> , along with another four that had been predicted but not experimentally validated  <cit>  . an additional  <dig> previously confirmed/predicted srnas appeared, from our data, to be highly expressed 5′ utrs and not independently encoded srnas. this did not, however, preclude these regions from having srna regulatory potential, as there are documented examples of functional srnas arising from transcription attenuation within 5′ utrs  <cit> .

unlike the asrnas, we found a significant number of intergenic srnas were conserved between the three species . of the  <dig> srnas we identified in s. coelicolor,  <dig> % were conserved at a sequence level  in all three species, while  <dig> % and  <dig> % were shared with s. avermitilis or s. venezuelae, respectively. we considered the possibility that some these conserved srna genes may - in addition, or alternatively – encode a small protein, as has been seen in e. coli <cit> . we scrutinized all conserved srna sequences for open reading frames that were also conserved between species, and found four of  <dig> with the potential to encode a conserved protein . further experimentation will be needed to assess the protein-coding capacity of these four genes.

here, we directed our efforts towards the initial characterization of a number of highly expressed, non-protein-coding novel srnas. using northern blotting, we probed the expression of three conserved srnas to verify our rna-seq data and to investigate their expression profiles. one of the most highly-expressed conserved srna had two equivalently expressed paralogues in s. coelicolor  . in s. avermitilis and s. venezuelae, the equivalent srnas  were also highly expressed . structural predictions suggested that these srnas adopted near identical structures , being largely unaffected by primary sequence differences. in each species, the srna was expressed from a site immediately downstream of sodf , where sodf encodes an iron/zinc superoxide dismutase involved in the defense against reactive oxygen species. while sodf-associated srnas have not been reported previously, srnas encoded within the 3′ regions of protein-coding genes are not unprecedented and have been described recently in salmonella <cit> . there is, however, evidence for control of sodf-like genes by small rnas: expression of the sodf equivalent in e. coli, sodb, is controlled by the ryhb srna  <cit> ; we do not currently have any data supporting a regulatory connection between sodf and the associated downstream srna. northern blot analysis revealed that this sodf-associated srna was expressed throughout development in all three streptomyces species .

we probed an additional conserved srna that was amongst the most highly expressed in all three species. scr <dig>  sar <dig>  and svr <dig> shared extensive sequence identity, and were predicted to have a structurally distinctive c-rich  terminal loop . many well-characterized srnas, such as rnaiii in s. aureus <cit> , target mrnas via c-rich loops; however, streptomyces genomes are very gc-rich , so whether an equivalent phenomenon exists in these bacteria remains to be seen. unexpectedly, northern blot analyses revealed that this srna was differentially expressed in three streptomyces species: it was expressed most highly during aerial hyphae formation and sporulation  in s. coelicolor and s. avermitilis, whereas in s. venezuelae, it was most highly expressed during vegetative  growth .

finally, we examined the expression profiles of the highly expressed scr <dig>  sar <dig>  and svr <dig> srnas. highest levels of each, as determined by northern blotting, were observed during aerial hyphae formation and sporulation . this srna was predicted to form a very stable stem-loop structure, again, having a c-rich loop region .

while many srnas were shared by all three streptomyces species, there were notable species-specific differences as well. we focused our attention on select highly expressed unique srnas, and used northern blot analysis to assess their expression profiles . within s. avermitilis, the  <dig> nucleotide sar <dig> was expressed exclusively during vegetative growth , while the equivalently sized sar <dig>  was expressed most highly during vegetative and aerial growth . in s. coelicolor, scr <dig>  was highly represented in our long transcript-enriched library and was not present in the srna-enriched library, unlike the majority of srnas identified in our study . scr <dig> was expressed at low levels during vegetative growth, with expression levels rising significantly during aerial development and sporulation , in contrast to the smaller  <dig> nucleotide scr <dig>  which was expressed solely during vegetative growth . in s. venezuelae, svr <dig> was one of the shortest srnas identified in our study at only  <dig> nucleotides, and unlike many other srnas, it was expressed throughout development . apart from svr <dig>  which was predicted to form a single stem-loop structure, all other srnas were predicted to adopt two or three stem-loop configurations.

in considering species-specific versus conserved srnas, we explored whether any correlation could be drawn between conservation and genome position. streptomyces chromosomes are unusual relative to those of most bacteria in that they are linear, and are organized such that there is a central ‘core’ region that is broadly conserved in all actinobacteria. this central core is flanked on either side by ‘arm’ regions whose sequences are more divergent. comparative genomic analyses have suggested that the left arm contains an actinomycete-specific region immediately adjacent to the core, while the equivalent position in the right arm is associated with streptomyces-specific genes. the extreme ends of the chromosome arms contain predominantly species-specific genes  <cit> . we examined the position of each srna in s. coelicolor in relation to these different genetic bounds . the majority of srnas  fell within the core region, with 50% of these conserved in at least one of the other two streptomyces species. of the  <dig> srnas located in the ‘actinomycete-specific’ region, a remarkable 82% were conserved, whereas somewhat surprisingly, only eight srnas were expressed from within the ‘streptomyces-specific’ region, and of these, only three were also found in s. avermitilis or s. venezuelae. in the divergent chromosomal ends, few srnas were identified, and all of these were unique to s. coelicolor.

* as per kirby et al.  <cit> .

in general, the  <dig> srnas identified here and elsewhere  <cit>  for s. coelicolor is comparable to the number of srnas detected in e. coli . this is fewer than might have been expected given the large streptomyces genome , and the relatively large proportion of protein-encoding genes dedicated to regulation in s. coelicolor . it is likely, however, that srna saturation has not been reached in any streptomyces species, given that there has yet to be an exhaustive search conducted using different growth and stress conditions, and that each investigation undertaken to date has identified unique srna subsets without considerable overlap.

ncrnas feature prominently in many secondary metabolite clusters
streptomyces species are renowned for their ability to produce a broad range of antibiotics, together with a host of other secondary metabolites having medical and agricultural utility. our transcriptome analyses have revealed previously unrecognized complexity for some secondary metabolic clusters, largely in the form of asrna expression.

asrnas were abundant in the predicted secondary metabolic clusters for the three streptomyces species examined here: 20% of s. avermitilis, 30% of s. coelicolor and 60% of s. venezuelae secondary metabolic clusters were associated with asrnas of at least one type . given the lack of general antisense rna conservation found both within the streptomycetes in this study, and in other bacteria  <cit> , we were surprised to identify a strongly-expressed cis-antisense rna within a hopanoid biosynthetic cluster in s. coelicolor and s. avermitilis . hopanoids are cholesterol-like pentacyclic molecules  <cit>  found throughout bacteria  <cit> . in s. coelicolor, the  <dig> gene hopanoid biosynthetic cluster is most highly expressed during aerial development, and it has been proposed that hopanoids help promote water retention during aerial hyphae formation  <cit> . this may explain why the equivalent cluster in s. venzeuelae  was expressed at very low levels. the asrna was transcribed opposite hopc  , a predicted phytoene dehydrogenase-encoding gene. using semi-quantitative rt-pcr, we determined that both sense and antisense genes were expressed at the same time . the hopanoid cluster in s. coelicolor is thought to direct the synthesis of both hopene and the related aminotrihydroxybacteriohopane  <cit> . little is known about the biosynthetic steps leading to the synthesis of either compound, and nothing is known about the role of hopc. it is possible that hopc expression may be modulated by its cognate asrna, which in turn could impact the production of one or both of these products.

two well-characterized secondary metabolic clusters in s. coelicolor also encoded distinct antisense rnas: the coelimycin p <dig>  biosynthetic cluster  and the prodiginine  biosynthetic cluster . the  <dig> gene coelimycin p <dig> biosynthetic cluster   <cit>  includes two genes with associated asrnas: cpke/sco <dig>  and cpkh/sco <dig> . the cpke-associated asrna was expressed most highly in the centre of cpke, while the cpkh antisense was expressed closer to the 3′ end of the coding sequence . the roles of cpke and cpkh in coelimycin p <dig> biosynthesis have yet to be elucidated. it is worth noting that cpke is expressed as part of a larger operon , and that the expression of this entire operon was increased by more than two-fold in an rnase iii mutant strain  <cit> , suggesting that the cpke asrna may function to destabilize its cognate polycistronic mrna in an rnase iii-dependent manner. in contrast, cpkh expression was not enhanced following the loss of rnase iii, although transcript levels for both upstream  and downstream flanking genes  were increased  <cit> , suggesting complex post-transcriptional dynamics in this area.

regulators of cpk gene expression  also appeared to be subject to asrna regulation . scba directs the synthesis of the ϒ-butyrolactone quorum sensing molecule scb <dig>  which is sensed by scbr - an scb <dig> receptor/dna binding transcription factor that represses cpk cluster expression in the absence of scb <dig>  <cit> . it has been previously reported that the promoters - and thus 5′ utrs - of the divergently transcribed scbr and scba genes overlap  <cit>  . in addition to the asrnas resulting from this 5′ overlap, we also found there was a highly expressed asrna within scba , adding an additional layer of regulation to an already transcriptionally intricate region.

the prodiginine cluster spans  <dig> genes and yields two major products: undecylprodigiosin and butyl-meta-cycloheptylprodigionine. redg, a rieske oxygenase-like enzyme, is thought to catalyze the conversion of undecylprodigiosin to butyl-meta-cycloheptylprodigionine  <cit> , and it was opposite redg that a significant asrna was detected . the undecylprodigiosin:butyl-meta-cycloheptylprodigionine ratio is typically ~2: <dig>  <cit> , so the redg-specific asrna could provide a means of selectively modulating redg expression without impacting that of the downstream redf, whose product acts earlier in the undecylprodigiosin biosynthetic pathway  <cit> .

in addition to expressing conventional asrnas, secondary metabolic clusters were also a rich source of cutornas, with eight , six  and three  cutorna pairs identified within these clusters . these included a distinctive cutorna pair within the  <dig> gene actinorhodin  biosynthetic cluster of s. coelicolor. actinorhodin is a blue-pigmented polyketide antibiotic whose synthesis is directed by one of the best-studied pathways in the streptomycetes. at the centre of this cluster are two convergently transcribed genes, actva <dig> and actr, whose coding sequences overlap, and whose transcripts extended the full length of their respective downstream genes . actva <dig> encodes a monooxygenase that catalyzes an intermediate step in actinorhodin biosynthesis  <cit> , while actr encodes a tetr-family repressor of the proposed actinorhodin resistance  encoding genes actab <cit> .

the intriguing genetic coupling of biosynthesis and transport-associated genes was also observed for the siderophore-producing coelichelin biosynthetic cluster  <cit> . within this  <dig> gene cluster, the 3′ utr of sco <dig>  extended into the coding region of sco <dig>  . similar to the cutorna pair from the actinorhodin cluster, sco <dig> encodes a coelichelin biosynthetic enzyme, and sco <dig> encodes an abc transporter that may participate in coelichelin export  <cit> .

this theme was further reiterated in the chloramphenicol biosynthetic cluster of s. venezuelae. a four gene region encompassing sven <dig>  cmlf, cmle, and cmld  was transcribed such that expression of the cmle-cmld operon failed to terminate, and instead extended through cmlf  encoded on the opposite strand, into sven <dig>  located approximately  <dig>  base pairs downstream . cmle and cmld are required for chorismic acid synthesis, where chorismic acid is a precursor for both aromatic amino acid and chloramphenicol biosynthesis  <cit> ; cmlf is a major facilitator transporter that may contribute to chloramphenicol resistance .

interestingly, while this cutorna phenomenon has not been previously reported, prior studies have identified short asrna regions associated with antibiotic resistance genes, that stemmed from overlapping divergent promoters  <cit> . it will be interesting to determine whether such overlap of 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions is important for the stability and/or function of the associated mrnas and protein products.

most secondary metabolic clusters exhibited transcriptional patterns that could be readily correlated with protein-coding genes or defined asrnas; however, there were clusters in each species that exhibited unusual transcriptional complexity. the most remarkable example of this was in the avermectin biosynthetic cluster of s. avermitilis. avermectin is an important anti-parasitic agent used broadly in veterinary medicine  <cit> . its biosynthetic cluster spans ~81 kb and  <dig> annotated genes  <cit> , and an 18 kb region at the left end of the cluster encompassed a multitude of ncrnas. this region included genes encoding the pathway-specific activator aver, two polyketide tailoring enzymes , and the first of four polyketide synthases . expression of the convergently-oriented aver and avef genes resulted in the generation of a cutorna . there was also very high antisense expression observed opposite avef and aved, which themselves appeared to be co-transcribed despite being separated by >700 bp .

mrna-associated small rnas are widespread in the streptomycetes
the srna-enriched library proved to be a rich source of not only intergenic srnas, but also mrna-associated short rnas. while the long transcript libraries yielded relatively even coverage throughout most mrnas, the srna-enriched libraries were dominated by sequences from the 5′ and 3′ utrs of coding sequences. these regions were, in some instances, represented 100– <dig> fold more highly than their corresponding coding sequences. in addition to these stable 5′ and 3′ utr-associated rnas, we also detected short sequences  within coding regions that were unusually highly represented relative to their flanking sequences. a typical example of both end- and internally-enriched rnas was seen for sven <dig>  which showed significant over-representation of its 5′ end and an internal  <dig> nt region, relative to the rest of the coding sequence . stable secondary structures within 5′ utrs have been previously described  <cit>  and can influence overall mrna stability, whereas stable regions within 3′ utrs may represent termination sequences . in e. coli, 5′ and 3′ utr fragments can accumulate to high levels, and in some cases appear to be expressed at times distinct from that of their corresponding mrnas, suggesting that they may have the capacity to act as independent rna molecules  <cit> . similarly, in salmonella, recent findings have revealed that 3′ utrs have significant srna-encoding potential  <cit> .

to begin understanding how these stable rna species could be generated, we selected  <dig> of the most highly represented sequences for further analysis . these sequences were confined to s. venezuelae, where this phenomenon was more predominant than in the other two species examined. secondary structure predictions  <cit>  for the  <dig> highly represented sequences, suggested that all of these regions were highly structured, compared with sequences that were less abundant in the srna-enriched library . we evaluated the gc content of these  <dig> sequences, comparing them with the nucleotide content of the entire coding sequence, and with a 15-nucleotide sequence window immediately upstream of the stable/structured sequences. we found the  <dig> structured sequences had a gc-content similar to that of the coding sequence as a whole. this is in contrast to the regions immediately preceding the structured sequences, which were significantly more at-rich , and contained a higher proportion of poorly-used codons relative to the structured sequence immediately following. this suggested the potential for translational pausing, which when coupled with a highly structured downstream region, could promote stable rna fragment accumulation. in e. coli, the major endoribonuclease rnase e cleaves in au-rich regions near hairpin structures  <cit> , and it will be interesting to see whether streptomyces rnase e  <cit>  contributes to the accumulation of these rna species. it is equally possible that these rna products were expressed independently of the associated coding sequence, as the at-rich upstream region would also be consistent with a promoter region. to determine whether these abundant intragenic rnas existed in the cell as discrete rna elements, we used northern blotting with a probe specific for the highly represented region within sven <dig>  we observed a stable product during the early vegetative growth phase of s. venezuelae , suggesting that these rnas do indeed accumulate; whether they have a functional role in the cell remains to be determined.

CONCLUSIONS
using an rna-seq approach to evaluate gene expression throughout the streptomyces life cycle, we have identified hundreds of novel ncrnas in three disparate streptomyces species. these included novel srnas, asrnas and a prominent new class of asrna – the cutornas – that result from overlapping convergent transcription. comparative analysis of the ncrnas revealed considerable differences between species and between ncrna types: s. coelicolor and s. avermitilis shared far greater numbers of ncrna elements than either did with s. venezuelae, and throughout all species, asrnas were less well conserved than srnas. from a genome-scale perspective, srna conservation largely mirrored that of protein-coding genes: srnas expressed from the chromosome ends were species-specific, while chromosome core-localized srnas were more highly conserved. notably, ncrnas were common features in secondary metabolic biosynthetic clusters, and likely contribute to the regulatory control of these pathways. uncovering the ncrna capacity of the streptomycetes will facilitate the downstream integration of these molecules into the regulatory networks governing growth, development and antibiotic production.

