BACKGROUND
probiotics are food or preparations containing live microorganisms, traditionally regarded as safe for human and animal use. when ingested in sufficient numbers, probiotics are believed to play an important role in the control of host intestinal microbiota and modulation of host immune responses  <cit> . both local and systemic immune responses can be modulated by probiotics, with production of a set of cytokines such as ifn-γ, tnf-α, il- <dig> and il- <dig>  and nitric oxide   <cit> . the increasing regulations and bans on the use of anticoccidial drugs in commercial poultry production, urges the need for novel approaches and alternative strategies to control avian eimeriosis. probiotics are an alternative to antimicrobial drugs commonly employed as growth-promoter to broilers, avoiding drug residues to accumulate in animal carcasses and in the meat  <cit> . in ourdays, most of the probiotic preparations studied or commercialised contains lactic acid bacteria .

criteria for screening of lactobacillus strains for use as probiotics includes functional characteristics such as the ability to resist environmental conditions found in the digestive tract , to antagonize or competitively exclude pathogens by secretion of antimicrobial substances or to compete for nutrients and adhesion sites. lab can produce different antimicrobial components such as organic acids, hydrogen peroxide, carbon peroxide, diacetyl, low molecular weight antimicrobial substances, bacteriocins, and adhesion inhibitor  <cit> . production of hydrogen peroxide by lactobacillus has been considered an important ecological factor that allows them to dominate some ecosystems like human vagina  <cit> . the adhesiveness of lab may involve passive forces, electrostatic interactions, hydrophobic steric forces, lipoteicoic acids and lectins  <cit> . the hydrophobic nature of the outermost surface of microorganisms facilitates the adhesion of bacteria to host epithelium, conferring an advantage for competition and colonization in the gastrointestinal tract  <cit> .

besides their well known nutritional benefits and almost null pathogenicity, showed as millenary food supplements, the use of lab as bacterial systems to express heterologous proteins or as vehicles to carry immunizing antigens after genetic modification is becoming a promising issue  <cit> . however, the successful expression of heterologous proteins in lab depends on the promoter compatibility between the species or strains used as vector or hosts  <cit> . as pointed out by pouwels et al.  <cit> , the control of transcription and translation may differ greatly between two lactobacillus species, implying that the knowledge generated for one organism may not simply be extrapolated to another. genes that are efficiently expressed in one lactobacillus species are not necessarily expressed in other species, or are expressed with different efficiency and/or with a different regulatory mechanism. therefore, the correct typing of new isolates with probiotic properties is crucial for the development of a successful oral vaccine.

l. crispatus strains possess different s-proteins capable to bind proteins of intestinal extracellular matrix such as collagens  and laminin . the s-promoter responsible for the high level of transcription of stable mrnas coding the s-protein monomers, which are capable to crystallizing into regular arrays and cover the lactobacillus cell wall  <cit> , is a good candidate to direct mrna synthesis of chimerical genes for expression of heterologous proteins at the s-layer. the c-terminal one-third region of these s-proteins is responsible for the attachment to the peptidoglycan layer and incorporation of that sequence to chimerical proteins halts them to bacterial surface  <cit> .

the aim of this study was to develop a transforming vector to express heterologous proteins using novel strains of lactobacillus isolated from different gastrointestinal regions of broiler chickens and previously selected for some probiotic properties.

RESULTS
thirty-eight isolates of bacteria were obtained from different gastrointestinal portions of five broiler chickens and selected as gram-positive non-sporing, catalase negative, and presenting rods with diverse sizes. table  <dig> summarizes the characteristics these isolates. species identification by 16s-23s rrna ardra showed that  <dig> different species were recovered in the following order:  <dig> l. reuteri ,  <dig> l. acidophilus ,  <dig> l. johnsonii ,  <dig> l. salivarius ,  <dig> l. vaginalis ,  <dig> l. crispatus , and  <dig> lactobacillus spp . l. reuteri and l. acidophilus were more frequently isolated from gizzard and ceca, respectively. the highest biodiversity in term of number of different lactobacillus species was found in intestines.

the strains were screened for the following probiotic criteria: in vitro gastric juice and bile salts resistance, surface hydrophobicity, and production of h2o <dig>  all strains were highly resistant to acidic ph, showing low  or no decrease of viable cell numbers  <dig> h after incubation at ph  <dig>  . on the other hand, bile salts tolerance varied markedly between strains , even for same species . some isolates showed no or few growth inhibition in mrs broth supplemented with  <dig> % oxgall, while others were moderately or highly susceptible to bile salts. the mats  method was used to evaluate the hydrophobic/hydrophilic cell surface properties of lactobacillus isolates and to compare with those of other probiotic bacteria  <cit> . the bacterial adhesion to xylene at a high ionic strength of  <dig>  m  reflects cell surface hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity because electrostatic interactions are absent. our results indicated that most of lactobacillus isolates  have hydrophobic surfaces . interestingly, all enterococcus strains co-isolated in this study were highly hydrophilic . the antagonistic capacity was evaluated by the production of h2o <dig> in tmb-plus agar medium under anaerobic condition followed by air exposure. the results showed that most of lactobacillus strains  produced h2o <dig> . the four isolates typed as l. salivarius  produced more h2o <dig> than other species while seven l. acidophilus, one l. johnsonii  and l. vaginalis  were unable to produce h2o <dig> 

in order to develop an expression vector for genetic manipulation of these new isolates of lactobacillus, we pcr amplified the nucleotide sequences of the promoter, the leader peptide, the cell wall anchor and the terminator of lbs gene using genomic dna of l. crispatus strain f <dig>  . as shown in figure  <dig>  a  <dig> pb fragment encompasses the regions containing the promoter, 5' untranslated portion and the leader peptide of the lbs gene. figure  <dig> upper panel shows the alignment of this pcr product cloned into the pcr <dig> -topo and the sequence of the lbsa gene of l. crispatus . figure  <dig> lower panel shows the alignment of the  <dig> bp pcr product encoding part of the coding region of lbsb gene that corresponds to the putative cell wall anchor and the terminator . these two fragments of the lbs gene were assembled into an expression cassette to produce recombinant proteins in fusion with the c-terminus of lbs protein, which should allow the heterologous protein to be attached to the bacteria cell wall. the expression cassette was constructed into pcr <dig> -topo backbone opposite to the lac promoter . this plasmid was chosen because it harbours replication origin for e. coli , which is not functional in gram-positive bacteria such as lactobacillus spp. thus, we expected to integrate the expression cassette into the chromosome by homologous recombination within the s-layer protein locus, present in almost all species isolated from chicken  <cit> . the plasmid integration has probably occurred since we have not detected on gel electrophoresis of dna extracted from transformed, erythromycin resistant and gfp-positive lactobacillus, any dna band that might correspond to plasmid dna .

the expression of gfp mut <dig> gene in e. coli xl1-blue transformed with the plbs-gfp-emr plasmid results in green fluorescent bacteria, as measured by facs at  <dig> nm excitation wavelength . the transformation of chicken lactobacillus isolates f <dig> , 1m14c, 1m14e and 3m14l, and the human strain of l. delbrueckii ufv h2b <dig>  with the plasmid plbs-gfp-emr was also successful as evaluated by pcr amplification of the gfp gene from the transformants . however, the analysis by facs was unsuccessful due to a strong green auto fluorescence displayed by all non-transformed control lactobacillus when excited at  <dig> nm. to overcome this problem, we performed confocal microscopy analyses that could discriminate the fluorescence from the bacteria expressing gfp and the auto fluorescence using different excitation wavelengths. as shown in figure  <dig>  by exciting at  <dig> nm we were able to detect the control bacteria as non-fluorescent while the most of cells transformed with the plbs-gfp-emr plasmid showed a strong green fluorescence.

discussion
in order to exert health-promoting effects, probiotic bacteria need to resist and survive the inhospitable conditions of chicken gastrointestinal tract. the fact that a high percentage of lactobacillus cells adhered to xylene, an apolar solvent, demonstrated hydrophobic cell surface of these strains. however, some lactobacillus isolates and all enterococcus co-isolated strains showed more hydrophilic cell surface properties. many previous studies on the physicochemistry of microbial cell surfaces have shown that the presence of  proteinaceous material on the cell surface results in higher hydrophobicity, whereas hydrophilic surfaces are generally associated with the presence of polysaccharides  <cit> . the high hydrophobicity of most strains isolated in this prospecting study could facilitate bacteria-host cells interactions and improve antigen delivering to the immune cells present in the gastrointestinal associated lymphoid tissue .

the viability of probiotics is not an essential requirement for some antigen delivery since killed bacteria also stimulate the host immune system when ingested in sufficient numbers  <cit> . however, various biotherapeutic mechanisms are dependent on metabolic activity such as the direct competition for nutrients or secretion of antimicrobial substances. for the efficiency of an oral vaccine, cell viability is also probably fundamental. however, bacteria entering the gastrointestinal tract must be able to resist to certain local stresses such as the gastric ph and bile salts. in this context, the stress resistance showed by the lactobacillus isolated in the present study would be important for these bacteria to exert a probiotic or oral live vaccine action. since many pathogens, including eimeria spp. sporozoites  <cit> , are very sensitive to h2o <dig>  its production by most of the lactobacillus strains also could assure their success in the gut ecosystem and improve the vaccination process.

non-pathogenic lactic acid bacteria  are attractive as live carriers to deliver protective antigens to the mucosal immune system. lactococcus lactis is the lab system for antigen delivery better established and used actually. several molecular tools were constructed to allow antigen expression in three cellular locations, intracellular, secreted or anchored to the cell wall  <cit> , combined to the adjuvant expression of il- <dig>  <cit> . such studies with a novel mucosal vaccine based on live lactococci expressing e <dig> antigen anchored to the cell surface and a secreted form of il- <dig> showed that this prophylactic immunization can provide long-lasting immunity in mice against human papillomavirus type 16-induced tumors and, also the therapeutic immunization with l. lactis recombinant strains induced regression of palpable tumors in treated mice a week after tumoral cells injection  <cit> . however, lactococcus lactis is not a probiotic bacterium, being unable to adhere to the intestine cells and competitively exclude pathogens. both persisting  and non-persisting  strains of lactic acid bacteria have been evaluated by grangette et al.  <cit>  and seem to elicit a very strong specific and protective humoral response by the systemic and nasal routes of administration. the same authors have also shown that persistence and viability of the strain impacts on its immunogenicity and on the level of protection it may induce, indicating that lactobacillus is more efficient than lactococcus as a vaccine delivery vehicle  <cit> . recently, the development of an efficacious vaccine against infection with helicobacter felis, delivered by recombinant lactobacillus strains producing h. pylori urease b  subunit, elicited ureb-specific antibodies and results in a decreased h. felis load in the stomachs of vaccinated mice. this was the first report of successful induction of partial protection against a pathogen with a mucosal prime-boost regimen in which recombinant lactobacillus strains were used as antigen-delivery vehicles  <cit> .

a new plasmid for genetic transformation of lactobacillus species allowing expression of heterologous proteins attached to the cell wall components was successfully constructed into an e. coli plasmid vector backbone. this plasmid was able to transform e. coli xl1-blue cloning host from non-fluorescent to green fluorescent cells, which could be measured by facs analyses or easily visualized by standard fluorescence microscopy using fluorescein isothiocyanate  filter settings. transformation of four different species of lactobacillus, l. crispatus, l. johnsonii, l. reuteri and l. delbrueckii, from chicken or human origin, was also successful despite an unexpected strong green autofluorescence of non-transformed cells, reported here for the first time. although the autofluorescence of native lactobacillus cells made facs analyses or standard fluorescence microscopy not applicable, it could be abolished by exciting gfp at a wavelength lower than  <dig> nm using a laser confocal microscopy set at  <dig> nm. this could explain the constant use of the uv mutant of gfp by others researchers instead gfp mut <dig> or mut <dig> genes  <cit> .

usually, intrinsic problems related to the genetic modification could arise after the selection of novel isolates such as the presence of restriction/modification enzymes which could interfere with the establishment of new exogenous plasmids. also, the presence of cryptic plasmids may result in incompatibility with the exogenous vector, as well as genetic exchange between plasmid from different bacteria present in the gastrointestinal tract. our strategy to avoid these problems was to include in the characterization of the probiotic potential of the novel isolates, electrophoretic analyses for the presence of extrachromosomal dna elements and to exclude those strains bearing endogenous plasmids. the persistence of the introduced plasmid was monitored through the detection of the new genetic traits such as the antibiotic resistance and gfp gene expression as well as by pcr analyses of the gfp sequence. also, gfp expression was detected after growing for several generations in the absence of drug selection.

CONCLUSIONS
thirty-eight lactobacillus strains were isolated from gastrointestinal tract of free-range chicks. bacteria selected for some probiotic features  expressed the reporter protein gfp after transformation using a plasmid vector carrying an expression cassette assembled with lbs gene sequences. these results are currently being applied in our laboratories to develop an oral live vaccine to protect broiler chicks against eimeriosis, a major poultry disease.

