BACKGROUND
parasites can adaptively manipulate host behavior resulting in complex extended
phenotypes expressed in the bodies of their hosts that serve to increase parasite
fitness  <cit> . while there are an
increasing number of prominent examples of parasitic behavioral manipulation
, the molecular mechanisms of host manipulation remain poorly
understood . one example
where significant progress has been made is the parasite toxoplasma gondii. infected rodents, with parasite cysts within their
neurons and glia  <cit> , become more
attracted to cat urine and display increased risk-taking behavior. these behaviors
increase parasite transmission to the ultimate host, a feline  <cit> . tyrosine hydroxylase secretion by t. gondii cysts increases the dopamine level inside
neurons that harbor them  <cit> . however,
increasing just dopamine levels in non-parasitized rodents does not result in
similar behavioral changes  <cit> . this,
together with research demonstrating that t.
gondii also alters the levels of other compounds in infected rodents
 <cit> , suggests that multiple mechanisms are involved in establishing
complex behavioral manipulation.

another dramatic example of a parasite extended phenotype is the death grip in
ants infected by fungi within the genus ophiocordyceps  <cit> . these
parasites manipulate the behavior of ants to facilitate spore dispersal. foraging
ants encounter fungal spores in the environment, which penetrate the cuticle and
start colonization. once the colony is sufficiently large, the fungus hijacks the
central nervous system , making the ant leave the nest and climb up the foliage
where it latches onto the vegetation  <cit> . this death
grip involves atrophy of the mandibular muscles leading to a locked jaw preventing
the cadaver from falling  <cit> .
following death, fungal hyphae grow out of the ant, forming a sexual structure from
which new spores are dispersed  <cit> .
this manipulated behavior of ants can be traced back to the eocene with fossil
evidence from  <dig> mya  <cit> . such a long
co-evolutionary history has resulted in a high specificity, with each infected
species of ant examined having its own species of fungus . however, not all ant species within a given habitat are infected
and previous surveys have shown that ant species that are ecologically and
phylogenetically similar to known host species of ophiocordyceps are not necessarily infected . this suggests that barriers to successful
infection and behavioral manipulation may exist.

there are many factors that determine which species become hosts to a particular
parasite group, such as the encounter rate, host defenses and abiotic factors
. for a parasite where manipulation of host behavior is
necessary for transmission, an important component is the host’s cns. we would thus
expect that manipulators have evolved molecular adaptations to successfully interact
with the cns  <cit> . here, we ask how
specific such adaptations are. to do this we isolated a newly discovered ophiocordyceps unilateralis sensu lato  from
infected carpenter ants found in the temperate woods of south carolina, usa. using
cultures of this fungal species we tested its ability to manipulate the behavior of
four sympatrically occurring ant species: two that are found naturally infected
 and two  that we have not encountered infected despite extensive
searches. since fungi interact with their environment via the secretion of
molecules, we focused on the secondary metabolites produced in the presence of ant
nervous tissue. to accomplish this we made use of an ex
vivo ant tissue culturing system combined with metabolomics
 <cit> . by integrating field ecology,
lab infections and secondary metabolite discovery, we report that the extended
phenotype of brain manipulating fungi can only be expressed in the correct ant host
seemingly because the fungus produces a specific array of compounds as a reaction to
the presence of the host brain it has evolved to manipulate.

RESULTS
manipulated dead ant collection and species verification
previous work on ophiocordyceps in ants has
focused on tropical habitats with the consensus that these fungi are uncommon in
temperate biomes  <cit> . however, we
discovered a large population of carpenter ants infected with o. unilateralis s.l. in donald’s county, south
carolina, usa. during our first field survey in  <dig> we identified and
individually marked  <dig> fungal killed carpenter ants  at one site:  <dig> c.
castaneus  and 82
c. americanus . all ants were attached to twigs from a number of
tree species. position of the death grip was highly stereotyped with 99% of ants
attached to the adaxial  side of twigs. ants were never recorded attached
to leaves, which occurs for infected carpenter ants in tropical habitats
 <cit> . similar patterns were found
in the following years  at this and  <dig> other sites.figure  <dig> 
natural and lab infections with
o. unilateralis s.l.
.

c. castaneus
 and c.
americanus
 infected with o. unilateralis s.l. collected in donalds, sc. 
o. unilateralis s.l. culture isolated
from an infected c. castaneus specimen.
 manipulated c. castaneus
 and c.
americanus
 upon infection with o. unilateralis s.l. in the lab.



we isolated o. unilateralis s.l. from a
freshly manipulated and killed c. castaneus
cadaver . species verification
was done through ssu  sequencing. blasting the obtained pcr fragment sequence 
against all fungi in the ncbi database resulted in a 97% identity with both
o. unilateralis strain osc  <dig>  and the very closely related
ophiocordyceps pulvinata voucher tns-f-30044
, verifying that we
successfully isolated o. unilateralis
s.l..

ant infections leading towards species-specific behavioral
manipulation
in this study, we addressed if our o. unilateralis
s.l. species could control the behavior of ants that are not normally
found infected in nature. we chose c.
pennsylvanicus and f. dolosa,
which we never found infected at our site despite them occurring sympatrically and
 <dig>  person hours of searching over four years. c.
pennsylvanicus is within the same genus as the two encountered hosts,
c. castaneus and c.
americanus, and is very abundant throughout the east coast of the usa
 <cit>  including south carolina
 <cit> . f.
dolosa is an ecologically similar species to c. castaneus and c. americanus
occurring in mixed woodlands with colonies in the soil  <cit> . the
genus formica has never been recorded as a host
to o. unilateralis s.l.  <cit> . the two
naturally infected ant species were compared to the two naturally uninfected
species using infection studies. since the insect cuticle is a highly
heterogeneous structure that varies between species, it is likely to affect the
ability of fungal spores to adhere and penetrate the cuticle needed to establish
infection  <cit> . therefore, we
bypassed such external barriers by directly injecting fungal cells into the ants.
for each species,  <dig> replicates of  <dig> worker ants were placed in a cage containing
branches that served as a biting platform and a darkened nest area. per replicate,
 <dig> ants were injected with fungal cells,  <dig> were sham treated, and  <dig> were left
untreated. cages were kept under strict twenty-four hour light and temperature
cycles since ant behavior is highly dependent on genes oscillating with circadian
rhythms . furthermore, field studies on o. unilateralis s.l. infected camponotus leonardi in thailand, showed synchronization of
manipulated biting behavior at solar noon  <cit> . next to that, the convergently evolved entomophthoralean
fungi are known to cause comparable behavioral manipulations in a range of
arthropods , followed by death and sporulation which also happens
at distinct times of day . observations
were made  <dig> times per day for  <dig> continuous days following infection, recording
behavior and time of death for each of the  <dig> individually marked ants. this set
up resulted in the successful reconstruction of behavioral manipulation of ant
behavior by a fungal parasite under controlled laboratory conditions.

the three camponotus species infected with
o. unilateralis s.l. had similar survival
probabilities . sham treated and untreated
ants for all three species had a significantly higher survival probability than
infected individuals . formica dolosa reacted adversely to the injection
procedure and was excluded from the analysis. following death, ant cadavers were
monitored for fungal growth emerging from them, which is necessary for parasite
transmission. for all three camponotus species
no fungal growth was observed upon death <9 days post infection. fungal growth
did emerge from c. castaneus and c. americanus individuals that died >/=9 days post
infection . we never observed fungal hyphae
emerging from the non-target host cadavers of c.
pennsylvanicus .
however, fungal blastospores were found inside the bodies of c. pennsylvanicus , demonstrating that the cause of death in
these ants was likely due to fungal growth.figure  <dig> 
survival, fungal growth, and behavioral manipulation
of three
camponotus
species infected with
o. unilateralis s.l.
.
 kaplan-meier survival curve for 3
different camponotus species infected
with o. unilateralis s.l.. the
thickened lines represent the time period in which fungal growth was
observed. the grey box indicates days post-infection during which
behavioral manipulation was observed. 
mean proportion of observations outside for each species-treatment
combination .



in addition, we recorded ant behavior. infected ants were observed in the
foraging arena significantly more often than their healthy and sham-treated nest
mates . only the two species of ants known to be
naturally infected  were manipulated to die biting
, while
c. pennsylvanicus was never found biting
twigs prior to death. similar to fungal growth, there seems to be a critical
period for manipulated biting behavior because we only observed successful
manipulation between  <dig> to 22 days post infection. this implies a parasitic growth
phase within the host is needed and that premature death of the host prevents
successful fungal development. we suggest that the complex nature of manipulation
partially explains why such a long incubation period inside the host is
required.

metabolomics of species-specific ex vivo
ant brain–o. unilateralis s.l.
interactions
only the two naturally occurring hosts of o.
unilateralis s.l. could be manipulated despite the ability of the
fungus to establish inside all three camponotus
species. the lack of manipulation in the non-target ant species, despite the
ability of the fungus to kill it suggests that this requires additional factors.
the complexity of the manipulated behavior suggests a specific reaction to the
host’s cns is required. this led us to ask if o.
unilateralis s.l. secretes a different array of metabolites  when presented with ant brains of the four
different species used in this study. in this experiment, f. dolosa has been included again as it allowed us to ask how
o. unilateralis s.l. would react to ant
brains from a different genus. we used a novel protocol that allows the
investigation of the secretome of fungal entomopathogens as a reaction to specific
insect tissues kept alive ex vivo  <cit> . through quadrupole time-of-flight mass
spectrometry, we measured the unique mass-to-charge/retention time pairs
 that were significantly enriched in samples where o. unilateralis s.l. was grown in the presence of ant
brains. biological replicates for the fungal-brain interaction samples and the
various controls 
were run together in a randomized order. within the chosen window of  <dig>  and
15 minutes and m/z between  <dig> and  <dig>   <dig>  unique ion features were extracted
from the raw data .

we performed a principal component analysis and discriminant analysis  on all ion features. this resulted in the clustering of the biological
replicates for each species interaction suggesting that, depending on the ant
species brains it was presented with, the secretome of o.
unilateralis s.l. differed . however, control samples representing the different species’
brains, could also be separated by pca-da . it is therefore possible that the clustering seen for the
brain-fungal interactions might be partially due to the brain tissues. this
implies that directly comparing o. unilateralis
s.l. grown beside the brain of one ant species with it grown beside
the brain of another is not the best approach when the aim is to specifically
study the fungal secretome. such an approach would lead to the complication of
extracting the differences between different species brain tissues from the data
set together with the compounds of interest secreted by the fungus as a reaction
to those different tissues. therefore, we performed statistical analyses within a
species to rank enriched ion features involved in fungus-brain according to
significance, prior to performing an indirect comparison between the species using
those ranked ions. separate pca-das for each of the four species tested resulted
in a separate clustering of o. unilateralis
s.l.–ant brain interaction samples and their corresponding
species-specific controls ,
showing that o. unilateralis s.l. reacts to
brain tissue through secretion. to rank the ion features enriched as a result of
o. unilateralis s.l.-ant brain interaction, a
t-test for each species was performed in which this interaction was compared to
the various controls. only those ion features that were found to be enriched with
a p-value of p <  <dig>  were used in the indirect, between species, comparison.
we found  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> significantly enriched molecular weight/retention
time peaks for o. unilateralis s.l. growth
beside c. castaneus, c.
americanus, c. pennsylvanicus and
f. dolosa brains respectively . we compared
the enriched ion features found for each species interaction, which showed that
most of the ion features  were only significantly enriched in
one of the four parasite-ant brain interactions . our study of the o. unilateralis
s.l. secretome thus indicates that this fungus reacts heterogeneously
to brains from the four ant species we studied by secreting a largely different
array of metabolites.figure  <dig> 
pca-da analyses to determine the heterogeneity
of
o. unilateralis s.l.
on different ant species’ brains.
 pca-da plot showing the clustering of
o. unilateralis s.l. secretion in the
presence of different ant species’ brains kept ex
vivo in schneider’s insect medium and the medium without ant
brains.  pca-da plot showing the
clustering of different ant species’ brains kept ex vivo and the medium by itself without fungal growth that
served as controls in this study. 
pca-da plots showing the clustering per species of o. unilateralis s.l. secretion in the presence of ant brains
of that species versus secretion in the medium without ant brains, ant
brains kept ex vivo without fungal
growth and the schneider’s insect medium by itself.
heterogeneous metabolite secretion by
o. unilateralis s.l.
on four ant species’ brains.
 venn-diagram comparing all ion
features found to be significantly  enriched in the medium of
samples in which o.unilateralis s.l.
was grown next to ex vivo kept ant
brains of the species c. castaneus,
c. americanus, c. pennsylvanicus and f. dolosa.
 bar chart visualizing how the ions,
that were found to be significantly enriched  due to
o. unilateralis s.l.-c. castaneus
brain interactions across two independent studies, overlap with ions
enriched in interactions with other species’ brains.



to investigate if these results could be  due to false positives and
if our findings hold when the analysis is performed across two independently set
up experiments, we repeated the part in which o.
unilateralis s.l. was grown beside brains of c. castaneus, the host species from which we isolated it. in
addition, in this set up, the fungus was also grown beside the mandibular muscles
of its host. we included this tissue in the analysis to exclude the features that
are enriched because of the interaction with ant tissue in general, but are not
necessarily brain tissue specific. this resulted in  <dig>  unique ion features
, which we analyzed using pca-da plots that
showed clustering of the different biological sample types, as seen before
. running the
samples at the same time and the use of an internal standard in both experiments
allowed the comparison of this experiment with the former one. the samples of this
second experiment were analyzed together with the c.
castaneus related samples of the first one . to rank the ion features that were
significantly enriched as a reaction to brain tissue, again a t-test was performed
in which the fungus-brain interaction was compared to the various controls.
choosing again a cut off of p <  <dig>  we found  <dig> significantly enriched ion
features within the secretome of o. unilateralis
s.l. grown on c. castaneus brains
. comparing these
enriched ion features with those found to be enriched for o. unilateralis s.l.-c. castaneus brain interactions in first
analysis described above,  <dig> were found to be in common . the discovery of these
significantly enriched ion features across two independent experiments suggests
that these are biologically relevant and not false positives due to the
experimental set up or data mining. we compared these  <dig> ion features that
o. unilateralis s.l. produced in the presence
of c. castaneus brains again with the ion
features found to be enriched for o. unilateralis
s.l. growth in the presence of other ant species brains. of these ion
features, 73% were only significantly enriched in the presence of c. castaneus brains . this more conservative analysis of the data thus resulted in
the same conclusion that o. unilateralis s.l.
secretes a specific set of metabolites depending on the ant brain it encounters.
in addition to providing insight into the patterns of specificity of organisms
evolved to control brains, these experiments resulted in candidate compounds that
might be involved in establishing behavioral manipulation.

identification of candidate metabolites involved in brain
manipulation
our attempt to identify metabolites focused on the ion features enriched in
the secretome of o. unilateralis s.l. in the
presence of brains of its natural host c.
castaneus. we found  <dig> ion features across two experiments
. in an attempt to
identify these we compared their ms/ms product ion mass spectra with those of a
similar m/z value in the metlin database  <cit> . a present roadblock is however that metabolite databases do
not yet hold an extensive amount of mass spectra and do not cover all eukaryote
species to the same extent. therefore, in most of the cases where a ms/ms product
ion scan was generated, no match was found. this of course results in limitations
that are inherent to the use of metabolomics in a study like the one presented
here, but with more data available, this will improve over time. despite this, we
did manage to putatively identify one of the candidate ion features to be
guanidinobutyric acid . this identification was
verified by comparing the retention time and product ion ms/ms spectra obtained
from our samples with an authentic standard . gba is involved in
the transport of compounds such as creatine and guanidinoacidic acid  across
the blood–brain barrier  <cit>  and
known to be involved in epileptic discharges and convulsions in rodents
 <cit> . altered levels of creatine
and gaa have been shown to cause neurological disorders  <cit> . gba has also previously been isolated from
the fungus trogia venenata, which has been
implicated in causing sudden deaths in yunnan, china  <cit> .

to search for additional compounds we adopted a less stringent but still
significant cut off value of p <  <dig>  for our ranking analysis across the two
experiments. this returned an additional  <dig> ion features, which still comprises
only the top  <dig> % of all ion features from the secretome of o. unilateralis s.l. grown beside the brains of
c. castaneus . among these features we putatively identified
a sphingosine . the identified metabolite was
verified by comparing the retention time and product ion mass spectrum to that of
an authentic standard of l-threo-sphingosine . sphingosines are
part of sphingolipid metabolism, which affects all types of cell regulation
 <cit> . defects can lead to cancers  <cit>  and neurological syndromes  <cit> . the secretion of fungal derived sphingosines have not been
reported to this date, but several different fumonisins, that mimic compounds
involved in sphingolipid metabolism, have been  <cit> . these compounds are produced by several plant pathogenic
fusarium species growing on cereals causing
leukoencephalomalacia  in life stock being fed with
infected crops  <cit> . we examined our
metabolomics dataset for these fumonisins but did not find any.

we identified two compounds that were enriched in the secretome of o. unilateralis s.l. grown beside c. castaneus brains. since these compounds  have known neurological effects on mammals  <cit>  we tested
their effect on ants. we injected serial dilutions of the authentic standards of
gba and l-threo-sphingosine separately and in combination into ants of the species
c. castaneus. this however did not result in
behavioral effects similar to those induced by o.
unilateralis s.l. infection. it is likely that the injection of
specific candidate metabolites is not biologically realistic because based on our
profiling of the fungal secretome we expect that multiple compounds, and therefore
mechanisms, act in concert. this is in line with the conclusions that can be drawn
from studies in t. gondii , described in the background section.

CONCLUSIONS
we assessed the species-specificity of ant brain manipulation by the specialized
fungus o. unilateralis s.l.. the fungus was
isolated from a manipulated, twig-biting cadaver of the ant species c. castaneus in the temperate woods of south carolina,
usa. cultures of this fungus were used to develop an infection protocol in which ant
hosts are infected through an injection of fungal material. this lead to the major
advancement of lab-induced behavioral manipulation of an insect by a fungal
parasite, opening up new possibilities to study the many different, complex aspects
of parasite-host interactions during behavioral manipulation. these aspects range
from integrative studies looking into social behavior, to host-parasite
co-evolution, disease dynamics, host immunology and molecular mechanisms employed by
the parasite.

here, we used this technique to investigate species-specificity beyond external
factors such as life history, environment and cuticle compatibility for spore
attachment. we conclude from these studies that o.
unilateralis s.l. is able to kill different species of ants, including
species that are not found infected in nature. however, the fungus is not able to
manipulate the behavior of all of them, which is crucial for successful
transmission. only the two species tested that are also manipulated by o. unilateralis s.l. in nature, displayed the
characteristic biting behavior prior to death in the lab. this suggests that the
fungus reacts heterogeneously to ant brains of different species causing it to be
able to alter the activity of the cns of some, but not all ants. despite a growing
interest in parasitic behavioral manipulation, the mechanisms and compounds used by
parasites to alter cns activity are still largely unknown. in this study we move
towards a better understanding of this phenomenon through the discovery of candidate
compounds o. unilateralis s.l. employs to
establish ant brain manipulation while simultaneously testing our hypothesis that it
employs different compounds in different host species. we therefore looked at the
metabolites this fungus secretes as a reaction to different ant species brains.
metabolomics analysis on an ex vivo system showed
that o. unilateralis s.l. indeed reacts
heterogeneously to the brains of different ant species. furthermore, our experiments
resulted in the discovery of candidate manipulator compounds, which had not been
reported before for this specialist entomopathogen. despite metabolite discovery
being a challenging and difficult endeavor we succeeded in identifying two candidate
metabolites that, based on their known effects, are likely part of the complex
mechanisms underlying brain manipulation. we found that guanobutyric acid  and
sphingosine, both reported to be involved neurological disorders, were enriched when
the fungus was grown in the presence of brains of its target species. however, since
both compounds are present in animal cells, the possibility exists that their
significant enrichment is the result of other yet to be identified fungal compounds
causing higher levels of gba and sphingosine to be released from the brain. gba has
however also been reported to have been isolated from fungal material, and though
the secretion of fungal derived sphingosines have not been reported, fungal toxins,
that mimic compounds involved in sphingolipid metabolism, have been. this implies
that, if the increased sphingosine and gba levels are indeed caused by o. unilateralis s.l. secreting them as a reaction to ant
brain tissue, the fungus might be producing more compounds that are similar to the
ones the host produces. future fungal genome and transcriptome studies, combined
with a better understanding of ant brain physiology, will help to fully determine
the undoubtedly complex mechanisms at play in this intriguing example of behavioral
manipulation.

