BACKGROUND
an increasing number of neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders are thought to result from defective dna:protein interactions specifically in neurons; furthermore, sustained changes in neuronal gene expression and behavior after exposure to certain drugs or stimuli are likely to involve chromatin remodeling, including dna methylation and histone modification changes  <cit> . however, even the most sensitive chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and most other approaches used to study the regulation of dna and histone modifications, transcription factor binding etc., lack single cell resolution and instead require the preparation of homogenates from at least  <dig> –  <dig> nuclei. consequently, detailed chromatin analysis was until now not feasible for nuclei of terminally differentiated neurons that typically reside in brain parenchyma intermingled with various types of glia and other cells mostly in a 2: <dig> – 1: <dig> ratio, dependent on species and brain regions  <cit> .

recently, immunostaining in conjunction with fluorescence-activated cell sorting  was used successfully to selectively collect neuronal nuclei from human  brain tissue for the purposes of retrospective birth dating  <cit>  or assessment of age-related changes in dna cytosine methylation  <cit> . however, these studies utilized the nuclear harvest for highly sensitive radiation and pcr assays, and it remained unclear whether the protocol could be modified for the purposes of chromatin immunoprecipitation and other techniques that require comparatively larger amount of input . we provide a detailed protocol for selective sorting of neuronal nuclei from mouse and human brain in quantities sufficient for immunoprecipitation with different chromatin preparations , followed by microarray or pcr studies. in addition, we introduce a transgenic mouse line for neuron-specific expression of gfp -tagged histone h2b. evidence is presented that even under baseline conditions, promoter-bound histone methylation in neuronal samples is significantly different when compared to unsorted, or non-neuronal nuclei from the same brain region. therefore, the methods presented here will be important for the study of molecular mechanisms governing epigenetic control of neuronal gene expression and chromatin remodeling specifically in mature brain.

RESULTS
h2b-gfp transgenic mice
the promoter of the α subunit of the ca2+/calmodulin dependent protein kinase ii gene  was used to drive h2b-egfp expression; as expected, this transgene labeled most of the neuronal populations in the fore- and midbrain, including cortex, striatum, hippocampus, with the notable exception of the gabaergic interneurons in cerebral cortex and hippocampus . in contrast, labeling in hindbrain, incl cerebellum, was less consistent . the transgene-derived labeling of neuronal nuclei with h2b-egfp was robust pre- and post-facs . to date, our oldest transgenic mice are  <dig> months of age and so far we did not observe any overt neurological phenotypes, even in animals expressing the fusion protein at comparatively high levels in cns neurons. likewise, no adverse effects were reported for transgenic mice expressing high levels of h2b-egfp in a wide range of tissues, including brain  <cit> .

loss of nuclei during the procedure
each of the major steps in this protocol –  extraction of nuclei from the tissue,  ultracentrifugation,  immunolabeling and  fluorescence-activated sorting – could result in loss of nuclei, together totaling perhaps up to 50% of the neuronal nuclei in the starting material. however, despite of these limitations, the alternative approach, such as nuclei harvesting from primary neuronal culture, is likely not to improve results in a higher yield and would have the additional disadvantage of any ex vivo preparation.

nucleosomes are preserved in sorted nuclei
nucleosomes as the elementary unit of chromatin – are comprised of  <dig> bp of genomic dna wrapped around core histones h2a, h2b, h <dig> and h <dig>  to find out whether nucleosomal structures remain intact in sorted neun+ nuclei, we compared nucleosome occupancy at promoters in forebrain from unsorted and neun+ nuclei, using a modification-independent anti-h <dig> c-terminus antibody for chip-dsl in conjunction with m8k promoter array . no significant differences between chip-to-input ratios of sorted neun+ and unsorted nuclei were observed. instead, h <dig> occupancy at specific promoter sequences showed a strong correlation between the neun+ and unsorted samples  . we conclude that promoter-bound nucleosomes are intact after the sorting procedure.

differential histone h <dig> methylation in neuronal nuclei
to find out whether or not neuronal chromatin, under baseline conditions, shows a histone methylation signature that is different compared to unsorted nuclei, we conducted chip for two histone lysine methylation marks, h3k4me <dig> and h3k9me <dig>  all studies were conducted on the forebrain of male mice 8– <dig> weeks of age. histone methylation levels were at  <dig> out of  <dig> – arbitrarily chosen – gene promoters significantly different in neuronal chromatin . furthermore, in  <dig> out of  <dig> promoters , changes in the "open" mark, h3k4me <dig> and the "repressive" mark, h3k9me <dig>  were in the opposite direction . notably, h3k9me <dig> levels at the mecp <dig> promoter – i.e., the rett syndrome gene which is robustly and ubiquitously expressed in mature cns neurons  <cit>  – were higher in neuronal vs. unsorted chromatin. this particular finding was unexpected and requires further investigations.

next, we wanted to  find out whether the above findings can be extrapolated to species other than mouse and  further confirm that histone lysine methylation at select gene loci is differentially regulated in neurons as compared to non-neuronal cells residing in the same tissue. to this end, we utilized postmortem tissue from the human prefrontal cortex for chip with h3-tri-methyl-lysine  <dig> , a chromatin mark enriched at sites of active gene expression  <cit> . for each tissue sample, neun immunopositive and immunonegative nuclei were sorted separately by facs, and then processed in parallel for anti-h3k4me <dig> chip followed by qpcr for the following genes:  the subunit 2b of the nmda receptor  and  brain-derived neurotrophic factor ; both these genes are in postnatal and adult brain predominantly or exclusively expressed in neurons  <cit> .  β  <dig> microglobulin , which in cns is expressed in a mixed population of neuronal and non-neuronal cells and considered as a "housekeeping gene" in postmortem studies  <cit> , and  the locus control region of the β globin locus , which is highly regulated in erythopoetic tissues but silent and inactive in brain  <cit> . levels of h3k4me <dig> at promoters of the neuron-specific genes, grin2b and bdnf, were consistently higher in chromatin of the neun+ nuclei as compared to neun- . these changes were highly specific because h3k4me <dig> levels in chromatin surrounding b2m were higher in neun- nuclei, and furthermore, h3k4me <dig> at the hbb locus control region were overall very low . taken together, our findings in mouse forebrain and human prefrontal cortex suggest that – even at baseline – important differences exist between histone methylation signatures of neuronal and non-neuronal chromatin.

CONCLUSIONS
the protocol presented here should be particularly useful to investigators who wish to study chromatin regulation, including epigenetic mechanisms of neuronal gene expression, in the mature and the aging brain. the alternative approach, i.e. the study of primary neuronal cultures or neuron-like cell lines, certainly is suited to model developmental mechanisms and neurodevelopmental disease  <cit> . however, neurons and other cns cells are sustainable in culture, at best, for a few weeks  <cit>  and therefore are not ideal from the viewpoint of chronic neuropsychiatric diseases, which often involve a protracted course, late onset and predilection for a specific neuronal subtype. furthermore, the complexities of brain connectivity and circuitry, among a myriad of other factors, is difficult or impossible to model ex vivo. for example, in vivo treatment with antipsychotic drugs induces chromatin remodeling in cerebral cortex and striatum, an effect that cannot be mimicked in cortical or striatal cell cultures lacking input from monoamine pathways  <cit> . finally, chromatin assays in whole brain tissue are potentially confounded by cellular heterogeneity, including potential shifts in cellular composition during the course of aging or due to disease. given that chromatin immunoprecipitation with genome-wide coverage from as little as  <dig>  cells is now feasible  <cit> , it should be possible to use transgenic mice – including the camiik-h2b-gfp lines presented here – to selectively study the epigenome for highly defined subpopulations of neurons in the mouse. furthermore, the relative resilience of nuclei in frozen-then-thawed postmortem brain tissue makes it possible to apply the techniques presented here to species other than small laboratory animals, including normal and diseased human brain. it remains to be determined whether or not the approach presented here is applicable to tissues other than brain. when compared to sorting protocols that are based on trypsinization of tissue and sorting of intact  somata  <cit> , our approach has several advantages. first, it is applicable to frozen tissues. second, the yield of recovered nuclei appears to be much higher, albeit direct comparisons are lacking. third, it is comparatively simple as compared to related protocols.

to summarize, the perspective to develop chromatin assays for specific types of neuronal populations of the mature brain, as described here, will be relevant for a wide range of physiological and neurological conditions related to transcriptional regulation and chromatin remodeling.

