BACKGROUND
the monophyly of the supraordinal placental mammalian clade afrotheria, whose living members include the endemic afro-arabian aardvarks , elephant-shrews or sengis , golden moles , tenrecs , sea cows , hyraxes , and elephants , is now strongly supported by diverse forms of genomic data, including indels  <cit> , sines  <cit> , "protein sequence signatures"  <cit> , chromosomal syntenies  <cit> , and nuclear and mitochondrial dna sequences  <cit> . although afrotheria is estimated to have had the longest stem lineage  of all extant placental supraordinal clades , morphological support for afrotherian monophyly is elusive  <cit> . a few morphological features have been mapped onto molecular phylogenies as synapomorphies of crown afrotheria  <cit> , but morphological phylogenetic analyses of the placental mammal radiation continue to favor afrotherian polyphyly .

an important first step in addressing the problem of morphological character support for afrotheria will be resolution of the phylogenetic position of tenrecs and golden moles  within that clade  <cit> . afrosoricids stand apart from sengis, aardvarks, and paenungulates  in that the latter are all thought to be derived from "proto-ungulate" or "condylarth" ancestors  <cit> , whereas afrosoricids – which were formerly placed in the order lipotyphla alongside hedgehogs, shrews, moles, and solenodons  – share a number of seemingly primitive morphological features with eulipotyphlans and cretaceous stem placentals. phylogenetic analyses of the longest available concatenation of afrotherian dna sequences  <cit>  nevertheless nest tenrecs and golden moles deep within afrotheria, with macroscelidea and tubulidentata placed as consecutive sister taxa to afrosoricida within a clade that has been named afroinsectiphillia  <cit> . the monophyly of afroinsectiphillia, but not afroinsectivora, is also supported by a single sine  <cit>  and a unique chromosomal synteny  <cit> , while afroinsectiphillia and afroinsectivora, but not afrosoricida, are supported by a recent analysis of line- <dig>  <cit> . this phylogenetic pattern implies that the "proto-ungulate" features shared by sengis, aardvarks, and paenungulates might have evolved along the afrotherian stem lineage, and that afrosoricid morphology represents a remarkable case of taxic atavism  <cit> .

another outstanding problem in afrotherian phylogenetics is the branching order among hyracoidea, proboscidea and sirenia within paenungulata. various types of genomic data have been collected in an effort to resolve paenungulate relationships  <cit> , but this information has consistently given either weak or contradictory signals, ultimately leaving researchers with a seemingly unresolvable trichotomy  <cit> . these results contrast with morphological evidence, which most clearly supports a sirenian-proboscidean clade  within paenungulata  <cit> . among other things, the monophyly versus paraphyly of tethytheria could have important implications for our understanding of the adaptations of the ancestral crown paenungulate, because early fossil proboscideans and sirenians are generally found in near-shore or marine deposits  <cit>  that suggest an early preference for semi-aquatic habitus. if tethytheria is monophyletic, this adaptive pattern is best explained as having been due to common ancestry, whereas if the group is paraphyletic, semi-aquatic habitus either evolved convergently in early proboscideans and sirenians, or was an ancestral feature of paenungulata as a whole.

the extant members of afrotherian orders differ dramatically in their morphology and adaptations, and represent the tips of long branches that extend well back into the paleocene and/or late cretaceous  <cit> . extinct taxa should play a critical role in efforts to resolve placental supraordinal phylogeny because fossils exhibit unique combinations of primitive and derived characters that help to break up long branches  <cit>  that otherwise might attract due to homoplasy rather than homology. the only recent phylogenetic analysis to have scored members of all extant afrotherian orders included only two undoubted fossil afrotherians, however, both of which were extinct paenungulates  <cit> . furthermore, a recent phylogenetic analysis that included more fossil afrotherians  <cit> , and which recovered a macroscelidean-paenungulate clade to the exclusion of perissodactyls and artiodactyls, did not sample aardvarks, tenrecs and golden moles, which lack some or all of the features that support the macroscelidean-paenungulate clade recovered in that study.

this study includes  <dig> morphological characters scored across  <dig> extant and  <dig> extinct afrotherians, and is combined with chromosomal associations  <cit> , retroposons  <cit> , and >  <dig> kb of nucleotide data  <cit>  to create the single largest phylogenetic data set  that has yet been brought to bear on the interrelationships of living and extinct afrotherians. included in the morphological partition are new data on recently published afrotherian fossil material from the paleogene of north africa  <cit>  as well as undescribed late eocene hyracoids, macroscelideans, and afrosoricids from egypt. parsimony analysis of these data reveals a new hypothesis of relationships within afrotheria, and highlights a central role for paleogene "elephant-shrews" in afrotherian phylogenetics.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis of extant taxa alone
regardless of how morphological characters were treated , simultaneous analysis of extant taxa alone recovered paenungulata, tethytheria, a macroscelidea-tubulidentata clade, and a macroscelidea-tubulidentata-paenungulata clade to the exclusion of afrosoricida . aside from monophyly of paenungulata, these results are at odds with the relationships recovered by amrine-madsen et al.  <cit> , although among these supraordinal clades only paenungulata had high bootstrap support . with afrosoricida placed as the sister group of all other afrotherians, there was only one unambiguously optimized morphological synapomorphy of afrotheria in the osa , none in the ua, but  <dig>  to  <dig>  ambiguous morphological synapomorphies of that clade. the macroscelidea-tubulidentata-paenungulata clade was supported by  <dig>  to  <dig>  ambiguously and  <dig>  to  <dig>  unambiguously optimized morphological synapomorphies.

phylogenetic analysis following addition of extinct taxa
parsimony analysis following addition of  <dig> extinct afrotherian species recovered a supraordinal branching pattern that is more consistent with amrine-madsen et al.'s  <cit>  tree based solely on molecular data. the macroscelidea-tubulidentata clade recovered in the analysis of extant taxa alone breaks down, and macroscelidea joined afrosoricida, forming a weakly supported afroinsectivora. the primary differences from amrine-madsen et al.'s  <cit>  tree are the placement of aardvarks with paenungulata rather than afroinsectivora, forming "pseudoungulata"  <cit> , and of hyracoidea as the sister group of tethytheria rather than of proboscidea alone. outside of paenungulata, the branching order among afrotherians was the same as in amrine-madsen et al.'s  <cit>  tree, but the root was placed between afroinsectivora and pseudoungulata rather than between afroinsectiphillia and paenungulata. inclusion of fossil taxa led to reduced bootstrap support for both paenungulata and tethytheria, in the former case due in part to the variable placement of the alleged stem macroscelidean herodotius, which in different equally parsimonious trees emerged as the sister taxon of either pseudoungulata, tubulidentata, paenungulata, or hyracoidea, but never as a sister group of crown macroscelidea. the lower support for tethytheria can be explained by the inclusion of primitive fossil proboscideans and sirenians, which reveal that a number of the apomorphies that were unambiguously optimized as tethytherian synapomorphies in the analysis of extant taxa alone are in fact more parsimoniously explained as homoplasies rather than homologies .

although it is interesting that the addition of fossil taxa led to an improved fit with the tree derived from maximum likelihood and bayesian analysis of the molecular data alone, closer examination reveals that this most parsimonious topology is not particularly stable. for instance, trees derived from analyses that were constrained to recover the interordinal arrangement )) were only two steps longer than the unconstrained tree, and could not be statistically rejected; nor could the alternative arrangement of a monophyletic afroinsectiphillia containing afroinsectivora . none of the three possible arrangements of the paenungulate orders were either well supported or rejected by statistical tests, and even afrosoricid diphyly  could not be rejected . furthermore, if the well-known oligocene embrithopod arsinoitherium was excluded from the analysis, afrosoricida was again placed as the sister group of a ) clade, within which hyracoidea was placed as the sister taxon of proboscidea to the exclusion of sirenia . such a major impact of a single taxon such as arsinoitherium is unsettling, given that it is a highly autapomorphic late-surviving genus that evolved a number of morphological convergences with proboscideans  <cit>  – some of which could be optimized as tethytherian synapomorphies given arsinoitherium's placement as a stem sirenian in the present analysis. deletion of basal eocene taxa, such as the herodotiines chambius and herodotius, the hyracoids microhyrax and seggeurius, the proboscidean phosphatherium, and the sirenian prorastomus did not alter the optimal interordinal topology , but afrotherian interordinal phylogeny did prove to be sensitive to placement of the root of the placental tree: if exafroplacentalia  was constrained to be monophyletic, afroinsectivora again broke down and macroscelidea was placed as the sister taxon of other afrotherians . interestingly, when the monophyly of atlantogenata  was constrained, afroinsectiphillia, afroinsectivora, and a hyracoid-sirenian clade were recovered in the osa .

statistics for most parsimonious trees derived from analyses that were constrained to agree with alternative phylogenetic hypotheses. consistency index excludes uninformative characters. value for templeton test  is the probability of finding a more extreme t-value under the null hypothesis of no difference between the two trees , arbitrarily calculated by comparing the first tree in each of the two alternative tree lists. results in bold are those that are present in the adams consensus of all equally parsimonious trees. os = ordered and scaled analysis; u = unordered analysis; na = not applicable.

interordinal relationships within afrotheria from  analyses constrained to agree with the alternative hypotheses exafroplacentalia ) and atlantogenata ), and  analyses run following deletion or addition of various extinct taxa. results followed by an asterisk are those that occur in the adams consensus of all equally parsimonious trees . os = ordered and scaled analysis; u = unordered analysis.

relationships among fossil taxa
the phylogeny of the diverse paleogene paenungulate radiation has never been analyzed within the context of afrotherian monophyly. one of the novel results of this analysis is the placement of enigmatic arsinoitherium as a stem sirenian rather than as a stem proboscidean  <cit>  or stem tethytherian  <cit> . within proboscidea, most debate revolves around the placement of middle-late eocene moeritherium, which is variously seen as a late-surviving basal form or as more deeply nested within the proboscidean radiation, sharing more recent common ancestry with oligocene-recent elephantiforms than with older taxa  <cit> . the results of the current analysis are more consistent with the stratigraphic succession of early proboscideans in placing the oldest taxa  as the most basal forms, slightly younger numidotherium koholense  <cit>  as the sister group of middle eocene-to-recent proboscideans, and moeritherium in a more nested position. moeritherium's enigmatic contemporary barytherium, which was recently placed with daouitherium in a more restricted analysis  <cit> , was placed as the sister group of elephantiforms to the exclusion of all other eocene taxa.

the hyracoid phylogeny recovered in this analysis is very different from all previous estimates, none of which took into account multiple afrotherian outgroups  <cit> . the results are again consistent with stratigraphic succession in placing the oldest  taxa seggeurius  <cit>  and microhyrax  <cit>  as the sister group of all younger hyracoids. in contrast to previous studies that positioned geniohyus as the sister taxon of other hyracoid genera  <cit> , in this study the small-bodied paleogene forms thyrohyrax and saghatherium are consecutive sister taxa of large-bodied forms including geniohyus. the genus thyrohyrax was consistently found to be polyphyletic, with only the type species  and thyrohyrax meyeri forming a clade along with extant procavia. geniohyus was found to be nested deep within the paleogene radiation in a clade containing species of bunohyrax and pachyhyrax. a clade containing antilohyrax, titanohyrax, and early miocene afrohyrax was also well-supported, and placed as the sister group of a bunohyrax-geniohyus-megalohyrax-pachyhyrax clade.

the fossil record of non-paenungulate afrotherians is relatively poor, although the eocene herodotiines chambius and herodotius are generally considered to be primitive macroscelideans  <cit> . undescribed new material of late eocene metoldobotes, including cranial remains, helps to place that genus as the sister taxon of crown macroscelidea with strong bootstrap support , but herodotius was consistently placed alongside "pseudoungulates" rather than macroscelideans . a placement of both herodotiines as stem macroscelideans could not be statistically rejected, however . within tenrecoidea, early miocene protenrec was placed as a sister genus of extant potamogale, suggesting that differentiation of crown tenrecoids might have already occurred by that time  <cit> . addition of two enigmatic african fossil placentals – early miocene kelba and late eocene widanelfarasia – does not alter the scheme of interordinal relationships supported by the full taxon set. regardless of how characters are treated, kelba is placed as a stem member of tubulidentata, lending support to a previous suggestion that ptolemaiids might be aligned with aardvarks  <cit> , while widanelfarasia nests within crown tenrecoidea as the sister taxon of protenrec .

morphological character support for afrotheria
despite the placement of afrosoricids with macroscelideans in the analysis of living and extinct taxa, under this arrangement afrotherian monophyly is not unambiguously supported by any of the "proto-ungulate" features that macroscelideans share with aardvarks and paenungulates. in fact the existence of any unambiguous morphological character support for afrotheria given this tree is dependent on whether delayed or accelerated optimization is used; under delayed transformation, there are four unambiguous synapomorphies of afrotheria regardless of how multistate characters are treated . an additional four features  emerge as unambiguous synapomorphies depending on treatment of certain multistate characters. under accelerated transformation, there are no unambiguous afrotherian synapomorphies, but there are  <dig>  and  <dig>  ambiguous synapomorphies of that clade.

given that there can be little confidence in any of the proposed arrangements of afrosoricida, macroscelidea, or tubulidentata within afrotheria, an alternative, and perhaps more conservative, approach is to optimize characters onto an afrotherian phylogeny that is less resolved at the supraordinal level. with macroscelidea, tubulidentata, afrosoricida, and herodotius forming a basal polytomy within afrotheria, kelba placed as a stem member of tubulidentata, widanelfarasia nested within crown tenrecoidea, and with relationships among hyracoidea, sirenia, and proboscidea unresolved, a total of  <dig> morphological features are identified as unambiguous afrotherian synapomorphies across the different assumption sets . of these characters, nine are congruently optimized as afrotherian synapomorphies regardless of how transformations are optimized  or how multistate characters are treated .

character state changes identified as unambiguous morphological synapomorphies of afrotheria when relationships among afrosoricida, macroscelidea, paenungulata, and tubulidentata are depicted as unresolved. osa_at = ordered and scaled analysis, accelerated transformation; osa_dt = ordered and scaled analysis, delayed transformation; ua_at = unordered analysis, accelerated transformation; ua_dt = unordered analysis, delayed transformation.

discussion
the instability of afrotherian interordinal relationships is remarkable given that all of the analyses performed here included at least  <dig>  parsimony informative molecular and morphological characters. molecular divergence estimates clearly indicate that cladogenesis among the stem lineages of tubulidentata, macroscelidea, afrosoricida, and paenungulata occurred rapidly, and probably in the latest cretaceous; according to the recent estimates provided by murphy et al.  <cit> , these clades had all diverged within the first  <dig> million years of crown afrotherian evolution. morphological evidence for these supraordinal divergences either did not accumulate along these short internal branches, or was subsequently "erased" by evolution along the much longer branches leading to ordinal crown clades.

considerable ambiguity is introduced by missing data and different methods for optimizing character states onto slightly different afrotherian phylogenies, but it remains distinctly possible that there are a number of morphological synapomorphies of crown afrotheria, and that the ancestral crown afrotherian more closely resembled a "proto-ungulate" than an "insectivore". for instance, some of the only character transformations that consistently optimized unambiguously onto the afrotherian stem on the less resolved tree  are related to molarization of the premolars, which is seen in paenungulates, early macroscelideans, herodotiines, and kelba. with characters unordered, the ancestral afrotherian is also reconstructed as having no parastyles and well-developed buccal cingula rather than stylar shelves, which again suggests that afrosoricids  have undergone reversals to the dental character states observable in more primitive cretaceous placentals.

of interest in this regard is the phylogenetic placement of the alleged stem macroscelidean herodotius, from the late eocene of egypt, which consistently groups with paenungulates or pseudoungulates to the exclusion of afroinsectivorans, while an older and very similar herodotiine  is placed in afroinsectivora with macroscelideans. herodotiine diphyly is probably an artifact of missing data, but the distribution of herodotiines on both sides of the afrotherian tree again lends some support to the idea that the paenungulate-like dental morphology of herodotiines may be primitive within afrotheria. the most likely explanation for herodotiine diphyly is that, in known parts, chambius and herodotius overlap solely in having very similar upper and lower molars and fourth premolars, but chambius is now known to have macroscelidean-like astragalar and calcaneal morphology  <cit> , whereas herodotius has somewhat paenungulate-like anterior premolars and incisors . if some uniformity of herodotiine morphology is assumed and chambius and herodotius are assigned the character states of the herodotiine taxon that preserves those parts, then these taxa together join tubulidentata  or pseudoungulata , but never macroscelidea, in parsimony analyses of the data set presented here. additional cranial or postcranial morphology of herodotiines should play a key role in future efforts to tease apart homology and homoplasy among early afrotherians: if herodotiines are in fact stem macroscelideans within afroinsectivora, then their detailed dental resemblances to paenungulates will either not be present in older and more primitive stem macroscelideans, or these features will emerge as plesiomorphic within afroinsectivora and afrotheria and will support a proto-ungulate origin for both clades.

of the remaining morphological features that support afrotherian monophyly on the less resolved tree, none clearly point to either a "proto-ungulate" or "insectivore" origin for the clade. under delayed transformation, at least one morphological feature that was previously thought to be a synapomorphy of paenungulata   <cit>  instead appears as a synapomorphy of afrotheria as a whole. other features that have already been identified as probable afrotherian synapomorphies, such as increased lumbar vertebral number  <cit> , cranial soft tissue features  <cit> , testicondy  <cit> , and aspects of placentation  <cit>  also optimize unambiguously as afrotherian synapomorphies across all or most assumption sets. presence of a contact between the navicular and calcaneus, which occurs in proboscideans, arsinoitherium, and aardvarks as well as some macroscelideans, tenrecs, golden moles, and fossil hyracoids, is here identified for the first time as another possible morphological synapomorphy of crown afrotheria.

there are a few obvious deficiencies of the present study, some of which should be improved upon in future analyses. one obvious improvement that can be made is greater taxon sampling within placentalia , including a greater diversity of cretaceous mammals, as all such taxa should help to clarify ancestral character states for crown placentalia. one obvious criticism of the equally-weighted total evidence approach taken here is that "rare genomic changes"  such as retroposons and chromosomal syntenies have been given equal weight to point mutations in dna sequences, the latter of which are surely much more prone to homoplasy  <cit> . unfortunately there is no clear solution to this practical problem aside from arbitrary weighting of rgcs – which, in the absence of a strong theoretical framework for predicting the relative likelihood of, for instance, chromosomal rearrangements relative to point mutations, is here considered to be an untenable approach. the same criticism can certainly also be raised regarding delimitation and treatment of morphological characters , however the same problem holds  <cit> . finally, the use of parsimony rather than likelihood in the analysis of molecular and/or morphological data is arguably not entirely satisfactory and ideally will be addressed in future analyses using programs that allow for mixed models  <cit> ; thus far, however, bayesian analyses of the current data set have failed to achieve convergence despite considerable computational effort, presumably due in large part to the numerous genomic and morphological characters missing in fossil taxa.

CONCLUSIONS
simultaneous analysis of ≤  <dig>  parsimony informative genomic and morphological characters scored across  <dig> extant and  <dig> extinct afrotherians recovers a monophyletic afroinsectivora , pseudoungulata , and tethytheria  within paenungulata. none of these supraordinal clades are well-supported, however, and phylogenetic alternatives such as afroinsectiphillia, a ) clade, an afrosoricida-tubulidentata clade, afrosoricid diphyly, a hyracoidea-proboscidea clade, and a hyracoidea-sirenia could not be statistically rejected.

divergences among afrosoricida, macroscelidea, paenungulata, and tubulidentata must have occurred very rapidly in the late cretaceous, and unambiguous morphological evidence for afrotherian supraordinal clades aside from paenungulata either does not exist or has been overwritten by subsequent evolution through the cenozoic. on the optimal topologies derived from these analyses, identification of unambiguous morphological support for afrotherian monophyly is dependent on optimization method, but on a less resolved interordinal phylogeny a total of  <dig> unambiguous afrotherian synapomorphies are identified,  <dig> of which appear as such across all character treatments and optimization methods.

relationships among early fossil members of each afrotherian order are generally consistent with stratigraphic succession; novel results are the placement of arsinoitherium as a stem sirenian, and the placement of the alleged macroscelidean herodotius with pseudoungulates. additional cranial and postcranial material of eocene chambius, herodotius, and other enigmatic early african taxa will be of great importance for understanding afrotherian interordinal phylogeny, and will help to test competing hypotheses of a "proto-ungulate" versus "insectivore" origin for that clade. of utmost importance, however, is the recovery of even earlier fossil afrotherians from previously unsampled early paleocene and late cretaceous horizons in afro-arabia.

