BACKGROUND
microarrays are routinely used for large scale transcriptome analyses and have been widely and successfully employed for simultaneously monitoring the expression of a potentially unlimited number of genes in parallel, thus providing the basis for identifying genes differentially expressed in distinct cell-types, developmental stages, disease states and cells subjected to exogenous reagents  <cit> . the rapid and significant improvements of cdna-chip technologies and the availability of multi-species gene catalogues within the various data bases have made possible the comparison of gene expression levels within a single mammalian organism and across different organisms on a large-scale.

the advantages of cross-species hybridisation are two-fold. first, cross-species gene-expression comparison is a powerful tool for the discovery of evolutionarily conserved mechanisms and pathways of expression control. the advantage of cdna microarrays in this context is that broad areas of homology are compared and hybridization probes are sufficiently large so that small inter-species differences in nucleotide sequence would not affect the analytical results. this comparative genomics approach would allow a common set of genes within a specific developmental, metabolic, or disease-related gene pathway to be evaluated in experimental models of human diseases. second, the use of microarrays in studies in mammalian species other than human and rodents, for example nonhuman primates, bovine, sheep and porcine may advance our understanding of human health and disease, for example the use of animal models in drug target validation. however, the inavailability of adequate sequence data and commercial cdna and oligonucleotide microarrays keeps this technology beyond the reach of investigators working on economically and scientifically important large domestic species such as cattle, pigs and sheep. a potential solution to this problem is the use of cross-species hybridisations, i.e, human sequence-based arrays as tools for undertaking comparative genome expression studies. such analyses have been performed using ape brain rna as target on a human oligonucleotide array  <cit>  and pig, mouse and atlantic salmon rna on human nylon arrays-  <cit> . these types of studies represent critical areas of research directly related to the understanding of human diseases because nonhuman primates, bovine, sheep and porcine play a crucial role in biomedicine, such as, organ transplantation, vaccine development, viral pathogenesis, gene therapy and a host of other human health-related technologies.

a crucial step employing domestic animals in biomedicine is genetic modification which requires extensive embryo and embryo-related technologies, such as in vitro production of embryos for stem cell derivation and somatic nuclear transfer cloning. employing the bovine model and sensitive rt-pcr assays, it has been shown that the majority of embryos derived from such sources display distinct mrna expression patterns in a variety of developmentally important genes compared to their in vivo derived counterparts  <cit> . some of these aberrations lead to "large offspring syndrome", a complex of multiple pathologies observed in offspring derived from in vitro production and/or nuclear transfer of which significant oversize is a predominant feature  <cit> . analysis of mrna expression patterns in early embryos via cdna microarray technology would provide insights into the function of gene regulatory networks and would thus be a major step forward in unravelling molecular mechanisms underlying developmental abnormalities. the technology to amplify the minute amounts of mrna in early embryos without significantly altering the ratio of the various mrnas in the original cell has recently been described  <cit>  and a prototype mouse cdna-macroarray enriched in embryonic sequences has been developed  <cit> .

important criteria for evaluating any microarray system include the reproducibility of the data generated, the specificity of detection of the targeted gene, and the validity of the results that identify and establish differential gene expression. the experiments described here show the systematic validation of cross-species microarray analysis, with emphasis on the reproducibility and statistical analysis of generated data using standard microarray data analysis tools.

specifically, we investigated the feasibility and reproducibility of cross-species hybridisation of orthologous genes within a defined developmental and metabolic pathway using as a test case and the first description of its kind, human and bovine fetal brain rna as cy-dye labelled targets on a human cdna microarray. the microarray is composed of  <dig> genes each spotted  <dig> times to ensure reproducible validation by independent technologies such as semi-quantitative rt-pcr as carried out in this study, or alternatively, real-time pcr and northern blot analysis.

RESULTS
array fabrication and gene annotation
the human cdna microarray used in this study consisted of  <dig> fully sequenced and annotated cdnas as described in the supplemental table  <dig>  thirty-five spots containing only spotting solution  served as negative controls. in addition, in a separate control plate, the housekeeping genes hprt and β-actin  were employed as endogenous guide dots to enable accurate grid placement prior to image analysis. these spots can be seen as intense yellow signals at the periphery of each block as portrayed in figure 1a. the embryonic-specific gene, oct- <dig> and arabidopsis cdnas  were included as negative controls to monitor hybridisation-specificity. the transcription factor oct- <dig> is expressed in human embryonic stem cells and primordial germ cells and is down-regulated upon differentiation  <cit> .

classification of the genes according to gene ontology annotations  and chromosomal location  demonstrates that the selected genes encompass a range of twelve different functional classes and are located on all except the y-chromosome. this implies that there is no obvious bias towards biological characteristics and the selected gene set can be viewed as representative for the current study.

global data characteristics
our experimental design incorporated dye-swaps and four replicated hybridisations. three hundred and forty nine cdnas, each representing a unique gene were spotted  <dig> times on each microarray. four independent experiments were performed with human and bovine brain, respectively. within each experiment the  <dig> replicates were averaged to yield a reliable signal for the respective probe. in the next step, the replicated signals from the different experiments were averaged to compute overall characteristics. the overall correlation of expression of the human and bovine genes is shown in figure 2a. the regression line bears a slope close to one  thus indicating similar expression of human and bovine genes across the replicated experiments with a slight increase of expression in the human brain. the overall correlation coefficient is  <dig> .

additionally, we computed ma-plots  <cit>  in order to detect artificial dependencies of the log-ratio across the signal range. figure 2b illustrates a typical result from a specific hybridisation experiment. the horizontal lines mark the two-fold levels of over-expression in bovine and human, respectively. a clear observation is that a few of the  <dig> genes under investigation fall outside these thresholds with the expression of  <dig> genes being more than 2-fold over-expressed in bovine and  <dig> genes more than 2-fold over-expressed in human. however, there is no increase or decrease in fold-change for the vast majority of genes and this is fairly stable across the signal range.

in order to measure whether a given gene was significantly expressed, we compared its cdna's signal to a signal distribution derived from negative controls represented by approx.  <dig>  empty spot positions on the array. after quantification of each array a low non-zero intensity is assigned to each of these empty spots reflecting the amount of background signal on the array. since these positions are spread uniformly over the array, the distribution of these signals reflects the distribution for signal noise and is an indicator whether signals are at the background level or reflect reliable expression levels. for each cdna we counted the relative proportion of empty positions on the array that are smaller than the actual observed intensity . bg-tags from replicated experiments for the same cdna were averaged. thus, high values  indicate that the cdna is expressed in the respective tissue whereas low values reflect noise. the limit of visual detection of a spot corresponds to a bg-tag level of  <dig> , however there is a grey zone around this value. comparison with rt-pcr analyses showed  <cit>  that this level is consistent with the limit of detection at the 25th cycle of a standard pcr reaction. cdnas were considered as "detected" when their average bg-tag was above  <dig> .

we grouped the  <dig> genes into three classes of expression levels with respect to their intensity values above background levels  with class  <dig> as low , class  <dig> as medium  and class  <dig> as high level of expression , respectively. within class  <dig>  are  <dig> bovine and  <dig> human genes. class  <dig>  comprises  <dig> bovine and  <dig> human genes and finally class  <dig> has  <dig> bovine and  <dig> human genes, respectively. the genes within expression class  <dig> have signal intensities below the detection level of our microarray analysis platform and as such these genes can be designated as "absent" . a list of all the intensity values is given .

data reproducibility and species variability
an essential criterion for the applicability of cross-species experiments is the data reproducibility. for example, if human probes hybridise to bovine mrna with far less reproducibility than to human mrna high changes in expression of bovine tissues can be observed that are solely due to technical variability. in order to test whether the variability in gene expression levels is conserved within both species or in contrast, is higher in the bovine than in the human hybridisations, we calculated the coefficient of variation  across the replicated experiments. histograms are shown in figure 3a. we then defined four classes of cvs for the genes . note that a cv of  <dig>  indicates that the signal standard deviation is in the order of the signal itself and therefore no meaningful statement on the measurement can be made.

differential gene expression in bovine and human fetal brain
three statistical tests that judge the significance of differences in the levels of gene expression in human and bovine fetal brains were employed  as described previously  <cit> . tests were carried out with the four independent experiments in bovine and human brain, respectively. note that with independent experiments we mean the independent technical replicates since we do not employ different biological replicates in our study. messenger rna levels of seven genes were significantly  different between the two species, whilst four genes were found to be differentially expressed only with the wilcoxon test . this emphasizes that the wilcoxon test is more conservative than the parametric tests. in contrast to the two parametric tests that assume a specific parametric signal distribution  for the underlying signal series, the wilcoxon test is non-parametric. thus, p-values calculated by this test are valid in a more general set-up, i.e. for larger classes of probability distributions, than with the other tests. furthermore, since the wilcoxon test is based on ranks rather than on the underlying signals it is a more robust procedure in the sense that it is less sensitive against outliers from the model assumptions. these four genes are, znf <dig>  apoargc, kiaa <dig> and mgc <dig> – highlighted as diamond shapes in figure 2a. the expression levels of the vast majority  of the genes remained unchanged.

furthermore, taking into account corrections for multiple testing, no gene is differentially expressed at the global experiment significance level of  <dig> . for example, the lowest p-value of the welch test is  <dig> e- <dig>  . thus, holm's setp-wise correction would start with an adjusted experiment level p-value of p =  <dig> / <dig> =  <dig> e- <dig>  similarly, measuring the false discovery rate by qvalues  <cit>  results in no significant differential gene expression. thus, we conclude that the level of expression of the individual  <dig> genes under investigation within human and bovine brain is roughly the same.

nucleotide sequence alignments of bovine and human transcripts
in order to characterise some of the vast number of unknown bovine ests within the various databases we screened for orthologs to the human genes  <cit> . the  <dig> known human genes were screened against the tigr bos taurus gene index . using high-quality matches  we were able to ascertain the expression of  <dig> orthologous genes . figure  <dig> shows the quality of the matches. of these genes,  <dig> had sequence identities of greater than 95%,  <dig> genes with identities between 90% and 95%,  <dig> genes with identities of 85% to 90%. the remaining genes did not meet the criterion for the assignment as orthologs  <cit> . forty genes had identities of 80% to 85%,  <dig> genes had identities between 75% and 80% and finally  <dig> genes did not have a significant blast hit. these matches are considered to be insignificant and therefore implying that these  <dig> human genes  in additional file 1) do not as yet have their bovine homologs present in the current bovine databases.

employing a comparative genomics approach we have functionally annotated previously uncharacterised bovine ests. these genes are depicted in the supplemental table as bovine ests lacking a gene name or description in the tigr bos taurus gene index. as an example, the gene slc11a <dig> which encodes a protein which functions as a solute carrier has 92% nucleotide sequence identity with an overlap of  <dig> bp with its bovine orthologue. additionally, we have demonstrated co-amplification of this transcript in both human and bovine fetal brain rna using primers derived from the bovine sequence – figure 5a and table  <dig> 

verification of expression levels of cross-hybridised orthologous genes by semi-quantitative rt-pcr
semi-quantitative rt-pcr was used to confirm the deduced expression data generated by the high stringency cross-species hybridisation. we selected a set of genes belonging to distinct families based on their published functional annotation, for example, cell cycle , solute transport- , protein assembly- , anion channel-  and as an endogenous reference, the housekeeping gene, β-actin. primer sequences were designed to co-amplify the orthologous genes .

the rt-pcr analyses  using a common set of gene-specific primers clearly demonstrate co-amplifcation of the orthologous transcripts and, in addition, differences in expression levels between genes within the same species are discernable. for example, the house keeping gene β-actin and calnexin which is involved in protein assembly are more abundant than for examples genes involved in cell cycle control. most importantly, the trends in the deduced ratios  of expression levels of orthologous genes from the hybridisation analysis are confirmed by the rt-pcr assay.

discrepancies in the bovine-human ratio with array data and the semi-quantitative rt-pcr data are also observable. furthermore, some of the genes  are expressed at a low level . here, microarray measurements are less reliable than pcr-based measurements and one comes close to the borderline of the detection limit of microarrays.

discussion
customised and focussed microarrays containing orthologous genes related to function, tissue, or pathways are becoming widely adopted for studying mrna expression patterns. in addition, the level of cross hybridisation between genes with high sequence identity is also of interest because arrays are not always available for mammalian species other than human and rodents so cross-species hybridisations are often carried out  <cit> . in view of this, it is crucial to know whether the hybridisation conditions  would enable identification of altered gene expression across species. here we have demonstrated cross-hybridisation of orthologous transcripts by adopting a high stringency hybridisation and wash protocol.

the overall correlation co-efficient of gene expression in the fetal brains of human and bovine was  <dig> , with the regression line at a slope of  <dig>  . this suggests that the  <dig> genes under investigation have rather similar expression levels as judged by the intensity values of the human and bovine genes across the replicated experiments. the use of replicate experiments is clearly essential in order to ascertain true expression change. for example, judging single experiments we find a couple of genes escaping the 2-fold bounds. the ma-plot  <cit>  shown in figure 2b suggests that of the  <dig> genes,  <dig> are over-expressed more than 2-fold in bovine and  <dig> are more than 2-fold over-expressed in human. however, most of the changes are due to experimental variability of this specific experiment.

an extremely important aspect of cross-species hybridisations is data reproducibility. a poor hybridisation experiment would lead to a high variability in the respective replicate experiments in human and bovine. with regards to this aspect, we identified fifteen genes  in human and twenty genes  in bovine with variability in expression levels in the four hybridisation experiments. in addition, approximately  <dig> genes have a cv of less than  <dig>  with human brain  compared to  <dig> with bovine brain . however, this level of variability is low and can be expected due to the fact that the probe set used are of human origin. moreover, the slight decrease in reproducibility due to species and nucleotide sequence differences can be compensated for by increasing the number of independent repetitions  of the experiments. the unexpectedly low level of variability in gene expression levels between human and bovine fetal brain can also be attributed to the  <dig> data points examined per gene and the four replicate hybridisations  carried out for each species. our finding further emphasises the need for sufficient technical and biological replicates in all microarray experiments.

in assessing differential gene expression in bovine and human fetal brain, we observed that the expression levels of the individual orthologous genes were roughly in the same broad range. for example, if one considers genes involved in pathways of cell cycle control, the microarray deduced ratios  were for cdc27:  <dig> , cdc6:  <dig> , pcna:  <dig> , respectively, whereas the deduced ratios derived from the semi-quantitative rt-pcr assay were  <dig>  for cdc <dig>   <dig>  for cdc <dig> and  <dig>  for pcna, respectively.

similarly the comparative ratios for slc11a <dig> and calnexin are  <dig>  vs.  <dig>  and  <dig>  vs.  <dig> . an illustration of co-amplification with common primers and also the confirmation of the array data for a selection of genes can be seen in figures 5a and 5b. the expression ratios of all the other genes under investigation are given . though co-amplification is possible by semi-quantitative rt-pcr, there is amplification bias related to primer mismatch . this effect was further highlighted when primer efficiencies were calculated using comparative real-time pcr . an important difference between the two techniques is that cdna array hybridisation is less sensitive to minor mismatches than pcr primer annealing. the bias in amplification specificity is not a drawback in this study and species specific primers would obviously be used to compare gene expression levels in an experiment in which a developmental/metabolic pathway or disease model is investigated.

the similar expression ratio of the orthologous genes implicated in cell cycle control and initiation of eukaryotic genome replication which is conserved in all eukaryotes highlights the feasibility and importance of our study in examining conserved pathways operative within the fetal brains of human and bovine and of course across other species using human cdna microarrays. a similar finding has also been confirmed when comparing yeast co-regulated genes against the archaeal and bacterial operons. this implies that the components of the protein translation process are conserved across organisms at the expression level with minor specific differences  <cit> .

we also identified four significantly differentially expressed genes as judged by the wilcoxon test. the wilcoxon test is known to be more conservative than the student's t-test and the welch-test, however, we have more confidence in this test since it is distribution-free, in particular it does not depend on the partly unrealistic assumption of an underlying gaussian distribution.

the genes znf <dig> and apoargc were  <dig>  – and  <dig>  -fold over-expressed in human whereas kiaa <dig> and mgc <dig> were  <dig>  – and  <dig> -fold over-expressed in bovine. znf <dig> encodes a zinc finger-containing transcription factor that acts as a transcriptional repressor and also implicated in small round cell tumours  <cit> . the gene apoargc encodes a protein with hydrolase activity. mgc <dig> and kiaa <dig> are uncharacterised ests so comments cannot be made with regard to their function.

orthologous genes between human and mouse and between human and rat both have a mean of approximately 85% sequence identity  <cit> . in two independent and unrelated studies carried out on cdna and 50-mer oligonucleotide microarrays, cross-hybridisation was only observed with genes with 70%-80% and 50%-75% overall sequence identity, respectively  <cit> . with respect to these studies, our data unequivocally confirm the feasibility and reproducibility of cross-species hybridisation of orthologous genes within defined developmental and metabolic pathway operative in human and bovine fetal brains. in addition, we have been able to assign gene names to previously uncharacterised bovine ests, thus, highlighting the importance of comparative genomics in identifying orthologous genes across species.

furthermore, using this protocol of cross-species hybridisation, we have compared gene expression in bovine unfertilised oocytes and blastocyst using a larger microarray  comprising  <dig>  fully sequenced and annotated genes and ests. the correlation co-efficient between the rna samples is  <dig> , thus reflecting the diversity between oocyte derived maternal transcripts and embryonic transcripts derived from the blastocyst .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this study highlights the significance and utilisation power of comparative genomics and also demonstrates the feasibility of using human cdna microarrays to facilitate the identification of differentially expressed genes in human and bovine fetal brain. our results indicate that cross-species hybridisation is not only a useful short-term solution for studying species for which gene maps, cdna or oligo microarrays are not yet available, but also possesses tremendous power in enabling the unravelling of common evolutionary evolved mechanisms in different species.

