BACKGROUND
the fascinating natural history of obligate mutualistic symbioses, in which two completely different organisms live in a close and fully interdependent relationship, are increasingly unraveled by studies of extant adaptations and phylogenetic history  <cit> . such intimate relationships have the potential to become very complex because their coevolution may produce specialized structures that provide indirect fitness via the symbiotic partner  <cit> . this may constrain a detailed understanding of the key molecular processes that maintain the symbiosis, so that identifying the gene sequences involved in these processes is of paramount importance. new high-throughput methods offer the opportunity to obtain a more comprehensive molecular understanding of so-called "nonmodel" organisms involved in obligate symbioses. illustrative examples are the recent genome sequencing projects on laccaria and black truffle fungi, which have led to significant new insights into the respective roles of these fungi in ectomycorrhizal symbioses  <cit> .

leaf-cutting ants of the genera acromyrmex and atta live in mutualistic symbiosis with a basidiomycete fungus , which they cultivate as fungal gardens in underground nest chambers. the ants provide the fungus with a growth substrate consisting of freshly cut leaf fragments. after new leaf fragments are brought into the nest, the ants chew them into smaller pieces and apply droplets of fecal fluid to the leaf pulp before depositing this mixed substrate in the fungus garden and inoculating it with small tufts of mycelium from older parts of the garden  <cit> . previous work has shown that the fecal fluid of a wide range of attine species contains various digestive enzymes such as proteases, amylases and chitinases  <cit> . the fecal fluid of atta colombica tonsipes has also been shown to contain enzymes to degrade pectin, xylan, carboxymethylcellulose and several disaccharides as well as synthetic p-nitrophenyl glycosides  <cit> . it has been suggested that the three fecal fluid proteases of atta texana and atta colombica tonsipes originate from the fungal symbiont, as proteases with similar biochemical properties could be isolated from the garden mycelium  <cit> . a more recent study used isoelectric focusing to show that cellulases, pectinases and laccases present in the fecal droplets of acromyrmex leaf-cutting ants had properties similar to those of fungus-produced enzymes, which likewise suggested a fungal origin of these enzymes  <cit> . however, it is rarely made explicit that the implications of this notion are rather spectacular, as this would imply that these fecal proteins are not affected by the digestive system of the ants and that they must have important functions for the symbiosis to compensate for the ants not under selection to digest these proteins.

the primary food source of leaf-cutting ants consists of the swollen hyphal tips, called gongylidia, that their fungus gardens produce in clusters . these structures are not known from any other fungi and are believed to be produced exclusively for the benefit of the ants. if the fecal droplet proteins would indeed be directly derived from the fungus ingested by the ants, we should expect the gongylidia to be the primary source of these proteins. here we use state-of-the-art molecular techniques , matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight  mass spectrometry, quantitative polymerase chain reaction , gene cloning, and quantitative enzyme assays) to test the validity of the idea that fungal proteins are excreted in ant fecal droplets to be recycled for active service in the decomposition of new leaf fragments.

our study focuses on pectinolytic enzymes, as previous studies have shown that these enzymes are present in the ant fecal droplets and because pectinolytic enzymes are known to play a key role in the infection process of live plants by necrotrophic fungal pathogens  <cit> . the fungi that are cultivated by leaf-cutting ants of the genera acromyrmex and atta belong to a clade of universal decomposers , but secondarily, and exceptionally, have evolved the ability to decompose live plant material that is offered to them as substrate by the farming ants  <cit> . the ant-fungus mutualism is thus facing similar selection pressures as necrotrophic fungi, that is, to breach the cell walls of living plant tissues to gain access to the nutritious interior of these cells. we therefore tested the hypothesis that gongylidia consumption and fecal droplet deposition might have evolved to concentrate and transport fungal pectinolytic enzymes to the upper part of fungus gardens to enhance the degradation of live plant cell walls immediately after they are processed by the ants.

we confirm that a large number of distinct proteins survive gut passage, that many of them are pectinolytic enzymes, that they are active in fecal droplets only when the ants are allowed to feed on symbiont mycelium and that the genes encoding these proteins are overexpressed in the gongylidia.

RESULTS
sds-page of fecal droplet proteins resulted in a specific pattern of protein bands  that was highly reproducible. to identify the proteins,  <dig> bands were extracted from the gel and subjected to tandem mass spectrometry . this resulted in  <dig> different peptide sequences determined from the ms/ms spectra. in a first approach to identifying the proteins from which these peptides originated, we designed degenerate primers matching the amino acid sequences of the peptides and used them in pcr reactions using cdna from the fungal symbiont as template. by this method, we were able to identify  <dig> fecal droplet proteins. in a second approach, the sequences were used in a basic local alignment search tool  search of a newly generated database  containing approximately  <dig> mb of genome sequence data of the fungal symbiont obtained by  <dig> sequencing  <cit> , which led to the identification of an additional  <dig> fecal droplet proteins. in both cases, rapid amplification of cdna ends -pcr was subsequently used to obtain the full-length sequences of the genes encoding these proteins. among the  <dig> gene sequences identified by these methods,  <dig> were found to share a high degree of similarity with enzymes involved in the degradation of pectin . the molecular mass of the proteins calculated from the corresponding cdna sequences were in all cases similar to the molecular mass predicted from sds-page, indicating that the proteins in the fecal material are full-length proteins and not just short degradation products.

a
athe letter j symbolizes the amino acids leucin and isoleucin, which have the same molecular mass and therefore are indiscernible by mass spectrometry. bthese numbers refer to the bands excised from the sds-page gel  in which the protein in question was found.

to reveal whether the obtained pectinolytic enzymes were in fact active in the fecal droplets of the ants, activity assays of five of the six identified types of enzymes were performed on single fecal droplets of nine ants taken from each of three different colonies. the same activity measurements were performed on fecal material from a similar number of ants that were kept for more than  <dig> weeks on sugar water and bramble leaves, but without the fungal symbiont to confirm the fungal origin of the enzyme activities. without exception, the enzyme assays showed pronounced activity in fecal material from ants kept with their fungal symbiont, whereas fecal material from ants deprived of their symbiont showed almost no activity . the low activities apparently still present in some of the assays on fecal droplets from the starved ants were most likely artefacts because any colored substances in the fecal material will absorb light during the spectrophotometric assays and will consequently produce a weak false-positive signal. alternatively, some enzyme activity may remain in the fecal fluid of the ants even after  <dig> weeks of separation from the fungal symbiont. enzyme assays of heat-denatured fecal droplets hardly showed any activity, confirming the appropriateness of our activity measurements . activity measurements for the sixth pectinase, rhamnogalacuronan acetylesterase, were not been performed as no suitable assay could be found.

to test whether the expression level of the identified pectinolytic enzymes is upregulated in the gongylidia, the main food of the ants, rna was extracted both from gongylidia and from gongylidia-free mycelium taken from fungus gardens of four different colonies. after reverse transcription of the mrna into cdna, the expression levels of the genes were measured by qpcr using three different reference genes to normalize the data. six of the seven genes showed significant upregulation in the gongylidia , while one gene  was equally expressed in the two types of tissue. the latter gene had a relatively high cycle threshold  value in the qpcr , suggesting that it was only weakly expressed. peptide sequence tags for the pectate lyase genes were found only in the weak bands  <dig> and  <dig> , confirming that this enzyme does not play an important functional role in the fecal droplets.

discussion
our tandem mass spectrometry analyses identified seven pectinolytic enzymes in the fecal material of acromyrmex echinatior leaf-cutting ants. activity assays showed that these enzymes were still active after passage through the ant gut, and our feeding and gene cloning experiments showed that these enzymes must be derived from the ingested fungal tissue . this is consistent with findings that pectinolytic enzymes are very rarely produced by animals  <cit> . the number of proteins that we were able to visualize on the sds-page gels remained limited , suggesting that many other proteins in the fungal food are being degraded in the ant guts. this is as expected because proteins are valuable nutrients with high nitrogen content, a resource that is clearly limiting for the overall performance of the symbiosis  <cit> . the fact that we were able to document the earlier inference  <cit>  that some proteins, including pectinolytic enzymes, are not digested in the ant gut indicates that selection for decomposition efficiency has affected the exosymbiosis between ant and fungi at a deep molecular level. we expect that other bands on our sds-page gels represent proteins with important functions in the symbiosis, and work to unravel these functions is ongoing.

the production, circulation and function of pectinolytic enzymes in the symbiosis
gongylidia, the swollen hyphal tips produced by the fungal symbionts of the higher attine ants , are generally considered to be the almost exclusive food source of the ants and their broods  <cit> . they are found nowhere else other than in these fungal symbionts and thus represent an evolutionarily derived trait that has been inferred to be adaptive for symbiosis  <cit> . however, the details of this adaptive function have remained poorly understood. for example, it has previously been suggested that only the larvae of leaf-cutting ants rely exclusively on a fungal diet  <cit> , whereas later research has shown that adult workers also ingest significant amounts of fungus garden material  <cit> , a notion that is corroborated by our present study. here we have shown that the gongylidia not only serve as nutrition for the ants but also produce enzymes needed for the degradation of the plant substrate in much higher quantities than in undifferentiated mycelium. our results thus imply that we have likely discovered an important adaptive function of the gongylidia, as we showed earlier that pectin degradation in newly grown sections of leaf-cutting ant gardens proceeds at a very high rate and with the primary function of providing access to the fresh cell contents of the leaf tissue  <cit> . the farming ants clearly prioritize highly digestible nutrients such as proteins and starch relative to the bulk of cell wall material, which tends to be discarded on the dump piles that leaf-cutting ants maintain  <cit>  . these studies also indicate that the degradation of pectin itself is unlikely to contribute much to the available resources of a leaf-cutting ant nest relative to the proteins and starch from the interior of the plant cells.

pectinolytic enzymes are known to be important for the virulence of both bacterial and fungal phytopathogens  <cit> . a recent study comparing the gene inventories of phytopathogenic versus free-living filamentous ascomycetes found that pectinolytic enzyme genes were more common in pathogenic fungi  <cit> . when the pathogenic fungus fusarium oxysporum is grown on a plant cell wall substrate, pectinolytic enzymes are the first enzymes to be secreted, followed by other carbohydrate active enzymes  <cit> . gene disruption studies have shown that the virulence of fungal phytopathogens may decrease significantly when a pectinolytic enzyme gene is mutated  <cit> , although in most cases more than one gene has to be mutated to affect virulence, owing to redundancy between multiple isoforms of these genes in the fungal genomes  <cit> . also, erwinia chrysanthemi bacteria produce a wide range of pectinolytic enzymes upon infection of plant tissue, and inactivation of at least some of these genes makes infection by these bacteria ineffective.

plant pathogenic microorganisms typically produce many different pectinolytic enzymes targeting both the pectin side chains and the backbones of the molecules, as both are apparently needed to breach the cell wall to gain access to the cell content  <cit> . in our study, we found one pectinolytic enzyme targeted toward the backbone of the smooth region that was upregulated in the gongylidia , whereas another  was found without being upregulated . otherwise, we found a pectinesterase that removes methyl groups of the smooth region of pectin molecules and several enzymes targeted toward the hairy regions, including an arabinogalactan endo- <dig> -β-galactosidase and an arabinofuranosidase that, respectively, remove galactose and arabinose from the side chains. in addition, we found two very similar rhamnogalacturonan acetyl esterases, which remove acetyl groups from the rhamnose moieties of the hairy region. however, no degradation enzymes targeted toward the backbone of the pectin hairy regions were found. we have previously found enzymatic activity toward rhamnogalacturonan in the fecal droplet material , but apparently the abundance of that protein was not high enough to be detected by the methods used in the present paper.

selection pressure, evolutionary pathways and convergence
when new leaf material is brought into the ant nest, it is added to the top of the fungus garden, and tufts of mycelium are subsequently placed on it  <cit> . this means that the leaf-to-mycelium ratio in the top of gardens is very high, so that production of digestive enzymes by these small mycelial tufts is likely to be a limiting step in the degradation process. application of high concentrations of these enzymes via the fecal fluid of the ants thus increases the turnover rate of garden substrate, which may provide some compensation for the relatively low nitrogen to carbon ratio of the leaf material. this may be why this intricate pathway of having pectinolytic enzymes brought in from mature parts of the garden via the digestive system of the ants could evolve by favoring mutations that allowed these enzymes to accumulate in the hindgut rather than being degraded.

plant tissues usually contain chemical compounds that have evolved to protect against attack from herbivores and fungal or bacterial pathogens  <cit> . being of saprotrophic origin, the free-living ancestors of the attine ant fungal symbionts may not have possessed mechanisms to cope with such defenses expressed in live plant tissues. the chewing behavior of ant workers turning leaf fragments into pulp before mycelium is inoculated may therefore make decomposition highly effective when it is combined with the application of large amounts of pectinolytic enzymes that open up and kill the plant cells so that the production of any secondary defensive compounds is terminated. this would imply that it is the combined effort of the unholy alliance  <cit>  between ants and fungus that allowed the efficient utilization of fresh leaves as a novel resource, something neither of the symbiotic partners would have been able to do on its own.

the fungi that are cultivated by latin american leaf-cutting ants of the genera acromyrmex and atta are highly peculiar, because they belong to a universally dead substrate decomposition clade , but have secondarily evolved the ability to degrade live plant material when it is offered to them as substrate by the ant farmers  <cit> . recent studies have shown that the fungus reared by the leaf-cutting ants throughout their range may be a single genetically variable species  that replaced older symbionts in a single selective sweep only a few million years ago  <cit> . future studies should address the extent to which pectinolytic enzymes are upregulated in the gongylidia of the less derived fungal symbionts of trachymyrmex and sericomyrmex, genera of higher attine ants that also rear symbionts with gongylidia, but with a much lower proportion of fresh leaf material in their diet  <cit> . in addition, it would be highly interesting to unravel the degree of convergence at the molecular level between the pectinolytic enzymes of leaf-cutting ant garden symbionts and fungi that are free-living parasites of fresh leaves.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that pectinolytic enzyme genes are overproduced in the gongylidia of leaf-cutting ant fungal symbionts. after ingestion of the gongylidia, the enzymes pass through the ant gut and end up in the fecal fluid, where a significant fraction of these enzymes remain functional. droplets of this fecal fluid are mixed with the new leaf material that the ants fragment to become fungus garden substrate, and we infer that it is particularly in this time window that the pectinolytic enzymes enhance the efficiency of the symbiosis. this jointly produced adaptive response to overcome cell wall defenses of fresh plant substrate resembles the enzymatic mechanisms that phytopathogenic fungi and bacteria realize by themselves when facing similar challenges of decomposing fresh plant material. this suggests either that these traits have evolved convergently in the different fungal lineages or that the ancestors of the leaf-cutting ant symbionts were somehow preadapted to a necrotrophic lifestyle. we believe that the former explanation is most likely, but explicit studies on nondomesticated leucocoprinous fungi are needed to confirm this contention.

