BACKGROUND
carbon catabolite repression  denotes the phenomenon of selective substrate uptake from complex media by yeast and bacterial cells  <cit> . indeed, e. coli strains with defective ccr display slower glucose uptake and growth  <cit> , suggesting that ccr contributes significantly to their survival and proliferation in ever changing nutrient conditions. ccr is mediated by various mechanisms, including transcriptional repression and protein-protein interaction-mediated inhibition of substrate uptake- and catabolism related proteins  <cit> . however, the fundamental reason for the development of this regulatory mechanism remains poorly understood.

in a previous study, we observed the characteristic ccr in e. coli cells that were grown in batch culture in a medium containing an equal mix of five different carbon substrates  <cit> . in that study we developed a constraint-based modeling framework  <cit> , called flux balance analysis with macromolecular crowding . this model has successfully predicted the observed sequential substrate uptake kinetics by using a modified form of fba, which takes into account the total enzyme occupancy limit inside the cell due to the highly crowded nature of the cell’s cytoplasm  <cit> .

volume exclusion by the presence of macromolecules , has various effects on biochemical reactions both in-vitro and inside the cell  <cit> . in-vitro systems show that increased macromolecular concentration attenuates diffusion limited reactions  <cit>  but accelerates the transition state-limited reactions  <cit> , accelerates and stabilizes gene-and protein expression  <cit> , promotes correct protein folding by extending association between the unfolded polypeptides with chaperon proteins  <cit>  and prevents protein aggregation  <cit> . in e. coli cells, in which the concentration of total protein and rna is in the range of 200 ~ 300 g/l  <cit> , increased macromolecular density enhances the self-association of bacterial cell division protein, ftsz  <cit> , increases pts  flux and activities  <cit> , and may promote the reorganization of cell metabolism in rapidly proliferating cells from oxidative phosphorylation  to simultaneous oxphos and aerobic glycolysis  <cit> . moreover, experimental and theoretical studies indicate that normally functioning cells maintain their intracellular macromolecular density within a narrow physiological range  <cit> .

in light of these observations, we have hypothesized that ccr is a regulatory mechanism for the maintenance of a near constant intracellular macromolecular density in cells producing biomass at a rapid rate. to test this hypothesis, in this study we characterize the growth of e. coli cells both in single substrate-limited and mixed substrate cultures. we find that in mixed substrate cultures e. coli cells do not display ccr at slow growth rates and that the gradual activation of ccr correlates with the increasing rate of e. coli cell growth and proliferation. we also find that a forced transient increase of intracellular macromolecular crowding  or perturbation of ccr delays cell growth. moreover, cell density and volume alteration were associated with ccr perturbation. thus ccr appears to represent an adaptive mechanism that contributes to the maintenance of physiological intracellular macromolecular density in bacterial cells for optimal cell growth.

RESULTS
e. coli cells display slower substrate uptake and growth rate in single carbon-limited-than in mixed substrate cultures
we previously characterized the culture density-, growth rate-  and substrate uptake kinetics  of e. coli cells in mixed substrate culture, and also determined the level of acetate, a well-known metabolic byproduct of rapidly dividing e. coli cells, in that culture’s supernatant   <cit> . the carbon source consumption profiles we observed  <cit>  were compatible with the presence of carbon catabolite repression  in the culture, in which the sole consumption of glucose preceded the concomitant utilization of all other substrates . to better understand the root cause of the observed substrate uptake patterns, we grew e. coli cells separately in the individual components of the mixed culture medium , the experiments being terminated upon substrate exhaustion from the growth media or when cells entered the stationary phase.

compared with the mixed substrate culture, the culture density  and growth kinetics  of e. coli cells in single carbon-limited media significantly differed, glucose-limited cultures displaying the fastest-and lactate-limited cultures the slowest growth. in terms of their maximal biomass glucose, maltose-, and galactose-limited cultures were comparable and slightly below the glycerol-limited culture , while lactate-limited growth resulted in about one half of that level . as in the mixed culture, all growth rate kinetic curves displayed an initial increase, peaked in the early exponential growth phase, and then decreased . however, compared to the growth rate seen in the mixed substrate culture the curves were substantially flattened for the galactose-, lactate-, and glycerol-limited cultures and slightly less flattened for the glucose- and maltose-limited cultures . this behavior correlated with their delayed substrate uptake rate from the culture media . acetate  secretion by e. coli cells mirrored these trends, except that in contrast to that seen in the mixed substrate culture  on a population level there was no evidence for acetate reuptake in the single carbon cultures .

the fbawmc model predicts the substrate uptake order of e. coli cells both in single carbon-limited- and in mixed substrate cultures
the substrate consumption rates in the five single carbon-limited cultures  correlate with their apparent substrate uptake order in mixed substrate culture . in both culture types glucose was utilized first  and glycerol last , while the other three substrates displayed slightly different rank order among the single substrate-limited and mixed substrate cultures.

to quantify the rate and order of substrate consumption kinetics independent of total biomass, we normalized the measured substrate consumption  to the biomass data . it is evident that the order of intrinsic substrate uptake rate among the five single substrate cultures  has varied from that seen in the mixed culture medium . the rate of glucose and maltose uptake rates have displayed consistent consumption ranks in both culture types , while the other three substrates displayed different consumption orders. of note, the consumption rates of all the substrates proved higher in the mixed substrate culture than in the single carbon-limited cultures.

we previously developed a model of e. coli metabolism to investigate the origin of the substrate hierarchy consumption in mixed substrate cultures  <cit> . this model, called flux balance analysis with molecular crowding  obtains the steady-state metabolic flux distribution that result in the maximum biomass production rate given the available nutrients  <cit> . here we used fbawmc to model substrate utilization in the single carbon-limited cultures, finding that its predictions  are similar to the observed uptake profiles , while the same model without applying mc as a constraint failed to predict this behavior. the modeling and experimental results thus imply that intracellular macromolecular crowding may relate to the presence of ccr in mixed cell culture.

e. coli cells resist the activation of maltose regulon more in mixed substrate- than in single substrate-limited growth media
the presence of a single substrate in a growth medium is known to exert a repressive effect on the uptake of other substrates ; for example, glucose represses the transcription of genes encoding transporters of other non-pts substrates, as previously reported in  <cit> . each of the specific substrates also tends to upregulate a spectrum of genes including its own transporter genes due to substrate induction  <cit> . the sequential substrate uptake observed in mixed substrate growth medium , however, suggest that it is a result of strict ccr. although substrate induction observed in single substrate culture tended to repress the expression of other substrates’ transporter genes , the repression should be more stringent when multiple substrates are present. to test this hypothesis, we examined the promoter activities of operons within the maltose regulon upon their induction in single carbon limited- and mixed substrates cultures using promoter-gfp reporter plasmid-containing e. coli cells . we used a real-time monitoring system, in which the ratios of gfp/od600nm of cells, with or without maltose regulon induction, were calculated to evaluate promoter activities .

selected maltose operon promoters, such as male and malk, whose gene products are subunits of the maltose transporter, responded strongly to the inducers, maltotriose and camp, in glucose-, galactose-, and glycerol-limited cultures  and displayed milder responses in lactate- and maltose-limited cultures . in contrast, delayed and repressed promoter responses were evident in the mixed substrate culture . of note, the repressed gene activities in mixed substrate cannot be interpreted as higher basal gene activity because the gfp/od levels in mixed substrate culture were similar to that in the maltose culture . these data indicate the presence of stronger ccr in mixed substrate- than in single substrate-limited growth media.

the presence and magnitude of ccr is dependent on the biomass production rate of e. coli cells in mixed substrate media
to further investigate the potential relationship between ccr and the biomass production  rate of cells, we next examined substrate consumption behavior in a mixed-substrate e. coli culture at various cell growth rates. in continuous-feed chemostat cultures the growth rate of e. coli cells can be precisely controlled by changing the culture’s dilution rate. as cells respond to a stepwise increase in the dilution rate of the growth medium, their rate of biomass synthesis and cell division increases  <cit> . we sampled the chemostat culture 24 hr after increasing the dilution rate , the ph of the growth medium, and the e. coli cell volume and cell density.

as in glucose-limited culture  <cit> , the cell concentration in the culture medium  decreases with the increased exchange rate of the culture medium . also, the ph of the culture medium decreases slightly to ph ~  <dig>  at  <dig> /hr dilution rate but then returns to ph ~  <dig>  and above at growth rates higher than  <dig> /hr. this is likely due to the faster dilution rate of the ph  <dig>  growth medium . from a cell volume of  <dig>  fl at the  <dig> /hr dilution rate there is an initial increase in the volume of e. coli cells with increasing dilution  rate that reaches its peak  at  <dig> /hr, and then decreases and levels off with ~ <dig>  fl at the highest dilution rate of  <dig> /hr . however, the buoyant density of e. coli cells displays much less variation. it is lowest  at the lowest dilution/ growth rate at  <dig> /hr, and then reaches a medium density  at growth rates  <dig>  and  <dig> /hr, respectively. cell density reaches its highest value of ~ <dig>  g/ml at  <dig> /hr dilution rate that is then maintained till  <dig> /hr. these data indicate that while cell volumes change dynamically to match the faster biomass accumulation rate brought on by faster cell growth, cell buoyant density remains remarkably stable and does not increase above a threshold level.

simultaneously, substrate consumption profiles indicate a clear correlation between the rate of cell proliferation and the presence of ccr . at the lowest growth rate  ccr is absent, as glucose and the other four substrates are utilized fully and simultaneously. at a faster cell growth  a limited ccr partially inhibiting the consumption of lactate and glycerol is seen . ccr is more widespread at  <dig> /hr when the uptake of galactose and maltose are also partially inhibited . above this dilution rate there is extensive ccr with predominant  glucose utilization. indeed, the utilization of maltose, glycerol and galactose is limited and lactate is not utilized at all at growth rate at and above  <dig> /hr .

the substrate consumption rate compared to total carbon uptake ratio is calculated to describe the percent contribution of each substrates’ uptake to the total carbon uptake along growth rate increase. as shown in figure 3c, the substrate uptake ratio curves start to diverge after growth rate  <dig> /hr, showing that the glucose consumption ratio increases as the growth rate accelerates and it becomes the dominantly utilized substrate. in contrast, as the growth rate increases the substrate consumption ratio of lactate and galactose decreases while that of maltose and glycerol only display a slight change . this pattern supports the notion that ccr is inactive in slow growing cells but becomes increasingly activated in rapidly growing cells, showing the largest effect at the fastest cell proliferation rate. fbawmc modeling provides largely similar results and predicts an even more dominant selective glucose consumption at the highest proliferation rates than seen experimentally .

of note, at the lowest proliferation rate  no secreted acetate is present in the growth medium indicating that metabolism takes place exclusively through oxidative phosphorylation . however, with the initial appearance of ccr there is a concomitant presence of secreted acetate in the growth medium, indicating the appearance of partial aerobic glycolysis in the culture . at very high growth rates  there is a second, much larger phase in acetate secretion that may indicate the down-regulation of oxphos and a dominance of aerobic glycolysis in the culture . this has been predicted by fbawmc and is also seen in a glucose-limited continuous-feed chemostat culture  <cit> .

taken together, these results show that the extent of ccr positively correlates with the e. coli cell growth rate, and implies that the activation of ccr in a mixed substrate environment may enable optimal cell growth.

transcriptome analysis of mixed-substrate e. coli chemostat culture reveals several switches in its metabolic state
to search for transcriptional evidence for the activation of ccr in proliferating e. coli cells and to further understand the consequence of growth rate change on e. coli cell physiology at the various dilution rates, we collected culture samples for microarray experiments and subsequent transcriptome profiling. we then focused on the relative gene expression levels of the main substrate transport- and catabolism related genes, metabolic enzyme-encoding genes, and genes encoding osmosensor-, anti-stress-, and cell morphology related proteins.

expression of ptsg, the gene encoding the glucose transporter ptsg/crr, is at a high level from the  <dig> /hr growth rate with a peak at  <dig> /hr . the low expression level of ptsg at  <dig> /hr coincides with the high expression levels of the glycerol regulon genes , the galactose regulon genes , the maltose regulon genes  and lactate dehydrogenase gene  . this finding is in agreement with the concomitant utilization of all substrates at this growth rate . the expression level of the transporter genes for all five substrates remained increased at  <dig>  and  <dig> /hr growth rates indicating active and simultaneous substrate consumption at the slow growing phase. at  <dig> /hr there is also an increased expression of the galekpt whose gene product is responsible for the transformation of galactose to intracellular glucose . however, with further increase in the culture growth rate the expression levels of most transporter genes have decreased sharply, except that of ptsg’s, whose expression was still maintained at a medium level from  <dig>  ~  <dig> /hr, corresponding to the continued glucose consumption at all growth rates . of particular interest, the gene encoding the alternative glucose transporter, glucokinase , which binds to malt to repress the expression of maltose regulon genes  <cit> , peaks at the highest growth rate,  <dig> /hr, when overall glucose uptake rate is at its highest . these results are consistent with the observed substrate consumption kinetics  and support the notion that ccr is only fully activated at a growth rate above  <dig> /hr.

we next examined the correlation between the expression of genes on specific metabolic pathways and the observed growth rate. most tca cycle related genes were expressed highly only at the slow growth phase  . in contrast, the expression of glycolysis pathway genes were initially repressed, followed by an initial peak expression at  <dig> /hr growth rate and a second peak at the highest growth rate phase  . a largely similar transcriptional shift from tca cycle gene activation to the utilization of glycolysis pathway genes with increasing growth rate was observed previously in a glucose-limited continuous-feed chemostat experiment  <cit> , implying that the selection of the metabolic pathway enzyme activities is more growth rate dependent than substrate dependent.

the activity of the glycolysis pathway is partially reflected by its metabolic byproduct, acetate, whose extracellular concentration is the consequence of a balance of its rate of secretion  and re-uptake . we find that acetate production genes  are expressed highly between  <dig>  ~  <dig> /hr growth rates . besides the metabolic switches, osmosensing and cell morphology related genes were also found to be activated differentially along growth rate increase  indicating their potential involvement in mc optimization of dynamic cell growth.

the ccr mutant, Δptsg, displays growth defects and altered cell density in mixed substrate chemostat culture
e. coli strains with defective ccr display slower glucose uptake and growth. the Δptsg mutant with the deletion of the glucose transporter gene encoding eiicbglc displays repressed glucose consumption with concomitant growth defects in glucose culture  <cit>  yet elevates ccr repression when grown in media containing other substrates such as xylose and arabinose  <cit> .

when grown in rate-controlled mixed substrate chemostat culture, e. coli Δptsg cells displayed similar cell culture density to wild type cells at growth rate  <dig>  to  <dig> /hr, but could not reach steady state growth above  <dig> /hr . interestingly, mutant cells displayed lower buoyant density  and larger cell volume  than wild type cells, implying that physiological cell density and volume regulation is intertwined with ccr.

as expected, the measured uptake rates of the five substrates have diverged significantly  from that seen in the wt e. coli culture . glucose consumption  remained very low throughout, while glycerol and lactate displayed the highest uptake rates at the faster growth rates. interestingly, the consumption of maltose and galactose also remained suppressed, probably because their transporters, such as galp, were allocated to transport glucose as the shared transporter, besides the maltose transporter malefg <cit> . the altered substrate metabolism phenotype of Δptsg mutant cells is associated with morphology and intracellular density alteration.

in summary, these data demonstrate that defective ccr results in cell growth defects  only at a fast growth phase but not at a slow growth phase, further suggesting that ccr is required for rapid cell growth and cell physiology regulation.

transient ccr disruption in mixed substrate e. coli culture is associated with cell growth inhibition and cell density alteration
ccr is activated in rapidly growing e. coli cells , while in the ccr mutant, e. coli Δptsg cells, mc alteration is associated with growth defects in the fast growth phase . however, ccr-negative mutants always have compromised glucose uptake  <cit>   and potentially have adapted to a new mc level in the extended period of culture. therefore, we also wished to examine the cell’s response to transient disruption of ccr. to this end, we induced maltose uptake in a mixed substrate culture with the addition of camp  plus maltotriose   at a proliferation rate when maltose uptake is normally inhibited .

first, we tested if the inducers are sufficient to overcome the ccr-induced repression caused by glucose on the maltose regulon genes. we determined the protein expression level of male , a subunit of the maltose transporter complex, by western blot analysis after  <dig>  hr of induction. we found that male expression level was significantly increased upon maltose regulon induction , indicating that the inducers are able to upregulate maltose transporter expression.

next, we studied cell growth upon the inducers’ addition. we observed that camp plus maltotriose treated cells displayed slightly inhibited cell growth compared to uninduced cells . simultaneously, the substrate consumption rate of e. coli cells displayed decreased uptake of maltose and glucose, with maltose consumption eventually accelerating . in contrast, the uptake of glycerol was unaffected. we also found a significant increase in cell volume  and a slight decrease in cell density  upon induction of the maltose regulon. thus, upon inappropriate activation of the maltose regulon e. coli cells expand their cell volume with concomitant slight delay in cell growth, perhaps in part to accommodate extra proteome mass. indeed, increase in proteome mass by inducing the expression of an exogenous protein yields a similar growth phenotype . these data suggest that optimal intracellular mc is constantly sensed and dynamically adjusted along ccr activation.

discussion
carbon catabolite repression  is an important regulatory mechanism in bacteria that ensures that the cell relies on its preferred substrates to achieve optimal growth  <cit> . ccr may provide a similar function to the stringent response regulatory mechanism  <cit>  by being sensitive to the growth needs  of the cell. it may act by turning on/off metabolic pathways by facilitating or repressing the necessary molecules of the pathway to ensure optimal cell growth. indeed, ccr was evident in a mixed substrate batch chemostat e. coli culture in the form of sequential substrate consumption   <cit> . this behavior was predicted by a flux balance model that takes into account the crowded intracellular milieu of the cell  without any prior knowledge of ccr  <cit> . nevertheless, the relationship of ccr and intracellular molecular crowding has not been formally examined.

in this study, we show that mixed substrate e. coli culture with ccr grows faster and to higher final biomass density than in any of its individual substrates, and that the kinetics of individual substrate uptake is very similar to that predicted by the fbawmc model . these data suggest that substrate uptake and cell growth relates to macromolecular crowding and that ccr enables optimal cell growth. in turn, we also show that in a mixed substrate culture the extent of ccr’s activation is proportional to the culture’s growth rate while the density of e. coli cells remains essentially unchanged . furthermore, transiently altered ccr in e. coli cells decreases their rate of proliferation and growth . transcriptome analyses  also show that strict transcription level regulation of substrate uptake only appears at higher cell growth rates. taken together, these data indicate that ccr is a regulatory mechanism that is fully active only during rapid cell growth and may exert its effect on cell function in part by enabling cells to maintain a near constant cytoplasmic density and/or by reducing transporter competition for membrane space  <cit> .

however, ccr may not be the only mechanism that may contribute to the maintenance of intracellular mc by reducing the need for increased total protein  content of the cell at rapid growth. indeed, we have shown previously that with increasing cell growth there is a switch from oxidative phosphorylation  to a “mixed oxphos with glycolysis” mode both in e. coli <cit>  and mammalian cells  <cit>  that can be interpreted by the same principle. temporal separation of metabolic activities   <cit>  may also contribute to the maintenance of optimal intracellular mc. thus, at slow growth biomass synthesis rate is low and cell metabolism operates in a “substrate limited” mode, in which multiple substrate catabolism pathways are used through oxphos to maximize substrate uptake and metabolic yield . yet, when cells are growing rapidly the biomass production rate is significantly higher, which with the same metabolic regime would require higher catalytic proteome content with subsequent increase in mc. to counter this need and to maintain a near constant mc level, bacterial cells initially increase their cell volume to accommodate the extra biomass production and, simultaneously, cell metabolism is reorganized in part to maintain a physiologically optimal mc.

CONCLUSIONS
mc is a biophysical constraint and cell metabolism has to adapt to this fundamental constraint. in rapidly growing cells, ccr and/or the switch to “mixed oxphos with glycolysis” mode is activated to supply atp production and substrate catabolism with less mc variation . additional regulatory mechanisms of cell metabolism have likely developed in response to the need for maintaining intracellular mc at an optimal level. uncovering the genes, proteins and pathways involved in the detection and regulation of mc is an important step for the understanding of the system-level regulation of cell metabolism.

