BACKGROUND
histidine biosynthesis is one of the best characterized anabolic pathways. there is a large body of genetic and biochemical information available, mainly for escherichia coli and salmonella enterica, including operon structure, gene expression, and growing sequence data  <cit> . in these two enterobacteria, the pathway is the same, unbranched, includes a number of unusual reactions, and consists of nine intermediates; his genes are arranged in a compact operon , with three of them  coding for bifunctional enzymes   <cit> .

histidine biosynthesis is a metabolic cross-road and plays an important role in cellular metabolism being interconnected to both the de novo synthesis of purines and to nitrogen metabolism. the connection to purine biosynthesis results from an enzymatic step catalyzed by imidazole glycerol phosphate  synthase, a heterodimeric protein composed by one subunit each of the hish and hisf products  <cit> . this heterodimeric enzyme catalyzes the transformation of n'--formimino-5-aminoimidazol-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide  into 5'- ribonucleotide , which is recycled into the de novo purine biosynthetic pathway, and igp, which leads to histidine. the important connection to nitrogen metabolism is due to a glutamine molecule, the source of the final nitrogen atom of the imidazole ring of igp. chemical and biological evidences suggest that histidine was formed during the long period of chemical abiotic synthesis of organic compounds and the monophyly of the three cell domains in phylogenetic trees of concatenated his proteins, suggests that this biosynthetic route is ancient. the chemical syntheses of histidine  <cit> , prebiotic analogues of histidine  <cit> , and of histidyl-histidine under primitive conditions has been reported  <cit> , as well as the role of the latter in the enhancement of some possible prebiotic oligomerization reactions involving amino acids  <cit>  and nucleotides  <cit> . it is therefore reasonable to assume that his-containing small peptides could have been involved in the prebiotic formation of other peptides and nucleic acid molecules, once these monomers accumulated in primitive tidal lagoons or ponds. if primitive catalysts required histidine, then the eventual exhaustion of the prebiotic supply of histidine and histidine-containing peptides  <cit>  imposed a selective pressure favoring those organisms capable of synthesizing histidine. hence this metabolic pathway might have been assembled long before the appearance of the last universal common ancestor  and the wet-lab and bioinformatics work carried out by our group in the last  <dig> years strongly supported this thesis  <cit> . a wide variety of clustering strategies of his genes have been documented  <cit> ; moreover, an impressive series of well characterized duplication, elongation, and fusion events has shaped this pathway. therefore, the histidine biosynthetic pathway represents a very good model for understanding the molecular mechanisms driving the assembly and refining of metabolic routes.

it is worth noting that at least seven genes, namely hisd, hisb, hisn, hisi, hise, hisf, and hish underwent fusion events in different phylogenetic lineages  <cit> . gene fusions provide a mechanism for the physical association of different protein domains that might be catalytic or regulatory  <cit> . moreover, fusions frequently involve genes coding for proteins that function in a concerted manner, such as enzymes catalyzing sequential steps within a metabolic pathway  <cit> . fusion of such catalytic centers likely facilitates the channeling of intermediates  <cit> ; the high fitness of gene fusions can also rely on the tight regulation of the expression of the fused domains.

besides, a special case of gene fusion has played a key role in the evolution of ancestral genes: several proteins have been shown to be the outcome of coupled "duplication and fusion" events . the outcome of such an event is a gene with two paralogous moieties  that might undergo further duplication events, leading to a gene with several internal repetitions. gene elongation events allow improving a protein's function by increasing the number of active sites and/or the acquisition of an additional function by modifying a redundant segment. the most documented example pertains two his genes, hisa and hisf, encoding two  <dig> barrel  proteins  <cit> .

the aim of this work is to evaluate the overall role that gene fusion might have had in the context of the assembly and evolution of histidine biosynthetic route, and to understand the biological significance of each fusion. for this purpose, the structure and organization of all the available his genes that underwent fusion event were analyzed using statistical and bioinformatics methods.

RESULTS
a cascade of gene elongations and duplications: hisa and hisf
the two genes hisa and hisf code for a -5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide  isomerase and a cyclase, respectively, which catalyze two central and sequential reactions  of the pathway  and belong to the tim-barrel family of proteins. the comparative analysis of the hisa and hisf proteins from different archaeal, bacterial, and eukaryotic organisms revealed that they are paralogous and share a similar internal organization into two paralogous modules half the size of the entire sequence  <cit> . comparison of these modules led to the suggestion that hisa and hisf are the result of two ancient successive duplications, the first one involving an ancestral module half the size of the present-day hisa gene and leading  to the ancestral hisa gene, which in turn underwent a duplication that gave rise to the ancestor of hisf  <cit> .

the barrel structure is composed by eight concatenated -loop- units. the β-strands are located in the interior of the protein, forming the staves of a barrel, whereas the α-helices pack around them facing the exterior. according to the model proposed  <cit>  the ancestral half-barrel gave a functional enzyme by homo-dimerization. the elongation event leading to the ancestor of hisa/hisf genes resulted in the covalent fusion of two half-barrels producing a protein whose function was refined and optimized by mutational changes; once assembled, the "whole-barrel gene" underwent gene duplication, leading to the ancestor of hisa and hisf  <cit> .

the structural symmetry of the tim barrel has prompted us to investigate the possibility of an even older gene elongation event involving -mers smaller than the  <dig> units of the ancestral "half-barrel" precursor. to this purpose an extensive analysis of all the available hisa and hisf sequences was carried out. this analysis was performed by splitting each hisa sequence into four modules  following secondary structures succession in the corresponding protein from thermotoga maritima, whose three-dimensional structure is available . the alignments concerning methanocaldococcus jannaschii are shown in figure  <dig> . the degree of sequence similarity is not very high but it might be used to support an evolutionary model suggesting that the present day situation could have been reached after two gene elongation events, each one doubling the length of the ancestral gene and the number of -modules in the product. thus the hisa tim-barrel would be the result of a cascade of two consecutive gene elongations . this model is supported by the structures shown in figure  <dig> . we used the t. maritima hisa structure  to obtain the coordinates of each atom composing the "quarters" of barrel and then performed a structural superposition using swiss pdb viewer. lang et al.,  <cit>  compared the structure of the two hisa half-barrels and obtained a root-mean-square deviation  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  Å using all main chain, non hydrogen atoms. our results concerning "quarters" structural superpositions showed for the first and the second quarters an average rms of  <dig>  Å using all alpha carbons, strongly supporting the model proposed. we showed examples from these two organism, because m. jannaschii with several other archaea showed the best overall degree of conservation of internal repetitions, while the choice of t. maritima followed the availability of hisa tridimensional structure  <cit> .

identity  and similarity percentages calculated for the alignments shown in figure  <dig> 

the symmetry of the tim-barrel structure suggests to test a further ancestral duplication in which the original gene coded for a single -module, capable of forming a homo-octamer to form a complete barrel. although the alignments constructed from the eight single -modules are very short, they still contain a non negligible amount of sequence and secondary structure similarities not expected from random distribution of amino acids and by visual comparison of their structure is in agreement with this hypothesis . thereby, the ancestral forms of life might have expanded their coding abilities and their genomes by duplicating a small number of mini-genes, i.e. the "starter types". we are completely aware that the evidence of the ancient duplications involving an ancestral mini-gene encoding the "quarter" of barrel and the single -module is based on very limited amount of sequence and structural similarities; in spite of this, in our opinion, the hypothesis mentioned above remains valid. moreover, further studies are needed to clarify the presence of these additional gene elongation events and to integrate them into a more general picture of the evolution of the very diversified tim-barrel family of proteins.

the hisnb fusion
the eighth and sixth steps of histidine biosynthesis are catalyzed by histidinol-phosphate phosphatase   and igp dehydratase , respectively  <cit> . distinct hol-pases have been characterized in different organisms, whereas igp dehydratase is the same in all known histidine synthesizing organisms. in e. coli the two activities are coded for by a single gene, referred to as hisnb  <cit> : the n-terminal domain  is a phosphatase belonging to the dddd family  <cit>  and the c-terminal domain is responsible for igp dehydratase activity. the evolutionary history of the hisnb gene has been recently reported by  <cit>  who showed that hisnb gene fusions are present in most γ-proteobacteria and in the ε-proteobacterium campylobacter jejuni; phylogenetic analysis allowed to trace the fusion event in an ancestor of the γ-subdivision and its later horizontal transfer to c. jejuni. moreover, hisn is paralogous to gmhb , catalyzing the dephosphorylation of d-α-d-heptose  <dig> -pp for surface lipopolysaccharide production  <cit> .

since the former hisnb evolutionary model was based on a limited number of genomes, we update it including all available genomes .

by combining results obtained with several queries, we retrieved  <dig> orthologous bifunctional hisnb sequences:  <dig> come from γ-proteobacteria,  <dig> from ε-proteobacteria,  <dig> to a α-proteobacterium and  <dig> from the cfb group . no archaeal and eukaryotic bifunctional sequence was retrieved although they possess genes encoding dddd-type phosphatases, or, more generally had hydrolases  <cit> . these data confirmed the narrow phylogenetic distribution of the hisnb fusion, which is mostly present in γ-proteobacteria. however, the occurrence of a fused hisnb gene in other lineages enlarged its distribution raising the question of the origin of this fusion in these phyla, i.e. if it is either the outcome of convergent evolution or a horizontal gene transfer event . to discern between these two different scenarios, a phylogenetic analysis of hisnb sequences was carried out. a phylogenetic tree obtained using a representative set of hisnb sequences is reported in figure  <dig>  which shows that hisnb sequences from α- and ε-proteobacteria, and cfb bacteria are intermixed with γ-proteobacterial sequences and do not reflect the 16s rdna phylogeny. this result strongly suggests that the hisnb gene has been horizontally transferred from some γ-proteobacteria to the other microorganisms. it is also quite possible that the transfer event might have involved the entire his operon or part thereof, as evidenced by phylogenetic trees of other his genes . this statement relies on the analysis of the organization of his genes in the  <dig> genomes harboring the hisnb fusion, which revealed  that all of them are localized within more or less compact operons.

phylogenetic distribution analysis of the fusions hisie and hisnb, along with the percentage of species possessing one of them  on the number of histidine producing organisms . eukarya are treated separately  and never possess the hisnb gene fusion.

the hisie fusion
the hisi and hise genes code for a phosphoribosyl-atp phosphohydrolase and a phosphoribosyl-amp cyclohydrolase that are responsible for the third and second steps in histidine biosynthesis, respectively. in e. coli and s. enterica the two genes are fused to form the last gene of the his operon .

the phylogenetic distribution of hisie genes was obtained by retrieving homologous sequences using the e. coli hisie amino acid sequence as a query to probe genome database. the data are reported in table  <dig> and can be summarized as follows :

 <dig>  the hisie fusion is not universally distributed;

 <dig>  bifunctional hisie genes were found in all eukaryotes ;

 <dig>  most of the archaeal genomes harbor monofunctional hisi and hise genes; the occurrence of hisie in thermococci and thermoplasmata is very likely the outcome of a hgt event from a bacterium donor  <cit> . moreover, when the hisi and hise genes are not fused in archaea, they do not belong to operons and are separated on the chromosome. the only exceptions are represented by sulfolobus species, where the two genes are in a compact operon but separated by the hish gene;

 <dig>  the hisie gene fusion is present in 100% of the histidine producing organisms belonging to aquificae, deinococci, bacteroidetes, cyanobacteria, and thermotogae. moreover, a bifunctional hisie gene was found in all γ-proteobacteria that branched off after the separation of pseudomonadales from the main branch. the presence of the fusion in ε-proteobacteria can be explained by means of a hgt of the entire operon  <cit>  from γ-proteobacteria; the same appears to be true for bacteria belonging to the cfb group and possessing the hisnb gene fusion . in spite of the high number of genomes sequenced , no hisie fusion was found in β-proteobacteria, which represent the key-point for the compacting of his genes during the construction of proteobacterial his operon  <cit> .

 <dig>  firmicutes show a complex scenario: we have found fused and stand-alone genes in very closely related species of bacillus ; the same is true for clostridia. the presence of the fusion in model organisms such as bacillus subtilis but not in some of the recently sequenced genomes of the same genus suggests that sequencing artifacts, probably favored by the gene organization of these two genes, might explain this situation.

 <dig>  actinobacteria lack this gene fusion.

 <dig>  apparently there is no correlation between the occurrence of hisie fusion and his genes organization. however, it is interesting that during proteobacteria evolution, we witness a progressive approaching of two initially far hisi and hise cistrons, starting from δ- and ε-proteobacteria. the distance between them decreases in bacteria belonging to the α-branch; then, they partially overlap in β-proteobacteria, a molecular event which is coincident with the formation of a complete his operon, which very often includes genes apparently not involved in histidine biosynthesis. finally, the two genes fused in the ancestor of γ-proteobacteria, where the compactness of his operon is very high  <cit> .

despite of the proposed hgts, the current phylogenetic distribution of the hisie bifunctional enzyme evokes a scenario of convergent evolution and independent gene fusions/splitting of the two cistrons in different lineages. however, phylogenetic analyses are not of great help to confirm this view  because these proteins are very short  and the informative sites in a multialignment of sequences coming from complete genomes are extremely reduced bringing to unreliable trees . on a different perspective, the analysis of the linker region connecting the two domains might help in understanding the evolutionary history of these fusions, but we have found that they are very short, giving no information on this issue . if the idea on convergent evolution of these gene fusions will hold future works, it might turn out that there is a strong selective pressure favoring their appearance in different lineages. lastly, the finding that the gene order in all the bifunctional genes is always hisi, hise, suggests that a different arrangement of the two domains should be disadvantageous for the enzymatic activity and that structural and/or functional constraints might be responsible for the extant arrangement.

from metabolons to multifunctional enzymes: the eukaryotic his <dig> and his <dig> fusions
two fusions involving his genes were disclosed in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae: his <dig>  corresponding to the bacterial hish and hisf genes  <cit> , and his <dig>  the latter gene codes for a tetrafunctional enzyme consisting of about  <dig> residues and containing three regions homologous to the prokaryotic hisi, hise and hisd genes, arranged in this order in the yeast gene, whose products perform the second, the third and the last two steps of histidine biosynthesis, respectively.

the igp synthase coding gene: his7
the bifunctional enzyme igp synthase catalyzes the fifth step of histidine biosynthesis, generating the imidazole ring of the histidine precursor, igp. the overall reaction is the conversion of prfar to igp and aicar  <cit>  via a glutamine molecule, and with no free intermediate . this represents the central step of the pathway, which connects histidine biosynthesis to nitrogen metabolism and the de novo synthesis of purines, through aicar. the active form of the e. coli igp synthase is a heterodimer of the hish and hisf products i.e. a glutamine amidotransferase  and a cyclase, respectively  <cit> . the requirement for a direct interaction between gat and the cyclase was confirmed by the discovery of the structure of the s. cerevisiae his <dig> gene coding for igp synthase  <cit> ; the analysis of the encoded enzyme demonstrated that it is constituted by two domains, an n-terminal and a c-terminal one, sharing a high degree of sequence similarity with known hish and hisf, respectively. previous works suggested that the eukaryotic his <dig> gene is the outcome of a fusion event involving two monofunctional, bacterial-like genes  <cit> . according to the model proposed, the eukaryotic lineage inherited two monofunctional genes, hish and hisf, that underwent gene fusion. the alternative scenario, that is the possibility of a hgt event from a prokaryote harboring a fused hishf gene to eukaryotes was excluded on the basis of the absence of the hishf fusion in prokaryotes. however, the increasing number of sequence in databases opens the possibility to modify this model. to this purpose the s. cerevisiae his <dig> aminoacid sequence was used in a blastp search  <cit> , allowing to retrieve  <dig> bifunctional sequences. whilst most  come from eukarya, three of them belonged to two δ-proteobacteria, raising the possibility that the bacterial and the eukaryotic hishf sequences share a common ancestry, even though a phenomenon of convergent evolution could not be ruled out. thus, all the available hishf bifunctional sequences and a set of bacterial and archaeal concatenated hish and hisf sequences were aligned using the program clustalw  <cit> . the multialignment  allowed to detect several conserved insertions that distinguish bifunctional proteins. this speaks towards a common origin of the eukaryotic and bacterial hishf genes rather than a phenomenon of convergent evolution. the phylogenetic tree obtained using the above mentioned multialignment showed in figure  <dig> supports this view: it can be splitted into two main clusters, one containing all the monofunctional sequences including the one coming from the δ-proteobacterium geobacter sulfurreducens, the second one comprising all the bifunctional eukaryotic and bacterial sequences; the three bifunctional bacterial sequences clustered with plants sequences. this body of data suggests that a bifunctional hishf gene might have been transferred from plants to some δ-proteobacteria.

a tetrafunctional gene: his4
the s. cerevisiae his <dig> gene codes for a tetrafunctional enzyme and consists of three regions sharing a high degree of sequence similarity with prokaryotic hisi, hise, and hisd, thus the activities performed by the his <dig> enzyme are, from the n-terminal end, a phosphoribosyl-atp pyrophosphohydrolase, a phosphoribosyl-amp cyclohydrolase and the two-step histidinol dehydrogenase. the first one  uses n'-5'-phosphoribosyl-atp  to produce n'-5'-phosphoribosyl-amp , whose purine ring is subsequently opened by the second  to give 5'-profar. this compound, in turn, undergoes seven additional enzymatic reactions leading to histidine, the last two of which are catalyzed by histidinol-dehydrogenase   i.e. the double oxidation of histidinol to histidine, through the intermediate histidinal, concomitant to the reduction of two nad+ molecules, with a bi-uni-uni-bi kinetic mechanism  <cit> .

sequence retrieval and hisi, hise and hisd gene structure in eukarya
the eukaryotic complete genomes database of protein sequences was probed using the hisie and hisd domains of the s. cerevisiae his <dig> enzyme . the blastp  <cit>  search returned the eukaryotic sequences listed in table  <dig> and revealed that the two sequences used as queries retrieved two identical sequences, with the exception of aspergillus nidulans , schizosaccharomyces pombe and plants, where genes corresponding to the prokaryotic hisie and hisd counterparts were detected.

summary of results obtained for his <dig> genes. right-most columns indicate the presence of a given domain in the corresponding protein; column marked with an asterisk corresponds to the n – terminal region found in fungi , of unknown function, and plants , a signal peptide for chloroplast localization.

a multialignment of all the retrieved sequences with a representative set of archaeal and bacterial hisie and hisd sequences  revealed that the his4-like genes can be subdivided into four portions : i) an n-terminal region of variable length, followed by ii) the hisie moiety, which in turn precedes iii) a linker region of variable sequence and length connecting the hisie region to the last domain, iv) the hisd region. plants sequences have an n-terminal region which is unrelated to any histidine biosynthetic enzymes and that might represent a signal sequence for chloroplast localization, an idea which is in agreement with a  compartmentalization of histidine biosynthesis into these organelles, as previously suggested  <cit> . a similar search performed on prokaryotic databases did not allow retrieving any his4-like protein.

analysis of the his <dig> n-terminal region
the fungal his <dig> sequences have an n-terminal domain  that is much longer than that found in hisie from plants; moreover, we detected no significant homology neither with the signal sequence found in plants nor with any other signal sequence of fungi or other organisms . this sequence has no known conserved domains, as appeared by the absence of hits in the conserved domain database . moreover, a psi-blast search did not permit to obtain any statistically significant hit, if we exclude other his <dig> proteins . however, both the presence of the corresponding sequence in mrnas  and the molecular weight of the isolated s. cerevisiae his <dig> enzyme   <cit>  speak toward the presence of this n-terminal sequence in the "final polypeptide". a structural rather than a catalytic role of this region can be suggested on the basis of alignment of the isolated n-terminal regions of the fungal his <dig> enzymes, which revealed that the degree of sequence similarity between them is quite low and significantly less than that shared by catalytic domains .

phylogenetic analyses
a phylogenetic analysis was performed to check whether hisie and hisd proteins/domains listed in table  <dig> experienced the same evolutionary history and whether the phylogenetic trees were congruent with the phylogeny of eukarya based on other molecular markers, such as 18s rdna. according to the eukaryotic phylogeny based on 18s rdna  <cit>  viridiplantae branched off from the major eukaryotic line earlier than fungi, that represent a sister group of metazoa. moreover, within fungi, basidiomycota appear to branch off earlier than ascomycota; the latter are rooted by archiascomycotina, including schizosaccharomycetes. however, discordant phylogenies have been obtained using different sequences and this might be mainly due to hgts or to the transfer of organellar genes to the nucleus  <cit> . the analysis of the hisd phylogenetic tree obtained using all the available eukaryotic sequences with their prokaryotic counterparts revealed that it is consistent with the eukaryotic species phylogeny and supported by very high bootstrap values , suggesting a vertical inheritance for hisd in fungi and plants. the phylogenetic analyses also revealed that the second aspergillus nidulans hisd gene has been acquired from a prokaryote, probably a cyanobacterium. the interpretation of the phylogenetic tree obtained using the hisie sequences is quite different : two distinct clusters can be recognized, the first one comprising sequences from fungi, and the second one including prokaryotic and plants sequences. hisie from fungi now is separated from plants, and eukarya are not monophyletic. a possible explanation is that hisie genes of fungi and plants have not been vertically inherited from a common ancestor; however hisie proteins often gave rise to 'strange' phylogenetic trees for their short length.

concerning the splitting of the two moieties  in s. pombe, the presence of the n-terminal unknown sequence in the hisie gene product  and the phylogenetic trees reported in figures  <dig> suggest a his <dig> gene fission event rather than its primary absence. moreover, the fission yeast belongs to the ascomycota, all of which possess the canonical s. cerevisiae-like his <dig> enzyme, and the same  is true for species which branch off earlier from the fungal lineage .

an evolutionary model for the origin and evolution of his <dig> gene
a possible evolutionary model for the origin and evolution of his <dig> predicts that  one copy of hisd was donated from prokaryotes to the ancestor of eukarya and this sequence was vertically inherited by fungi and plants. concerning hisie, it is quite possible that the ancestor of eukaryotes received a bifunctional hisie gene from prokaryotes rather than two monofunctional genes that then underwent a gene fusion. these ideas are consistent with both the structure of hisie genes in known eukarya and with the phylogenetic trees shown in figure  <dig>  however, the ancestor of fungi and plants might have received the hisie gene from different prokaryotes, as shown by the hisie phylogenetic tree . after the divergence of fungi from plants the fusion between the two bifunctional genes  occurred in fungi leading to the extant his <dig> tetrafunctional gene, which was maintained during the evolution with the exception of s. pombe, where it was split.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we have analyzed the fusions involving histidine biosynthetic genes. at least eight out of ten his genes, i.e., hisa, b, d, e, f, h, i, and n underwent different fusion events strongly supporting a major role of this mechanism in both the assembly and evolution of histidine biosynthesis. each of the five his fusions detected so far, i.e. hisa/hisf, hisie, hishf , hisnb, and hisied  has been analyzed for: i) gene structure, ii) phylogenetic distribution, iii) timing of appearance, iv) horizontal gene transfer, v) correlation with gene organization, and vi) biological significance. our results might be summarized as follows:

 <dig>  the only "universal" gene fusion concerns hisa and hisf genes, which are the outcome of a cascade of  two gene elongation events followed by a paralogous gene duplication. the structure of hisa and hisf, that is the presence of two paralogous modules half the size of the entire gene, is the same in all histidine-synthesizing organisms and no correlation with his genes organization exists, in the sense that the two genes maintain the same structure independently from his gene organization . it is also interesting that the traces of the two elongation events are detectable at the primary sequence level in only a few species, mainly archaea.

this suggests that the two elongation events are very ancient i.e. they date before luca. the analysis of the sequence and structure of hisa and hisf depicts a likely scenario for divergent evolution of  some of the proteins belonging to the tim-barrel family; interestingly hisa is the only one maintaining an almost perfect subdivision in two modules half the size of the entire gene and sharing a high degree of sequence similarity. in other tim-barrels, such as hisf and trpf, the common origin of the two halves has been obscured by point mutations and/or larger rearrangements due to functional and/or structural constraints. therefore it is possible that hisa might resembles the ancestral tim-barrel enzyme. by structural comparisons of fragments of the t. maritima hisa protein we obtained indications on the paralogy between quarters of the barrel  <dig> module).

 <dig>  no fusion involving his genes has been disclosed in archaea, with the exception of hisie in some euryarchaeota. however, the hisie bifunctional genes are very likely not native of those archaea, but are the outcome of a hgt event involving an entire bacterial his operon  <cit> .

 <dig>  the fusion between hisi and hise occurred more than once in bacteria, speaking towards a phenomenon of convergent evolution; in many cases it has been preceded by the progressive approaching and overlapping of the genes . sometimes, the fusion was concomitant with the formation of compact operons. moreover, this gene might have been horizontally transferred.

 <dig>  the hisnb fusion is a relatively recent evolutionary event that happened in the ε-branch of proteobacteria. this fusion was parallel to the introgression of hisn into an already formed and more or less compact his operon. once occurred, the fusion was fixed and transferred to other proteobacteria and/or cfb group along with the entire operon or part thereof.

 <dig>  the fusions involving hish and hisf, hisie and hisd occurred in the eukaryotic lineage. whilst the fusion leading to the tetrafunctional gene his <dig> is peculiar of eukaryotes, a hishf fusion was found also in two bacteria, probably as a result of a hgt from an eukaryote.

the more or less narrow phylogenetic distribution of these fusions raises the question of the structure of his genes in the luca. on the basis of the available data, we suggest  that luca possessed all monofunctional histidine biosynthetic genes.

the whole body of data reported above suggests that the fusion of histidine biosynthetic genes has been driven by different selective pressures. in the case of the elongation events leading to the extant hisa and hisf, a structural/functional significance can be invoked. indeed, the elongation events were very likely positively selected in order to optimize the structure and the function of the ancestral tim-barrel.

the fusion of hol-p phosphatase and igp dehydratase might have been selected to ensure a fixed ratio of gene products that function in the same biochemical pathway. concerning the hishf  fusion, its biological significance is clear; whilst in prokaryotes the two proteins encoded by hish and hisf must interact in a 1: <dig> ratio to give the active form of igp synthase, in the eukaryotic bifunctional protein, the two entities are fused allowing their immediate interaction and the substrate tunnelling. a similar "substrate channeling" and/or "fixed ratio of gene products" might be invoked for the fusion involving the prokaryotic hisie genes, which code for enzymes performing consecutive steps of histidine biosynthesis.

independently from their case-by-case biological significance, such associations might be responsible for a more specific commitment of intermediates in a given pathway by means of the spatial co-localization of enzymes. operons might allow bacteria to reach the same target: the translation of polycistronic mrnas favors protein-protein interactions or the spatial segregation of a pathway. indeed, genes coding for interacting proteins are often organized in operons  <cit> ; in this context, it has been suggested that the bacterial igp synthase might be part of a complex metabolon whose entities are encoded by the four genes hisbhaf, constituting the so-called "core" of histidine biosynthesis  <cit> . data presented here might suggest that the polypeptides coded for by hisi, hise, and hisd are part of another metabolon.

this scenario can clarify the biological significance and the evolutionary advantages of the fusion leading to the his <dig> and his <dig> proteins and their prokaryotic counterparts. indeed, the cytoplasm of a prokaryotic or eukaryotic cell represents an extremely complex and crowded environment, where al lot of macromolecular structures might represent an important barrier to the free diffusion of  polypeptides; it is plausible that the stochastic movement of proteins that have to interact in the bacterial cytoplasm is a rate-limiting step for a pathway. it has been observed that the diffusion coefficient of many molecules in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells is less than in water  <cit> . accordingly, the intracellular concentration of proteins in e. coli cells has been measured to range between  <dig> and  <dig> mg/ml  revealing the bacterial cell interior to be a very crowded environment. the greater the volume and complexity of the cell the greater is the obstacle to the free diffusion of intermediates or signal molecules inside the cell. the problems related to the crowding of the intracellular milieu have been proposed to be greater for eukaryotic cells, not only for the distances an intermediate have to override to reach a given catalytic site, but especially for the presence of a number of physical obstacles, as the cytoskeleton, multi-enzymatic complexes and organelles. one of the major effects of the crowding is the reduced mobility of molecules, an effect directly related to the properties and the translational ray of a molecule. moreover many of the intermediates of metabolic pathways can be sequestered by aspecific binding to intracellular structures or be consumed by unwanted catalytic activities, reducing the overall rate of production of the end-product and augmenting its average energetic cost. if a similar view is correct, and the diffusion problem is rate limiting for at least some of the metabolic pathways performed by the cell, then the substrate channeling can permit to bypass the problem and the loss of intermediates by collateral pathways, which might result in a waste of energy. in eukaryotic cells, where the operons are absent and whose inside is more complex than that of prokaryotes, this obstacle might be bypassed by the fusion of functional domains that permits an immediately active product after the translation of a single mrna.

