BACKGROUND
htra is a highly conserved serine protease and chaperone found in both eukaryote and prokaryote organisms  coli htra was identified as essential for growth at temperatures higher than 42°c   <cit> , and as the locus required for degradation of misfolded proteins   <cit> . htra has since been reported to be a periplasmic protease and chaperone during e. coli extracytoplasmic stress response, with a structural temperature switch to mediate between these two activities  <cit> . htra has important functions for virulence and stress resistance in a variety of bacteria . recently we characterised purified recombinant htra from chlamydia  trachomatis l <dig>  demonstrating that it had biochemical features typical of a htra protease, and critically, that it was capable of both protease and chaperone activities at physiologically relevant temperatures  <cit> . the protease activity was temperature activated  and specific for unfolded proteins. however, the physiological function of htra during the developmental cycle of chlamydia is currently unknown.

chlamydia is an obligate intracellular bacterial pathogen, which is unable to be genetically manipulated, making traditional approaches such as gene deletion studies currently impossible. the bacterium undergoes a unique biphasic developmental cycle consisting of small  extracellular, metabolically in-active, infectious particles called elementary bodies  and larger  intracellular, metabolically active particles termed reticulate bodies   for c. trachomatis l2) . the rbs asynchronously reorganise back to ebs to enable continued infections. htra expression may occur throughout much of the developmental cycle of c. trachomatis, as transcripts for the gene were detected from  <dig> h to  <dig> h pi, with much higher expression levels occurring later in development  <cit> .

chlamydia can also enter a persistent phase of development whereby the rbs morphologically and metabolically adapt to remain indefinitely within the host cells, often in response to nutrient deprivation or other stress conditions  <cit> . persistence induced by the presence of the cytokine ifn-γ, thought to correlate with in vivo chronic infections, has been widely used in laboratory studies to investigate the molecular basis of persistence  <cit> . depletion of host cell pools of tryptophan via ifn-γ induction of indoleamine- <dig> -dioxygenase, the first enzyme in the catabolism of this amino acid has been characterised as the mechanism leading to persistence of c. trachomatis  <cit> . the ifn-γ persistent chlamydia typically are larger morphologically altered rbs, with fewer cells present in each inclusion and do not produce ebs  <cit> . the effect of ifn-γ treatment on c. trachomatis transcriptome was analysed by belland and coworkers  <cit> , who reported that htra transcript levels during ifn-γ persistence were approximately  <dig> fold less than acute conditions at  <dig> h pi and were present at similar levels to acute cultures at  <dig> h pi. the gene for the major outer membrane protein  transcript was also reduced during ifn-γ persistence  <cit> . momp and lps proteins were reported to decrease during ifn-γ persistent cultures of c. trachomatis although the decrease was most noticeable at time points beyond the scope of this investigation  <cit> . in contrast, htra protein levels increased during ifn-γ persistent infection models with c. pneumoniae  <cit> . furthermore, a key role of htra during heat stress was also suggested by the detection of  <dig>  fold increased levels of htra during a proteomic analysis of heat shock response in c. pneumoniae  <cit> . penicillin is also known to induce persistence of c. trachomatis by inhibition of binary fission of rbs from approximately  <dig> hours into development, although chromosome and plasmid replication continues, and enlarged rbs are formed in large inclusions  <cit> .

in the absence of a transformation system, genomic and proteomic approaches have been used to probe the function of many genes throughout the developmental cycle and persistence cultures of chlamydia. in the present study, we have analysed c. trachomatis l <dig> htra during development, persistence, and heat shock conditions using polyclonal sera generated against purified recombinant htra to test the protein levels by western blotting and immunocytochemistry. the ability of the c. trachomatis l <dig> htra to complement the heat sensitive phenotype of e. coli htra- was also demonstrated.

RESULTS
htra is highly conserved between chlamydia species and is homologous to e. coli htra
there is considerable knowledge of the key residues and domains involved in the protease and chaperone activities for htra from e. coli , and high conservation of these residues in other bacterial htra homologs has been reported  <cit> . htra is highly conserved throughout the chlamydia species  as multiple sequence alignment demonstrated 64% identity and 17% similarity of the amino acid sequences . the high homology of htra between the chlamydia sp. is supported by the ability of the polyclonal sera generated to recombinant c. trachomatis l <dig> htra  to detect c. pneumoniae ar <dig> htra by immunofluorescence . the three essential residues for serine protease activity , and the two putative c-terminal pdz domains are conserved in all of the chlamydia htra homologs from the available genomes. pdz domains function in protein-protein interaction and protein binding in a range of different proteins  <cit> . pdz <dig> sequence is highly conserved between chlamydial htras, functions in e. coli htra for coordinating substrate binding and access to the active site, including by binding of the carboxyl terminal of the protein substrates, pdz <dig> is known to function in protein interaction within the e. coli htra hexameric structure  <cit> . the homology between the ancestoral relative parachlamydiaceae htra sequences and chlamydia was found to be not a lot greater than the homology to e. coli htra, suggesting whilst key features remain conserved, htra has evolved along with the chlamydia genomes to suit the intracellular niche. the predicted cellular location of htra is within the periplasm for all chlamydia sp, as determined using psort andsignalp  <cit> . this suggests that chlamydia htra has a similar physiological function to the homologs in other bacteria for maintenance of extracytoplasmic protein quality, by both protease and chaperone activities.

c. trachomatis htra can complement the lethal high temperature phenotype of e. coli htra-
the increased levels of htra during c. pneumoniae heat shock  <cit> , and the essential role for e. coli htra during growth at temperatures higher than 42°c  <cit> , have led us to test the ability of chlamydia htra to complement the heat sensitive phenotype of htra- e. coli. a htra- mutant was generated in e. coli mg <dig> for the purposes of this investigation using the λ red recombinase method as described by datensko and wanner  <cit> . the htra- strain was verified by pcr analysis using primers to the kan cassette and to the chromosome flanking the htra gene , the strain showed the expected phenotype of lack of growth at 44°c when tested on lb agar plates, whereas the wild-type  was able to grow . the ability of the e. coli htra  and c. trachomatis htra  genes supplied on the low copy number vector pacyc <dig>  to complement the heat sensitive phenotype of the e. coli htra- mutant was tested. when e. coli htra- was complemented with either e. coli or c. trachomatis htra  growth was restored at 44°c. the e. coli htra- strain harbouring only pacyc <dig>  was unable to grow at 44°c on lb agar plates . thus, both the e. coli htra and c. trachomatis htra genes are able to complement the heat stress phenotype of e. coli htra-.

during the initial stages of this investigation the c. trachomatis htra was supplied on the higher copy number vector pbr <dig> which proved toxic to e. coli at 30°c, and was unable to complement the heat sensitive phenotype . this finding is consistent with previous reports of a similar copy number dependent toxicity of the e. coli htra gene during complementation studies  <cit> . in order to ensure that no toxicity occurred with either c. trachomatis or e. coli htra genes, the strains were further tested by determining growth curves at 30°c and 44°c on lb broth. the presence of either pacycechtra or pacyccthtra did not alter the growth of htra- e. coli at 30°c aerobically on lb media , similarly no effect of the complementation plasmids was observed for the growth of wild-type mg <dig> . the complementation plasmids were not able to completely restore the growth of htra- to that of wild-type when grown aerobically at 44°c  , however the strains were able to grow under these conditions where htra- is lethal, demonstrating that on both liquid media and agar plates the c. trachomatis htra- gene was able to complement the lethal high temperature phenotype of e. coli htra-.

in order to confirm that the complementation was due to the presence of c. trachomatis htra protein , western blots were conducted on the total soluble extracts from the e. coli strains using the polyclonal sera generated for this investigation. the cthtra protein was present in the mg <dig> paycycthtra  and htra- paycycthtra  strains grown at both 30°c and 44°c . the cthtra, protein which is predicted to be  <dig>  kda, appears as a doublet on the western blot at approximately  <dig> kda, which is likely due to the mature and immature forms of the protein where the signal sequence is not yet cleaved. the figure also shows a western blot with c. trachomatis uninfected and infected hep- <dig> cell extracts to demonstrate the specificity of the sera to a band at the expected size for cthtra .

htra is present at higher levels in chlamydia trachomatis l <dig> during heat stress
the increased levels of the htra from c. pneumoniae heat stress cultures  <cit> , and the ability of c. trachomatis htra to complement the heat sensitive phenotype of e. coli htra- both suggest a critical role for htra in the chlamydia heat stress response. the expression of htra from c. trachomatis during heat stress was tested using using c. trachomatis l <dig> infected hep- <dig> monolayers at  <dig> h pi  which represents the mid-phase of chlamydia development, when rbs are actively dividing. cultures at  <dig> h pi were shifted to 42°c for  <dig> h and total cellular extract was immediately harvested; controls included uninfected hep- <dig> cells and cultures which were not heat stressed. the cultures were examined by transmission electron microscopy  to determine the affect of heat stress on the morphology of the chlamydia . the heat stressed cultures showed clear morphological alterations compared to untreated  cultures, including: reduced numbers of rbs within the inclusion, larger rbs with condensation of electron opaque material within the rbs and excess membranous-like material within the inclusion.

total cellular extracts  from the acute and heat stressed cultures were analysed by western blots for htra . western blots for momp were conducted on the same samples to allow comparative analysis using densiotometry quanitification of band intensities in each sample . the localisation and expression of momp and htra was examined by indirect immunofluorescence microscopy , where increased levels of htra immunofluorescence was detected during heat stress compared to acute conditions . these results showed that momp protein levels decrease during heat stress , whereas the htra protein intensity showed a marked increase during heat stress when compared to acute conditions.

a similar trend was observed when htra immunofluorescence was compared to lipopolysaccharide  immunofluorescence during co-labelling experiments. lps is significantly reduced during heat stress conditions , whereas htra levels showed a marked increase . these observations all support a key role for htra in the heat stress response by c. trachomatis.

htra is likely to function during penicillin induced persistence of c. trachomatis
analysis of the htra cellular localisation under acute conditions using immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy showed that the protein is located solely around the periphery of each reticulate body at  <dig> h pi; there was no immunofluorescence detected within the cytoplasmic space of the bacteria . there are  <dig> inclusion vacuoles with numerous rbs within each inclusion visible in fig 6a, each rb visible shows htra staining is only present around the periphery of the cell which supports extracytoplasmic location of htra, which could be periplasmic considering the in silico predictions. similarly when closely examining every reticulate body within an inclusion vacuole htra staining was only visible around the periphery . the labelling of the  <dig> h pi cultures with htra was consistent with the observations for  <dig> h pi with htra immunofluorescence also associated with the periphery of individual rbs. additionally, increased intensity of htra immunofluorescence was associated with smaller particles corresponding to the size of both intermediate bodies  and ebs which would be expected to be present in the culture at this later stage of development . momp immunofluorescence was observed at  <dig> h pi and  <dig> h pi .

immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy of momp and htra revealed that both proteins were present during mid  and later  stages of penicillin persistence and resolved larger rbs contained within large inclusions  compared to the control acute cultures . this is consistent with previous reports of the chlamydia trachomatis morphology during penicillin persistence  <cit> . htra and momp were also detected by western blot from the penicillin persistent cultures although less protein was detected than that observed for acute conditions . the analysis of the persistent cultures by dual labelling immunocytochemistry for htra and lps demonstrated that lps is present during penicillin persistent cultures of c. trachomatis which is consistent with previous reports  <cit>  . quantitative analysis of the fluorescence showed that htra was present at lower levels compared to acute cultures  at  <dig> h pi, but that higher levels of htra were present at  <dig> h pi  .

a each number represents the ratio of htra to lps immunofluorescence in > <dig> individual inclusions dual labelled with lps  and htra  antibodies. quantification of total fluorescence was conducted under identical laser and microscopy settings on slides prepared on the same day .

b standard error measurements are shown in brackets beside each figure.

&immunofluorescence for ifn-γ cultures was conducted with a higher laser power setting for laser  <dig> collections to enable accurate calculations of the htra measurements. due to this difference control acute ratios are shown for both conditions.

htra levels are lower during ifn-γ persistence of c. trachomatis when compared to acute conditions
htra, momp, and lps were all detected by immunofluorescence at  <dig> and  <dig> h pi during ifn-γ persistence cultures during this investigation . the htra and momp proteins were also detected by western blot . the momp and htra bands, which are less intense then that in the acute cultures, appear to decrease in intensities from  <dig> h pi to  <dig> h pi in the western blots, consistent with the change in transcript levels previously reported  <cit> . the acute and ifn-γ persistence cultures were examined by transmission electron microscopy  to determine if the rb morphology was comparable to that previously reported , and the expected persistent morphology for rbs under these conditions was observed. htra immunofluorescence  from persistent cultures in the presence of ifn-γ showed markedly reduced levels compared to acute culture controls at both  <dig> h and  <dig> h pi .

discussion
htra is known to be an important stress response protease for many bacteria and has been shown to be critical for virulence in many bacteria, including intracellular pathogens salmonella enterica and legionella pneumophila  <cit> . there is considerable evidence from both microarray and proteomic studies that htra is expressed in chlamydia.

in the absence of a genetic manipulation system, a complementation approach was used to test the physiological function of c. trachomatis htra in a heterologous host . e. coli htra protein  and c. trachomatis htra protein  are known to have differences in substrate specificity for their protease activities, although both have temperature activated protease activity, and are specific for unfolded proteins  <cit> . the findings reported here show that the c. trachomatis htra was able to protect e. coli htra- against its lethal high temperature phenotype. this suggests that the ability to chaperone and degrade unfolded proteins, regardless of specificity for residues at the site of peptide bond cleavage, is sufficient to protect against the damage caused by heat stress. minor differences observed in complementation by echtra and cthtra  could be attributed to; differences in substrate specificities of the enzymes, potential differences in the 'switch' to chaperone activity at higher temperatures as e. coli has been previously reported to act only as a chaperone at temperatures below 30°c  although more recent studies suggest echtra may have chaperone activity at higher temperatures , or finally due to different copy number requirements for the two genes. however, regardless of the minor differences in complementation by growth curve, it is clear that chlamydia htra can protect e. coli htra- against the detrimental affects of heat stress. this data provides direct evidence for in vivo physiological functionality of c. trachomatis htra as a molecular chaperone and/or protease to protect against protein stress induced by high temperatures. the lack of a genetic manipulation system for chlamydia limits the ability to collect in vivo physiological evidence, however we feel the use of this heterologous system has provided strong evidence that chlamydia htra protects against protein stress in vivo.

protein levels were examined in c. trachomatis l <dig> cultures under acute and heat stressed conditions to examine the role of the htra. heat stress is an ideal laboratory model to induce protein level stress and is highly relevant for many bacteria, but it is important to note that c. trachomatis would more commonly encounter other forms of protein damaging stress such as, immune related oxidative and nitrosative stress, temperature flux in the genital tract, rapid ph changes during early development of the inclusion vacuole, and possibly osmotic flux. the increased level of htra during heat stress was observed both by western blot and immunofluorescence . the use of the major outer membrane protein  as a comparative protein for molecular studies in chlamydia is widely reported. momp levels have been reported to decrease during c. trachomatis persistence and stress conditions  <cit> . however, as different fixatives were required for the htra and momp antibodies used during this study, lps was used in conjunction with htra immunofluorescence. the heat stress model we tested was consistent with previous studies on c. pneumoniae and c. trachomatis with both morphological similarity when examined by tem and similar decreased levels of momp and lps  <cit> . furthermore, we tested under conditions for which it is known a high proportion of the c. trachomatis cells remain viable. that is, after  <dig> hrs heat shock at 42°c once heat stress is removed, c. trachomatis was able to complete the developmental cycle, and form infectious ebs  <cit> . this suggests that cthtra is important during heat stress and could be one of the key factors for protection of cellular envelope proteins sufficiently to allow restoration of normal growth once heat stress is removed. the protection is likely to be mediated by both the protease and chaperone functions we previously reported during in vitro investigations of htra  <cit> . the data presented here clearly indicates a cell envelope or extracytoplasmic localisation of htra which seems likely to be periplasmic as indicated by in silico predictions. further experimental data would be needed to confirm the exact location of htra , however, regardless of the exact location it is clear that htra's protein maintenance function would still serve much of the extracytoplasmic proteome.

two well established persistence models were used during this investigation to test for the potential significance of htra for persistent infections. the penicillin induced persistence model affects the development of chlamydia by binding to three penicillin binding proteins halting binary fission and preventing later phases of the chlamydial developmental cycle  <cit> . this affect of penicillin on chlamydia is somewhat paradoxical as there is no unequivocal evidence for the presence of peptidoglycan, although it is predicted that peptidoglycan synthesis functions in rbs during chlamydial cell division . thus, in the presence of penicillin at  <dig> h pi, the rbs will have no peptidoglycan  or components thereof, and less momp and outer membrane cysteine rich proteins such as omcb  <cit>  which normally contribute to the rigidity of the outer membrane by extensive disulfide crosslinking. the decreased outer membrane disulfide crosslinking and peptidoglycan likely results in reduced extracytoplasmic integrity, reduced protection from osmotic and redox stress for extracytoplasmic proteins due to these reduced physical and chemical barriers. osmotic and redox stress is known to affect protein integrity  <cit> . thus, htra may be present at increased levels during penicillin persistence to protect against this possible additional protein stress. these findings suggest that htra is less important for the initial adaptation to penicillin but rather functions during longer term persistence presumably via maintenance of extracytoplasmic proteins possibly required for ongoing viability or for the capability to return to normal development once the selective pressure is removed.

htra protein levels were reduced at both  <dig> h pi and  <dig> h pi during ifn-γ persistence, possibly indicating that extracytoplasmic protein stress is less important during this form of persistence until at least  <dig> h pi. ifn-γ persistence for chlamydia is effectively a form of amino acid deprivation stress, which results in a lack of binary fission and prevention of rb development to ebs. the amino acid deprivation is not likely to result in direct stress on existing extracytoplasmic proteins, which could explain the reduced levels of htra under these conditions. the considerable reduction in htra during ifn-γ persistence, when compared to acute, heat stress and penicillin data, suggests that ifn-γ persistence doesn't involve chlamydial extracytoplasmic stress response, unlike previous suggestions for c. pneumoniae that ifn-γ persistence is a stress response  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the role of htra for chlamydia likely involves both the protease and/or chaperone functions in protection, assembly, or degradation, of extracytoplasmic chlamydial proteins during intracellular development , extracellular survival , and stress conditions. the data presented here demonstrated the presence of htra during development, with increased htra levels during conditions which most likely induce protein stress, such as heat shock and penicillin induced persistence. furthermore, the results suggest that ifn-γ persistence doesn't involve an extracytoplasmic stress response for chlamydia trachomatis. these observations combined with the demonstrated ability of chlamydia htra to protect e. coli htra- against lethal heat stress in vivo, support an important role of htra for maintaining the viability of chlamydia during any conditions where extracytoplasmic protein stability is compromised. the findings of this study have further contributed to the understanding of the role of htra for bacterial pathogenesis  <cit> , particularly within the intracellular niche.

