BACKGROUND
the yeast yarrowia lipolytica has the ability to accumulate a large fraction of its mass as neutral lipids, mainly in the form of triglycerides  <cit> . this, along with its genetic tractability, has made it an attractive model for the production of high value lipids and biofuel precursors  <cit> . as in other fungi, lipid accumulation in y. lipolytica is heavily dependent on environmental conditions, particularly the relative amounts and types of carbon and nitrogen sources available .

the response to nitrogen quality and quantity has been well characterized in saccharomyces cerevisiae  and is primarily regulated by nitrogen catabolite repression, which operates in yeast and filamentous fungi  <cit>  to allow preferential utilization of preferred nitrogen sources. when high quality nitrogen sources are available, the gata type transcription factors gln3p and gat1p become phosphorylated and remain bound to ure2p in the cytosol, whereas they localize to the nucleus and activate nitrogen utilization genes in poor nitrogen conditions . a second set of gata type transcription factors, gzf3p and dal80p, act as repressors that compete for binding sites with and are regulated by gln3p and gat1p  <cit> . it is unknown whether the pathways above operate similarly in y. lipolytica. interestingly, work comparing the evolutionary conservation of regulatory network motifs between y. lipolytica and other yeasts, including s. cerevisiae, identified post-transcriptional regulation as the most conserved aspect of gene regulatory networks  <cit> . comparison of the transcriptional regulators found that regulation of β-oxidation and peroxisome biogenesis by fara and amino acid biosynthesis by gcn <dig> are likely to be conserved between y. lipolytica and filamentous fungi  <cit> .

the purpose of this study was to reveal the regulatory changes of y. lipolytica in response to nitrogen limitation. though transcriptional responses to nitrogen limitation have been previously characterized in y. lipolytica  <cit> , the regulatory mechanisms driving these responses are not well understood. we analyzed the metabolome, proteome, and phosphoproteome in nitrogen replete and limited conditions to connect intracellular metabolite pools with the expression level and phosphorylation of proteins the analysis presented is focused on changes in the expression and phosphorylation state of regulatory proteins  to generate hypotheses regarding which of these pathways are involved in regulation of the lipid accumulation response. to our knowledge, this is the first global study of protein phosphorylation in y. lipolytica and as such, paves the way for future work on post-translational modification and protein engineering in this organism.

RESULTS
nitrogen limitation results in rapid increase in lipid droplet size
it has been shown previously that limitation of nitrogen is an excellent and well conserved method to induce lipid accumulation in oleaginous fungi  <cit> . we have compared samples of the oleaginous yeast y. lipolytica growing in either high  or low  nitrogen conditions to further our understanding of the metabolic events that lead from limitation of nitrogen to lipid accumulation. we grew y. lipolytica in high  or low  nitrogen minimal medium followed by measurement of dry cell weight and microscopic examination . per cell lipid droplet staining intensity increased in high and low nitrogen conditions by three hours post transfer from rich medium  and differed significantly by six hours post transfer  . cell mass accumulation was not significantly less in the nitrogen limited cells until hour nine  . we chose to further explore the response to nitrogen limitation at hour nine, where lipid accumulation was clearly proceeding and cell mass accumulation was affected due to nitrogen limitation, by analyzing intracellular and extracellular metabolites as well as the global proteome and phosphoproteome.fig.  <dig> experimental design for measuring the response to nitrogen limitation. a
y. lipolytica cultures grown in ypd are washed and split into ynb medium with a high  or low  concentration of ammonium sulfate to analyze the response to nitrogen limitation. after transfer cells were collected at regular time intervals and fixed for confocal microscopy or dried for mass measurement. we chose to collect samples at hour nine for metabolome and proteome experiments. b fixed cells were stained with calcofluor-white  to visualize the cell wall and nile-red  to image lipid droplets in response to nitrogen limitation. bars indicate 5 μm. c quantification of lipid droplet intensity. box plot indicates the median, 10th, 25th, 75th and 90th percentiles. d quantification of dry cell mass accumulation. error bars represent the standard deviation of three replicates



metabolomic, proteomic and phosphoproteomic response to nitrogen limitation
we collected and analyzed extracellular and intracellular polar metabolites from y. lipolytica  <dig> h after transfer to growth medium with either a high  or low  concentration of nitrogen in the form of ammonium sulfate, as well as after one hour of growth from the c/n =  <dig> condition.  <dig> intracellular metabolites were quantified,  <dig> of which were identified.  <dig> extracellular metabolites were quantified and  <dig> of these were identified. we also analyzed the proteome from y. lipolytica after  <dig> h of growth in either high  or low  nitrogen conditions, and identified  <dig>  unique peptides in at least one biological replicate. these peptides mapped to  <dig> of the y. lipolytica protein models in at least one replicate of the experiment and to  <dig> of the models in all replicates, representing  <dig>  % of the annotated coding sequences  <cit> . we identified  <dig> unique quantifiable peptides after enrichment with immobilized metal affinity chromatography .  <dig> of those peptides had at least one phosphorylated serine, threonine or tyrosine residue and mapped to a total of  <dig> genes, paving the way for studies of protein phosphorylation in y. lipolytica. the  <dig> peptides identified after imac enrichment but without a phosphorylation site are skewed toward the most abundant peptides identified in the phosphoproteomics analysis, suggesting they represent contamination from highly expressed proteins  – these were not considered further. all quantified metabolites and peptides are tabulated in additional file  <dig>  we annotated and mapped y. lipolytica genes to metabolic pathways relevant to nitrogen limitation and lipid accumulation and overlaid the metabolome, proteome and phosphoproteome data onto this map .fig.  <dig> response of the lipid and nitrogen metabolic networks to nitrogen limitation. proteome, metabolome and phosphoproteome of y. lipolytica grown in low  versus high  nitrogen conditions after nine hours. nodes represent metabolites and edges represent genes. colors of metabolites indicate log <dig> fold-change. colors of gene names indicate significantly up and down regulated proteins identified by global proteomics; up-regulated indicates higher expression in the low  nitrogen condition. underlines indicate proteins with an identified phosphorylation site. colored arrows indicate significant changes in phosphorylation level of a protein; up indicating more phosphorylation in the low  nitrogen condition. black text indicates metabolites and genes from which proteins were not identified. metabolic pathways and gene names are based on homology to s. cerevisiae and n. crassa




nitrogen limitation results in nitrogenous metabolite depletion and intracellular carbon compound accumulation
we found that nitrogen containing compounds tend to be depleted in cells grown in nitrogen limited medium , while most non-nitrogen containing carbohydrates, alcohols and acids were present at higher intracellular levels in nitrogen limited medium . of the amino acids we measured, only alanine was significantly depleted in nitrogen limited cells, while the other significantly depleted nitrogen containing compounds between the c/n =  <dig> and c/n =  <dig> conditions at hour nine were 3-amino,2-piperidone, putrescine, spermidine and urea . we found arabitol, fructose, nigerose, threitol and mannitol at higher extracellular levels after  <dig> h than one hour in the c/n =  <dig> condition suggesting these metabolites are released by the cells . of these only threitol was at a significantly higher extracellular concentration after nine hours at c/n =  <dig> versus c/n =  <dig> suggesting threitol production is induced by nitrogen limitation. intracellular threitol concentration is also significantly higher in the c/n = <dig> condition supporting this idea . other significantly enriched metabolites found in the nitrogen limited cells include citrate, mannitol-p, xylitol, malate, fumarate, arabitol, α-hydroxyglutarate, phenyllactate, ribonate, γ-hydroxybutyric acid, and inositol .fig.  <dig> intracellular metabolite pools in response to nitrogen limitation. intracellular metabolite concentrations were measured and dry weight normalized after one and nine hours at c/n =  <dig> and nine hours at c/n =  <dig>  average fold change from three replicates each of  nitrogen containing metabolites and  non-nitrogen containing metabolites was calculated at nine hours for c/n =  <dig> vs. c/n =  <dig>  and for c/n =  <dig> at  <dig> vs. 1 h . *significantly changing intracellular metabolites . arginine hydrolyzes to ornithine during chemical derivatization for gc-ms, thus ornithine represents a pooled value for intracellular ornithine and arginine



proteomic response to nitrogen limitation
we tested up- and down-regulated genes for gene ontology term enrichment and found that genes associated with proteolysis are up-regulated after nine hours of nitrogen limitation while amino acid metabolism, translation and ribosome biogenesis associated genes are down-regulated along with β-oxidation  similar to what has been found in the oleaginous yeast rhodosporidium toruloides  <cit> . we also found that of 115/ <dig> proteins annotated as being a structural component of the ribosome are significantly down-regulated  while none are significantly upregulated. we tested whether inhibiting translation would result in lipid accumulation in nitrogen replete conditions by addition of cycloheximide which blocks the elongation step in eukaryotic ribosomes  <cit> . we found that inhibition of ribosome function resulted in lipid droplet growth but to a lesser extent than nitrogen limitation . this suggests that downregulation of the structural components of the ribosome, and presumably also a decreased capacity for translation, both play a part in lipid accumulation but are not entirely responsible. we found that proteins predicted to utilize acyl-coa’s within the peroxisome for β-oxidation are downregulated, however, we did not see a change in the number of peroxisomes during lipid accumulation  and so suggest it is only their function that is changing.table  <dig> enriched biological process gene ontology terms. analysis of up- and down-regulated genes  for gene ontology term enrichment


fdr false discovery rate after fisher’s exact test

fig.  <dig> inhibition of translation induces lipid droplet growth. y. lipolytica cultures grown for nine hours were fixed, stained with calcofluor-white  to visualize the cell wall and nile-red  to image lipid droplets. cells were imaged in triplicate by confocal microscopy. representative images are shown. the area of each cell covered by lipid droplets is calculated and statistically different in all three treatments . bars indicate 5 μm. box plot indicates the median, 10th, 25th, 75th and 90th percentiles

fig.  <dig> number of peroxisomes does not change in response to nitrogen limitation. y. lipolytica strain feb <dig>  harboring a green fluorescent protein tagged version of peroxisomal marker pex <dig>  was grown in low  and high  nitrogen conditions as in fig.  <dig>  a at nine hours cells were collected, stained with calcofluor-white , and imaged for pex13-gfp . b the number of foci corresponding to peroxisomes per cell from two images from each of three replicates is not significantly different 



phosphoproteomic response to nitrogen limitation
we analyzed the  <dig> proteins with a phosphorylation site for gene ontology  term enrichment to determine whether any particular types of proteins are prone to phosphorylation. interestingly, this identified the process of protein phosphorylation and the functions of tyrosine and serine/threonine kinase activity as being very significantly enriched  suggesting the main function of phosphorylation in y. lipolytica may be the regulation of kinases. we next compared the fold change values of the phosphorylated peptides with their counterparts in the global proteomics data to control for changes in protein expression and identify phosphorylation sites that change in their fractional abundance during nitrogen limitation.  <dig> peptides were identified as having decreased phosphorylation levels, while  <dig> exhibited increased phosphorylation  during nitrogen limitation.

identification of regulatory pathways associated with nitrogen limitation
we are particularly interested in identifying the regulatory pathways affected by nitrogen limitation in y. lipolytica, and to that end we predicted  <dig> kinases,  <dig> phosphatases and  <dig> dna binding proteins present in y. lipolytica using domain analysis and by comparison with homologs in other fungi. from those,  <dig> proteins  were found to change significantly in their abundance , while  <dig> peptides were found to change in their phosphorylation state   and which define a set of nitrogen responsive regulatory factors. we found that 37 %  of the predicted kinases and 18 %  of the predicted dna binding proteins have at least one phosphorylation site, indicating that these potentially regulatory proteins are enriched for protein phosphorylation compared to the genome as a whole  but that phosphatases are not enriched for phosphorylation . the number of phosphorylation sites identified for a given protein is also greater for kinases, and to a lesser extent, dna binding proteins .table  <dig> regulatory proteins significantly changing in their abundance. up- and down-regulated dna binding proteins, kinases and phosphatases . best blastp hits for s. cerevisiae and n. crassa are shown

s. cerevisiae
n. crassa
s. cerevisiae
n. crassa
fig.  <dig> regulatory proteins are enriched for phosphorylation. genes were identified that are predicted to encode regulatory proteins . the number of phosphorylation sites identified per protein in either of the conditions tested is quantified for each of these classes and the proteome as a whole



identification of dna regulatory motifs associated with nitrogen limitation
we have found genes that are up- and down-regulated by limitation of nitrogen at the protein level. we were curious whether we could predict dna elements driving these expression changes in the absence of rna expression data. thus, we analyzed the promoter elements of genes that were significantly up- and down-regulated for enrichment of short motifs. while this type of analysis is more appropriate for investigation of rna expression data and in this context does not account for post-transcriptional regulation of expression, we identified two enriched motifs in the up-regulated genes and four enriched motifs in the down regulated genes as well as a motif specifically enriched in the promoters of β-oxidation genes , which are significantly down-regulated . we validated the dna motifs identified in the up- and down-regulated genes by comparing the effect of their position relative to the transcription start site  on expression level across all genes . we found that the presence of either a ccttat or gtaagc site within roughly  <dig>  kb of the tss correlates with up-regulation, while a tgagtca, tgaaaaa, accccaca or cacgtg site correlates with down-regulation. the ccccaca site identified in the β-oxidation specific promoters is similar to the accccaca site found in the down-regulated genes and is associated with down-regulation in both cases.fig.  <dig> promoter elements associated with nitrogen limitation responsive genes have distance dependent effects. a promoter regions of genes that encode up- and down-regulated proteins as well as a subset of β-oxidation specific down-regulated proteins are enriched for specific dna motifs. b for each y. lipolytica gene the distance to the nearest occurrence of each motif five prime of the transcription start site is determined and binned in  <dig>  kb windows based on this distance. the average protein fold change values for each bin up to  <dig>  kb from the transcription start site for y. lipolytica grown in low  versus high  nitrogen are plotted. the grey span indicates the interquartile range. c the most strongly enriched gene ontology  terms  for genes with the given dna motif present within  <dig>  kb 5’ of their transcription start site



prediction of function of dna motifs associated with nitrogen limitation
the function of the ccttat motif in the up-regulated genes is unclear. the second motif, gtaagc is clearly a binding site for gata family transcription factors. of the  <dig> predicted gata family transcription factors in y. lipolytica three are up-regulated  and three are down-regulated  during nitrogen limitation. we hypothesize that one or more of these six proteins in combination regulate genes with a gtaagc site in their promoter region. included in these gata transcription factors are three proteins with similarity to gln3p in saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit>  and area in aspergillus nidulans  <cit>  both of which regulate nitrogen catabolite repression in these organisms  <cit> .

the functions of the motifs in the down-regulated genes are also predictable. the tgagtca motif is similar to sites in s. cerevisiae that are regulated by nitrogen responsive transcription factors that regulate amino acid biosynthesis including gcn4p, arg81p, arg80p and cup9p . we did not identify significant changes for homologs of these genes in y. lipolytica. however, the ortholog of gcn <dig>  has a phosphorylation site at s <dig> that decreases during nitrogen limitation. we did not detect peptides specific to gcn <dig> in our global proteomic data and were thus unable to calculate the fractional change for this phosphorylation site. however, in nitrogen replete conditions in s. cerevisiae, gcn4p is rapidly turned over by a process dependent on phosphorylation of the proteins activation domain and subsequent degradation by the 26s proteosome  <cit> . our results indicate a similar mechanism controlling amino acid metabolism is active in y. lipolytica.

the gaaaaa motif resembles the ribosomal rna processing element, bound by stb3p in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . the homolog in y. lipolytica  has a number of detected phosphopeptides, none of which change significantly. this is in contrast to studies in s. cerevisiae where nutrient limitation results in decreased phosphorylation of stb3p by sch9p as a mediator of ribosome biogenesis  <cit> .

the accccaca motif resembles that bound by the carbon catabolite repressor mig1p  or crea   <cit> . we did not detect significant changes in the protein level of the mig <dig> homolog in y. lipolytica . however, it may be differences in regulation rather than protein level that contribute to the nitrogen limitation response. deletion of mig <dig> in y. lipolytica results in lower expression of β-oxidation genes at the rna level and increased lipid accumulation  <cit>  together, these results suggest mig <dig> is a direct regulator of β-oxidation genes in y. lipolytica.

the cacgtg motif resembles the e-box motif originally described as an enhancer in mammals  <cit>  and subsequently found to be bound by a number of basic helix-loop-helix  transcription factors in yeast including cbf1p, tye7p, hac1p, rtg3p, ino2p, pho4p and ino4p  <cit> . of the nine predicted bhlh family transcription factors in y. lipolytica, two are up-regulated , one is down-regulated  and the homolog of rtg1p  is significantly phosphorylated during nitrogen limitation.

discussion
nitrogen limitation induced lipid accumulation
biochemical investigations into the nature of oleaginous fungi has found that lipid accumulation occurs when environmental nitrogen is depleted in the presence of excess carbon, glucose in this case. when nitrogen is limited, the cells continue to utilize glucose but will no longer divide. excess carbon flow into the tricarboxylic acid  cycle accumulates as citrate which is transported from the mitochondria to the cytosol and utilized for de novo production of fatty acids  <cit> . both decreased capacity for amino acid biosynthesis for protein production and polyamine biosynthesis, which are essential for nuclear division  <cit> , may prevent cell division. however, the ultimate reason for decreased division may depend on initial environmental conditions that determine which intracellular nitrogenous metabolite becomes limiting first. after nine hours of nitrogen limitation, we found that all three y. lipolytica cyclins are significantly down-regulated , suggesting fewer cells are in g <dig>  s or g <dig> phase. examination of the tca cycle in an oleaginous yeast such as y. lipolytica would suggest that αlpha-ketoglutarate would accumulate when ammonium is not available for fixation to glutamate. we found this to be the case, along with accumulation of all other detected tca cycle intermediates , highlighting that carbon intermediate build-up occurs throughout the tca cycle and is not specific to citrate  <cit> . accumulation of citrate is thought to promote lipid accumulation through the production of acetyl-coa via atp-citrate lyase  <cit> . in support of this idea, we found that citrate synthase, which utilizes acetyl-coa to make citrate from oxaloacetate, and aconitase, which isomerizes citrate to isocitrate, are down-regulated, suggesting flux through these reactions is proceeding at a lower rate .

we did not find a difference in expression of any of the enzymes involved in de novo lipid production from citrate. rather, atp-citrate lyase and acetyl-coa carboxylase are phosphorylated , suggesting that if their activity is changing due to rapid accumulation of lipids, it is due to posttranslational modification of the enzymes. overexpression of atp-citrate lyase  <cit>  and acetyl-coa carboxylase  <cit>  have yielded positive results when applied to lipid accumulation in y. lipolytica. however, if the activity or localization of these enzymes is regulated by phosphorylation, then it may be possible to achieve better results using strains where the phosphorylated residue have been mutated to mimic constitutively phosphorylated or unphosphorylated enzymes. work in mammals has identified phosphorylation of atp-citrate lyase by insulin responsive pathways as a regulator of fatty acid biosynthesis in the liver  <cit> , and global analysis of protein phosphorylation has identified numerous sites on acetyl-coa carboxylase that are subject to modification in s. cerevisiae  <cit> , some of which have been mutated in recent attempts to enhance lipogenesis in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . an additional general driver of lipid synthesis in oleaginous organisms is thought to be malic enzyme which oxidizes malate to pyruvate and co <dig> and reduces nadp+ to nadph - the production of nadph as a reducing agent for fatty acid synthesis being the key aspect of this reaction  <cit> . in agreement, we found the gene for malic enzyme to be upregulated in y. lipolytica during lipid accumulation .

while the enzymes for synthesis of acyl-coa from acetyl-coa appear to be controlled by phosphorylation, the production of storage lipids is a different story. de novo production of triglycerides can proceed by repeated acylation of glycerol, which becomes the backbone. however, production of glycerol-3p via either phosphorylation of glycerol or reduction of dhap is unlikely as both enzymes are down regulated during nitrogen limitation. instead, the expression of slc <dig> and ale <dig>  which make phosphatidic acid, and are <dig> and are <dig>  which acylate sterols to steryl-esters, increases during nitrogen limitation, suggesting that most of the acyl-coa produced is being transferred to sterols and 1-acyl-sn-glycerol-3p. this suggests that, for production of neutral lipids rather than sterol esters, it may be useful to engineer strains with lower expression of are1/ <dig> 

nitrogen assimilation
of particular interest is the effect of limitation of extracellular nitrogen on intracellular nitrogen carriers and intracellular sensing and signaling in response to depleted metabolites. nitrogen assimilation occurs via either  nadp dependent glutamate dehydrogenase , which utilizes nadp+ to convert αlpha-ketoglutarate and nh <dig> to glutamate, or  glutamine synthetase , which produces glutamine from glutamate and nh <dig> with energy from atp. during nitrogen limitation we found both gln <dig> and gln <dig> to be strongly up-regulated, while gdh <dig> was somewhat down-regulated suggesting route  is used for nitrogen assimilation during nitrogen starvation, as has been reported previously in other organisms . glutamate synthase  which drives the production of two molecules of glutamate from glutamine and αlpha-ketoglutarate, thus completing the cycle of formation of glutamate from αlpha-ketoglutarate and nh <dig>  is down-regulated, suggesting the cells are limited for glutamine rather than glutamate and are free to make it using atp when glucose is available in excess.

of the amino acids we detected, only alanine is significantly depleted in nitrogen limited cells while the other significantly depleted nitrogen containing compounds we measured are 3-amino, 2-piperidone, putrescine, spermidine and urea. urea production occurs via arginase mediated degradation of arginine to ornithine and urea  <cit>  or as a biproduct of purine catabolism  <cit> . the decrease in urea confirms that ammonium is not available in excess in the c/n =  <dig> condition as expected. the physiological relevance of 3-amino,2-piperidone in fungi is unclear; however, it is found at elevated levels in homo sapiens with a defect in slc25a <dig>  which transports ornithine across the mitochondrial membrane  <cit> , suggesting it may be involved in urea cycling. the polyamines putrescine and spermidine are produced from ornithine via the activity of ornithine decarboxylase  and spermidine synthase   <cit>  and their production is regulated at the level of spe <dig> in neurospora crassa  <cit> . putrescine and spermidine decrease during nitrogen limitation, as does intracellular ornithine to a less significant degree; these decreases occur concurrently with down-regulation of spe <dig> and spe <dig> . this result is unexpected when compared to studies in n. crassa where polyamine starvation results in high spe <dig> activity  <cit>  but may reflect repression due to low ornithine availability during nitrogen limitation.

kinase signaling in response to nitrogen limitation
categorically, we observed the highest number of phosphorylation sites on kinases. in total we identified  <dig> kinases that change significantly in their phosphorylation state and thus can begin to construct a network of phosphorylation dependent signaling cascades in y. lipolytica. we compared the significantly changing phosphorylation sites with the wealth of phosphorylation data available for s. cerevisiae through phophogrid  <cit>  but found most  occur in regions of the proteins without significant homology between s. cerevisiae and y. lipolytica. we can say little about the function of the sites we observed that change in their phosphorylation state in the absence of clear homology with other organisms. however, global studies on protein-protein interactions and functional studies using phosphosite mutants will aid our effort to construct a complete regulatory network for yarrowia. of the six phosphorylated sites that are in conserved regions between s. cerevisiae and y. lipolytica, four have not been observed to be phosphorylated and two have been observed as phosphorylated on a homologous site in s. cerevisiae. these two phosphorylation sites are present in homologs of rim11p  and yak1p  and in both cases are required for, or enhance, the kinase activity of the enzyme. phosphorylation of tyr- <dig> in yali0d20966g is a conserved site of modification that regulates the activity of the glycogen synthase kinase  <dig> enzymes rim11p  and gsk-3b . in both yeast and humans phosphorylation is associated with an increase in the activity of the kinase  <cit> , suggesting that in y. lipolytica this kinase is activated during nitrogen limitation. phosphorylation of tyr- <dig> of yali0c16665g is homologous with tyr- <dig> phosphorylation in s. cerevisiae yak1p, which is autophosphorylated, resulting in kinase activation  <cit> . dephosphorylation of yali0c16665g suggests the activity of a yak1-like pathway is decreased during nitrogen limitation.

regulatory response to nitrogen limitation
the effect of limiting nitrogen on the transcriptome has been previously characterized in y. lipolytica and results in changes in transcripts related to nitrogen metabolism along with repression of protein production  <cit> . however, the regulatory factors driving these changes have not been previously investigated in y. lipolytica. our results show that the response to nitrogen limitation involves changes in the intracellular metabolite pools that affect the expression and activity of genes through specific transcription factor binding domains and kinase signaling. we identified short dna elements that associate gata family transcription factors with up-regulated genes and leucine zipper family transcription factors with down-regulated genes . gata family transcription factors primarily control amino acid biosynthesis in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . this function appears to be conserved in y. lipolytica as genes with a gtaagc motif within  <dig> base pairs 5’ of their transcription start site are enriched for amino acid biosynthetic processes . amino acid biosynthetic go terms were also identified for upregulated genes with a tgagtca site in their promoter that is similar to that bound by gcn4p  <cit> , which activates genes in response to amino acid starvation  <cit> . in the nitrogen limited cells, genes with the tgagtca motif tend to be down- rather than up-regulated suggesting the nitrogen replete cells represent conditions more akin to amino acid starvation or that this motif represents regulation by a novel pathway in y. lipolytica.

a motif similar to that bound by the carbon catabolite repressor crea, accccaca, is associated with genes that are down-regulated during nitrogen limitation. this is quite interesting as the sole carbon source for the experiment is glucose. during nitrogen limitation, the intracellular concentration of glucose and glucose-6p is higher which may explain greater repression of genes with the accccaca motif in their promoter. depictions of carbon catabolite repression in s. cerevisiae often emphasize repression of genes involved in utilization of alternative carbon sources  <cit> . in y. lipolytica the alternative carbon source genes are those associated with fatty acid metabolism and peroxisomal β-oxidation which makes sense in light of the fact that yarrowia is often isolated from lipid rich substrates  and whose metabolism is geared toward utilization of fats  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have used a variety of techniques to characterize the response to nitrogen limitation in the oleaginous yeast y. lipolytica. in our growth conditions we observed complex changes in intra- and extracellular metabolite levels during batch culture and correlate these with microscopically observed cellular features and changes in protein expression and phosphorylation state. substantial effort has been applied in the past few years to understanding the nature of and engineering oleaginous yeast  <cit> , but to date only limited work has been done to characterize lipid accumulation from a regulatory perspective. here we provide a comprehensive dataset describing nitrogen limitation induced lipid accumulation in y. lipolytica that will enable more detailed experiments to understand the oleaginous nature of yarrowia and provide genetic targets for future metabolic engineering efforts.

