BACKGROUND
atherosclerosis is considered an arterial inflammatory disease resulting from lipid entrance in the vascular wall and subsequent oxidation. lipid oxidation has been related to infectious agents  <cit> , mainly chlamydophila or chlamydia pneumoniae   <cit> . cp induced or accelerated atherosclerosis in experimental animals  <cit> . although more than  <dig> studies have been published focusing cp in atherosclerosis, the inconsistent results of clinical trials using antibiotic therapy discouraged the infection theory. however, our previous studies have shown that co-infection of cp and mycoplasma pneumoniae  is usually present in atherosclerotic plaques, in greater amount in ruptured plaques  <cit> . the co-infection theory is corroborated by the recent finding of increased serum antibodies to mp and cp in patients with atherosclerosis and acute myocardial infarction  <cit> . fibrous cap stabilizes human atherosclerotic plaques and we found that plaque fibrosis is related to increased growth factors and higher proportion of mp to cp  <cit> . on the other hand, predominance of cp in such co-infection is related to plaque rupture. mycoplasma is the smallest self-replicating microorganism having particular characteristics as cholesterol requirement for growth, drawing the host for immune depression  <cit>  and increase the pathogenicity of co-infective agents  <cit> . association of different microorganisms in a host may increase the virulence among them  <cit>  and may explain the disappointing clinical trial results with anti-chlamydial antibiotic therapy  <cit> .

the objective of the present study was to verify whether inoculation of mp or in association with cp aggravates cholesterol-induced atherosclerosis in apoe ko mice. the severity of atherosclerosis was evaluated by measuring the plaque height, plaque fat area, intima and adventitia inflammation and amount of plaque/surface of the vessel. we also evaluated whether co-infection would cause plaque rupture.

RESULTS
the experimental infection caused six deaths in the  <dig> studied male mice: among the death mice, four were inoculated with mp, one was inoculated with cp + mp and one was from the sham group. by the end of the experiment, the pooled serum were tested for total cholesterol, hdl and ldl in all groups. the respective values were:  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 532; hdl  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and ldl  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> mg/dl. after  <dig> weeks the inoculated mice showed serum antibody titers of: < 1: <dig> to cp, from 1: <dig> to 1: <dig> to mp and the sham did not show antibodies to cp and mp. electron microscopic of the intimal plaque of a mouse inoculated with mp showed structures suggestive of mp such as irregular rounded bodies with  <dig>  to  <dig>  μm in diameter, lack of the cell wall, containing granular chromatin-like material . one animal of the cp + mp inoculated group exhibited the structures of mp and the elementary bodies of cp in the myocardial fiber characterized by rounded electron-dense bodies enveloped by two membranes .

analysis of the extent and degree of atherosclerosis
mp - mycoplasma pneumoniae, cp - chlamydia pneumoniae, sd -standard deviation. p values correspond to anova test and dunn's, for non-normally distributed values or bonferroni's test for normally distributed values.

in variables showing a trend to be different when comparing simultaneously the  <dig> groups, student t test was used to compare the two groups with the highest difference. it showed significant major plaque high in cp group than the sham and a trend to have major plaque area/internal surface in mp and cp groups than in sham group.

external diameter, which indicates vessel remodeling, did not differ between infected versus sham groups. however, the animals infected with cp or mp inoculums exhibited more atheroma plaques on the intima surface  than the sham group  with no statistical significant difference . the most severely obstructed atherosclerotic sites had increased plaque height in the cp group compared with sham and more adventitial inflammation in mp+cp group, compared with mp group. there was not ruptured plaque in any of the groups.

discussion
the present study showed that intraperitoneal inoculation of mp, cp or the both microbes aggravated atherosclerosis induced by cholesterol-enriched-diet in apoe ko male mice, as measured by plaque height, % luminal obstruction, adventitial inflammation and amount of plaque area/internal surface. this study analyzed the ascending aorta and aortic arch, which are segments of aorta that are more prone to development of atherosclerosis  <cit> . cp infection is associated with increased lymphocytic inflammation  <cit> . particular characteristics of mycoplasma might contribute to different atheroma plaque outcomes: mycoplasma growth depends of cholesterol viability, this microorganism has surface compounds that modulates the host immune response, cause immunosuppression and facilitates the proliferation of other infectious agents  <cit> . however mp seems to inhibit cp growth  <cit> .

infection by cp and co-infection by mp + cp caused more severe % luminal obstruction and adventitial inflammation than sham group or inoculation with only mp in apoe ko mice fed cholesterol-enriched-diet. the severity of % of luminal obstruction is a combination of plaque height and vessel diameter. in cp group the plaque height is high but probably associated with positive remodeling as the external vessel diameter is larger than the sham group. the mp + cp group presented smaller plaques but without vessel remodeling, the external vessel diameter presenting the same values than the sham group. the hypothesis of a flattened lumen vessel due to a lack of fixation of the vessel wall should be considered. the plaques in mp group were also associated with positive vessel remodeling. the lack of statistical significant difference in the external vessel diameter that represents the degree of vessel remodeling may be related with three factors: a) large standard deviation values and b) the site chosen for doing the measures: as exemplified in methods with the figure  <dig>  section  <dig>  it was not used the plaque height but the lowest lumen value for choosing the site to be measured and c) some segments might be partially collapsed due to a lack of perfusion fixation.

the interrelationship between these microbes and different atheroma plaque morphology have already been found in human plaques. advanced coronary atheroma plaques in humans showed that few cp and mp antigens were detected in small and fibrotic plaques, which were associated with negative vessel remodeling causing severe obstruction, and on the contrary, vulnerable plaques were rich in mp, increased adventitial inflammation that correlated with the numbers of cells positive for cp  <cit> . also, in initial human atherosclerotic lesions, high mp/cp ratios were associated with increased levels of growth factors and fibrosis and low number of macrophages  <cit> .

similarly, in the present study, inoculation of cp was associated with increased plaque size, higher mean external vessel diameter, which are characteristics of plaque vulnerability as described in humans  <cit> . favoring the co-infectious theory, human clinical studies demonstrated association of increased mp and cp antibody titers with acute myocardial infarction patients  <cit> .

previous studies in the literature did not show aggravation of atherosclerosis by intranasal cp inoculation in apoe ko mice in a short follow-up period  <cit> . intranasal mycoplasma pneumoniae inoculation in rabbits did not induce atherosclerosis in a short follow-up period  <cit> . in comparison to presented findings, it is believed that differences in the route of inoculation of infectious agents  and time of follow up may explain these apparently conflicting results. it seems that intraperitoneal inoculation is more efficient in disseminating the infectious agents than intranasal inoculation and also that the peritoneal route would make it easier for infectious agents to reach the adventitia, which may be the main entrance for infectious agents. the ultrastructural study, which was performed only in one case for group, confirmed the presence of mycoplasma cells in the plaque, and of cp elementary bodies in the myocardial fibers, as well as of mycoplasma in the myocardial extracellular matrix. these data suggested that the studied infectious agents reached the circulation and many organs. the aggravation of atherosclerosis is probably caused by elements derived from infectious agents such as heat shock proteins or lipoproteins and not by direct presence of these agents in the lesion  <cit> . the mice fed with cholesterol enriched diet since the age of  <dig> weeks were infected at the age of  <dig> weeks and sacrificed at  <dig> weeks of age. this quite late period for inoculation increases the possibility that bacteria may be present in the atheroma plaques only as innocent bystanders, as they get a good breeding ground. however herein, the experimentally infected mice groups showed increased severity and different morphologies in atherosclerotic plaques than non infected animals. the presented results strongly point to that the studied infectious agents have a relevant role in atherosclerosis aggravation inducing injury directly by their presence in the plaques and/or indirectly by immune system activation.

all the infected groups showed low titers of serum antibodies to cp and mp. this is an expected result, since chlamydia and mycoplasma infections usually do not progress with high levels of antibodies probably due to the microbe escape mechanisms from the immune response  <cit> . due to the small amount of blood collected from each animal, an individual antibody serum analysis could not be performed. the atherosclerosis was correlated more with the cholesterol levels than the antibodies to cp  <cit> . for this reason, the lack of individual animal antibody titers to cp or mp may be not so relevant for the interpretation of the studied infection.

the progression of atherosclerosis may be influenced by repeated microbe infections. periods of increase and decrease of atherosclerotic lesions are seen by angiographic studies  <cit> . bacterial lipopolysaccharides and endotoxins, autoimmunity due to molecular mimetization between the infectious agents, endovascular proteins such as heat shock proteins and the activation of toll-like receptors by lipoproteins of the infectious agents are some of the mechanisms attributed to the development of inflammation and endothelial dysfunction in atherogenesis  <cit> . during both chronic and acute infections in humans, hdl levels decrease and may aggravate atherosclerosis  <cit> , since this lipoprotein is important in reverse cholesterol transport and in the removal of oxidization products and inflammatory mediators from the circulation. however, in apoe ko mice, the loss of the ligand for lipid particle receptors is associated with an increase in total cholesterol due to mainly ldl particle accumulation. basal cholesterolemia of apoe ko mice is up to five times higher than that of animals of the same strain without the genetic defect, that aggravate with cholesterol enriched diet  <cit> . development of atherosclerotic lesions is also affected by cholesterol reverse transport in which apoe plays a pivotal role. in our study, lower level of ldl was seen in infected groups, mainly in mp group. however, the statistical analysis was not performed because we analyzed a pool of sera from each group.

plaque rupture is not usually present in experimental atherosclerosis in animals including the apoe ko mice, which are considered an adequate experimental model for atherosclerosis studies  <cit> . in the present study it was not found ruptured plaques either. in humans, vulnerable plaques exhibited a third class of microbes, the archaea  <cit> , in close association with cp and mp.

CONCLUSIONS
intraperitoneal inoculation of chlamydia pneumoniae , mycoplasma pneumoniae  or both microbes caused aggravation of experimental atherosclerosis induced by cholesterol-enriched diet, with different characteristics. mp or cp caused more extensive atherosclerotic lesions in the aorta, cp resulted in increased plaque height with positive vessel remodeling and co-inoculation of mp + cp led to the development of more obstructive lesions due to smaller plaques associated with no vessel remodeling.

