BACKGROUND
the health of honey bees  is crucial for honey production and pollination of a wide variety of crops. the contribution of honey bees to canadian agriculture exceeds $ <dig>  billion  while the value added to crops such as almonds, berries, fruits, vegetables and other nuts in the u.s. is estimated to be $ <dig>  billion  <cit> . winters, in particular, are a profound determinant of colony survival. prior to  <dig>  overwintering mortality of honey bee colonies in north america was  <dig> to 15%; however, losses in north america and europe have dramatically increased to an average of approximately 30%  <cit> . while this has not yet had a discernable effect on crop yields, it has made it much more challenging for beekeeping companies to remain solvent. the causes of honey bee losses have been attributed to a multitude of factors  <cit> , including bee-specific pathogens and parasites such as the mite varroa destructor and the microsporidia nosema apis and nosema ceranae. also, long-implicated as a leading cause of colony mortality before the introduction of v. destructor, the bacterial brood pathogen paenibacillus larvae that causes american foulbrood continues to be a problem  <cit> . v. destructor is now considered the single greatest natural threat to honey bees worldwide, as it weakens and kills colonies by parasitizing bees as well as vectoring several viruses that may be even more virulent to bees than the mites themselves  <cit> .

though acaricides, antibiotics and fungicides are registered for controlling v. destructor, p. larvae and nosema spp., a number of negative consequences are associated with their use. these include the economic cost of the treatments themselves, concerns around the potential contamination of hive products  <cit> , widespread antibiotic  <cit>  and acaricide resistance  <cit> , and concerns over the effectiveness of chemotherapy for controlling nosema spp  <cit> . indeed, these pathogens are on a path akin to a chemical treadmill whereby resistance develops within a few years of the initial use of a particular chemical  <cit> . at the same time, viruses’ impact on bee health continues to increase and no conventional treatments are available to counter them. the phenomenon of drug resistance is not recent, even in microlivestock such as bees, and will likely become more widely spread. spivak and gilliam observed over ten years ago that acaricides and antibiotics were no longer effective against varroa and paenibacillus larvae  <cit> .

an alternative pest management approach is to identify and select bees with an increased ability to tolerate diseases without chemical intervention. while this could be achieved through heightened innate immunity, honey bees, as eusocial animals, have the added capacity for social behaviors that enable resistance to pathogens. several behaviors that help to confer colony-level resistance against parasites and pathogens have been characterized, including hygienic behavior   <cit> , varroa sensitive hygiene   <cit> , grooming behavior  <cit>  and others  <cit> . hb is the best understood and it involves the detection of dead or diseased bees in brood cells, uncapping of cells and removal of the affected larvae or pupae by nurse bees. the primary means by which hb confers disease resistance is thought to be the continual elimination of brood pathogens from the hive environment, which would otherwise remain, multiply and potentially infect other bees. in the case of p. larvae, with which a. mellifera has had the longest time to co-evolve, bees specifically remove infected larvae or pupae when the bacteria are still in the vegetative state  <cit> . although the term ‘hygienic behavior’ was originally used to describe removal of brood infected with p. larvae, its use has gradually been expanded to describe the removal of brood infected with chalkbrood disease , as well as brood parasitized by varroa  <cit> . it has further been applied to brood invaded by the greater wax moth, galleria mellonella  <cit> , or brood infested with the small hive beetle, aethina tumida  <cit> . the magnitude of hb varies between individual colonies and populations, making it possible to selectively breed bees to enrich hb  <cit> , with the goal of increasing the ability of the bee population to manage disease while reducing beekeeper intervention and chemical treatments. testing colonies for selective breeding, however, is a slow and resource-intensive process that could be facilitated by more rapid molecular assays.

we have previously reported that larval proteins involved in chitin biosynthesis, wound healing and innate immunity pathways are correlated with hb and vsh  <cit> . in the same study, we discovered that hb and vsh were also associated with the expression of antennal proteins in functional classes such as cell surface-linked signaling and protein modification pathways. in the current study, we extend our original approach to cover three generations, two geographically distinct sites and far more colonies  towards two goals: 1) identify prognostic biomarkers that could be used for marker-assisted selection and 2) better understand the mechanisms underlying behaviors that confer social immunity.

RESULTS
enrichment of hb by selective breeding in gf
differences in a phenotype such as a behavior must be the result of altered protein expression or activity so our guiding hypothesis was that honey bees exhibiting hygienic and other social immunity behaviors should display unique protein expression profiles, at least in the tissues/organs involved in the behaviors. if these unique profiles could be accurately characterized then the proteins most highly up or down-regulated relative to ‘normal’ bees would make excellent biomarkers for selective breeding and they would also be likely to have a mechanistic role in the manifestation of the behavior. hb is heritable so it follows that the expression patterns of proteins involved in hb must also be heritable so we first established that we could selectively breed for hb efficiently.

prior to the experiments aimed to evaluate protein expression patterns and to identify hb markers, we performed a small selective breeding program to confirm that social immunity traits, particularly hb, could be enriched in our apiaries based on field testing. using a closed mating system and the field-based liquid nitrogen freeze-kill test  <cit>  as a test of hb, we observed a significant enrichment of the trait over only three generations . the distribution of hb in the population changed dramatically in the first round of selective breeding, and the hb values continued to improve in the second round of selective breeding. further, the proportion of colonies with high hb scores  increased from 12% in the first year to 18% the second year and to 26% in the third year.figure  <dig> 
selective breeding of hygienic behavior . in an initial breeding experiment, colonies were selectively bred for hb over three generations to test the efficacy of selection. for each generation, colonies expressing the highest level of hb estimated by the fraction of freeze-killed pupae removed after 24 hours  were selected as breeders and their virgin queens and drones close mated in an isolated apiary. f <dig> bars represent the natural frequency distribution of hb in the starting population, while the f <dig> and f <dig> bars represent the distribution after one and two rounds of selection, respectively. the frequency distribution in the f <dig> and f <dig> is significantly different from the f <dig> .



wide range of hygienic behavior in starting populations
we then explored the correlation between protein expression and hb to identify proteins correlated with the behavior. we established two populations in geographically distinct areas of western canada and proceeded to breed progeny with divergent levels of hb and measured protein expression profiles for each generation . the starting colonies at each location presented a wide range of hb  and were assembled from geographically diverse sources of stock used by canadian beekeepers. breeding was performed as outlined in methods using instrumental insemination of drones and virgin queens from high- and low-scoring colonies was used to achieve a controlled partial diallel crosses which created high and low scoring colonies, as well as hybrids, intended to facilitate the identification protein expression related to hb, and to estimate heritability of the protein markers .figure  <dig> 
breeding and sampling design for the identification of heritable protein markers. a. diagram illustrating our approach to identify specific proteins associated with hb behavior using mass spectrometry. b. breeding design and origin of samples. parallel breeding programs were conducted in beaverlodge, alberta  and grand forks, british columbia . samples for proteomic analysis were taken each year at each location. the partial diallel cross used with the instrumental insemination in ab and in y <dig> in bc is shown in c.
hygienic behavior of starting populations. a. hb of the y <dig> colonies in grand forks, bc and at the research farm in beaverlodge, alberta, showed a wide range of hb values as determined by the proportion of cells that were uncapped and pupae were removed after 24 h  using the liquid nitrogen freeze-killed brood method. b. the five populations analysed in beaverlodge, one originated in saskatchewan , two in california , one in chile  and one in ontario , also showed a wide range of hb.



antennae of workers on brood frames were collected from all colonies in each of the generations. the choice of tissue to focus on is obviously important when studying expression markers  and as such we were guided by the following rationale: what causes bees to be hygienic is not known but it may involve either a heightened sensitivity to detect a specific signal or a unique wiring of the brain that causes hygienic bees to respond to a signal differently. the former possibility would likely manifest as differences in sensory organs  while the latter would mean differences in their brains. le conte et al.  <cit>  reported the analysis of brain transcriptome of highly varroa-hygienic bees and the identification of a set of genes involved in social immunity. although the function of these candidate genes did not seem to support higher olfactory sensitivity in hygienic bees as previously hypothesized, the authors noted that the analysis of peripheral tissues, like antennae, should be performed since insect behavior can be dramatically affected by changes in expression of antennal-specific genes. we, therefore, elected to focus on the proteomic analysis of antennae. proteins were extracted from the collected antennae and the protein expression pattern of each colony was measured by mass spectrometry, employing a triplexed stable isotope labelling approach that we have applied previously  <cit>  in a randomized incomplete block .figure  <dig> 
structure and results of the randomized incomplete block design. a. the matrix illustrated below allowed for a comparison of the protein profiles of all colonies. each colony was sampled in triplicate and each sample was labeled with either light, medium or heavy isotopes, and was assigned to a block. each block, represented by a triangle, contained three samples from different colonies and labels and was analysed in one mass spectrometry run. b. due to the semi-stochastic nature of data-dependent acquisition in lc-ms/ms and the wide range of protein abundances, not all proteins were detected in every sample. shown is a representative plot of the frequency where  <dig> proteins were detected across  <dig> blocks in bl-y <dig> sample set. the  <dig> proteins that were detected in at least  <dig>  of the blocks were considered in the analysis.



approximately  <dig> proteins were quantifiable in the analyses of each generation and, of these, approximately  <dig> in each set were represented in at least 25% of the ‘blocks’ . those detected in at least 25% of the blocks were then compared with hb data collected for the same colonies in order to identify proteins whose expression patterns correlated with the behavior . briefly, a linear mixed effects model was used to estimate the effect of each predictor variable  on the protein expression level.

geographical origin affects protein expression
given our previous observations  <cit>  we first asked whether any of the protein expression profiles could be explained, at least in part, by the geographical origin of the colonies? of the  <dig> proteins in at least 25% of the blocks, the profiles for thirty eight showed a statistically significant effect of geographical origin  and these were then subjected to gene enrichment analysis as described previously  <cit> . hierarchical clustering of heat-maps enabled the visualization of two major protein clusters associated with specific biochemical functions . enrichment analysis indicated that bees of canadian and californian origin are divergent in expression of proteins involved in mitochondrial respiration  and glutathione detoxification . the chilean bees were divergent, sharing reduced expression of mitochondrial enzymes with californian and increased expression of glutathione detoxification proteins with canadian varieties.figure  <dig> 
clustering and functional enrichment of proteins regulated by geographical origin. proteins regulated by geographical origin were clustered  based upon statistical significance and relative abundance. using orthologous proteins derived from drosophila the function of bee proteins were predicted and each cluster was tested for the enrichment of gene ontology categories biological processes, cellular compartment and molecular function using david .



the effect of population origin on the relative abundance of proteins in the antenna supports our previous observation that historic latitudinal clines are detectable in the expression of metabolic proteins in imported bees  <cit> . the co-regulation of proteins driving oxidative metabolism with those of glutathione mediated detoxification is consistent with the management of oxidative stress associated with increased metabolic rates. in our analysis of population origin, no functional enrichment for neurological proteins was observed compared to the antenna proteome indicating that basic neurological function or structure was similar between the bees of different geographical origin.

proteins correlated with hb
we then studied whether variations in protein expression were associated with behavioral differences, and if they could be predictive markers of social immunity, focusing on hb . among the y <dig> colonies at the alberta breeding site, the expression patterns of gi: <dig>  and gi:  <dig>  showed a strikingly strong correlation with hb . proteins that are intrinsically involved with a behavior should be correlated with that behavior independent of where the measurements are taken and as such we examined which proteins were consistently correlated with hb at both breeding sites. the proteins strongly correlated with hb  at both locations were odorant binding protein 16/gi: <dig>  calcyclin binding protein/gi:  <dig>  3-ketoacyl-coa thiolase/gi:  <dig>  and vamp /gi: <dig>  found previously. the other protein observed initially, gi:  <dig>  had too many missing data at the gf breeding site to be considered. we then extended this approach to cover y <dig>  y <dig> and y <dig>  particularly to incorporate heritability information obtained from the y <dig> bc partial diallel cross . over the six datasets , proteins were ranked based on a hb-correlation factor average of all datasets plus a heritability factor . of the top ranked proteins, we also required that they were quantitated in at least four of the six datasets. bm-40-sparc, odorant binding protein 18/gi:  <dig> and 26s protease regulatory subunit 6a/gi:  <dig> showed the highest hb correlation factors when considering all datasets. compiling these approaches, the seven proteins that emerged  with expression patterns were most closely correlated with hb, are thus putatively useful for marker assisted selective breeding of hb and also suggest some testable hypotheses regarding the mechanism underlying hb.figure  <dig> 
identification of proteins correlating with hb. a. partial regression plots of hb versus protein level. results from bl-y <dig> colonies showed two proteins with a strong correlation with hb. the p-values for bm-40-sparc/ gi:  <dig> and vamp/ gi: <dig> were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively and the q-values were  <dig>  for both proteins. b. final hb correlation score of proteins from all datasets calculated as described in methods. bm-40-sparc, odorant binding protein 18/ gi: <dig> and 26s protease regulatory subunit 6a/ gi: <dig> showed an hb correlation factor > <dig> 
proteins most highly correlated with hb



accession #
protein markers
direction
general function


exploring potential ligands of obps linked to hb
among the seven hb-associated proteins  two were odorant-binding proteins , suggesting that hygienic bees may be sensing something emitted from diseased or dying larvae. the natural ligands are unknown for most bee obps, however, so we purified recombinant versions of the two high correlated obps detected here  and screened their affinity towards several metabolites in competitive binding assays. as reference, we chose obp <dig>  which is a ‘c-minus’ obp, like obp <dig> and obp <dig>  containing only four of the six conserved cysteines present in classic obps  <cit> . we had also characterized obp <dig> in terms of ligand-binding affinities  <cit> .

affinities of twenty-nine ligands to the three proteins were evaluated in competitive binding assays, using n-phenyl-naphthylamine  as a fluorescent reporter and measuring the fluorescence decrease produced by the addition of the ligand in a concentration dependent fashion. actual dissociation constants were calculated from the concentrations of each ligand halving the initial fluorescence of the complex  as described in methods.

potential ligands were selected from among the terpenoids commonly occurring in the scent of flowers, fatty acids and their esters, components of the queen mandibular pheromone and the brood pheromone and other volatiles potentially linked to hygienic behavior  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the binding affinity of the twenty-nine compounds tested; the upper panel reports the data for the strongest ligands, whose affinities are about one order of magnitude higher than the ligands reported in the lower panel. interestingly, obp <dig> and obp <dig> bind to nearly all compounds tested with higher affinity than obp <dig> figure  <dig> 
potential ligands of obps. twenty nine potential ligands were tested in a competitive binding assay for their binding to obp <dig>  obp <dig> and obp <dig>  each purified recombinant protein was mixed with the fluorescent probe n-phenyl-1-naphthylamine , both at the concentration of 2 μm in tris buffer. each mixture was titrated with a ligand and the displacement of the fluorescent probe from the complex was used to evaluate the relative dissociation constants, as described in the methods section. compounds with higher affinities are shown in the top panel, while compound with lower affinity are shown in the lower panel. obp <dig> and obp <dig> showed higher affinities for most compounds than the previously characterized obp <dig>  of particular interest is the high binding affinity of obp <dig> to oleic acid.



the three obps bind n-phenyl-1-naphthylamine  with dissociation constants in the range of  <dig> to 5 μm , similar to most other insect obps  <cit> , thus allowing accurate evaluation of the affinities towards other ligands in competitive binding assays. all ic <dig> and kd values are listed in additional file 3: table s <dig>  while the dissociation curves for the strongest ligands are shown in figure  <dig>  in general, all three obps tended to prefer fatty acids and their ester and amide derivatives, as well as three structurally similar terpenoids:  <dig> -dimethyloctanol, geraniol and geranyl acetate. obp <dig> and obp <dig> can both accept linear and branched molecules while obp <dig> seems to have greater specificity to linear chains of  <dig> carbon atoms. obp <dig> showed the highest affinities for several compounds including oleic acid which is released by decaying insect corpses  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
differential ligand binding to obps. a. binding curve of obps to 1-npn, showing dissociation constants in the range of  <dig> to 5 μm which allowed for an accurate evaluation of the affinities towards other ligands in competitive binding assays. purified recombinant proteins at the concentration of 2 μm in tris buffer were titrated with increasing amounts of the fluorescent probe. b, c and d: competition curves for the seven ligands with the highest affinities for obp <dig>  obp <dig> and obp <dig> respectively using the procedure described in figure  <dig> and in the methods section.



discussion
honey bees are an essential component of human agriculture but are under ever-increasing threat from parasites and infectious diseases. while acaricides, fungicides and antibiotics have been useful for controlling many bee pathogens and pests, resistance to these products is spreading and there is substantial public pressure to move away from such chemical controls. in-hive chemical treatments can leave residues in honey and other hive products, and in the environment. in addition, they can have sublethal effects on bees including potential effects on their immune system  <cit> . selection of bees with higher disease resistance may reduce the need of chemical treatments and some disease-resistance traits have been identified in bees. though honey bees can be selectively bred, the traits for disease resistance are, however, difficult to test and only a few, highly specialized groups, usually at universities or in technical transfer teams are able to use them   <cit> . if molecular markers correlated with disease resistant traits were known, bee breeders could potentially utilize these in a more effective selective breeding program by employing molecular diagnostics in place of field behavioral assays. one typically thinks of such markers at the level of dna  but there has been little progress towards identifying any loci linked to disease-resistant behaviors in bees  <cit> . nevertheless, protein expression levels could be marker of disease resistance. indeed, the proteins identified would likely be more closely linked to the mechanism behind the behavior than a dna feature.

protein biomarkers and prospects for marker-assisted selective breeding in bees
hb is an economically beneficial, heritable trait that enables bees to co-exist with pathogens and as such we have undertaken an extensive and exhaustive search for proteins whose expression levels are highly correlated with hb. we chose to focus on expression levels within the antennae of nurse bees because it is this particular behavioral ontogenic stage that performs the hb in the colony and one of the likely mechanisms for hb is a heightened ability to sense dead, dying or diseased larvae  <cit> , which would likely involve antennae. despite these experiments being performed in the field with genetically diverse, outbred populations, the results provided a strikingly clear confirmation of our hypothesis, that there is indeed a protein expression pattern unique to hb.

the discovery of biomarkers specific to hb allows for the possibility to develop prognostic assays that could be used to select parent colonies in a marker-assisted selection breeding program. we envision that the hb markers reported here will be useful to facilitate selective breeding efforts. future work will aim to validate and apply these biomarkers in a marker-assisted selective breeding program with the goal of enriching honey bee populations for this social immunity trait. beyond this potentially practical application, the proteins whose expression levels were most highly correlated with hb are all obviously linked to various aspects of chemosensory processes, suggesting several very interesting and testable hypotheses regarding the mechanism underlying hb.

sensing the signal for hb
insects rely on chemical communication to monitor the environment and exchange information between conspecifics. social insects, in particular have developed a highly sophisticated chemical language, enabling members of the colony to perform different tasks. the chemoreception system of insects is mediated by olfactory receptors, located on the membrane of sensory neurons, and by soluble proteins present at high concentration in the lymph of chemosensilla  <cit> . these proteins belong to two major classes, obps  and csps , in both cases small polypeptides folded into α-helical domains, arranged in two different unique motifs  <cit> . although the specific action of obps and csps is not yet clear, certainly airborne molecules, as those associated with diseased or dead bees, upon entering the antenna interact with these soluble proteins and are tightly bound to be carried through the aqueous environment of the sensillar lymph to membrane receptors  <cit> . thus, if hygiene in bees is due to an enhanced sensitivity towards specific signals originated in the affected brood, obps would probably be effecting this and obp <dig>  and obp <dig>  are the most likely candidates, based on the data presented here. neither obp <dig> nor obp <dig> are exclusive to antennae, although their tissue expression patterns are consistent with a sensory molecule. obp <dig> is expressed exclusively in peripheral tissues, including antennae, and is found in all castes, although it is most highly expressed in workers  <cit> . obp <dig> is also largely in peripheral tissues but is also concentrated in the nerve cord of the female castes  <cit> . clearly this is where obps should be, but what is it that they are detecting when they are expressed? the natural ligands of most bee obps, including these two, are unknown but our investigations here with recombinant proteins suggest that both obp <dig> and obp <dig> prefer branched and linear fatty acids. this general class of molecules includes many bee pheromones  <cit>  so is consistent with a role for them in hb. of particular interest is the high affinity of obp <dig> to oleic acid because it is released by decomposing insects  <cit>  and may be a strong mediator for social immunity in apis mellifera and other eusocial species. further demonstration of the precise ligand they are detecting would require electroantennogram tests of selected compounds in bees that have had one obp or the other knocked down by sirna.

transmitting the signal for hb
two proteins involved in inter-nerve communication were the most tightly linked to hb: vesicle-associated membrane protein  and secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine ca binding . as any animal behavior requires peripheral, if not also central nervous system activity, it seems reasonable that a heightened behavior could result from up- or down-regulation of proteins required in signal propagation. vamp is a well-known snare protein required for fusing synaptic vesicles at the synaptic cleft to release neurotransmitters  <cit>  and as such our observation that it is inversely correlated with hb would suggest that it is particularly important in an inhibitory synapse and that its expression needs to be suppressed for neurons involved in hb to fire properly. bm-40-sparc  is a proteoglycan whose function is not understood but its transcript is up-regulated in nurse bees  <cit> , which are the bees that performs hb, and it is implicated in brain development in mammals  <cit> .

degrading the signal for hb and down-regulating the response
an important aspect of a response to any signal, particularly the depolarization involved in triggering a nerve response, is the termination of the signal to allow the system to be reset so that it may respond again. the remaining three proteins correlated with hb appear to fall within this this category:

3-ketoacyl-coa thiolase  is involved in beta-oxidation and catalyzes the conversion of acyl-coa and acetyl-coa to coa by itself and 3-oxoacyl-coa. the isoform found here is likely the mitochondrial version, which would suggest that its key role is in energy production. this could indicate a specific energy requirement for hygienic behavior but this enzyme also happens to degrade the same class of molecules that acts as ligands for obp <dig> and obp <dig> so it is tantalizing to speculate that it may also act to shut down the signal for hb.

calcyclin binding protein  is involved in targeting specific signalling proteins for degradation in other organisms, implying that it may be involved in degrading components of the signalling involved in hb, perhaps the obps themselves. calcyclin binding protein is known as siah-interacting protein in humans but it is not clear that its interaction with calcyclin there has any functional relevance. structural analysis of siah and siah-interacting/calcyclin-binding protein indicates that calcyclin-binding protein is a component of an e <dig> ligase complex and that it is required to recruit an e2-substrate complex for the final step of ubiquitin transfer  <cit> . it has been most-studied in the context of signalling oncogenes so it is attractive to speculate that it may also be involved in degrading proteins involved in the signalling behind hb and thereby down-regulating the signal.

26s protease regulatory subunit 6a  appears to be a multi-functional protein and it is not clear which of its roles might be relevant in hb. it is a component of the 26s proteasome  <cit> , which degrades ubiquitylated proteins, therefore tat-binding protein might somehow help to turn over other proteins directly involved in hb, such as those above. given that calcyclin-binding protein is also involved in ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation, it seems most likely that it is in this capacity that tat-binding protein is involved in hb too. however, it is also a transcriptional co-activator  <cit>  of hormone receptors  so it could conceivably be regulating the expression of other proteins involved in hb, such as obp <dig> and obp <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
since protein expression can be influenced by environment and the technology for measuring proteins has lagged behind tools for measuring nucleic acids, protein markers has often been ignored in favor of qtls or snps for marker-assisted selection for breeding purposes. nevertheless, the link between qtls or snps and phenotype can also be influenced by environment in most cases and so there is no intrinsic reason for proteins not to be investigated as biomarkers. to this end, we have shown that the expression levels of a selected set of proteins are heritably associated with an important social immunity trait in honey bees, hygienic behavior. our data suggest that bees expressing this trait are better able to detect and respond to a chemical signal emitted by diseased or dying larvae, stimulating them to remove the potential threat from the colony environment. the chemical signal responsible for this remains to be identified but the proteins described here should make suitable biomarkers to guide selective breeding for hygienic behavior.

