BACKGROUND
prion diseases or transmissible spongiform encephalopathies  have long incubation times and are characterized by progressive neurodegeneration leading to death  <cit> . brain tissue adopts a spongy appearance and a modified form of a normal host protein, the prion protein, is deposited. it is this conformational isomer of prion protein  that is believed to be the infectious agent. the progressive neurodegeneration resulting from infection with prion agents involves diverse cell types, a variety of cellular interactions, and multiple genes. genomic and proteomic techniques can be used to measure the relative abundance of messenger rna transcripts and proteins in cells and tissues. the differential expression of these molecules between normal and diseased tissues provides information that can be used to determine the precise molecular mechanisms involved in neurodegeneration in prion disease.

a number of studies to determine the gene expression changes that accompany prion diseases have been performed in different laboratories, including our own  <cit> . hundreds of differentially expressed genes in various models of tses have been identified; many repeatedly. in the present study we have performed an extensive global analysis of gene expression in two strains of mice infected with three strains of scrapie, to create a list of genes consistently deregulated in multiple scrapie models. this gene list includes many previously described, as well as a number of novel genes. comprehensive bioinformatics analysis of these data has allowed us to make substantial progress in defining networks of interacting genes which operate during neurodegeneration in mouse scrapie.

RESULTS
identification of consistently deregulated genes in mouse prion disease
c57bl/ <dig> mice were inoculated by intracerebral infection of brain homogenate from mice clinically infected with the me <dig>  79a and 22a strains of scrapie. in addition vm mice were also inoculated with the 22a scrapie strain. mice were sacrificed at the onset of clinical diseases as manifested by uncoordinated gait, flaccid paralysis of the hind limbs, rigidity and abolishment of the righting reflex. brain tissue was collected from these mice and the rna isolated. mouse cns gene expression was analysed by two-colour microarray experiments using an in house manufactured  <dig> k mouse cdna microarray  <cit> . rna from individual infected mice was hybridized to each array versus pooled reference rna from an equivalent number of age-matched, mock-infected control mice. in total we hybridized  <dig> different samples to microarrays in this experiment; 8– <dig> individual mice from each of the four sample groups were individually processed for separate microarrays. hierarchical clustering shows that the patterns of gene expression are for the most part common to the different mouse models . we used the program edge to identify genes that were differentially expressed in mouse brain during clinical disease  <cit> . we used a p value cut-off of  <dig>  as the criteria for selection of significantly differentially expressed genes.

in our previous study we found very few genes to be significantly differentially expressed during pre-clinical disease and so in this study we limited analysis to those genes that were up- or down-regulated at the late clinical stage of the disease  <cit> . the resulting gene lists contained between  <dig> and  <dig> significant genes from each sample group tested; a sample group contained 8– <dig> individual infected mice and equal numbers of age matched, mock-infected control mice. these lists of significant genes were used to compile a master list of genes based on the criteria that significant differential expression was identified in at least three of the experimental sample groups tested. the  <dig> genes that selected were termed "prion-related genes" ; a complete list of these differentially expressed genes including annotation is provided as additional file  <dig>  this list of genes includes many that have been previously identified as deregulated in neurodegenerative diseases, these genes are marked on the table; a number of novel genes were also identified. we confirmed deregulation of ~50% of the  <dig> prg's  to be accordingly deregulated in a fourth strain of scrapie, rml, using whole genome mouse arrays purchased from agilent.

we used an online tool based on a curated database, the ingenuity pathways knowledge base , to annotate genes and to determine potential regulatory networks and pathways. the ipkb contains information on human, mouse, and rat genes including annotations, synonyms and over  <dig>  million published biological interactions between genes, proteins and drugs. this database is continually updated and supplemented with curated relationships taken from medline abstracts; i.e. each gene interaction held in the ipkb is supported by published information. thus, the ipkb thus provides a framework by which lists of genes identified by large-scale microarray studies can be annotated in terms of their functional relationships, and those that have been shown to interact.

we first identified key biological functions and/or diseases that contain a disproportionately high number of genes from the prg list in relation to the assayed gene population as a whole; the assayed gene group is the total genelist from the microarray used. representative categories of biological functions and/or diseases in which prg genes are over-represented  are provided in table  <dig>  this list of genes includes members of gene families that have been identified in previous studies including genes involved in; lysosome organization and biogenesis, immune cell activation and inflammatory response, lipid metabolism, apoptosis, protein biosynthesis and proteolysis, nervous system function and synaptic transmission, and cytoskeleton organization and biogenesis.

identification of biologically relevant networks
to further investigate the global expression response to infection with the prion agent, and to define how individual regulated genes interact to have a coordinated role in specific pathways, we identified potential networks of interacting prg's using the ingenuity pathway analysis tool. the methodology integrates genomic data with mining techniques to predict protein networks that comprise protein-protein interactions and other functional linkages. each potential network is given a score, which is a probabilistic fit between the networks and a list of biological functions stored in the ipkb. the score takes into account the number of focus genes  in the network, and the size of the network, to approximate how relevant it is to the original list of genes; these scores are used to rank the networks. as the list was extensive we restricted our analysis to those networks that had scores > <dig> . we identified  <dig> networks of potentially interacting genes from amongst the prgs; the top  <dig> networks are provided in table  <dig> 

* genes in bold type are those mapped by the significant genes. # a score of  <dig> or greater was considered significant 

the two highest ranked networks are provided as figures  <dig> and 2; each contain  <dig> prg's with very strong evidence of connectivity between the genes. the biological functions and/or diseases that were most significant to the genes found in each network were identified. the top ranked network identified by ipa  is associated with tissue development, specifically the determination of the quantity of cells, particularly phagocytes, and in biological processes controlling cell death and survival. strikingly, network  <dig> consists of genes that almost all interact directly with transforming growth factor -beta  <dig>  the up-regulation of tgf-beta  <dig> was confirmed by rt-pcr . tgf-beta  <dig> is a multifunctional cytokine that is a potent regulator of injury and inflammatory responses in the central nervous system and has been implicated in cerebral amyloid deposition and pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, including prion diseases  <cit> . tgf-beta  <dig> expression has been previously reported to increase throughout prion disease concomitant with astrocytes and microglial accumulation  <cit> . indeed, tgf-beta <dig> is largely produced in astrocytes and microglia but can be expressed in neurons. over expression of tgf-beta <dig> in astrocytes protects adult mice against neurodegeneration during acute, excitotoxic and chronic injury  <cit> , its loss leads to increased neuronal cell death and gliosis  <cit> . its role during prion induced neurodegeneration is likely to be to suppress inflammation in the brain that could exacerbate the course of the disease.

network  <dig>  contains genes that are primarily involved in nervous system function. the major biological functions of genes in this network are learning and behaviour , neuronal migration and outgrowth of neurites  and cell cycle progression . the genes in this network may play a role in the loss of function and eventual death of neurons that underlies the irreversible pathogenesis of prion induced neurodegenerative diseases.

as in network  <dig> this network also contains a central gene, ctnnb <dig> that interacts in some way with a large proportion of the other network genes. the small but consistent up-regulation of ctnnb <dig> was confirmed by rt-pcr, figure 2b. this gene is a phosphoprotein involved in wnt signaling and is an important mediator of cell survival, but has previously not been shown to have a role in prion diseases.

other up-regulated ctnnb <dig> interacting genes in this network are sgk, ptn, ptprz <dig> and sdc <dig>  sgk is a serine/threonine kinase, serum and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase  <dig>  which is up-regulated in response to various external stimuli and a number of neurological diseases including. sgk appears to be ubiquitously up-regulated in the brain in response to a strong stress signal and may have a neuroprotective effect like ctnnb <dig> which is gradually overridden by deleterious mechanisms during the disease process  <cit> . ptprz <dig> and sdc <dig> are both receptors expressed on neurons; significantly they share the same ligand, the heparin-binding growth factor ptn, which is also an up-regulated prg suggesting. although ptn is known to stimulate neuron and astrocyte differentiation  <cit>  the receptors ptprz <dig> and sdc <dig> are primarily expressed only on neurons. ptn has also been shown to be up-regulated in response to cell stress  <cit>  and to have a neuroprotective role in some instances  <cit> .

prediction of cell-specific regulation of prg's
one of the major pathological features of prion diseases is astrocytosis. as our results were obtained with whole brain tissue it is likely that many deregulated genes were of astrocytic/microglial origins. to give a more complete picture and greater accuracy in the identification of specific pathways involved in prion pathogenesis, we annotated the prg list based on information on the specific cellular location of the expression of individual genes. to do this we used data from various sources including published microarray studies, pubmed searches and an online in situ hybridization database, the allen brain atlas   <cit> . this resulted in the basic annotation of the prg list in terms of the cell-type; in this case astrocytes/microglia versus neurons. especially useful was a recent genomic study that identified distinctive transcriptional profiles in astrocytes from in vitro model systems as well as primary astrocytes; these experiments produced a list of  <dig> astrocyte-specific candidate genes  <cit> . comparison of this list with our prg list revealed that at least one third of these genes were amongst the up-regulated prg. we used this list, plus further gene expression data from a study by ponomarev et al  <cit>  to compile a list of  <dig> genes, prg-a, that we concluded to be exclusively or predominantly expressed in astrocytes or microglia. these genes are provided in additional file  <dig>  the remainder of the prg list was named prg-n and contained some genes known to be expressed in neurons, due to incomplete annotation; however, it is likely that some genes in this list may be expressed in other cell types within the cns.

we analyzed the prg-a and prg-n lists in isolation to reveal the most significant biological processes/diseases associated with these sub-groups of genes. not surprisingly, the prg-a list contained genes primarily involved in cellular proliferation and growth, cellular migration and inflammatory disease, accurately reflecting the proliferation, activation, and migration of astrocytes and glial cells to damaged areas of the brain. the most significant network is provided in figure  <dig>  all the prgs are up-regulated.

another highly represented group of genes from this list  have an association with lipid metabolism and transport as annotated in the ipa knowledge base database; apod, apoe, abca <dig>  ctss, tnf, il1a, mbp, plp <dig>  prdx <dig>  clu, cebpd, tgfb <dig>  a disruption in lipid metabolism and signaling is one of the early alterations apparent in many neurodegenerative diseases, including prion diseases  <cit> . this group includes some of the most up-regulated prg genes identified in the study including apoe, apod and abca <dig> involved in the transport of cholesterol. neurons require apoe-cholesterol to develop synapses in vitro; apoe-cholesterol synthesis occurs mainly in glial cells and is secreted in a process involving abca <dig>  a cholesterol efflux pump in the cellular lipid removal pathway. neurons pick up cholesterol via an ldl receptor. interestingly, three genes from the prg-n list were also involved in lipid biosynthesis, specifically cholesterol catabolism, and are down-regulated in our mouse models; dhcr <dig>  hmgcs <dig> and cyp46a. these genes previously been reported to have an association with alzheimer's disease  <cit> . deregulation of lipid homeostasis, particularly a cholesterol turnover in the cns, is a feature common to neurodegenerative diseases including prion disease. indeed cholesterol metabolites are targets of a number of recent studies aimed at the identification of early biomarkers for neurodegenerative diseases  <cit> .

a number of mechanisms for neuronal cell death during prion disease have been suggested including the direct toxicity of prpsc and mechanisms in which the normal cellular function of prpc is subverted resulting the triggering of pathways that lead to cell death  <cit> . in either case it is vital to determine the specific cell death pathways in affected neurons in order to fully understand the disease process and develop drugs that promote neuronal survival. we next used the ingenuity pathway analysis tool to identify biological networks and cellular functions that were most significant to the prg-n list. the top-ranked pathway is shown in figure  <dig> and contains largely down-regulated genes. the most affected biological processes were molecular transport and protein trafficking, regulation of gene expression, cellular movement and cell signalling. additionally a number of signalling pathways, in particular those involved in synaptic long term potentiation, calcium signalling, and the erk/mapk signalling pathway were significantly over represented  in this group of genes, figure  <dig> 

all of these pathways have previously been reported to contribute to neuronal death in prion diseases. abnormalities in synaptic plasticity are believed to be one of the earliest features of prion disease, detectable at about the same time as the deposition of prpsc, although there are conflicting reports as to the specific electrophysiological changes that take place  <cit> . significantly, data from many of these electrophysiologic, and ca2+ measurement studies in neurons converge to suggest that the recruitment of prpc into prions leads to compromised ca2+ homeostasis  <cit> . additionally, these studies, as well as a number of other genomic studies, strongly implicate calcium homeostasis as a biological process that is deregulated in prion diseased brain. we cannot determine from this data whether synapse dysfunction, and alterations in calcium signalling are a cause or effect of neuronal death in prion disease. however, it is known that synaptic dysfunction can render neurons vulnerable to excitotoxicity and apoptosis by a mechanism involving disruption of cellular calcium homeostasis.

in total,  <dig> genes from the ingenuity erk/mapk signaling pathway were found to be over represented amongst the prg-n genes; creb <dig>  h3f3b, ppp2r <dig>  prkar1a, prkcd, prkce, prkcg, rap1a, tln <dig>  ywhab, ywhag. the erk/mapk pathway is stimulated by various growth factors and extracellular stimuli and plays an important role in transducing stress-related signals in eukaryotic cells and promoting differentiation and survival of neuronal cells. a number of previous reports have provided evidence that the deregulation of mapk pathways play an active role in disease pathogenesis, possibly by upsetting the balance of intracellular signaling in neurons  <cit> . indeed, major targets of the mapk pathway are the closely related immediate early genes creb and egr <dig>  which are down-regulated prgs. both of these genes code for transcriptional regulators known to be phosphorylated during neural activity that leads to long-term synaptic plasticity  <cit>  and are thus used as markers of neural activity  <cit> . previous studies have linked decline in the expression of creb to a progressive increase of apoptosis  <cit> , and in one study the disruption of creb <dig> expression in mouse forebrain, resulted in progressive neurodegeneration in the hippocampus and in the dorsolateral striatum  <cit> . creb has also been shown to share a disproportionate number of transcriptional targets with the other down-regulated ieg, egr <dig>  <cit> . egr <dig> is one of the most consistently down-regulated prg genes that we detected in this study; we confirmed its expression in a number of models of mouse scrapie by quantitative rt-pcr at both clinical of infection . there is evidence to suggest that both creb and egr are activated by phosphorylation in prion disease  <cit> . this seemingly contrasts with our finding of down-regulation of gene expression; however, sustained activation of regulatory proteins by phosphorylation is often followed by a reduction of gene expression as a mechanism of feedback regulation. indeed a number of studies have shown that egr <dig> is involved in regulation of the mapk pathway as part of a negative feed back loop; activation of the erk/mapk induces active egr <dig> which in term transcribes cdk5/p <dig>  that is able to "switch off" the signaling cascade  <cit> .

four of the deregulated genes are activators of the erk/mapk signaling pathway; prkcg, prkce, prkcd and prkar1a. all of these genes are down-regulated apart from prkcd, and three of the four kinases belong to the same family, protein kinase c . different pkc isoforms can have opposing roles in particular signaling pathways and can act as sensors mediating either pro- or anti-apoptotic outcomes to different stimuli  <cit> . pkrcd is a key mediator of apoptosis, and its up-regulation during prion diseases suggests that this pkc isoform may have a role in prion pathogenesis either in gliosis or apoptosis of neurons. indeed, a number of studies have shown that a damaging insult to brain tissue is able to induce the prkcd gene in cells such as cortical neurons, astrocytes and in microglia, in which it is not present under physiological conditions  <cit> .

a summary of the results from this study showing the genes, pathways and biological processes that characterize the key molecular events in clinically prion infected mouse brain is provided as a schematic in figure  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
microarray experiments have been performed on tissues affected by many diverse diseases in efforts to document the changes in tissues at the transcriptional level. the majority of such studies generally result in the identification of hundreds of genes that are involved in many different biological processes and pathways. in essence most of these studies provide a very broad overview of transcription in the tissues involved in disease pathogenesis, with little structured information on the specific processes and pathways occurring in individual cells. in this study we used dna microarray analysis to identify genes that are consistently differentially expressed in multiple scrapie infected mouse models. we went further than our previous study by including data from a number of different models of mouse-adapted scrapie. the large numbers of mice used in the study, and the variety of different mouse models provided greater sensitivity and statistical confidence in selection of differentially expressed genes allowed us to identify a comprehensive list of genes, prgs, from our bmap microarrays that are consistently deregulated in these models. we show that many of these prgs are most likely expressed in proliferating astrocytes and microglia in the brains of prion infected mice.

although a number of cell types are able to propagate prions it is neuronal cells which sustain the damage which leads to clinical symptoms and death. a recent study by malluci et al showed that the replication of prion in non-neuronal cells is insufficient to cause damage to prp-null neurons suggesting that deregulated genes expressed in non-neuronal cells are secondary to those involved in neuronal damage  <cit> . however, a complimentary study by jeffrey et al in which transgenic mice expressing prpc only in astrocytes did succumb to disease, albeit following an extended incubation period, suggests that the mechanisms of cell death are complicated, and not restricted to a neuronal response  <cit> . it is possible that different pathways leading to cell death are triggered either by the direct effect of a build up of prpsc or by an indirect effect triggered by the intra-neuronal replication of prpsc. the implementation of gene expression studies in isolated cell populations to identify pathways triggered in these different models will be instrumental in determining the molecular events that define prion pathogenesis in vivo.

in this report we show a bioinformatic strategy to separate non-neuronal and neuronal gene expression. although many of this core group of genes has been identified in previous genomic studies of neurodegeneration in mouse-adapted scrapie, the use of these new bioinformatics tools allows us to gain further insights into the prion pathobiology. further work using microdissection strategies and single cell analysis is essential to identify those genes most important to pathogenesis.

