BACKGROUND
the ribosome is a large rna-protein complex having multiple roles in the translation process. the rna moiety in eukaryotes includes four rna molecules that provide the structural scaffold for the functional sites of the ribosome, and interacts with various proteins of the translation machinery. the protein moiety is composed of more than  <dig> proteins, located mostly at the ribosome's periphery. these proteins were shown to play various roles, including assistance in ribosome assembly, interaction with translation initiation factors, stabilization of the ribosome structure, and more  <cit> .

the yeast ribosomal protein s <dig>  is known to play a role in accurate decoding  <cit> . mutagenesis analysis yielded a general  suppressor phenotype, characterized by suppression of termination by all three stop codons, as well as misreading of various codons  <cit> . some of these mutations are characterized by an increase in the isoelectric point of s <dig>  suggesting a defect in acidic amino acids  <cit> . recent structural studies in prokaryotes and eukaryotes revealed that s <dig> is located at the head of the small ribosomal subunit near the entrance tunnel of the mrna leading into the decoding center  <cit> . part of the protein is in close contact with the rrna, while other regions extend out of the ribosome. the position of the bacterial homolog of s <dig>  prompted yusofova et al. to suggest a role in opening the secondary structure of the incoming mrna  <cit> . indeed, it has been recently shown that prokaryotic ribosomes having mutations in s <dig>  possess a lower ability to unwind rna duplexes  <cit> . thus, s <dig> might exhibit a helicase activity, which may be related to its role in accurate decoding.

in s. cerevisiae, there are two genes for s <dig>  that differ significantly in their transcription levels. while rps9b is highly transcribed, much lower levels of rps9a were detected . the encoded proteins, however, are almost identical and differ only in five amino acids, four of which are at the highly acidic c terminus. deletion of either gene is not lethal, yet the omnipotent suppression phenotype was only shown for mutations in rps9b, and expression of rps9a did not complement the phenotype  <cit> . this suggests that the suppressor phenotype of rps9b is either due to the expression difference or to the slight sequence difference.

here we characterized the effects of changing the acidic c terminus of s <dig>  we performed a genome-wide polysomal analysis of a strain expressing s <dig> mutated in its last  <dig> amino acids. of the ~ <dig> genes for which we were able to compare the ribosomal association between wild-type and the mutant strain, 40% had a significant change in ribosomal association. analysis of several physical and functional features of the affected transcripts did not reveal any feature that correlates with the extent of change. ribosome density mapping  analysis for four mrnas with increased association suggests an accumulation of ribosomes towards the 3' end of the mrna for at least two of them. these results suggest that s <dig> is involved in ribosomal dissociation at the termination site.

RESULTS
mutation of s9
s <dig> is an essential protein located at the entrance tunnel of the mrna into the ribosome. it was implicated in functions related to translation elongation such as decoding accuracy and mrna unwinding. to further explore functions of s <dig>  we performed partial deletions at various regions of interest. here we present data regarding a mutation of the last  <dig> amino acids . these amino acids include multiple aspartic and glutamic acids  and form a dead-like sequence . they are located outside the region of interaction with the rrna  and extend out of the ribosome surface  <cit> .

there are two copies of the s <dig> gene in yeast that express almost identical proteins. the differences between the encoded proteins are only arginine to lysine substitution in position  <dig>  and four amino acids difference in the c terminus. both genes were deleted by the mating and sporulation of haploids carrying either rps9a deletion or rps9b deletion. a single-copy plasmid carrying the mutated rps9a coding region with  <dig> bp upstream and  <dig> bp downstream was inserted into these cells prior to sporulation, and was selected during the sporulation with the appropriate medium. the last  <dig> amino acids  were deleted from the mutated s <dig> and the deletion procedure led to the addition of three amino acids . although these added amino acids are uncharged, we cannot exclude the possibility that the observed effects are due to their addition. the deletion resulted in the removal of four amino acids differing between s9a and s9b, and the only remaining difference between s9a and s9b is the substitution of basic amino acid at position  <dig>  we therefore refer to the resulting altered protein as s <dig> rather than s9a and hereinafter designate it as rps9-Δ <dig> 

the resulting strain exhibited normal growth rates in rich medium , and northern analysis of rps9-Δ <dig> mrna levels revealed similar levels to the wild-type strain . no accumulation of rrna intermediates was observed when samples were run on agarose gels, and the ribosomal profile appeared similar to wild-type cells . thus, although s <dig>  as several other ribosomal proteins, was shown to be involved in rrna processing  <cit> , this mutation probably does not interfere with this process. we also generated an isogenic strain in which the mutated s <dig> was tagged at the n-terminus with a flag epitope. western analysis of polysomal fractions collected from this strain revealed its association with fractions corresponding to the small ribosomal subunit, 80s and polysomes . this result and the normal growth of the mutant strain indicate that the mutated s <dig> is inserted into the ribosome. to avoid effects that are due to the highly acidic flag tag, all subsequent experiments were performed with the untagged rps9-Δ <dig> 

genome-wide analysis of rps9-Δ188
to determine the effects of mutating s <dig> on a broad spectrum of mrna sequences, we utilized dna microarrays carrying ~ <dig>  known and predicted yeast orfs. we first describe the results of a transcriptome analysis that characterizes the relative effects on the steady-state mrnas levels, and then the results of analysis of multiple polysomal fractions aimed at characterizing the effects on ribosomal association.

for transcriptome analysis, rna was collected from wild-type and rps9-Δ <dig> strains grown on either rich media  or minimal media . each of the rna samples was labeled with red fluorescent dye  and hybridized to a dna microarray together with a reference rna sample labeled with a green fluorescent dye . about  <dig>  genes passed the quality selection procedure  in each of the microarrays . to determine the genes that were affected by the s <dig> mutation, we compared the changes in expression of the mutant relative to the wild-type strain in each growth condition. the relative expression of only  <dig> and  <dig> genes were changed by more than two-fold in ypd and sd media, respectively . many of these genes are ty elements, a repetitive sequence in the yeast genome that experimentally might represent only a single sequence. the small number of genes whose relative abundance had changed indicates that the mutation in s <dig> has minor effects on the transcriptome profile of the parental strain. in addition, although s <dig> was shown to be part of the yeast penta-snrnp complex  <cit> , we did not observed any significant change in the relative abundance of intron-containing mrnas. it should be noted that because of the experimental set-up, these changes are only relative and do not report on global changes .

the observation that more genes are affected in sd medium might be related to the higher transcriptional activity of some metabolic pathways under these conditions. interestingly, the group of reduced genes in the minimal medium included genes involved in nucleic acid metabolism , although the medium included adenine, and none of the adenine pathway genes is mutated in this strain. consistent with this, we observed that the mutant strain exhibits slow growth phenotype in the absence of adenine in the growth media . this may suggest an indirect role for s <dig> in the transcription of genes involved in nucleic acid metabolism, probably by affecting the translation of a transcription factor. indeed, polysomal profile analysis of the bas <dig> transcription factor, which is known to regulate the expression of genes encoding enzymes involved in purine, pyrimidine and histidine biosynthetic pathways  <cit> , revealed a decrease in its polysomal association from >80% in the wild-type strain to  <dig> % +/-  <dig> % in the mutant .

to gain insight into the role of s <dig> during translation, we performed genome-wide analysis of mrnas separated into multiple polysomal fractions. the rps9-Δ <dig> strain was grown in optimal conditions , cells were harvested, and large complexes were separated by velocity sedimentation in sucrose gradient. figure 2a presents the od  <dig> profile of the entire gradient that is indicative of the amounts of polysomal complexes. as can be observed, there is a strong signal in the region of the gradient that includes polysomal complexes, and no significant differences are observed when comparing the od profile to the profile of a wild-type strain . this indicates that the majority of mrnas in the cells is associated with ribosomes, and is presumably translated.

to characterize changes in translation of particular mrnas, we collected multiple fractions along the gradient and analyzed the mrna content in each fraction by dna microarray. the first fractions were pooled together and included all complexes up to the size of 80s. this fraction was designated "free mrna" sample, since it contains molecules that are free of fully assembled ribosome. the remaining part of the gradient, which included mrnas associated with one or more ribosomes, was fractionated to multiple fractions of equal volume. five in vitro transcribed bacterial rnas were spiked into each of the fractions at equivalent amounts and were used to normalize for differences in all subsequent steps of the procedure, including rna purification, labeling with fluorescent dyes, hybridization to dna microarrays and scanning  <cit> . this external normalization procedure retains the inherent differences in mrna amounts at the different fractions, and therefore enables the construction of a sedimentation profile for each gene, which is refractory to global changes in mrna levels  <cit> . rna from each fraction was labeled with red fluorescent dye and hybridized together with an unrelated rna sample, labeled with green fluorescence as a reference to a dna microarray. this experimental procedure was repeated three times, and the ratios obtained for all genes are presented in additional file  <dig>  there are many missing signals for many genes at various fractions. these missing values represent spots that did not pass the quality selection criteria for various reasons, either technical  or biological . for further analysis we selected only those genes that, in general, had only one missing value in their polysomal region of the gradient . this selection resulted in ~ <dig>  genes for which we could assign a "peak fraction", i.e., the fraction having the highest red-to-green signal . from this group of genes, we filtered in only genes in which the peak fraction repeated itself in two or more experiments . about  <dig>  genes passed this selection criterion, and from the peak fraction and the od <dig> of the gradient  we assigned for each mrna the average number of ribosomes that it is mostly associated with .

to verify the microarray results using an alternative method, we performed a northern analysis on polysomal fractions of six different mrnas . for each gene, the signal obtained from the northern hybridization was normalized to the signal obtained for one of the spiked in vitro mrna , similar to the normalization procedure performed in the microarray analysis. as can be seen in figure 3b, the profile obtained by northern analysis in all cases agreed well with the one obtained by the microarray analysis.

to determine whether the mutation in s <dig> led to changes in ribosomal density of specific mrnas, we compared the findings to published values of an experiment that was done with an isogenic wild-type strain grown under the same medium and subjected to the same extraction procedure <cit> . overall, the wild-type strain and the mutant strain yielded a similar polysomal profile , consistent with no major differences in the experimental procedure. about  <dig> genes had a reliable ribosomal association value in both the wild-type and the mutant strain . not surprisingly, this group includes genes whose transcripts are relatively highly abundant compared to the entire genome of yeast. the median abundance value for this group is  <dig>  mrna copies per cell, while for the entire yeast genome the value is only  <dig>  copies per cell. the bias towards abundant mrna is probably due to the stringent selection procedure, which filters out genes with weak signals or with missing signals from multiple microarrays. this bias probably led to other indirect effects, including the following:  <dig>  an enrichment for genes containing introns . intron-containing genes have relatively high abundance of mrnas in yeast.  <dig>  exclusion of relatively long transcripts , as almost all of them are expressed at low levels in yeast. the results and conclusions presented below were also obtained when much lower filtration criteria were employed .

the selected genes were divided into seven categories according to the extent of change in their ribosomal association . for 60% of the genes , the s <dig> mutation had a very small effect of one or less ribosome change. yet, 40% of the genes had a more pronounced change due to the mutation. to explore the basis for the change in ribosomal association, the genes in each category were compared for various physical and functional properties. for each group, we calculated the average codon bias  or codon bias ), gc content, predicted thermal stability  of the  <dig> nts upstream to the start codon , predicted thermal stability of the orf , orf length and mrna length  <cit> . we also calculated each group's average abundance and half-life as previously assayed  <cit>  . a simulation procedure was performed to determine if there is enrichment for certain parameters in each group. the simulation was based on selecting a similar number of genes at random and calculating the average value for this random set. this was repeated for  <dig>  iterations and the distribution of average values was determined. while no general correlations were observed, some parameters appeared to be significantly enriched in two groups: 1) the group of genes with the strongest increase in ribosome density appeared to have a high enrichment for parameters related to expression level – these parameters include mrna abundance and codon usage , which are relatively low compared to the other groups. 2) the genes with the strongest decrease in density appeared to be enriched in parameters related to transcript length, including orf length and Δg. note that orf length and Δg strongly correlate with each other , therefore it is expected that both will perform in the same way. we attempted to normalize for the two parameters  in order to distinguish between the effects of the two parameters, yet we did not obtain statistically significant results, probably because of the strong linkage between them.

a – number of ribosomes in the parental strain  minus number in rps9-Δ <dig> strain .

b – values that differ significantly from the rest of the genes.

c – the abundance in the mutant was calculated from the transcriptome analysis by multiplying the relative expression in the mutant by values obtained from the wild-type strain .

we also utilized the go mapper tool from sgd in order to determine if any enrichment for specific functional groups exists in any of the affected groups. for this analysis we combined several groups together  in order to have groups large enough. the lists of genes that changed by two or more ribosomes was subjected to this analysis . we did not observe any specific enrichment in the process, the function or the component that these genes are assigned to.

s <dig> mutation leads to increased density at the 3' end
to gain insight into the basis of increased ribosomal density, we examined the ribosomal distribution along some of the mrnas having higher ribosomal density. increased density at particular regions of the mrna  will suggest the involvement of s <dig> at a specific translation step . we performed a ribosomal density mapping  analysis on four mrnas  that appeared to have three or more ribosomes compared to the wild-type strain. for each gene, the polysomal fraction containing most of its mrnas was isolated from the wild-type and mutant strains, and cleaved at the middle of the coding region by the addition of specific antisense oligodeoxynucleotide  and rnase h. the cleavage products were separated on a sucrose gradient, and the sedimentation position of each half of the mrna was determined by northern analysis . during the cleavage reaction, the mrna is associated with ribosomes, and therefore the cleavage site is not always accessible to the odn. thus, in every experiment there is a fraction of mrnas that was not cleaved  and sediment in the heavy region of the gradient. mrna molecules for which the cleavage was successful yield two products , which usually sediment in lighter fractions of the gradient than the full-length as they contain less ribosomes. in the wild-type strain, both halves of each yhb <dig>  and ygr026w  appear to sediment exactly the same, and the same fraction contains the highest signal for both halves  . this result is consistent with similar ribosomal association on both halves of each message. in the rps9-Δ <dig> strain, however, the peak fraction for the 3' half is in the heavier fractions in both cases: in fraction  <dig> for yhb <dig> and fraction  <dig> for ygr026w. this indicates that the 3' half for both genes sediment more heavily than the 5' half, consistent with more ribosomes being present in this region. this result was repeated in three independent experiments, and the sedimentation of the 3' half always appeared heavier than the 5' half. calculating the weighted-average fraction of the signal indicated an increase in the sedimentation of the 3' fragment in all cases . it is difficult to determine the extent of this change in terms of number of ribosomes due to the low resolution in this region of the gradient and the lack of sedimentation markers. in addition, averaging the extent of changes in the different experiments is also not informative since a shift of a single fraction in the heavy region of the gradient is not comparable to a similar shift in the lower region of the gradient. yet, for all genes and in all repeats, the fragment containing the stop codon  sediments as associated with more ribosomes than the upstream fragment . it should be noted that although the changes observed by rdm are relatively small, they are significant in this experimental set-up because both halves are the products of the same cleavage reaction, are separated on the same gradient and are analyzed on the same northern blot. thus, the two halves can be compared directly to each other, and any difference in sedimentation can be directly related to the mrna fragment and not the experimental set-up.

numbers indicate the weighted-average fraction for each fragment. they were obtained by summing the products of the relative signal in a fraction times the fraction number for all fractions with a signal above background.

a – this experimental repeat is presented in figures  <dig> and  <dig> 

b – cleavage scheme as depicted in figure 4a.

c – cleavage scheme as depicted in figure  <dig>  note that in the second and third repeats, the cleavage was done simultaneously with both odns added to the same sample. this enabled performing the entire procedure with a single sample , therefore lowering the experimental error.

d – cleavage scheme as depicted in figure 4b.

e – difference between the weighted-average fraction for the 3' fragment and the 5' fragment. this value represents the difference in sedimentation between the two fragments.

we analyzed another two mrnas  for differences in sedimentation between their 3' and 5' halves. the results suggest that on these mrnas as well there is an increased density of the 3' half in the mutant strain, yet the extent of increase is small and therefore its significance is unclear .

to further pinpoint the region of increased density, we designed rdm for a shorter region towards the stop codon of yhb <dig> mrna. polysomal rna was mixed with an odn complementary to a region  <dig> nts upstream to the stop codon. for comparison, odn complementary to a region  <dig> nts downstream to the start codon was used in a parallel reaction . these cleavage positions are expected to result in fragments representing the 5' third of the orf  and the 3' third of the orf . each of the reactions  was separated on a sucrose gradient. since in this experimental set-up each sample is separated in a different gradient, a fraction of mrnas associated with three ribosomes was collected, and an aliquot from it was added to each sample to serve as a common reference for the separation step. following separation, multiple fractions were collected, and the sedimentation of the 3' and 5' products was identified using specific probes . in addition, the sedimentation position of rpp2a mrna, which normally sediments in the fraction of three ribosomes, was determined using a specific probe and served as a reference for all gradients. quantitation of the sedimentation of the 5' fragments from the wild-type and mutant strains revealed a sedimentation similar to rpp2a mrna ; in both cases, the maximal signal for rpp2a  and the 5' fragments  appeared in fractions 13– <dig> . however, the 3' fragments appear to sediment differentially compared to rpp2a . in the wild-type strain a two fraction difference is observed between the peak fractions of rpp2a  and the 3' cleavage product  , yet in rps9-Δ <dig> only a one fraction difference is noted ). we also performed this experiment in a slightly modified protocol, whereby both odns were added to the same cleavage sample and the products were separated on a single sucrose gradient. this set-up allowed direct comparison of their sedimentations without the need for an external reference  . in all cases, the 3' fragment  sedimented in heavier fractions than a similar size 5' fragment. these results further suggest that there is an increased ribosomal association towards the 3' end of yhb <dig> mrna in rps9-Δ <dig> strain.

rps9-Δ <dig> does not confer a read-through phenotype
a possible basis for increased density at the 3' end is read-through of ribosomes into the 3' utr. this is a compelling possibility in the case of s <dig> since some mutations in it were previously shown to yield read-through of premature termination codons   <cit> . to quantitatively analyze the efficiency of read-through in rps9-Δ <dig>  we used a reporter assay in which the activity of a ptc-containing luciferase gene was tested  <cit> . plasmids carrying the luciferase gene with one ptc  or two ptc  under the control of an inducible promoter  were transformed into either the wild-type or the rps9-Δ <dig> strains. luciferase activity in these strains was measured after  <dig> hr induction of expression in galactose. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  some read-through activity is observed in the wild-type strain. this activity is eliminated completely if there are two consecutive stop codons, and is induced by more than two-fold following treatment with paromomycin. in the rps9-Δ <dig> strain, read-through levels are similar to those in the wild-type, indicating that the s <dig> mutation does not confer a read-through phenotype to a pre-mature stop codon.

discussion
genome-wide analysis of the role of ribosomal proteins
ribosomal proteins are known to play many roles during the translation process  <cit> . various methods were used to explore these roles, including sensitivity assays to antibiotics, analyses of reporter mrnas carrying premature termination codons or rare codons, and structural assays that examined their positions on the ribosomes at different translation states. here we took a different approach and used the information extracted from the ribosomal association of many different sequences in order to gain insight into the role of a particular ribosomal protein. we were able to compare the ribosomal association of ~ <dig> mrnas and divide them into several groups of affected mrnas. our limited analysis did not reveal any physical or functional feature that correlated with the extent of change . yet, our data might serve as a basis for more thorough analyses, utilizing novel computational tools. most necessary are algorithms for calculating and aligning rna structures, which may reveal correlations that we failed to identify. another current limitation stems from the limited information available for various mrna features, such as 3' utrs length, local structure stability and sequence elements. recently, a large-scale cdna analysis provided important information about lengths of 5'utrs in yeast  <cit> . although we did not find correlation between the 5' utrs lengths and changes in ribosomal association, information other than the length  may be involved. better characterization of these features may assist in defining broader roles of s <dig> 

changes in transcript levels were shown in many cases to correlate with changes at the translational level, a phenomenon that was termed 'potentiation'  <cit> . such a process can occur, for example, if specific proteins are deposited on the transcript as it is synthesized  <cit> , or if alternative transcription start site is selected  <cit> . when comparing the changes in transcriptome to the changes in ribosome association of the  <dig> genes, we did not observe any correlation between the two . this could be because our sample is relatively small and has small changes in relative transcript levels. alternatively, the effects of s <dig> might only be at the translation step , and therefore the changes of transcript levels are only indirect consequences of the translational effects. such indirect secondary effects are likely to be diverse, therefore simple correlation will not be observed.

the analysis presented here focused on those mrnas having increased density, and based on the few mrnas that were tested specifically, we propose a role for s <dig> in termination. however, a significant number of genes appeared to have a similar ribosomal association as in the wild-type, as well as decreased density compared to the wild-type strain. this suggests that the effects on the termination of s <dig> are conferred only to a subset of mrnas, for example, mrnas with a specific sequence or structural motif in their 3' utr. we were unable to identify a common sequence motif using standard tools  and are currently attempting to combine structure alignment algorithms to this end. alternatively, s <dig> might similarly affect termination on all mrnas. yet, due to differences in re-initiation rates between different mrnas, the effect will appear to be differential and strong enough on some mrnas to lower ribosomes' reloading. in such a model, the net balance of termination inhibition will be a decrease in ribosomal association for mrnas with a strong affinity between their 5' and 3' ends, and an increase in density for mrnas with weak interactions. testing this model necessitates knowledge about affinities between the ends of different mrnas or the rates of re-initiation on different mrnas. such information is yet to be determined.

possible involvement of s <dig> in termination
we have herein focused on the sub-group of mrnas having increased ribosomal association. for two of the tested mrnas an increased ribosomal association towards the 3' end of the mrna was observed; such an increase cannot be excluded for the other two mrnas. the increased density towards the 3' end of the mrna might be due to ribosomes reading through the stop codon and accumulating at the 3' utr. however, if our results from the premature termination codon analysis  are applicable to a natural stop codon, a likely explanation for the increased density is that ribosomes accumulate upstream to the stop codon. s <dig> might interact with one of the elongation or release factors that are necessary for efficient termination and ribosome recycling  <cit> .

possible roles of the acidic domain
the region of s <dig> that was changed includes multiple acidic amino acids. the high-resolution structures of both the prokaryotic and the eukaryotic ribosomes suggest that this region can interact with incoming mrna or other proteins. there are numerous examples of protein-rna interactions that are performed through negatively charged residues  <cit> . these residues interact preferentially with the bases of the mrna molecule  <cit> . it is possible that once the ribosome approaches the termination region, the c terminus of s <dig> interacts with the incoming 3' utr and thereby allows efficient termination. another possible role for the acidic domain is through interaction with other proteins. the c terminus might interact with elongation or termination factors, or with other proteins necessary for efficient termination.

CONCLUSIONS
we presented here the first genome-wide study of changes in ribosomal association due to a mutation in the ribosomal protein . for analysis we selected a protein that resides at the entrance of the mrna leading into the ribosomes and which might interact with the incoming message. this analysis revealed groups of mrnas that changed their ribosomal association compared to the wild-type strain. limited bioinformatics analysis did not reveal a general correlation between the change in association and physical or functional properties of the mrna . yet, this data might serve as a template for the development of more advanced tools that will identify a novel sequence or structure elements in the mrna. we focused here on the group of mrnas having increased association and found that at least for some the increased association is biased towards the 3' end of the transcript. this suggested a novel function for s <dig> in the termination process. future studies aimed at identifying elements or factors that interact with s <dig> will provide insight into the exact mechanism by which s <dig> affects termination.

