BACKGROUND
nucleic acid binding sites recognized by transcription factors are comprised of families of short, related, often degenerate sequences that share a common function. this degeneracy may be represented in the form of a position-specific weight matrix   <cit> . in fact, pwms have been widely applied  <cit>  and several databases host them  <cit> .

using information theory, the degree of conservation of an individual member  of that family and its corresponding weight matrix may be quantified in terms of bits of information  <cit> . the strength of experimental binding has been shown to correlate with the predicted value of binding strength in bits for individual transcription factor binding sites  <cit> . we have used this approach, for example, to successfully find potential splice sites and to predict the probability that a given splice site will be used  <cit> .

regions upstream of transcription initiation sites typically contain multiple potential heterogeneous binding sites recognized by the same transcription factor. however, such sites can be found in the promoter regions of both genes that are, and those that aren't, regulated by the same factor  <cit> , suggesting that additional sequence or structural properties are needed to discriminate true target genes from those which are not regulated by a particular factor. this paper addresses the problem of the identification of target genes for xenobiotic-sensitive transcription factors in the human genome by using a combination in tandem of information theory, a novel information density-based clustering  algorithm and machine learning approaches for classification.

as proof of concept, binding sites recognized by the nuclear receptor transcription factor, the pregnane x receptor , are used to develop an algorithm that identify genomic target genes regulated by this factor. the algorithm exploits a pwm that accurately models the affinity of the protein for these sequences  <cit> . pxr is a ligand-activated transcription factor that heterodimerizes with the 9-cis retinoic acid receptor x  to form pxr/rxrα. following exposure to xenobiotics like rifampin, clotrimazole, ritonavir, phenobarbital and hyperforin, and endogenous compounds like lithocholic acid steroids  <cit> , pxr/rxrα binds response elements in the promoters of regulated genes to induce gene expression.

RESULTS
an information theoretic approach has high recall in identifying promoter elements bound by pxr/rxrα. given a representative weight matrix, sensitivity is essentially 100%. however, information theory weight matrices are not sufficient to discriminate between true and false positives, since binding sites were also found within the promoter regions of genes known not to be regulated by pxr/rxrα. the analysis of total information content in positive versus negative sites shows that, on average, the information is concentrated more in stronger sites in the case of regulated genes . figure  <dig> shows the ratios between the fractions of the sum of the information content found in regulated versus unregulated genes at each binding strength. for example, if we consider sites that have a binding strength of  <dig> bits, we first count the number of such sites found in regulated genes and multiply this by  <dig>  the resulting number is then divided by the total number of bits for all sites, irrespective of strength, and this yields the average fraction of information content in a promoter region that is found in sites with a bit strength of  <dig>  if the same calculation is carried out for genes known to be unrelated to pxr/rxrα, the ratio of the fraction computed for regulated genes to that for unrelated/unregulated genes gives the corresponding y-axis value in fig.  <dig>  thus, the graph shows that a 10-fold higher proportion of total information content is found within sites having a strength of  <dig> bits in regulated versus unregulated promoters. however, note that this is an observation based on an average quantity, and no significant differences are evident at sites that are  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> bits in strength. it was apparent from our preliminary studies  that multiple binding sites were necessary for transcriptional activation. none of the promoters examined to date contain a single strong binding site, rather they contain multiple sites. putatively, a few moderately strong sites might increase the odds of a transcription factor recognizing a promoter that is then bound to the strongest site in the region. therefore, in this paper, we have outlined a tandem machine-learning approach for the characterization of pxr/rxrα genomic signatures that takes into account the density, strength, and location of the sites predicted by information theory. in effect, the unknown function for successful regulation of a gene that we are trying to approximate may be expressed as f where b = the frequency distribution of binding site strengths, d = the set of distances of binding sites from the transcription start site and s = the spacing  between the sites for a given promoter region.

the information gain ratio with respect to classification of a region as positive or negative was computed for each attribute . the gain ratio rather than information gain was used to accommodate the fact that the number of possible states for the distribution differs from attribute to attribute. the attributes with the highest information gain ratios were considered for further analysis. based on this analysis, the attributes with the highest gain ratios were found to be the number of clusters , total information , number of sites , information within clusters , information in top three clusters , and information over  bits . hence, these attributes were used for analysis with classification algorithms.

the results of the learning from the classification algorithms are summarized in tables  <dig>   <dig>  we expected to get progressively better performance in the sequence naïve bayesian, decision trees, neural networks  and neural networks . this is in keeping with the limiting assumption of naïve bayes learning that all attributes have independent probability distributions and the progressively flexible allowance for boundaries in dimensional hyperspace. for example, decision trees are limited to the use of hyperplanes that are perpendicular to some attribute or variable. neural networks based on backpropagation relax this requirement to allow hyperplanes to adopt any orientation. the use of radial basis functions allows further flexibility in the partitioning of hyperspace. contrary to expectation, all these methods exhibited comparable average performance. however, the nns had the most consistent performance, i.e., they showed the least variance in performance with respect to choice of training set.

we also tested the performance of the prediction methods on a test set of  <dig> genes  that had not been included in either training or validation sets. the methods individually classified between  <dig> and  <dig> of the  <dig> genes correctly and a jury prediction correctly classified  <dig> of the  <dig> genes. the proportion of correct classification  on this test set is in line with the performance noted in cross-validation of the training data .

one of the questions raised by the idbc analysis was to what extent did the genomic organization of predicted binding sites determine whether a particular gene was classified as a target for pxr/rxrα. we first considered the possibility that treating dna strands separately might for promoter regulation, however experimental studies have shown that functional pxr/rxrα sites can occur on either strand and enhance transcription of genes regulated by this factor  <cit> . we then looked for trends in inter-site spacing. there is a bias  in the periodicity of the separations of sites within clusters, indicating a preference for separation of sites by helical turn length, ie.  <dig> bp , which is consistent with multimeric protein recognition across the same face of the helix. the information maxima within pxr/rxrα binding sites are also separated by  <dig> bp, also consistent with major groove recognition  <cit> . however, the length of the binding site is considerably longer than this spacing, suggesting that binding site cluster recognition may in some way be mediated by interactions involving overlapping or alternating half sites. surprisingly, this distribution is evident in promoter regions of both genes that are regulated pxr/rxrα  and those whose expression is unchanged in response to rifampin . there was no evidence of higher order chromatin accessibility to binding sites, since there was no preference for nucleosome phasing  of binding sites .

discussion
the importance of clustered binding sites as an indicator of a regulatory region has been noted in several studies. one of the first  <cit>  modeled the occurrence of clusters as a poisson process in order estimate a p-value. however, this study required exact matches to consensus sequences, rather than pwms and did not identify putative binding sites. the objective was to maximize specificity at the cost of recall. berman et al.  <cit>  used a program called cis-analyst for the recognition of clusters of binding sites in the drosophila genome. cis-analyst uses a window-based approach to cluster sites solely based on physical location, without regard to strength of the sites. further, cluster boundaries are coarse because they depend on the simple rule of collapsing overlapping windows. therefore, the size of the cluster is on the order of a multiple of the parametric window size. mscan  <cit>  aims to detect regulatory regions in genomes by clustering binding sites for all transcription factors. both cis-analyst and mscan use pwms  <cit> , clearly a superior alternative to consensus sequence detection of binding sites. however, a fixed window size is used for the detection of clusters by mscan, and the computed p-values represent an upper bound. several other studies also use a fixed-size window  <cit> . cluster-buster  <cit>  scans whole genomes with pwms using dynamic programming to efficiently compute the log likelihood ratio of a clustered model to that of a random background model. it is not clear what threshold should be used to determine if the results obtained are significant.

the algorithm, the underlying information pwms, and the nature of the present study distinguish the current approach from previous work. idbc uses the metric of information density for delineating clusters of binding sites. thus, the criterion for clustering is not the distances separating the binding sites per se, but is proportional to the number of bits of information. this implies that the size of a cluster may be highly variable, being influenced by both binding strength and the number of constituent sites. neither is a rigid requirement for the number of sites imposed , nor is the boundary of a cluster constrained. some studies  <cit>  claim to obviate the need for training data. this is strictly not true as a pwm implicitly represents a trained model, but such studies do offer the advantage of not needing a known list of regulated genes. such methods may be valuable as preliminary screening tools, especially when there is paucity of training data. but approaches that use training data have the potential to yield higher specificity and sensitivity such as that reported in the present study. better discrimination between regulated and unregulated genes can be achieved by having suitable positive and negative examples from which to automate learning. this will help to map a transcription factor to a comprehensive set of cognate gene targets.

despite the high level of performance we report, it is necessary to consider why our accuracy is limited. possible explanations are:

i) the effect of 3d higher order structure of dna has not been taken into account in the study, other than looking for periodicity in location of the sites. this might result in a difference to accessibility of different promoter regions by transcription factors.

ii) for some of the genes, the concomitant presence of binding sites for other transcription factors might be important. or, in general, other additional factors may be important. in other words, pxr/rxrα might be necessary, but not sufficient, for activation/repression of some of the target genes.

iii) the negative training set may be confounded by cryptic pxr/rxrα target genes whose expression did not change in response to rifampin treatment in the hepg <dig> hepatic cell line. since pxr/rxrα appears to be more broadly expressed  <cit> , it is quite plausible that some target genes containing binding site signatures may not have been activated or repressed in the hepg <dig> background. these false negative assignments may be rectified by analysis of expression in appropriate tissues treated with pxr ligands.

iv) the analysis has been limited to the  <dig> kb region upstream of each gene. though this is likely to be the most representative region for the vast majority of genes, this may ignore the presence of control elements in other locations in a few cases.

v) the classification boundaries might be highly complex. this is supported by the fact that we noticed a slight improvement upon changing the neural network architecture from standard backpropagation with log-sigmoid functions to rbf learning. the former is theoretically limited by its use of hyperplanes while the latter uses gaussian distributions to divide multidimensional space.

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented a tandem machine learning approach for the computational identification of target genes for a given transcription factor. the locations and organization of binding sites alone are insufficient to discriminate genes regulated by a transcription factor from other gene targets. the strength of the approach is based on the tandem use of information-theoretic weight matrices, a novel density-based clustering approach and machine learning methods for classification. the method has been validated for the transcription factor pxr/rxrα, and has the potential for the improved identification of transcriptional regulatory targets across the entire genome  <cit> .

