BACKGROUND
e. sakazakii is a motile, non-spore forming, gram negative facultative anaerobe microorganism. it was previously referred to as "yellow-pigmented enterobacter cloacae" until it was designated a unique species by farmer et al.  <cit> .

the organism is an occasional contaminant of powdered infant formula milk that can cause a rare, but life threatening form of neonatal meningitis and necrotizing enterocolitis, which is the most common gastrointestinal emergency in the newborn  <cit> .

the current food and drug administration  method for detection of e. sakazakii includes a pre-enrichment procedure in buffered peptone water , enrichment in enterobacteriaceae enrichment  broth, plating on violet red bile glucose agar  and picking of five grown colonies onto tryptone soy agar  plates, which are incubated at 25°c for 48– <dig> hours. yellow-pigmented colonies, typical for e. sakazakii, on the tsa plates are confirmed using the api20e system. however, there is a strong need for simplified methods for isolation and identification of e. sakazakii. guillaume et al.  <cit>  published a new procedure, based on selective enrichment in modified lauryl sulfate tryptone broth, by addition of  <dig>  m nacl. additionally, there is a strong need for good identification methods for presumptive e. sakazakii isolates. a feature, which can be used for this is the α-glucosidase activity, which was demonstrated to be present in all e. sakazakii strains and not in most other members of the enterobacteriaceae  <cit> . based on this biochemical property several differential media were developed recently  <cit> . two of these media the oxoid chromogenic enterobacter sakazakii agar  – also known as the druggan-forsythe-iversen  formulation  <cit>  – and enterobacter sakazakii isolation agar , are commercially available and were included in our comparative study.

in a recent study, the molecular basis of the α-glucosidase activity in e. sakazakii was determined  <cit> . an open reading frame containing a sequence potentially coding for a  <dig> -α-glucosidase was identified. in the current study, the potential of a pcr system based on the  <dig> -α-glucosidase for the specific identification of e. sakazakii was evaluated on the dna of target and non-target strains.

the vit  represents a commercially available detection and identification system based on fluorescently labelled gene probes targeting specified regions on the ribosomal rna of the bacteria. subsequent to analysis, the illuminated e. sakazakii cells are visualised under an epifluorescence microscope.

the current study represents a comparison of two commercial chromogenic media, which indicate presumptive e. sakazakii colonies, as well as an evaluation of an α-glucosidase based pcr assay and a rrna targeting in situ technique for the rapid identification of e. sakazakii.

ninety-eight target and non-target strains were included in the study and results were compared for specificity and convenience in performance.

RESULTS
the chromogenic media
the results of the target and non-target strains included in this study for the comparison of the dfi and the esia media are summarized in table  <dig> and  <dig> in view of producing presumptive, typical colonies for e. sakazakii. generally, the results for the  <dig> e. sakazakii strains were in good concordance, blue-green coloured colonies on dfi agar and turquoise on esia media, except for one e. sakazakii strain , which gave grey-white colonies on dfi agar  and thus was considered negative on this medium. furthermore, of the  <dig> non-target strains , one s. ficaria environmental isolate showed the typical blue-green colour when grown on dfi agar, but was correctly identified as negative on esia medium .

however, within a set of  <dig> strains, originally isolated from fruit powder , typical blue green and turquoise colonies, respectively were observed for  <dig> strains on esia and for  <dig> isolates on dfi medium, when incubated at the recommended temperature. an example of the fruit powder isolate 1160/ <dig> grown on dfi and esia medium is given in figure 2a and 2b. api32e analysis on these strains revealed ambiguous results, but none of the strains were identified as e. sakazakii. according to the literature p. shigelloides, e. vulneris, c. koseri or pantoea sp. can give typical coloured colonies on dfi agar  <cit> . api32e identification suggested as identification e. vulneris and pantoea spp. as well as buttiauxiella agrestis  <cit> , which was previously known as citrobacter group f, for several isolates within this group, although with low levels of confidence. however, the two reference strains e. vulneris atcc  <dig> and p. agglomerans atcc  <dig>  included in this study were correctly identified as negative by both selective media .

in order to obtain more information on the fruit powder strains partial sequencing of the 16s rrna gene was performed. affiliation to the phylogenetic tree revealed, that all isolates were clearly distinct from e. sakazakii sequences from both lineages  <cit> . in figure  <dig> and  <dig> the phylogenetic tree  and the respective distances matrix  of these strains with respect to e. sakazakii strains from both lineages and other selected members of the enterobacteriaceae are given. sequence similarities of  <dig> – 97% to type strains of other members of the enterobacteriacaeae suggested that the organisms were members of the same genus but none of the isolates exhibited sequence similarities > 97% to e. sakazakii sequences from both lineages . finally, ribotyping was performed on nine of the questionable strains again revealing, that the strains are not belonging to the e. sakazakii group .

additionally, growth experiments were performed for the strains of interest using a recently developed selective enrichment for e. sakazakii detection in environmental samples  <cit> . experiments were performed in lauryl sulfate tryptose broth  supplemented with  <dig>  m nacl and  <dig> mg/liter vacomycin with or without an included non-selective enrichment step in bpw starting with bhi grown cultures. all strains were unable to grow within mlst broth at 44°c, regardless including a non-selective enrichment step in bpw or not . in the study recently published by guillaume-gentil et al.  <cit> , all of the e. sakazakii strains  tested, were able to grow in mlst at 45°c, whereas  <dig> of  <dig> strains of potential competitors, all belonging to the enterobacteriaceae, were suppressed. they concluded, that the inclusion of this enrichment broth could be very useful for the reliable detection of e. sakazakii in environmental samples. in our study, however, e. sakazakii strain fsm  <dig> could also not grow in mlst.

the α-glucosidase based pcr

applying the α-glucosidase based pcr system we were able to identify all target strains. no false positive result was obtained within the group of non-target strains. an example of the identification of a fruit powder strain by pcr assay is given in figure 5a.

it is worth mentioning that both compared selective media are based on the proposed α-glucosidase activity of e. sakazakii. from literature it is known, that several other organisms also exhibit this biochemical feature and can grown on dfi  <cit> . the α-glucosidase based pcr system, however, exclusively targets the gene responsible for the α-glucosidase activity in e. sakazakii.

vit 

by using the vit test, all of the e. sakazakii strains were identified. no false positive result was obtained within the group of non-target strains. these results were in good concordance with those obtained with the α-glucosidase based pcr system. the target strains were easy to identify due to the specific red colour under the epifluorescence microscope. in figure 5b, an example of a positive identification of e. sakazakii fruit powder strain1160/ <dig> by vit is given. however, during analysis of the strains used in the study, some autofluorescence was observed in several samples of the non-target strains. inclusion of a positive reference strain during analysis can overcome this problem, since a "true signal" differs significantly in brightness.

the major advantage of this easy to handle molecular method is represented by the fact, that the bacterial rrna is targeted by the probes, thus in principle only vital e. sakazakii cells containing an efficiently high ribosomal content are detected by the assay. results are obtained within three hours and the performance of the test is not restricted to an especially equipped laboratory.

detection is possible to the single cell level, even in mixed material containing target and non-target cells. the detection limit of the assay was experimentally determined using serial dilutions of overnight cultures of two different e. sakazakii reference strains  and determination of the cfu/ml by quantitative plating. a detection limit of  <dig> cfu/ml was ascertained for both strains.

CONCLUSIONS
by comparing the two chromogenic media on a set of  <dig> target and non-target strains, the esia medium proved to be more indicative for presumptive e. sakazakii colonies. inclusion of an enrichment step in mlst can reduce the number of presumptive colonies, with are not e. sakazakii. nevertheless, all presumptive colonies on esia and dfi media need a further species identification. the two molecular methods, although based on completely different target regions and methodologies performed equally well in identifying e. sakazakii strains. both methods showed 100% specificity. the pcr based system needs a dna extraction step, prior to amplification set up, but is easily implemented into pcr adapted laboratories. the vit test represented a fast and convenient to handle test system.

