BACKGROUND
changes in environmental conditions alter the outcome of natural selection, affecting the selective benefits of subsequent adaptations that improve an organism's fitness in the new conditions. in the case of extreme environmental change, the appearance and fixation of beneficial adaptations can be essential for survival. a large number of different factors, e.g. resource availability, temperature, community dynamics, etc., can drive adaptive evolution. in particular, species' responses to climate changes are of growing concern, and numerous studies have been carried out for a wide variety of organisms in nature as well as the laboratory, e.g. pikas  <cit> , fish  <cit> , honey bees  <cit> , daphnia  <cit>  and microbes  <cit> , amongst many others.

within eukaryotic and even bacterial species, identifying the correspondence between minute molecular adaptations and changes in the organism's fitness is challenging. in contrast, bacteriophages have frequently been isolated from nature and used as model laboratory systems due to their much more compact genomes and the corresponding relative ease for assessing molecular responses to selection. moreover, while each phage has a small genome, phages are the most abundant form of life on earth and play a pivotal role within the global ecosystem  <cit> . as such, numerous studies have been conducted examining phages and their thermal environment in nature. metagenomic studies have examined the diversity of marine viruses, which includes phages, in diverse thermal conditions, from thermal vents and hot springs  <cit>  to samples from the bitter cold of antarctica  <cit> .

in the laboratory, adaptive evolution experiments have been performed for individual phage species, exploring their viability at temperatures both within and exceeding their thermal niche  <cit> . in addition to assessing adaptations made in response to new selective pressures phenotypically , mutations occurring in response to a particular thermal environment can be directly determined and monitored over generations. the range of temperatures and duration of exposure differs from one study to another; moreover, the means in which the treatment is applied also varies. for instance, many of the studies of the phages Φx <dig> and g <dig> have explored the response to elevated temperatures on the phage-host pair, in other words plating/culturing the phage and bacterial host  at a range of temperatures: 42°c to 56°c  <cit> , 38°c to  <dig> °c  <cit> , 37°c to 45°c  <cit> ,  <dig> °c to 44°c  <cit> , and 27°c to 44°c  <cit> . despite the knowledge garnered from previous studies of e. coli growth at different temperatures  <cit> , identifying the adaptations of the phage due solely from the thermal environment and not from a host response to the environment is challenging. avoiding such obstacles, studies have also been conducted in which changes in temperature were applied to just the phage, e.g. Φx <dig>  <cit> , t <dig>  <cit> , and Φ <dig>  <cit> .

thus far, research has chiefly focused on relatively modest changes in thermal environment. survival and adaptive evolution to extremes remains largely unknown. here, using the well-studied ssdna bacteriophage Φx <dig>  elevated temperatures both for relatively short as well as long durations of time are explored. in contrast with other studies of temperature selection for this phage  <cit> , thermal treatments are focused on the phage itself. extreme temperatures, comparable to those occurring within hot springs   <cit> , were explored to assess the ability of Φx <dig> to survive and adapt in novel environments.

RESULTS
acute thermal selection
following the experimental design illustrated in figure  <dig> , plaque numbers for phage treated at 50°c, regardless of the time of exposure, were unchanged relative to control phage lysates; dilution series were carried out confirming a minimal  decline in phage survival . in contrast, many of the samples subjected to 70°c did not form any plaques when plated. comparison of the number of pfu of the control lineage, the anc strain,  and each of the treatment lines allows us to calculate the average survival rate. table  <dig> delineates the results of a two-way anova of the survival rates for all  <dig> samples  revealing that only temperature is found to be statistical significant. the average survival rate for the 50°c treatment samples was 98% and for the 70°c treatments was  <dig> %. the survival rate within the 70°c treatments varied according to the exposure time; the average survival rates and standard error of the mean for the 70°c treatments are shown in figure  <dig>  it is important to note, however, that only two-thirds of phage populations at the 70°c treatment temperature survived. the number of plaques produced was drastically smaller than that of the 50°c treatments.

plaques from eight of these 70°c treatment plates were isolated and their adsorption rate was quantified . table  <dig> lists the adsorption rates for the heated  isolates as well as the untreated isolate . while two of the eight acute selected isolates had higher rates of adsorption than the control, the majority exhibit a reduced adsorption rate.

as previous studies suggest  <cit> , the ability to endure this elevated temperature is likely due to adaptations within the structural proteins. thus, we sequenced a ~ <dig> bp region encompassing the structural coding regions of the isolated plaques to identify possible beneficial mutations; each sequenced region was compared to the ancestral strain's genomic sequence in order to identify what mutations occurred. the sequences of the isolates from the 50°c treatments were identical to the ancestor anc sequence. on the contrary, the 70°c treatment isolate sequences included several mutations : the e150d mutation occurred within the d protein coding region ; the a45v, l242f and q349h within the f protein coding region; and the v44l, t63s and g79v within the h protein coding region. all of the mutations observed were nonsynonymous; individual nucleotide changes are listed in additional file 1: supplemental table s <dig>  in total four different genotypes were observed. the average adsorption rates for each genotype are:  <dig>  × 10- <dig> ,  <dig>  × 10- <dig> ,  <dig>  × 10- <dig> , and  <dig>  × 10- <dig> .

extended thermal selection
we next explored the evolution of the phage to withstand longer exposure to elevated temperatures. in particular, we were interested in determining the extent of adaptation to 70°c resulting from extended selection. when creating a high titer Φx <dig> stock for use in the extended thermal selection experiments, the population incorporated two nonsynonymous mutations  resulting in a modified strain, which we refer to as jacs, serving as the ancestral population of the extended thermal selection experiments . this high titer lysate was subjected to much longer durations of heat exposure, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> hours . just as in the acute thermal treatments, the mutations occurring within the phage during these treatments are a result solely of the temperature, as has been previously observed  <cit> , rather than in response to the host or replication errors. after each selection period,  <dig> μl of lysate was sampled onto e. coli c while the remaining lysate solution was then returned to thermal selective conditions. periodically, the entire lysate was plated on the host, and following overnight incubation, the plate was harvested and used for subsequent heat treatments . these brief periods of relaxed selection, in the absence of elevated/extreme temperatures, were critical. as the number of viable phage decreases, the probability of their collection between heat treatments  also decreases. by plating the entire remaining lysate and allowing for a population expansion, we could readily assess the viability of the entire population and decrease the potential for population extinction. the observations made during these platings served as the rationale behind the times and temperatures of successive rounds of selection . in addition, this also assisted in maintaining a relatively constant solution volume within the tube under treatment while allowing the treated phage of replicating within the host and the associated introduction of genetic variability.

as expected based upon the short-term heat-treatments, the majority of the replicate lineages did not survive the initial treatment at 70°c; in fact, of the estimated  <dig> ×  <dig> phage within the  <dig> ml tube treated, less than 10- <dig> survived the first two treatments. for the  <dig> replicates, only one of each line survived the subsequent eight rounds of selection. figure  <dig> shows the relative percentage of surviving phage; denoted by the asterisks are the treatments in which the phage lysate was collected from the previous treatment's plating and incubation at 37°c for  <dig> hours. as a result of these platings, it is very likely that the volume of phage is not held constant throughout the duration of the thermal treatments. despite this, two important observations can be drawn from the figure. firstly, because both lines are undergoing the same treatment regiment after the first treatment, one can compare the survival and relative changes in fitness  between the two lines. as shown in the figure, the phage population of line a decreased after the second selection round whereas the line b population remained rather static after the initial treatment. after subsequent heating, however, line a regained fitness and the ability to withstand prolonged heating at 50°c. both lines showed an improved survival rate at 50°c than they did after the initial long-term exposure to 70°c during the first treatment. secondly, one can see that the surviving phages  do not experience a rapid increase in fitness and regain a titer comparable to the initial ancestral line during subsequent temperature treatments.

one of the factors which can affect phage fitness is its ability to be adsorbed by the host species. thus the adsorption rate for each of the surviving phages  was determined to be  <dig>  × 10- <dig> ml/min for line a and one order of magnitude less,  <dig>  × 10- <dig> ml/min for line b.

to determine if these isolates were more capable to withstand elevated temperatures than the jacs or anc strains, five replicates of the surviving lineages  were heated for  <dig> hours at 50°c and  <dig> hours at 70°c. both the line a and line b isolates treated at 50°c appeared identical to the untreated jacs and anc strains as well as the treatments from the short-term experiment. in contrast with the results of the short-term exposure to 70°c, lines a and b appeared identical to the untreated jacs and anc strains; dilution series were performed showing no detectable decline in titer.

dna from the two surviving lineages was isolated, amplified, and sequenced  in order to uncover which molecular changes were responsible for the isolate's ability to withstand long periods of elevated temperatures. table  <dig> lists the mutations identified; line a includes one nonsynonymous mutation and one synonymous mutation and line b includes two nonsynonymous mutations. the sequence for line a has been deposited . interestingly, the mutations within the two surviving lines occurred at positions different from those observed during the sequencing of the short-term heat treatments. moreover, the mutations which occurred in the acute thermal selection experiments were not seen in the surviving long-term treatment isolates. to assess the uniqueness of the individual mutations within the lines, the isolate's genome was aligned with  <dig> publically available Φx <dig> genomes. the presence of threonine at amino acid position  <dig> of the f protein is common amongst the sequences . the lysine at amino acid position  <dig> of the h protein is also common; in fact the jacs ancestor is the only strain with another amino acid at this position.

* indicates synonymous mutation

discussion
exposing phage to elevated and extreme temperatures can have one of two principal effects. firstly, as previous studies have shown, mutations can be induced by heat  <cit> . thus new genetic variations can arise within the population as a result of increased temperatures. secondly, genetic variants present within a population can respond differently to their new environmental conditions. thus, genotypes with the ability to tolerate this new environment, regardless of their initial frequencies within the population, will survive while others may perish. a combination of the two is also possible.

we can draw two conclusions based upon the results of exposing the phage to acute thermal selection. firstly, heating the wild-type Φx <dig> at 50°c for brief periods of times had no or little effect on phage viability and does not lead to the introduction of genetic variation or increase within the population of genetic variants. no decline in phage titer occurred between one and four hours suggesting that the phage is inherently able to withstand this heat in an aqueous environment, despite the fact that it is well above the temperature that is comfortable for its host. secondly, exposure to 70°c for even a short period of time greatly diminishes ancestral phage survival, although some phages persist in this harsh environment. the morphology of the plaques isolated after 70°c selection were similar to those produced by the untreated Φx <dig>  albeit drastically fewer in number.

the fact that the 50°c treatment line sequences and subsequent resequencing of plaques from the control lines do not include the mutations detected within the 70°c treatment sequences suggests that the mutations observed within the lines are in response to their exposure to the elevated temperature rather than possible variation present within the initial phage population. as such, one could conclude that all  of the mutations found confer the ability to withstand brief exposure to 70°c. to confirm this hypothesis, these isolates were subjected to another round of heating  and replated; the number of pfus exceeded that of its previous plating  indicating that these mutations do in fact correspond with heat resistance.

the mutations detected within the sequences of the heat tolerant plaques reveal that there are multiple mutations which are associated with the response to temperature. three of the isolates, one treated for  <dig> hours and two treated for  <dig> hours, had the exact same set of mutations. all but one of the eight isolates contained the transversion g→ t  at nucleotide position  <dig> within the f coding region and the transition c→ t  at nucleotide position  <dig> within the h coding region. the missense mutation at the position in f is believed to have a role in stabilizing the viral capsid as well as allow fusion of the viral particle to the bacterial cell membrane  <cit> . histidine, unlike glutamine, can support cross-linking within the viral capsid by accepting protons from adjacent amino acids, which may provide support and reinforce the viral capsid during the extreme hot temperatures  <cit> . furthermore, glutamine residues have been characterized as essential for entry of enveloped viruses into their host cells; without which the viral capsid is unable to fully fuse with the bacterial cell membrane  <cit> . the function of the h protein or the minor spike protein is attachment of the virion to the host lipopolysaccharides  <cit> . one may thus speculate that this particular missense mutation may have allowed the isolates to remain viable at extreme temperatures. in a stability experiment, the cysteine amino acids in the spike protein of phage p <dig> were replaced with serine; the resulting mutant could survive at temperatures of up to 75°c  <cit> . the combination of the two mutations occurring together suggests epistasis, and that the selective benefit of one of the mutations is contingent on the presence of the other. from these data alone, it is unclear which of the mutations is truly beneficial, and if the selective benefit of the second mutation is due to amelioration of the pleiotropic costs of the first  <cit> .

one of the isolates treated for  <dig> hours is unique in that a single missense mutation within the h coding region  not only conferred tolerance to the extreme temperature for  <dig> hours of exposure but also improved the rate in which the phage could be adsorbed ; the ability to be adsorbed more quickly, although not specifically selected for here, should lead to higher fitness for the phage mutant strain  <cit> . this isolate's improved adsorption rate may be attributed to valine's contributor to cell anchoring  <cit> . this single mutation in fact increases the rate in which it can be adsorbed exceeding that of its ancestor. additionally, the survival rate of this particular isolate was the highest of any of the short-term treatment lines, 1%. this suggests that the single exchange of a glycine to valine may in fact both increase adsorption and provide resistance to elevated temperatures, at least for a short duration. the phenotypic ramifications of this single mutation warrant further investigation.

the c→ t transition at the  <dig> nucleotide position within the f coding region  appears in four heat isolates all of which also include e150d, q349h, and t63s. this particular transition has been previously identified  <cit>  ; in fact in the introduction of high temperatures  in the study of bull et al.  <cit> , this particular mutation was recovered in ~85% of the isolates. the mutation found in the study of bull et al.  <cit>  at nucleotide position  <dig>  however, was not detected within the acute thermal selection experiments conducted here. the other mutation within the f protein found in this study  has not been previously detected with respect to elevated temperature experiments .

the results of the acute thermal selection experiments may be the result of heat-induced mutation or the result of proliferation of particular genetic variants present within the initial population. as table  <dig> shows, several of the different lines independently converged upon the same mutations suggesting that these mutations, conferring the ability to withstand extreme temperatures, may:  be preferred sites of heat mutagenesis  <cit>  while  maintain the phage's ability to infect and replicate successfully within its host. the question, however, remained: would these same mutations afford the phage with resistance to longer periods of elevated and/or extreme temperatures?

the extended heat selection gave surprising results in comparison to the acute selection. none of the mutations observed in the eight sequenced acute selection isolates were found in either of the two sequenced extended selection isolates. while the acute results indicated that adaptive responses to thermal stress could be observed with sufficiently large populations, they were not predictive of longer-term molecular evolutionary responses. the absence of similar prevalent genotypes between the acute and extended selection treatments and between the two extended selection isolates strongly suggests historical factors played important roles in the molecular outcomes. the historical factors likely involve differences in the initial selective regime, as observed to differences in the chance fixation of adaptive mutants  <cit> . the acute isolates all experienced relatively short high temperature exposures, four hours or less, while the extended isolates both experienced long initial exposures,  <dig> hours or more.

as presented here, one can see that the protocol employed for the extended thermal selection experiments  differs greatly from that of the acute thermal selection experiments. the fluctuations in duration and temperature reflect our efforts to expose the phage lysate to extreme temperatures while simultaneously avoiding complete annihilation of the population. moreover, the starting ancestral strain for the extended experiments differs from that used for the acute experiments by two nonsynonymous mutations. this was an unintentional result of creating the high titer phage lysate prior to starting treatments; this was not a factor for the acute thermal experiments but actually does provide insight into how the phage was able to survive extreme temperatures for days.

firstly, if we look at line a, we find that only one nonsynonymous mutation separates its ancestor jacs and itself. the line b survivor also contains this same nonsynonymous mutation thr <dig> in the f coding region. the anc strain, which was used as the ancestral line for the acute thermal selection experiments, also includes thr <dig>  it is highly unlikely, however, that the acquisition of threonine at this position conferred thermotolerance. this conclusion is supported by the fact that the re-heating of the surviving line a and b strains for  <dig> hours at 70°c revealed a significantly greater survival rate than that seen in the acute thermal selection experiments. following the same rationale, we can hypothesize that the nonsynonymous change n151k within the h coding region of the surviving line b isolate does not confer its thermotolerance as this same amino acid within the anc line also includes a lysine at this position.

if we discount the mutations observed within the surviving lines, how can one explain the ability for these lines to survive their extended exposure to extreme temperatures? returning to the results of the acute thermal selection experiments, we concluded that the exposure to 50°c did not introduce an extreme stress upon the phage, as no decline in the survival rate was detected. thus, one could conjecture that the mutation which inferred the thermotolerance of line a and b was lost during the final five treatments at 50°c as the conditions were relaxed. the fact that the number of mutations observed within both line a and line b are not unique to the individual isolates indicates that Φx <dig> is inherently resistant to elevated temperatures  even for long periods of time.

another possibility exists - the presence of the asparagine within the h protein  assisted in the phage's ability to withstand the extreme temperatures. although we know that protein h is present within the external spikes of the viron  <cit> , the atomic structure of protein h is still not resolved; bioinformatic analyses predict an n-terminal transmembrane and several coiled-coil domains  <cit> . the mutation within the jacs ancestral line and the surviving line a occurs in the beginning of the first coiled-coil domain  <cit> . it is predicted that the n-terminal end is coiled in the depression on the external surface of each spike and the remaining coiled-coil domains are positioned within the capsid  <cit> ; upon binding with the host lps, it has been documented that the h protein changes its conformation  <cit> . until the structure is in fact known, however, one can only speculate that the asn <dig> aids in the viron's ability to survive extreme temperatures.

recently, we subjected numerous samples of the anc high-titer lysate  to 70°c for  <dig> hours and were unsuccessful in producing any viable phage. on the contrary, when the phage collected from the surviving line a were exposed to  <dig> hours at 70°c and then plated, plaques were observed. the same was found to be true when exposed to 80°c, a temperature more extreme than that considered in the long-term treatment regiment. while not conclusive this suggests that the presence of asn <dig> may play a role in the ability to withstand this extreme temperature for longer durations. with regards to the line b survivor, one could speculate that the nonsynonymous mutation, n151l, occurred once the temperature was reduced to 50°c in rounds  <dig> through  <dig> of the treatment protocol . further investigation of the impact of asn <dig> is warranted.

CONCLUSIONS
using the model organism Φx <dig>  we have been able to study adaptive evolution on the molecular level under extreme thermal changes in the environment, which to-date had yet to be thoroughly examined. using both short-term and long-term heat treatment protocols, we were able to observe mutations that occurred in response to excessive external pressures independent of concurrently evolving hosts. acute thermal selection resulted in many nonsynonymous mutations; these mutations very likely occurred out of necessity for survival when the phage is forced to evolve to withstand new environmental conditions. because of the appearance of several mutations in tandem, it leads us to believe that the combination of mutations, specifically q349h within the f coding region and t63s within the h coding region, occurred to increase phage resistance to high temperature levels. interestingly, this pair of mutations was not previously observed together in temperature treatment studies in which both Φx <dig> and its e. coli host were heated  <cit> . extended thermal selection, however, produced less than certain conclusions. none of the mutations identified in the acute thermal selection experiments appeared in the final sequenced surviving lines. the mutations detected within the final surviving lines, moreover, provided very little insight into how the two lines survived the lengthy exposure to extreme temperatures. the presence of asn <dig> within the h protein of initial ancestral strain jacs may potentially be responsible, necessitating further investigation. the results of the acute and extended thermal selection experiments, together, confirm that Φx <dig> possesses an inherent means of tolerating elevated temperatures of 50°c.

most notably, the fact that under either short or long durations of elevated or extreme temperatures, exceeding that previously explored  <cit> , confined solely to the phage rather than the phage-host pair resulted in many mutations which have until now not been associated with Φx174's ability to withstand increased temperatures. we thus hypothesize that the mutations found by our predecessors  <cit>  which were not observed in our experiments are likely in response to changes within the host induced by the new thermal condition in which the phage-host pair is subjected. even though its host cannot tolerate extreme temperatures such as the ones tested here, this study confirms that Φx <dig> is capable of survival.

