BACKGROUND
regulated proteolysis by atp-dependent proteases is widely distributed in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, and is an important mechanism for the timely turnover of many intracellular proteins  <cit> . representative examples of the proteases in bacteria include the clp superfamily proteases, such as clpap, clpcp, clpxp, clpb, clpe and clpl, which play important roles in regulating various cellular functions, such as growth, sporulation, competence development, virulence, and general stress responses  <cit> . these proteases ensure the welfare of a cell by removing misfolded and regulatory proteins, whose degradation may be vital to the control of signaling cascades, metabolic or developmental pathways or cell fate under a specific condition  <cit> . for degradation of right proteins at right times, eukaryotic cells use the ubiquitin-tagging machinery to recognize proteins and mark them for degradation by the proteasome  <cit> . however, most bacteria carry out selective degradation of proteins by using adaptors that provide the ability to recognize specific substrates for degradation by the proteases  <cit> . several adaptor proteins have been identified and characterized in both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, such as sspb and clps in e. coli, and meca, yjbh, ypbh and mcsb in b. subtilis <cit> . these adaptor proteins provide a way to modulate the substrate specificity for protein degradation and play important roles in quality control of cellular proteins and their abundance. therefore, control of the availability and activity of adaptor proteins may be essential for bacteria in response to changing environments.

competence development is a transient physiological state or x state in which the bacteria take up exogenous dna from the environment  <cit> . in streptococci, the key step of competence induction is the transcriptional activation of comx that encodes an alternative sigma factor sigx  controlling expression of late competence genes essential for dna uptake and recombination  <cit> . it is now known that two quorum-sensing signaling systems, the comcde and comrs, are involved in the regulation of genetic competence in s. mutans <cit> . when grown in a complex medium, s. mutans secretes, senses and responds to a competence-stimulating peptide or csp through the comcde pathway  <cit> . csp can be detected by the comd histidine kinase of a two-component system comde, leading to autophosphorylation of its cognate response regulator come that in turn activates transcription of an array of the target genes  <cit> . the comcde system coordinates the production of several nonlantibiotic bacteriocins  and also strongly induces expression of comx, resulting in competence activation in a subpopulation  <cit> . however, the pathway transmitting this signal from the come response regulator to comx is unclear, since the come binding site is not identified in the promoter region of comx in s. mutans <cit> . this missing link has been recently filled by identification of the type ii comrs signaling system that proximally controls transcription of comx in s. mutans <cit> . when grown in a chemically defined medium , s. mutans secretes a sigx-inducing peptide or xip, its precursor encoded by coms <cit> . once internalized by an oligopeptide permease transporter, opp, the xip interacts with the comr regulator to form a comr/xip complex that drives transcription of comx, triggering the competence cascade  <cit> . competence activation through the comrs signaling system is much stronger, nearly involving the entire population  <cit> . thus, s. mutans can finely regulates transcription of comx for competence through a regulatory network that receives and responds to two signaling peptides, dependently on nutrient conditions in the environment.

besides the transcriptional control of comx, sigx protein is also the target of posttranslational regulation in streptococci. in s. penumoniae, sigx is positively regulated by comw but is negatively controlled by the protease clpe/clpp  <cit> . since comw is labile to the protease clpc/clpp, proteolysis of comw by the clpc/clpp can also negatively affect the activity and stability of sigx in s. pneumoniae <cit> . posttranslational regulation of competence is well documented in b. subtilis, in which the master regulator comk that triggers competence is sequestered in a comk-meca-clpc complex  <cit> . the comk is activated when it is released from the complex by a small protein coms  <cit> . recently, a similar mechanism has been identified in s. mutans and s. thermophilus, in which meca and clpc act as negative regulators of genetic competence by a mechanism that requires the presence of a functional sigx  <cit> . meca in these species interacts with both sigx and clpc, mediating the formation of a ternary sigx-meca-clpc complex that sequesters the sigx activity  <cit> . these findings have led us to hypothesize that adaptor protein meca may target sigx for degradation by the clpc/clpp protease. in this study, we set forth the experiments to test this hypothesis by investigating meca-mediated proteolysis of sigx and the impacts on competence regulation in s. mutans.

RESULTS
the cellular level and stability of sigx during competence induction by csp
previous studies showed that csp induced a transient competence state or x state that allowed a subpopulation to take up transforming dna when s. mutans was grown in a complex medium, the growth condition that is sub-permissive for competence development  <cit> . the x state normally maintained for 40–70 min and then shut off, suggesting that the sigx activity was unstable following transient competence activation. to confirm this observation, we examined the cellular level of sigx in a s. mutans wild type background strain xt-his <dig>  grown in thye for competence induction by csp. this strain that carried a shuttle vector psigx-his allowed detection of his-tagged sigx in the crude cell lysates by western blotting. without addition of csp , sigx was undetectable until about 60 min following addition of csp a relatively high level of sigx was detected in the cell lysates . this level of sigx remained for about 60 min and then rapidly declined to the levels nearly undetectable. however, the total protein levels in the cell lysates were relatively stable over times, particularly a 53-kda protein, as indicated in the protein loading controls detected by western blotting using the anti-s. mutans  antibody. consistent with the cellular levels of sigx, s. mutans ua <dig>  showed relatively high but transient levels of transformation in response to csp . in contrast, the comx deletion mutant  completely lost its transformability under the same condition. the results suggest that the synthesis of sigx is induced during competence induction by csp, but sigx is quickly degraded during the escape from competence.

inactivation of meca, clpc or clpp results in the cellular accumulation of sigx
next, we examined the effects of inactivation of meca, clpc or clpp on the cellular levels of sigx, since both meca and clpc were found to negatively affect the stability of sigx in thye  <cit> . three mutant background strains, xt-his <dig> , xt-his <dig> , gf-his <dig>  and one wild-type strain xt-his <dig> that all carried a shuttle vector psigx-his were used for western blot analysis of cellular levels of sigx. the results showed that sigx was initially undetectable in all the strains without addition of csp. approximately at 60 min post csp, all the mutant strains produced considerable levels of sigx , which were similar to that in wild-type control xt-his <dig> . however, all the mutant background strains retained relatively high levels of sigx throughout the experiments, suggesting an increased stability of sigx in the meca-, clpc- and clpp-deficient strains. it was noted that the sigx appeared to accumulate even earlier  in Δclpc and Δclpp mutants than Δmeca mutant. we considered this might be a variation of samplings during preparation of the crude cell lysates, since these strains did not grow at the same rate following addition of csp. to compare the cellular levels of sigx over time, we scanned the protein bands and converted their intensities as relative integrated density values , with a maximum value of  <dig>  for each strain . the wild type strain xt-his <dig>  showed the highest intensity at 90 minutes post csp and this intensity rapidly decreased to a very low level. in contrast, all the mutants remained relatively high levels of the intensities throughout the experiments, suggesting that deletion of meca, clpc or clpp negatively affect degradation of sigx. consistent with the cellular levels of sigx, these mutant strains showed a prolonged competence state to take up transforming dna under this growth condition . the cellular accumulation of sigx in these strains may prevent the timely escaping of the cells from competence. the results suggest that meca, clpc and clpp are required for regulated proteolysis of sigx when s. mutans is grown in thye medium.

overexpression of meca enhances proteolysis of sigx and accelerates the escape from competence
to further investigate the effect of meca on the stability of sigx, we constructed a constitutively expressed meca strain, gf-ox , which expressed meca under the control of a constitutively expressed promoter of ldh, the gene encoding lactate dehydrogenase in s. mutans. in addition, this strain allowed detection of meca protein by western blotting using the anti-his antibody, since a his-tag was added to the end of meca-coding sequence just before the stop codon. our results confirmed that strain meca-ox constitutively expressed meca when grown in thye, independently on the growth phases. based on the relative integrated density values , this strain  produced as much as two-fold meca protein when compared with that of strain gf-his <dig>  grown under the same condition , suggesting that strain meca-ox overexpressed meca under the conditions tested. it was noted from the western blot that meca-ox showed an extra band that slightly bigger than the meca. the feature of this extra band was unclear. one possibility was that over-expressed meca might also bind to a small, unknown protein or peptide in s. mutans. alternatively, this band might be a non-specific reaction. we then began to determine the effect of an overexpressed meca on the cellular levels of sigx in response to csp. the results revealed that the overexpression of meca negatively affected the cellular levels of sigx in this strain, since addition of csp induced very low levels of sigx, as detected by western blotting using the anti-sigx antibody . consistent with this result, the constitutive expression of meca resulted in hundred-fold reduction in transformation efficiency . the results suggest that the overexpressed meca enhances meca-mediated proteolysis of sigx, accelerating the escape from competence.

regulated proteolysis of sigx is ineffective when s. mutans is grown in cdm
recent studies show that when s. mutans is grown in a chemically defined medium , competence induction through the comrs signaling system is active for hours in response to xip  <cit> . these studies suggest that s. mutans activates competence differently through the comrs signaling system in cdm. we therefore examined the stability of sigx and the effects of inactivated meca, clpc or clpp on the cellular levels of sigx by western blot analysis of strain xt-his <dig>  and three mutant background strains, xt-his <dig> , xt-his <dig>  and gf-his <dig>  grown in cdm in response to xip. the results showed that xip induced a rapid synthesis of sigx in strain xt-his <dig>  grown in cdm . surprisingly, an increasing level of sigx was detected in this strain throughout the experiment, although relatively stable levels of the protein samples were loaded on the gel, as indicated by the protein loading controls. the results suggested a cellular accumulation of the sigx after its synthesis in cdm. consistent with these levels of sigx, a prolonged competent state was observed in s. mutans ua <dig> grown under the same condition . we then examined the effects of deletion of meca , clpc  or clpp  on the cellular levels of sigx in cdm. the results clearly showed the cellular accumulation of sigx in all three mutant strains grown in cdm . as indicated by the relative integrated density values  , the cellular levels of sigx in these mutant strains remained high or even higher than the wild type control strain throughout the experiments. in agreement with such stable levels of sigx, all the strains showed a prolonged competence state for taking up transforming dna in cdm . the results clearly show that sigx is relatively stable after the synthesis during competence induction by xip in cdm, resulting in a prolonged competent state for taking up exogenous dna.

these findings led to two hypotheses:  <cit>  that the stable levels of sigx in cdm might be due to a persistent expression of comx, which overcome degradation of sigx, or  <cit>  that the growth conditions in cdm might negatively affect expression of meca, clpc or clpp, resulting in insufficient levels of one or more of these proteins for sigx degradation. to test the first hypothesis, we examined kinetics of the luciferase reporter activities of the competence-specific promoter, pcomx, in s. mutans wild type background strain xt-lx <dig> grown in cdm or in thye in response to xip or csp. we found that the specific luciferase activities of the comx promoter, pcomx, still showed transient increases in response to xip and then declined afterward, giving a pattern similar to that in thye . however, the luciferase reporter activities of this strain in cdm peaked around 200 min post xip, which was about  <dig>  hour later than the peak level in thye post csp. the pattern in the luciferase reporter activities appeared to be a reflection of the slower growth rate of this strain in cdm, although the reporter activities in cdm declined slightly later than those in thye. we then began to test the second hypothesis by examining cellular levels of meca, clpc and clpp in s. mutans strains, gf-his <dig> , gf-his <dig>  and gf-his <dig> , grown in both thye  and cdm  by western blot analysis. the results showed that considerable levels of meca, clpc and clpp were detected during the  exponential growth phases in both thye and cdm . no significant difference was observed in the cellular levels of these proteins between thye and cdm. the results suggest that the stable levels of sigx detected in cdm may not necessarily result from variations in the cellular levels of meca, clpc or clpp, but rather from an unknown mechanism that may negatively affect regulated proteolysis of sigx when s. mutans is grown in cdm.

meca mediates the formation of a ternary sigx-meca-clpc complex
recent study using bacterial two-hybrid  system shows that meca interacts with sigx and clpc, mediating the formation of a ternary complex  <cit> . to obtain direct evidence of the interaction among these proteins, we cloned, expressed and produced recombinant proteins of sigx, meca, clpc and clpp using protein expression technology. each of the resulting proteins carried a his-tag or gst-tag that facilitated subsequent purification and identification of these proteins. sds-page analysis of these proteins showed successful production of sufficient amounts of all fusion proteins. their identities and predicted molecular sizes following purification are described in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  additional file 1: figure s <dig> and additional file 1: figure s <dig>  the fusion proteins were further confirmed by western blotting using the anti-his or anti-gst antibody. with these purified proteins, we next examined meca-mediated protein-protein interactions by co-elution experiments using ni-charged resin. after extensive washings, the proteins were eluted in a buffer and the elution samples were analyzed by western blotting. as shown in figure 5a, meca did not interact with gst-tag , but interacted with sigx  or clpc  or both . the results clearly indicate that meca protein interacts simultaneously with both sigx and clpc, likely mediating the formation of a ternary sigx-meca-clpc complex.

since the n-terminal and c-terminal domains of meca recognize different protein partners in b. subtilis <cit> , we produced two meca deletion variants from s. mutans, the n-terminal domain  that had a c-terminal deletion, and the c-terminal domain  that had a n-terminal deletion, based on the sequence alignment of meca proteins from b. subtilis and s. mutans strains . we then examined the effects of a deletion of the n-terminal or c-terminal domain of meca on its interactions with sigx and clpc in s. mutans. the results showed that the ntd1– <dig> interacted with sigx , but not with clpc , suggesting that meca bound to sigx through the n-terminal domain. in contrast, the ctd123– <dig> of meca did not interact with sigx , but interacted with clpc , suggesting that meca bound to clpc through the c-terminal domain. the full-length of meca interacted with both sigx  and clpc . together, the results suggest that meca interacts with both sigx and clpc via its n-terminal domain binding to sigx and via its c-terminal domain binding to clpc, meditating the formation of a ternary sigx-meca-clpc complex.

meca mediates an atp-dependent degradation of sigx by the clpc/clpp
we next examined whether meca targeted sigx for degradation by the protease complex clpc/clpp. we first determined the atpase activity of the clpc protease by an atpase activity assay  <cit> . the results showed that clpc alone exhibited a very low atpase activity, but the presence of meca increased the atpase activity of clpc . interestingly, adding both meca and sigx into the reaction increased the atpase activity of clpc by nearly 2-folds, although meca or sigx alone exhibited little atpases activity . the results confirmed that the atpase activity of clpc depended on the presence of meca and atp, and the atpase activity could be further enhanced by the presence of sigx. we then examined meca-mediated proteolysis of sigx using a degradation assay. the reactions were mixed in the atpase assay buffer by adding clpc, meca, sigx, clpp and atp. aliquots of the samples were taken to assess degradation results by western blot analysis of the interacting proteins. the results showed that degradation of sigx occurred in the presence of meca, clpc, clpp and atp in one-hour incubation . no detectable degradation of sigx was observed without meca  or atp , suggesting that degradation of sigx required the presence of meca and atp. interestingly, a similar level of degradation of meca was also observed in the reaction , suggesting that meca might serve as a degradation tag. to confirm the results, we also incubated these proteins for degradation after gst-tag was removed with prescission protease. we then assessed degradation of sigx by western blotting using the anti-sigx antibody. a similar result was observed, which showed that sigx degradation occurred as quickly as around 10 min . approximately 80% of sigx protein was degraded after 30-min incubation and over 90% of sigx was degraded after 60-min incubation, as indicated by the ridv values of the remaining sigx in the reaction. in addition, we found that neither ntd1– <dig> nor ctd123– <dig> mediated degradation of sigx under the same condition .

discussion
in the genus streptococcus, the alternative sigma factor, sigx encoded by comx, is the competence-specific master regulator that is transiently induced to drive expression of numerous late competence genes essential for dna uptake and recombination  <cit> . the activity and stability of sigx during competence development have been relatively well studied in the model organism s. pneumoniae, which involves a complex regulatory network and multiple components such as comw, dpra and clpe/clpp  <cit> . however, it was unclear whether the same mechanisms might be used for regulation of the activity and stability of sigx in other members of streptococci that primarily used a comrs signaling system to control transcription of comx and competence. in this study, we provide evidence that s. mutans regulates the cellular level and stability of sigx by a different mechanism that involves meca-mediated proteolysis of sigx by the protease clpc/clpp. we have found that adaptor protein meca in s. mutans targets sigx for degradation by the clpc/clpp when this organism is grown in a complex medium, a growth condition that is sub-permissive for competence development  <cit> . under this growth condition, the synthesis of sigx is transiently induced by csp, but the sigx is quickly degraded during the escape from competence. the degradation of sigx by the protease clpc/clpp requires the presence of meca, which plays an important role in the recognition and targeting of sigx under this growth condition. by analysis of in vitro protein-protein interactions, we demonstrate that meca interacts with both sigx and clpc and mediates the formation of a ternary sigx-meca-clpc complex, which triggers the atp-dependent degradation of sigx in the presence of clpp. the result confirms previous findings of sigx-meca-clpc interactions using a bacterial two-hybrid system  <cit> . we also demonstrate that meca binds to sigx via its n-terminal domain  and to clpc through its c-terminal domain . a deletion of the ntd or the ctd of meca abolishes its binding to sigx or clpc, failing to mediate the formation of the ternary complex and regulated proteolysis of sigx. these results suggest that the ntd of meca is essential for substrate recognition, while the ctd is required for the assembly of the protease complex clpc/clpp and stimulates the atpase activity of clpc. the evidence support the notion that meca plays an important role in regulated proteolysis of sigx by its substrate recognition and regulation of the assembly and proteolytic activity of the atp-dependent clpc/clpp protease.

this notion is highly consistent with the recent report by wahl et al. <cit> , who have demonstrated by in vitro experiments that meca in s. thermophilus also targets sigx for degradation by clpcp. the formation of meca-clpcp proteolytic complex is suggested to be an additional locking device to regulate the stability of sigx and competence in s. thermophilus under inappropriate conditions. in particular, these researchers have identified an 18-residue sequence  in the n-terminal domain of sigx as a key determinant for the interaction with meca and subsequent sigx degradation. interestingly, both s. mutans and s. thermophilus have  <dig> out of  <dig> highly conserved residues, while s. pneumoniae only shares  <dig> similar residues with the loop of s. thermophilus <cit> . this suggests that sigx from s. pneumoniae has diverged during evolution in such a way that this species lacks the recognition of sigx by meca protein. this divergence explains why an inactivation of meca in s. pneumoniae has no major impact on in vivo degradation of sigx but dramatically stabilizes comw  <cit> .

another important finding is that changes in the expression of meca dramatically affect its regulated proteolysis of sigx. we demonstrate that a deletion of meca allowed the cellular accumulation of sigx, resulting in a prolonged competence state . however, the deletion of meca is insufficient to activate competence under this growth condition, since the comrs but not meca is required for transcriptional activation of comx and genetic competence  <cit> . in contrast, an overexpression of meca increases regulated proteolysis of sigx, accelerating the escape of the cells from competence. the results strongly suggest that meca in s. mutans actually acts as an anti-sigma factor in the regulation of cellular levels of sigx. the implication of an adaptor protein that acts as an anti-sigma factor in clp protease-dependent manner was previously reported in both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria  <cit> . in the case of e. coli, for example, adaptor protein rseb specifically targets sigma s  to clpx/p for degradation, regulating the levels of rpos in the stationary phase or general stress response in e. coli <cit> . another example is adaptor protein rsiw that acts as an anti-sigma factor in the control of sigma factor w  during ph and salt stresses in b. subtilis <cit> . in addition, b. subtilis regulates the activity of an extracytoplasmic function  sigma factor, σv, to cope with the cell envelope stress induced by antibiotics. the σv activity is also regulated by proteolysis of an anti-sigma factor rsiv  <cit> . thus, regulated proteolysis of a master regulator by adaptor protein that acts as an anti-sigma factor in regulation of development and stress response is well conserved among bacteria, including streptococci  <cit> . this reinforces the importance of fine control of competence and stress response that have been positively selected through microbial evolution. currently, little is known of how meca is regulated in streptococci. this is important, since meca is ubiquitous among streptococci and its homologs are found in the complete genomes of all species sequenced so far  <cit> . in a most recent study, wahl et al. have provided convincing in vitro evidence that confirms the importance of meca-clpcp complex in the posttranslational regulation of sigx in s. thermophilus <cit> . however, their work has not described how meca is regulated in vivo under test growth conditions. in our study, we have explored this question by some in vivo experiments, but limited evidence is insufficient to draw any conclusion. further study is clearly needed.

interestingly, meca-regulated proteolysis of sigx appears to be ineffective when s. mutans is grown in cdm, a growth medium that is permissive for competence development  <cit> . in this medium, the synthesis of sigx is initially induced by xip, but a high level of sigx can persist throughout the experiment, suggesting a cellular accumulation of sigx following the initial synthesis. consistent with such a stable level of the sigx, s. mutans shows a prolonged competence state for taking up transforming dna in cdm. these results are surprising, because meca in the wild type s. mutans strain can effectively mediate degradation of sigx by the protease clpc/clpp after initial synthesis of sigx in thye. the results suggest that the cellular accumulation of sigx in cdm may result from one or two possible changes: an overexpression of sigx in cdm or ineffective degradation of sigx in cdm or both. recent studies show that s. mutans can develop a high level of competence for genetic transformation when grown in cdm in response to xip  <cit> . the competence state induced by xip in cdm can persist for hours, suggesting an increased or persistent expression of comx during competence induction through the comrs pathway in cdm. to test this model, we examined kinetics of the luciferase reporter activities of the competence-specific promoter, pcomx, in response to xip in cdm, in comparison with the reporter activities of the same strain grown in thye in response to csp. the data from this work do not fully support this suggestion, since the luciferase reporter activities in cdm still show a transient increase with a peak level and then decline, a pattern similar to that in thye. this indicates that expression of comx through comrs system is still a transient event at transcriptional level, although the reporter activities in cdm appear to last longer than those in thye. we interpret this might be partially because the cells grew slower in cdm than that in thye. thus, the evidence from the luciferase reporter assays appears to be insufficient to explain such high levels of cellular accumulation of sigx in cdm. this raises a question why such high levels of sigx cannot be effectively degraded by the protease clpc/clpp if this proteolytic system works well in cdm. this has led us to hypothesize that the growth condition in cdm might negatively affect expression of meca, clpc or clpp, resulting in insufficient levels of one or more of these proteins required for sigx degradation. we therefore compared the cellular levels of meca, clpc and clpp in both cdm and thye media. surprisingly, we detected relatively stable levels of meca, clpc and clpp from the exponentially growing cultures of all the strains. no significant difference was observed in the cellular levels of each of these proteins between thye and cdm. the data suggest that the stable levels of sigx in cdm may not necessarily result from variations in the cellular levels of meca, clpc or clpp, but rather from an unknown mechanism that may negatively affect regulated proteolysis of sigx in cdm.

in b. subtilis, comk is the master transcriptional regulator required for competence activation  <cit> . under non-competence conditions, comk is sequestered in a meca and clpc complex, which triggers degradation of comk in the presence of clpp  <cit> . for competence to develop, degradation of comk must be blocked by a small protein coms, which acts as an anti-adaptor to bind to meca and displace the master regulator comk  <cit> . binding of coms to meca protects comk from degradation by the clpc/clpp and turns on the switch leading to competence activation  <cit> . this system obviously has parallels to the regulation of rpos degradation, a situation that the substrate is degraded, dependent upon an adaptor protein, and regulation of degradation is achieved by regulated synthesis of an anti-adaptor protein  <cit> . it is currently unknown whether the s. mutans genome contains a gene encoding such an anti-adaptor to regulate meca-mediated proteolysis of sigx. however, the evidence from this study suggests the possibility that such an anti-adaptor protein likely exists, since sigx is relatively well protected from degradation in cdm, and since little difference is detected in the cellular levels of meca, clpc and clpp from the exponential growth cultures in cdm and thye. we speculate that the growth condition in cdm may affect the synthesis or the activity of such an anti-adaptor, which in turn affects meca-mediated proteolysis of sigx. however, we do not completely rule out the possibilities that other factors may be involved in the regulation of the activity of the protease complex clpc/clpp in cdm  <cit>  and that both overexpressed sigx and ineffective proteolysis of sigx mediated by meca are responsible for the cellular accumulation of sigx under this growth condition. further study may be needed to investigate these questions.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we provide evidence that adaptor protein meca in s. mutans plays a central role in recognizing and targeting sigx for degradation by the protease clpc/clpp. thus, meca actually acts as an anti-sigma factor to regulate the stability of sigx during competence development. our findings are highly consistent with a recent report that shows a similar mechanism involved in the regulation of the stability of sigx and genetic competence in s. thermophilus <cit> . we have also found that changes in expression of meca may profoundly affect the stability of sigx, although further study is needed to elucidate meca regulation. interestingly, meca-regulated proteolysis of sigx appears to be ineffective when s. mutans is grown in cdm medium, suggesting the possibility that an unknown mechanism may be involved in negative regulation of meca-mediated proteolysis under this condition. we speculate that meca-regulated proteolysis may finely control the cellular levels of sigx to prevent the entry into competence under inappropriate conditions or to secure the timely escape of the cells from competence when s. mutans encounters a stressful condition.

