BACKGROUND
theobroma cacao l.  is a diploid tree grown in more than  <dig> tropical countries as a major cash crop that provides income to millions of small-holder farmers  <cit> . the fermented and dried seeds of cacao provide the basis for a multi-billion dollar cash crop of importance to the economic trade and social development of these regions. cacao seeds consist primarily of embryonic cotyledons that form a highly invaginated tissue rich in oils, terpenes, proteins, starch and flavonoids.

plant embryo development is initiated with the double fertilization of male and female gametes, followed by the process of zygotic embryogenesis , during which the formation of the embryo occurs by a complex program of lateral, radial and longitudinal growth  <cit> . embryonic growth has been classified into globular, heart, torpedo, and mature stages of development  <cit>  and proper progression through these developmental stages is controlled by a sophisticated regulatory network  <cit> .

despite its complexity, the embryogenic process can be artificially induced from somatic tissues in many plant species including cacao  <cit> , in a process known as somatic embryogenesis , first reported with carrot in  <dig>  <cit> . during se maturation, cells develop completely outside the maternal context into somatic embryos and by ‘conversion’, into whole morphologically intact plants  <cit> . in some plants, this complicated process can be initiated by simple manipulation of hormones, whereas in others, its efficiency is dependent on genotype and explant tissue type, and requires precise control of hormonal and environmental conditions. extensive research has focused on the discovery of genes that control the highly complex regulatory mechanisms leading the initiation and regulation of embryogenesis  <cit> . somatic and zygotic embryos follow the same overall pattern of development despite the fact that somatic embryo initiation is preceded by the dedifferentiation of somatic cells rather than formation of haploid gametes via meiosis as in sexual reproduction and occurs in the absence of endosperm and maternal ovary tissues  <cit> . in plant seeds, endosperm plays an important role in providing nutrients to the embryo during development and germination  <cit>  and it has been shown to play a role in integrating the different components and genetic programs of seed development  <cit> . the main axis of cacao ses morphologically resembles its zygotic counterpart with a bipolar structure and typical embryonic organs. however, during zygotic seed development, the embryonic cotyledons expand and accumulate large amounts of lipids, protein, carbohydrates and terpenes, while somatic embryos produce small underdeveloped cotyledons.

the se protocol for cacao includes  <dig> major steps: primary somatic embryogenesis, secondary somatic embryogenesis, somatic embryo conversion to plantlets and plant acclimation  <cit> . ses of cacao have been generated from many different genotypes and se-plants have been grown under field conditions, and have demonstrated growth similar to plants propagated by seeds  <cit> . although the system is sufficiently efficient to be utilized commercially, it includes several steps that are highly genotype dependent. one of the most inefficient steps of the procedure is somatic embryo conversion, which involves transition of mature somatic embryos into whole plants  <cit> . the conversion rates depend on many factors including genotype and success rates vary from  <dig> to 75% .

in order to investigate the regulatory and gene expression networks involved during ze and se maturation in cacao, we characterized gene expression profiles using whole genome microarrays. expression profiles from  <dig> zygotic and  <dig> somatic embryo developmental stages demonstrated major differences in expression of transcription factors, flavonoid biosynthesis genes and lipid biosynthesis genes during zygotic and somatic embryo maturation suggesting a molecular basis for the lack of full development of somatic embryo cotyledons. understanding the genetic components regulating the se developmental cascade could provide guidance towards controlling the somatic embryo maturation process to improve the efficiency and quality of plantlets produced through manipulation of the chemical and physical culture environment. further, our results provide new knowledge of gene expression programs during zygotic embryo development in cacao, which provides insight into the basic biology of seed development of an important tropical tree crop.

RESULTS
overview and microarray analysis
using the published cacao criollo genome assembly v <dig>   <cit> , a whole genome 12-plex nimblegen expression microarray representing  <dig>  genes was manufactured on which only  <dig> of the predicted cacao genes were not represented by at least one probe. to study cacao embryo development, total rna was isolated from four biological replicates of six different tissue types and stages of embryo development: zygotic embryo tissues - torpedo , early-full , late-full  and mature  embryos; and somatic embryos - late torpedo  and mature  stages. representative images of embryos at these stages are depicted in figure 1a. twenty-four rna samples were hybridized to a single chip simultaneously using two-color fluorescent labeling. after background subtraction and normalization, a heatmap was generated to represent the global dynamics of gene expression during zygotic and somatic embryo maturation . clustering analysis of the datasets indicated that the two se developmental stages clustered closest to the profile of the mature developmental stage of ze as might be expected.

dynamics of gene expression during zygotic embryo development
to identify differentially expressed genes during ze maturation, a paired t-test analysis  was performed with cut-off of p <  <dig>  and ≥ 2-fold change.  <dig>  genes were identified to be either up or down regulated in this dataset . the list includes all significant genes that were differentially expressed in at least one of the stages when compared to the t-ze expression value. k-means clustering established  <dig> clusters representing different expression patterns containing between  <dig> and  <dig> significantly regulated genes . relative to the t-ze, large sets of genes were regulated uniquely in each stage and sets of genes overlapping between all of the stages were also observed. the total number of differentially expressed genes  increased sequentially through the progression of embryogenesis .

to further explore the biological pathways involved in ze maturation, gene ontology  terms were assigned to the significantly regulated genes, revealing that  <dig> genes had annotations associated with various biological processes . we explored the enrichment of go categories in the significantly regulated gene sets as compared to their proportions found in the entire genome. fourteen different go categories were significantly enriched, with responses to abiotic and biotic stimulus and response to stress being among the most highly enriched .

dynamics of gene expression during somatic embryo maturation
we compared the gene expression profiles of  <dig> advanced somatic embryo developmental stages  using p <  <dig>  and ≥ 2-fold change filters and detected significant differences in gene expression levels. the significant genes  distributed into  <dig> major k-means clusters . go enrichment analysis indicated that genes associated with “transport”, “catabolic process”, “signal transduction” and “response to stress” where enriched during transition from lt-se stage to m-se stage . all but three of these go categories were also enriched in ze development . taken together, our results indicated that zygotic and somatic embryo maturation in cacao largely share similar transcriptome profiles, with some unique differences including genes involved in cell communication, pollination, tropism in ze , and in cell cycle, secondary metabolism, cellular homeostasis in se .

comparison of zygotic and somatic embryo maturation
to perform a comparative analysis, we conducted two different cluster analyses contrasting the two somatic embryo stages with either t-ze or m-ze zygotic stages . a large number of differentially regulated genes were detected in the se/t-ze comparison that grouped into five clusters . the number of differentially expressed genes between t-se and t-ze  is comparable to the number of differentially expressed genes identified in the developmental transition from t-ze to m-ze , which illustrates the dramatic differences between torpedo stage somatic and zygotic embryos.

fewer differences in gene expression were detected in the comparison of se/m-ze . of these,  <dig> genes were assigned to both the up and down regulated groups since their expression was either higher or lower depending on the se stage. consistent with the initial clustering of m-ze with the two se stages, the number of differentially expressed genes was 30% lower than when compared to t-ze.go annotation enrichment analysis was performed to explore the differences between zygotic and somatic embryo gene expression profiles . for both comparisons, the most widely represented enriched go terms were associated with response to abiotic and biotic stimulus, metabolic and cellular processes. we also detected enrichment of “pollen-pistil interaction” and “epigenetic regulation” genes only in the t-ze specific comparison . in the mature zygotic embryo comparison, “cell death” was uniquely enriched, suggesting a difference in the regulation of apoptosis during the different modes of embryo maturation .

functional classification of differentially expressed genes in zygotic and somatic embryo maturation
in contrast to the  <dig> clusters of genes with similar gene expression profiles identified by k-means clustering methods  when comparing ze stages, five expression clusters of genes were identified when comparing the two se developmental stages to t-ze . to obtain a quantitative assessment of the biological processes involved in the different clusters, go enrichment analysis was performed . the dominant functional go term annotations in each cluster were associated with “metabolic and cellular processes”. the down-regulated cluster i of the ze group contained a proportionately greater number of genes in signaling and biological regulation . in se, the down-regulated cluster iv contained more “cellular process” genes, whereas more “metabolic process” genes were obtained in up-regulated clusters . these results suggest that up-regulation of metabolic processes likely play an important role in somatic embryo maturation. this led us to further examine the specific classes of genes associated with seed development, namely, transcription factors and major enzymes of the major seed metabolic pathways.

expression profiles of transcription factor genes and genes associated with major seed-related metabolic pathways
based on the accumulated knowledge gained with model plant systems, four functional groups of genes were selected for analysis: transcription factors, lipid biosynthesis, flavonoid biosynthesis and seed storage proteins . we investigated all genes in these classes that were differentially expressed during zygotic embryo maturation and based on the observation that the two se developmental stages clustered closest to the m-ze, we selected to compare the somatic embryo mature stage relative to mature zygotic embryos.

transcription factor genes
based on a publication by mitsuda and ohme-takagu  <cit>  a list of plant transcription factors was generated as queries to perform tblastx homology searches within the cacao genome. the homology analysis identified  <dig> cacao genes potentially coding for transcription factors , of which  <dig> and  <dig> were differentially expressed during ze and se maturation respectively . 54%  of these were differentially expressed during both, ze and se maturation. k-means clustering of the differentially expressed, in at least one stage, tc-tf genes resulted in  <dig> subclusters in both se and ze development .

go enrichment analysis indicated only minor differences in representation of the major functional classes of transcription factors . functional categories were also assigned to significant tc-tf genes using mapman software  <cit>  . the mapman analysis revealed  <dig> transcription factors in the “ethylene metabolism and ethylene response” categories, of which  <dig> showed significantly higher expression levels in se compared to ze. the majority of these cacao genes are related to arabidopsis genes that are rapidly induced by ethylene, belonging to the erf/ap <dig> family, which control the synthesis of proteins that mediate physiological and developmental responses to ethylene  <cit> . this could indicate that ethylene, a known stress response hormone, is accumulating in our culture system and this could be triggering downstream ethylene mediated stress response unfavorable to embryo development.

a targeted subset of cacao tf genes similar to genes in other species previously implicated to play role in embryogenesis  <cit>  were examined including: tclec <dig> , tcwri <dig> , tclec <dig> , tcagl <dig> , tcbbm , tcabi <dig> , tcabi <dig>  and tcfus <dig>  . genes that had dramatically reduced expression values in m-ze compared to the other ze stages included tclec <dig>  tclec <dig>  tcwri <dig>  tcagl <dig>  and tcfus <dig>  surprisingly, except for tclec <dig>  the expression of these genes is higher in m-se samples compared to the less mature lt-se. tcbbm and tcabi <dig>  showed a slight decrease in expression from lf-ze to m-ze. tcbbm however, exhibited the opposite behavior in the se stages . these results reveal a large variation in the expression of transcription factors associated with embryogenesis between zygotic and somatic embryos and this likely contributes to the dramatic differences in morphological appearance of these structures .

differential regulation of fatty acid biosynthesis pathway during maturation of zygotic and somatic cacao embryos
cacao seeds contain about 50% cocoa butter, which is the one of the most valuable fats for industrial use, and the accumulation of fats in the cotyledon is closely related to seed development and maturation  <cit> . we investigated the expression changes of  <dig> cacao genes  that were previously identified and annotated to be potentially involved in fatty acid biosynthesis  <cit> . in the comparison of m-se to m-ze,  <dig> out of  <dig> differentially expressed genes were up-regulated in m-se . functional characterization of the significant tc-fa genes indicated that a large set of plastidial fatty acid biosynthesis genes were up-regulated in m-se compared to m-ze, suggesting up-regulation of the fatty acid metabolic pathway in mature se tissues . for example, genes involved in fatty acid biosynthesis initiation steps, such as acetyl-coa carboxylase , biotin carboxyl carrier protein of acetyl-coa carboxylase  <dig> , biotin carboxylase  and several isoforms of 3-ketoacyl-coa synthase  were up-regulated in m-se compared to m-ze, all of which control the carbon flux leading to de novo fatty acid biosynthesis. in addition, genes involved in determination of the fatty acid profile, were also up-regulated in the m-se compared to m-ze, including stearoyl-acp desaturase , oleoyl-acp thioesterase , plastidial β-ketoacyl-acp synthase ii  and plastidial omega  <dig> desaturase . differences in the expression levels of these key enzymes could contribute to the higher degree of fatty acid unsaturation observed for mature somatic embryos as compared to zygotic seed tissue . it is worth noting that the dynamics of lipid accumulation could be contributing to the observed fa transcript dynamics: considerable accumulation of lipids has occurred prior to the selected mature zygotic embryo stage, but not the ‘mature’ somatic embryo stage.

differential regulation of flavonoid metabolism genes during maturation of zygotic and somatic cacao embryos
flavonoids are ubiquitous in the plant kingdom and have many diverse functions including defense, uv protection and auxin transport inhibition  <cit> . the expression of  <dig> cacao genes  homologous to known flavonoid biosynthesis genes were examined and of these,  <dig> and  <dig> were differentially expressed during ze maturation and se maturation respectively . k-mean analysis was used to generate up and down-regulated gene clusters for both groups . thirty-nine of the  <dig> regulated genes in se were also regulated in ze.

the analysis also demonstrated that from the  <dig> differentially expressed genes in the se/m-ze comparison,  <dig> genes were expressed significantly higher in m-se as compared to m-ze, indicating more active secondary metabolism in m-se. the functional categories assigned by mapman supported the prediction that tc-fb genes are indeed involved in the synthesis of secondary metabolites including flavonoids, phenylpropanoids and lignin, but additionally mapman assigned  <dig> of the genes to the “ethylene synthesis and degradation” category , indicating possible co-regulation of the flavonoid and ethylene biosynthesis pathways. these included genes: naringenin, 2-oxoglutarate 3-dioxygenases , leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase , a gene for flavonol synthase , and flavonol synthase/flavanone 3-hydroxylase . five of these genes  had higher expression in m-se compared to m-ze.

differential regulation of seed storage protein genes during maturation of zygotic and somatic cacao embryos
embryo maturation in the majority of higher plants is associated with accumulation of large amounts of storage proteins, which is regulated by a combination of hormonal, genetic and metabolic controls  <cit> . based on a publication by higashi  <cit>  a list of seed storage proteins in arabidopsis was generated as queries to perform tblastx homology searches within the cacao genome. in our analysis, we selected  <dig> cacao genes coding for potential seed storage proteins . the limma test identified  <dig> and  <dig> of these genes differentially expressed during ze and se maturation respectively . the k-mean analysis generated up-regulated  and down-regulated cluster i for the ze group, with an additional distinction of ‘low-’ and ‘high-’ expressed gene clusters for the se group . the  <dig> differentially expressed genes during ze included a vicilin gene, a putative gene for the sweet protein mabinlin,  <dig> genes coding for 21-kda trypsin inhibitor proteins, and  <dig> genes encoding for late embryogenesis abundant proteins  . significant genes identified during se maturation compared to m-ze included  <dig> of the same 21-kda trypsin inhibitor proteins genes, the expression of which was higher in m-se compared to m-ze . six of the  <dig> ze significant genes encoding for lea proteins were also differentially expressed during se. during ze maturation the expression of  <dig> of the  <dig> differentially expressed lea genes increased with development reaching their highest expression values at the final m-ze stage; the remaining  <dig> lea genes demonstrated the opposite pattern with reduced m-ze expression. by comparison, the expression values of the  <dig> differentially regulated lea proteins were significantly lower during se compared to m-ze . although the expression of all  <dig> lea genes increased from lt-se to m-se stages, these results indicated that the two se stages are perhaps earlier in development compared to m-ze.

an interesting observation was that the expression of the gene tc01g <dig> was significantly lower in m-se compared to m-ze. this gene is nearly identical to the arabidopsis aba <dig> gene, which encodes a zeaxanthin epoxidase critical for the first step in the synthesis abscisic acid . since aba is known to be important for the induction of genes involved in the synthesis of storage compounds and the maturation of embryos, this also suggests that the se samples were at an earlier stage of development compared to the ze samples.

validation of microarray data by rt-qpcr
to validate the microarray results, rt-qpcr analysis was performed using  <dig> randomly selected significantly regulated genes. gene expression of samples from m-ze and lt-se were compared using the same rna extractions used for the microarray hybridizations. the  <dig> genes demonstrated similar expression patterns in the microarray and the rt-qpcr analysis . although the r <dig> value of  <dig>  suggests only a modest correlation in quantitative absolute values, in all but  <dig> of the ten genes tested, the relative differences in expression levels between ze and se samples were the same for the microarray and rt-qpcr data. thus we consider the microarray data to adequately measure the relative gene expression changes, and the rt-qpcr data to more accurately quantify the precise quantitative differences.

considering the observation that a large number of tf genes involved in ethylene signaling appear to be regulated during both ze and se development, we also additionally verified the expression patterns of three selected genes involved the ethylene signaling pathway: tcein3-binding f-box protein  <dig>  , tcethylene insensitive  <dig>  and tcindole-3-acetate beta-glucosyltransferase  <dig> . average expression values from microarray and rt-qpcr data were plotted for each developmental stage. a clear correlation was observed between the expression values of both analyses for all three genes .

discussion
development programs in plants are highly complex and require the interaction of many inter-related molecular processes, the activities of which need to be finely controlled and coordinated. our whole genome expression analysis reveals this complexity as it relates to the mechanisms of embryo maturation in cacao. roughly 36% of the nearly  <dig>  genes are differentially expressed during zygotic embryo maturation with approximately equal numbers of up- and down-regulated genes. the number of significant genes increased with maturation, reaching  <dig>  genes in mature zygotic embryos. these results indicate that cacao zygotic development is characterized by a significant shift in gene expression. this is consistent with studies of arabidopsis where  <dig> %  were differentially expressed during the various embryo developmental stages  <cit> . in the current study, in both zygotic and somatic embryogenesis, we observed a large number of differentially regulated genes that encode for transcription factors . this is consistent with the findings of gliwicka et al.,  <dig>  whom explored the changes of gene expression during somatic embryogenesis of arabidopsis  <cit> . they observed  <dig> tfs whose expression changed during se. consistent with our results, they reported that many of the tf genes were down-regulated later in development of zygotic embryos, but continued high expression in later somatic embryo development. as in cacao, many of the tfs were annotated with functions related to plant development, phytohormones and stress responses.

a major difference between ses and zes is the maturation of cotyledons, which in ze results in large folded tissues containing flavonoids, lipids and seed storage proteins where in se, results in only small, under-developed tissue. while gene expression profiles of ses clustered most strongly with the mature ze expression profile, a set of genes was also identified which is expressed strongly in ses, suggesting that specific metabolic pathways might be associated specifically with se and could help explain the difference in cotyledon development.

further analysis of specific genes and pathways leading to seed development revealed that while many of the seed development specific genes are expressed in both types of embryos, many genes related to auxin and ethylene responses and to stress response were up-regulated in ses. many of these genes were expressed at higher levels in earlier stages of development and were not down-regulated in ses as they are in normal seed development. based on these results, we hypothesize that the lack of full cotyledon development in somatic embryos is a result of alterations in gene expression patterns due to accumulation of stress response signaling during the culture process. this could be triggered by stress resulting from sub-optimal media composition or environmental conditions.

regulation of hormone and flavonoid biosynthesis genes
over  <dig> genes involved in auxin or ethylene metabolism and  <dig> genes related to biotic and abiotic stress are differentially expressed in ses. this suggested that under in vitro conditions, ethylene signaling is up-regulated in cacao ses, resulting in increased expression of ethylene-mediated stress response genes. a similar observation was reported in white and black spruce somatic embryogenesis where increases in ethylene signaling were implicated in abnormal embryo development  <cit> . it is plausible that increased stress response gene expression restricts cotyledon development in ses as a result of reallocation of resources away from cotyledonary reserves.

ethylene is also involved in the up-regulation of flavonol biosynthesis in arabidposis <cit> , consistent with our observations of elevated expression of genes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis in the cacao somatic embryos relative to zygotic embryos. flavonoids are commonly associated with plant stress responses and they appear to play a role in controlling growth and development in response to auxin and ethylene signaling by modulating auxin transport  <cit>  and thus are critical to regulation of seed development. in summary, the observation that large numbers of genes involved in ethylene function were up-regulated in somatic embryos is consistent with the hypothesis that ethylene-mediated stress response plays a significant role in the abnormal development of cacao somatic embryos.

regulation of fatty acid biosynthesis in somatic embryos
we also observed high levels of mis-expression of genes encoding for key enzymes controlling lipid metabolism in somatic embryos. we observed increased expression of fab <dig> <cit> , kasii <cit>  and fata <cit>  all involved in synthesis of oleic acid, a substrate for polyunsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis. furthermore, the up-regulated expression of omega  <dig> and omega  <dig> desaturase genes fad <dig> <cit>  and fad7/ <dig> <cit>  is also consistent with our recent observation that compared to cacao seeds, mature cacao ses contain a higher proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acids, including linoleic acid and α-linolenic acid, but lower percentage of stearic acid and oleic acid , which is characteristic of an immature zygotic seed and cacao leaves  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
a very large portion of the genome is differentially regulated during cacao zygotic embryo maturation, similar to what has been reported for other species. we conclude that the major gene expression programs during the maturation phase of zygotic embryogenesis are only partially expressed during somatic embryo maturation. this is not surprising considering the remarkably different environments and developmental pathways involved. our results indicate that auxin, ethylene and flavonoid biosynthesis and regulation genes are abnormally expressed in ses and these pathways could be very important targets for future optimization of the somatic embryogenesis process.

this research has provided a comprehensive list of differentially expressed genes and their expression profiles that could be further developed as markers for the maturation of ze and se. the data represents useful new knowledge into the metabolic processes associated with both of these embryo developmental processes in t. cacao, and provide a resource for functional genomics research and in vitro optimizations of medium and environmental conditions for improvement of the cacao se system. these findings will provide hypothesis and tools to further dissect these factors and lead to improved somatic embryo protocols for cacao.

