BACKGROUND
aphids are hemipteran insects that have close associations with various lineages of microorganisms. most aphid species harbour the obligate mutualist , buchnera aphidicola , within the cytoplasm of specialized cells called bacteriocytes  <cit> . since the initial infection more than  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , buchnera have been subjected to strict vertical transmission through host generations, and the mutualism between buchnera and their host has evolved to the point that neither can reproduce in the absence of the other. buchnera cannot proliferate outside bacteriocytes and, when deprived of buchnera, the host insects suffer retarded growth and sterility, as they are obligately dependent on buchnera for the supply of essential nutrients they cannot synthesize, and which are scarce in their diet of phloem sap  <cit> . during the process of co-evolution with the host, buchnera has lost a number of genes that appear to be essential for bacterial existence ; this raises the question of how buchnera survive within the host bacteriocyte. one of several possible explanations for the absence of these genes is that some genes were transferred from the genome of an ancestor of buchnera to the genome of an aphid ancestor and are now expressed under the control of the host nucleus. such lateral gene transfer  should take place in the germ line for the transferred gene to be inherited through the generations of the recipient. during most of their life stages, buchnera are confined within bacteriocytes, which are segregated from germ cells; however, the symbionts are freed from the maternal bacteriocytes before being transmitted to the next generation. in cases of parthenogenetic reproduction, buchnera cells are transferred into the parthenogenetic blastoderm-stage embryos; buchnera are localized proximal to the host germ cells during early development of the host. moreover, in cases of sexual reproduction, buchnera enter sexual eggs at the pre-cellularization stage; at this stage, there are no membranous barriers between buchnera and the germ lines  <cit> . such localization of buchnera cells proximal to host germ lines might provide opportunities for the lgt from buchnera into the germ lines.

in addition to buchnera, a number of aphid strains harbour other maternally transmitted intracellular bacteria, such as rickettsia , spiroplasma , and various γ-proteobacterial microbes, including hamiltonella defensa, regiella insecticola, serratia symbiotica, and arsenophonus species  <cit> . these 'secondary symbionts' are often shared between divergent insect lineages. for example, hamiltonella and arsenophonus are observed in scattered strains and species of aphids, psyllids, whiteflies and planthoppers  <cit> . wolbachia lineages  are observed in a wide variety of arthropods  <cit> , though only one case of infection has been reported in aphids  <cit> . these suggest that secondary symbionts undergo horizontal transfer among matrilines within and between species. they are also transmitted vertically  <cit> , but this appears to be achieved in a less tightly controlled manner in comparison to the case of buchnera  <cit> . whereas buchnera exist as passive symbionts within their hosts, which in turn have evolved mechanisms to maintain and transmit the buchnera  <cit> , secondary symbionts overcome host immune responses and invade various types of host cells, including germ cells  <cit> . thus, there are likely to have been frequent opportunities for aphids to acquire genomic fragments from these symbiotic bacteria during evolution.

we previously performed transcriptome analysis of the bacteriocyte of the pea aphid acyrthosiphon pisum, to elucidate the host mechanisms required to maintain buchnera  <cit> . this study identified a number of aphid genes that are highly expressed in the bacteriocyte. among them, two genes  exhibited similarity only to prokaryotic genes, and not to those of extant buchnera lineages. southern blot analysis confirmed that they are encoded in the aphid genome.

in the present study, we show the detailed analysis of the phylogenetic positions, domain structures, and expression profiles of these genes, thus revealing their evolutionary history and functional roles.

RESULTS
full-length sequencing of cdna clones
in the previous study, the sequences of the transcripts corresponding to the cdna clusters  r2c <dig> and r2c <dig> were not fully determined, as the cap-trapper cdna clones were sequenced only from the 5' end. in the present study, all the cap-trapper clone inserts relevant to these unigenes were amplified by pcr using vector primers  and sequenced from both ends to obtain full-length sequences. in the case of r2c <dig>  all of the four clones had an identical sequence of  <dig> bp encoding a polypeptide of  <dig> amino acid residues . full-length sequences for r2c <dig> were approximately  <dig> kb in length, with slight variations mainly in the putative untranslated regions . they encoded a polypeptide of  <dig> amino acid residues . these full-length unigenes are hereafter referred to as r2c00214f  and r2c00193f , respectively.

putative ld-carboxypeptidase
basic local alignment search tool  search demonstrated that the product of r2c00214f has significant sequence similarity to the bacterial enzyme ld-carboxypeptidase , and the microcin c <dig> self-immunity protein  that are produced by gram-negative bacteria . the top blast hit for the r2c00214f product was the hypothetical protein wd <dig>   , which has not been fully annotated; however, the analysis of the conserved domains of the gene product performed using the cd-search at the national center for biotechnology information  website indicated that the gene encodes the bacterial ldca belonging to the peptidase s <dig> family . the subordinate hits were either ldca or mccf, the latter of which mediates resistance against microcin c <dig>  an antimicrobial peptide that is secreted by enterobacteria and inhibits the growth of bacterial species phylogenetically related to the producing strains  <cit> . the mechanism through which mccf mediates resistance against microcin c <dig> is uncertain; however, mccf belongs to the peptidase s <dig> family, and all the residues required for ldca activity are conserved in it  <cit> . thus, in this paper, we collectively refer to these proteins belonging to the s <dig> family as 'ldcas'. putative orthologs of r2c00214f are found in a variety of bacteria, but not in eukaryotes, except for the fungus gibberella zeae , implying that the two distantly related organisms, namely, the aphid and the plant pathogenic fungi, independently acquired ldca from a bacterium via lgt. we discuss this possible mode of inheritance via lgt below.

r2c00214f appeared to lack the sequences required to encode the middle region of canonical ldcas . to check the corresponding genomic sequences, the preliminary genome assembly of the pea aphid  was screened using r2c00214f as the query sequence. the entire coding sequence  of ldca was located in a single scaffold; however, the genomic dna had a sequence corresponding to the middle region of the ldcas that was missing from the r2c00214f gene product. this suggests that the sequence fragment represents an intron of the r2c00214f gene . in order to search for splice variants, we further amplified cdnas for the aphid ldca by rt-pcr using specific primers and determined their sequences. unexpectedly, the amplified cdnas essentially consisted of a single type of sequence variant that contained a sequence  corresponding to the middle region of ldca. this long form of the transcript  encoded a 360-amino acid-long polypeptide sequence, while the short form  encoded a 226-amino acid-long polypeptide sequence . the long form and the short form appeared to be splice variants as cap-trapper libraries rarely contain inappropriate artifacts that do not reflect the mrna structures in vivo  <cit> . the terminal dinucleotides of the insertion sequence were gt-cg, which is similar to the canonical splicing signal gt-ag. it has previously been verified that the gt-cg set can also be used as a splicing signal  <cit> . the short form of the transcript was not detected by rt-pcr; this might, at least in part, reflect the low level of expression of this truncated form of the transcript in the sample used in the study. the inconsistency might also be due to some bias in constructing the cdna library in the previous study and/or in the rt-pcr employed in the present study.

the long-form transcript was also characterized by blast similarity search. once again, the top blast hit was the hypothetical protein wd <dig>   . the subordinate hits were similar to those obtained with the short-form transcripts, but with much smaller e-values. the amino acid sequence of the long-form transcript exhibited 45% and 24% identity to the ldca proteins of wolbachia wmel and escherichia coli, respectively . three catalytically active sites identified in pseudomonas ldca   <cit>  were conserved in the aphid ldca . no other domain structure was observed in the protein.

putative rare lipoprotein a
the blast search revealed that the r2c00193f gene product is significantly similar to a bacterial protein, rare lipoprotein a  . the top blast hit was a putative rlpa family protein   , and essentially all of the subordinate hits were thus annotated rare lipoprotein a. homologous sequences of the pea aphid putative rlpa gene were observed in various bacteria, but not in eukaryotes, except for two other aphid species, aphis gossypii  and toxoptera citricida . domain analysis revealed that the region detected by the similarity search corresponds to the double-ψ β-barrel  fold, which is the domain conserved in rlpa proteins. although the function of rlpa is not well understood  <cit> , the dpbb fold is suspected to be an enzymatic domain  <cit> .

using rt-pcr cloning, two types of sequences were identified. as expected, these sequences corresponded to the transcripts originally found in the sequence cluster of r2c00193f . these contained putative full cdss encoding 220-amino acid polypeptide sequences . these sequences appeared to be from distinct alleles, with two nucleotide discrepancies in their cdss resulting in a single amino acid difference .

three other domain structures were observed in the pea aphid putative rlpa . at the n-terminal region, a eukaryotic signal peptide motif was identified. blast search of the remaining sequences revealed that two regions adjacent to the dpbb domain are similar to the inhibitor cysteine-knot  motif of three antimicrobial peptides – alo- <dig>  alo- <dig>  and alo- <dig> – of the harlequin beetle acrocinus longimanus   <cit>  . the ick motif presents a unique knotted topology of three disulphide bridges, with one disulphide penetrating through a macrocycle formed by the other two disulphides and interconnecting the peptide backbones  <cit> . the ick family proteins are relatively small , and are found in various lineages of eukaryotes including plants, molluscs, arachnids and insects, exhibiting various biological activities such as toxic, antimicrobial, and insecticidal activities  <cit> . this motif was observed also in the putative orfs of two other aphid transcripts. however, the domain has never been found in bacterial proteins, including rlpa.

to reveal the exon/intron structure of the pea aphid putative rlpa, a preliminary genome assembly of the pea aphid  was screened using r2c00193f as the query sequence. the pea aphid rlpa locus was split into two distinct scaffolds . the rlpa gene consists of three exons and two introns. the first exon contains the eukaryotic signal peptide, the second contains one of the cysteine-rich domains, and the third contains the dpbb domain and another cysteine-rich domain. the boundaries of the protein domains were consistent with the locations of introns. the chimeric structure of the aphid rlpas might have come into being as the result of exon-shuffling  <cit>  involving prokaryotic and eukaryotic elements.

pea aphid ancestor acquired ldca via lgt from a wolbachia-like bacterium
the amino acid sequence of the aphid putative ldca was subjected to molecular phylogenetic analysis . the phylogenetic tree demonstrated with robust statistical support  that the aphid gene is most closely related to the clade of ldcas of rickettsial bacteria, especially wolbachia  and orientia tsutsugamushi . this branching pattern can be most simply explained by the hypothesis that the aphid acquired ldca via lgt from wolbachia or some other rickettsial bacteria, many of which are known to be intracellular symbionts of insects. the putative orthologous gene detected in the plant pathogenic fungus g. zeae was distantly related to the aphid ldca ; this further suggests that the ancestors of a. pisum and g. zeae independently acquired the genes from different lineages of bacteria.

common ancestor of three species of aphids acquired rlpa via lgt
the amino acid sequences of putative rlpas of a. pisum, a. gossypii, and t. citricida were subjected to molecular phylogenetic analysis with rlpas of various bacterial lineages . the highly conserved dpbb domains were aligned and used for this analysis. the phylogenetic positions of aphid rlpas were not clearly resolved with a high level of statistical support. however, to date, no rlpa genes have been observed in any eukaryotes, except aphids. moreover, the phylogenetic tree showed that the aphid rlpas are monophyletic and that the phylogenetic relationships were congruent with the species tree of aphids  <cit> . this suggests that the common ancestor of these three aphid species acquired the rlpa gene from a bacterium via lgt. the relatively low resolution of the phylogenetic positions of the aphid rlpa may be partly due to the high evolutionary rate of the aphid lineages .

aphid rlpa encodes a functional protein
to test the integrity of the functionality of the aphid rlpas, ka/ks ratios of the dpbb-encoding sequences of aphid rlpas were calculated. the ratios between a. pisum and a. gossypii, and between a. pisum and t. citricida were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. both of the ratios were significantly smaller than  <dig> . this indicates that the aphid genes are not pseudogenes, but are functional and contribute to the fitness of the insects. however, the ka/ks values were somewhat higher than those of other bacteria . this indicates that the selective constraints on amino acid substitutions in the dpbb domains are  <dig> to  <dig> times more relaxed in aphids than bacteria, under the assumption that synonymous sites evolve neutrally.

ldca and rlpa are highly expressed specifically in the bacteriocyte
to examine the expression profiles of ldca and rlpa, we quantified their transcripts in the bacteriocyte and in the whole body using real-time quantitative rt-pcr . the results clearly demonstrated that ldca and rlpa are actively transcribed in the bacteriocyte. transcripts for ldca and rlpa were  <dig>  and 154-fold more abundant in the bacteriocyte than in the whole body, respectively. it is also notable that the copy numbers of their transcripts in the bacteriocyte were comparable to those of the control transcript encoding ribosomal protein l <dig> , indicating that their expression levels are relatively high. high levels of expression of these genes in the bacteriocyte strongly suggest that they are not only functional, but they play important roles in maintaining the symbiotic relationship with the obligate mutualist, buchnera.

discussion
aphids have recruited genes from bacterial genomes via lgt
we have obtained strong evidence for two cases of bacteria-to-insect lgt. the genes encoded in the aphid genome that are expressed in the bacteriocyte were demonstrated to be significantly similar only to the bacterial genes, ldca and rlpa. quantitative rt-pcr further verified that these genes are highly expressed in the bacteriocyte. the orthologs of such genes are absent in buchnera, the obligate mutualistic bacteria that are harboured in the bacteriocytes. these findings imply that the aphid ldca and rlpa have compensational functions to support the survival of buchnera.

although until recently it was believed that lgt plays an important role exclusively in the evolution of unicellular organisms, especially prokaryotes  <cit> , the accumulating genomic data is now revealing that lgt also affects the genomic content of multicellular eukaryotes with segregated germ cells. dna sequences with significant similarity to genes of wolbachia, an endocellular rickettsial bacterium, have been observed in the genomes of a wide range of arthropods and filarial nematodes  <cit> . wolbachia is a maternally transmitted endosymbiont that can enter the germ line of host animals  <cit> , which facilitates bacterial dna transfer to the host nucleus. however, many of the transferred wolbachia genes appear to be in the process of pseudogenization, and even intact "genes" are not expressed at a significant level  <cit> , implying that these transferred genes do not confer novel functions on the host organisms.

the cases discovered in the present study are especially interesting in that these transferred bacterial genes not only retain their functionality, but are highly expressed in the bacteriocyte, which is the cell that harbours buchnera. the molecular phylogenetic analysis clearly indicated that the aphid ldca is closely related to that of wolbachia, and of other rickettsial bacteria. although infections of wolbachia and rickettsia are sporadically observed among the aphid species  <cit> , the iso strain that was used in the present study lacks such symbionts  <cit> ; this suggests that the previous infection left only a transferred gene as a footprint, while the source bacterium disappeared. with regard to rlpa, it was clearly demonstrated that this gene also was of bacterial origin, but its phylogenetic position has not been fully resolved.

eukaryote-type structures of the genes and transcripts
recent studies have revealed that lgts from bacteria can occur in metazoa  <cit> . however, these transferred genes cannot function unless they obtain eukaryotic promoters, since the gene expression systems of prokaryotes and eukaryotes differ. the likelihood of promoter acquisition seems very low, as suggested by the previously reported lack of expression of laterally transferred genes  <cit> . the aphid ldca and rlpa are highly expressed in the bacteriocytes, clearly indicating that these genes have acquired eukaryotic promoters, although the mechanism of promoter acquisition has yet to be determined. the cdnas for the aphid ldca and rlpa were originally observed in a cdna library constructed by the cap-trapper method that targets the 5' cap structure and 3' poly-a tails of eukaryotic mrnas  <cit> . this suggests that both the mrnas for the aphid ldca and rlpa have the 5' cap structure and 3' poly-a tail that bacterial mrnas lack. indeed, polyadenylation signals  are observed in the 3'-utr of the transcripts. screening of the genome scaffold followed by pcr cloning revealed that the genes have spliceosomal-type introns. this type of intron has not been observed in bacterial genes, suggesting that these genes acquired introns after they were transferred into the aphid genome.

ldca may be used to control buchnera
ldca is an enzyme required for recycling murein , a component of the bacterial cell wall. ldca releases the terminal d-alanine from l-alanyl-d-glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelyl-d-alanine, which contains turnover products of murein. the disruption of e. coli ldca results in bacteriolysis during the stationary phase, indicating that the reaction is essential for bacterial survival  <cit> . in the mutant, due to a defect in murein recycling, the unusual murein precursor uridine 5'-pyrophosphoryl n-acetylmuramyl-tetrapeptide accumulates, and the overall cross-linkage of murein decreases dramatically. this is interpreted as a reflection of the increased incorporation of tetrapeptide precursors that can only function as acceptors and not as donors in the cross-linking reaction.

buchnera has cell walls composed of murein  <cit> , but it lacks ldca  <cit> . although the evolutionary origin of the aphid ldca seems to be from rickettsial bacteria and not from buchnera, it is intriguing to note that this gene is highly expressed in the bacteriocyte. aphids may control the proliferation of buchnera using ldca, which was recruited from another symbiotic bacterium that previously had resided in aphids.

chimeric structure of putative rlpa
the molecular phylogenetic tree indicated that the lgt of rlpas occurred before the divergence of the three aphid species. on the basis of fossil records, this divergence is inferred to date back to more than  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . even if the transferred genes successfully acquire sequence elements that allow their expression, contribution of the genes to the host fitness, or strategies enabling the selfish propagation of the genes, would be required for the maintenance of the transferred genes in the host genome for such a long period of time. the functional role of the rlpa in any bacteria is not well understood; however, rlpa suppresses the e. coli mutant of prc that cleaves the c terminus of ftsi  <cit> , suggesting that rlpa plays an important role in bacteria. domain analyses revealed that, in addition to the conserved dpbb domain, the aphid rlpa has three other domains that are not found among bacterial orthologs. this implies that rlpa might have gained novel functions that are yet to be determined. although the function of rlpa is not well understood, the high level of expression of the aphid rlpa in the bacteriocyte implies that this gene is also essential for buchnera.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, several lines of evidence indicated that aphids acquired genes from bacteria via lgt, and are using such genes to maintain the obligately mutualistic bacteria, buchnera. phylogenetic analysis clearly demonstrated that one of the genes was derived from a rickettsial bacterium that is closely related to the extant wolbachia. this is the first report of functional genes that were laterally transferred from symbiotic bacteria to metazoa. the cases presented here are of special interest in that these transferred bacterial genes not only retain their functionality, but are highly expressed in the bacteriocyte that is differentiated so as to harbour buchnera, which lack such genes.

