BACKGROUND
since many of the presently applied biomedical markers are not recommended for early diagnosis and therapy surveillance of cancer   <cit> , an intensified search for more reliable diagnostic markers is required.

beside the clinical research for characteristic biomarkers in the genomic profile  and the expressed protein pattern , increasing interest is directed towards the end products of physiological processes represented by different metabolite classes.

the field of metabolomics deals with the fingerprint analysis of biochemical alterations among various metabolic degradation products initiated by diseases, drugs and toxins in a defined biological system  <cit> . many of the key metabolic pathways are interconnected and thus perturbations – for instance caused by malignant cancer diseases – in one subset can cause implications on the others. the metabolomic approach in conjunction with its practical appliance for early diagnosis and therapy surveillance in certain diseases is to narrow down the great diversity of possible compounds to those with a huge information content for classification predictions.

possible targets for a characteristic metabolite fingerprint associated with neoplastic cancer diseases are compounds originating from the cellular rna metabolism and peripheral biochemical processes.

the cross-linked pathways of purine de novo biosynthesis and histidine metabolism  contribute to the cellular ribonucleotide pool and thus the general build up of rna molecules. the polyamine/methionine cycle is directly connected to the enzymatic modification of rna nucleosides via the ubiquitous methyl- and propylaminodonor s-adenosylmethionine  .

rna contains a series of modified nucleosides in addition to the common ribonucleosides adenosine , guanosine , uridine  and cytidine . modifications like methylation, hydroxylation, reduction, isomerization, sulfur/oxygen substitution and addition of complex side chains are implemented posttranscriptionally within the polynucleotide molecule by various modifying enzyme systems.

the major task of these modifications is thought to be the general improvement of biological activity, integrity and efficiency of rna in various biochemical processes  <cit> .

at present about  <dig> modified nucleoside structures are known to occur in different rna types like transfer rna , messenger rna , ribosomal rna  and small nuclear rna  with trna being the most intensively modified   <cit> .

during posttranslational rna catabolism, nucleosides are released due to enzymatic hydrolysis of the polynucleotides and subsequent elimination of the phosphate moiety. the common nucleosides c, u, a and g are recycled for intracellular rna-rebuilding in the so-called salvage pathway by stepwise re-phosphorylation to the corresponding triphosphate nucleotides.

this passage is obstructed for modified nucleosides due to the lack of specific phosphorylases. thus they are excreted quantitatively out of the cell as metabolic end products via blood stream into the urine  <cit> .

in cancer, rna metabolism is impaired, which has been demonstrated by altered levels of modified nucleosides. in this context, rna metabolites have been analyzed in several biological fluids like blood  <cit>  and urine  <cit>  as well as in rna-hydrolysates  <cit> .

it was shown that the levels of 1-methylinosine  and n <dig> n2-dimethylguanosine  are elevated in urine from breast cancer patients  <cit> . increased amounts of modified nucleosides were also observed in urine of patients suffering from leukemia  <cit> , gastrointestinal cancer  <cit>  and lung carcinoma  <cit> .

different methods have been applied for identifying and quantifying nucleosides using high-performance liquid chromatography  with uv detection and capillary electrophoresis   <cit> . recently, the coupling of hplc, gas chromatography or capillary liquid chromatography with mass spectrometric detection via electrospray ionization ion trap mass spectrometry   <cit> , esi tandem ms  <cit>  and fast atom bombardment   <cit>  has been applied. esi-tof ms  <cit>  and offline mass spectrometric techniques like maldi-tof ms  <cit>  have proven valuable tools for the identification of nucleoside structures.

bioinformatic methods like artificial neural network   <cit> , principal component analysis   <cit> , learning vector quantization  and support vector machine   <cit>  enabled sophisticated nucleoside pattern recognitions, resulting in improved values for specificity/sensitivity and hence a more significant classification in early cancer diagnosis.

related to metabolic profiling in blood and urine, cell culture supernatants offer the great advantage of the exclusion of subsequent interferences along the excretion pathway, e.g. enzymatic actions in the blood stream, liver and kidney as well as the falsification by bacterial metabolites. thus, it is possible to generate unaltered metabolite patterns of cellular origin.

according to the metabolomic approach of contemplating the analyzed biological system as a whole set of more or less interconnected processes, we screened cross-linked metabolic pathways of the cellular rna metabolism. therefore we performed a qualitative and semi-quantitative lc-it ms analysis of nucleosides and related metabolites  excreted by breast cancer cell cultures to get a deeper insight into properties and variations of cell metabolism at the point of origin.

RESULTS
in the present study, we utilized the potentials of ion trap mass spectrometry to analyze differences in the metabolite excretion patterns of mcf- <dig> breast cancer cell line and mcf-10a breast epithelial cell line.

for compound identification we applied auto-lc-ms <dig> runs  <cit>  of the extracted cell culture supernatant samples. collision induced dissociation -experiments enabled the generation of constant neutral loss  chromatograms, showing only those compounds losing a defined functional group in the first fragmentation step. in nucleoside structures, this step is generally represented by the characteristic decay into the neutral sugar moiety and the corresponding nucleic base fragment at the fragile n-glycosidic bond. loss of  <dig> amu is a strong indication for metabolites with an unaltered ribose,  <dig> amu loss points at a 5'-deoxyribose decay . 5'-deoxy-5'-methylthioadenosine , 5'-deoxy-5'-methylthioadenosine sulfoxide , s-adenosylhomocysteine  and sam  eliminate the corresponding thioribose derivatives. .

nucleosides with a stable c-glycosidic bond like pseudouridine  do not loose the entire sugar moiety in the first fragmentation step but show multistep water eliminations within the ribose structure.

the characteristic decay of the sugar moiety  observed in the ms/ms step and the subsequent fragmentation of the remaining heterocycle  by ms <dig> gave precious information about the structural identity of the isolated compounds .

 <dig> nucleosides and ten additional compounds from different metabolic cell pathways were identified by comparison of fragmentation patterns and retention time to analogous standards.

1-ribosylimidazole-4-acetic acid  and 3--uridine  were previously identified by our research group in human urine with combined lc-it ms and esi-tof ms measurements  <cit> . 1-ribosyl-pyridin-2-one-5-carboxamide  was identified by maldi-tof ms analysis  <cit> .

1-ribosylnicotinamide , 5-carbamoylmethyluridine , mta-so, 5'-deoxyadenosine , n6-methyl-n6-threonylcarbamoyladenosine , 2-methylthio-n6-threonyl-carbamoyladenosine  and 5-methoxycarbonyl-methyl-2-thiouridine  were identified in a parallel in-depth study of urinary metabolites by accurate mass measurement via ft ms combined with fragmentation pattern analysis by it ms . as the obtained fragmentation pathways and retention times of the mentioned compounds are similar in both analyzed biological fluids, they are most probably identical. an assortment of ms <dig> fragmentation patterns for selected metabolites is shown in table  <dig> 

† r: loss of ribose , mr: loss of modified ribose

for a comparative, semi-quantitative pattern analysis of the two studied cell lines, the peak areas of the identified metabolites in the processed eics were related to the peak area of the internal standard isoguanosine . some of the analyzed metabolites show striking varieties between the cancer cell line and the reference cell line, presumably caused by the cellular response to pathophysiological mutations .

† areaq*  <dig> = /peak area  ) *  <dig> , tabulated by increasing retention time, n.d.: not detectable

modified nucleosides
we found that the modified nucleosides  <dig> -dihydrouridine , Ψ, acp3u, 3-methylcytidine , 5-methyluridine , 3-methyluridine , xanthosine , 1-methylguanosine , m22g, n <dig> n <dig> -trimethylguanosine , mcm5s2u, n6-threonylcarbamoyladenosine  and m6t6a are elevated in the supernatants of mcf- <dig> cells compared to those of mcf-10a cells. therefore, we generally considered a compound level as "elevated" when the area ratio exceeds the mean value of the reference cell line by two standard deviation values   <cit> . the methylated nucleoside n6-methyladenosine  is not included in this list because it can be formed through isomerization of 1-methyladenosine  and thus could not be normalized.

especially the levels of m5u with ratios ~4/ <dig> , m <dig> ,7g , m6t6a  and acp3u  should be pointed out.

m5u is present in eukaryotic trna and rrna  <cit> . roe and tsen postulated, that this nucleoside might be involved in the regulation of translational processes in mammalian liver  <cit> . its formation in trna is associated with the stabilization of the macromolecular structure. a lack of m5u, 2'-o-methylguanosine and Ψ at the positions  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> in trnas of escherichia coli induced a reduced growth rate and led to defects in translation processes  <cit> .

m <dig> ,7g is present in eukaryotic mrna and snrna  <cit> . in the latter, the hypermethylated guanosine is part of the m3g-cap-structure, a snrna-specific variant of the regular monomethylguanosine--cap at the 5'-termini. nascent snrnas  are transported to the cytoplasm were they assemble with small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles . subsequently, the two additional methyl groups are transferred from sam and the snrna/protein-complex can enter the nucleus  <cit> .

small nuclear rnas belong to a group of non-coding rnas . these rna species have been implicated in diseases including various cancers and neurological diseases  <cit> . snrnas can suppress the expression of genes. they probably bind directly to mrnas and stop protein production. additionally snrnas seem to regulate gene expression epigenetically. the massive amount of ncrna that is expressed from the genomes of higher organisms suggests that ncrna may constitute an endogenous control system that regulates the programmed patterns of gene expression  <cit> . increased levels of m <dig> ,7g in mcf- <dig> cells might indicate a "tumorigenic" change of gene expression on the epigenetic level.

to date the occurrence of m6t6a has been described in trnathr from e. coli, wheat embryo trna and rat liver trnaser  <cit> . the methyl group of this nucleoside is supposed to improve the trna reading efficiency in e. coli  <cit> .

to the authors' best knowledge, this report describes for the first time the identification of this hypermodified nucleoside in human cell lines.

the nucleoside acp3u occurs in several mammalian trnas  <cit> . it is posttranscriptionally synthesized via transfer of the aminocarboxypropyl moiety of sam on certain uridine residues in the rna macromolecule, yielding mta as degradation product  <cit>  . an elevated production of acp3u is thus directly associated with an elevated build up of mta as observed in mcf- <dig> cells .

randerath et al generally proposed that the reason for differences in the base composition of tumor trna and thus the excreted modified nucleosides may be changes in the concentrations of specific trnas, presence of trnas with altered sequences in tumor tissue and aberrant modifications  <cit> .

the methylated nucleosides are synthesized at the posttranscriptional level by transfer of methyl groups from sam to the nucleobase at certain positions in the rna molecule by specific enzyme systems. the observed increased excretion of certain methylated nucleosides can be generally traced back to the elevated activity of specific trna methylases associated with breast carcinoma  <cit> .

beside its main task in translational processes, additional functions of trna, e.g. the participation as cofactor in enzymatic reactions, have been reported. in this context, trna modifications or trna modifying enzymes are thought to act as regulatory devices between the translational and other metabolic processes. the degree of modification in the individual trna species is regulated differently under the influence of the physiological status of the cell   <cit> . thus, the observed, elevated excretion of certain modified nucleosides may be attributed to the tumor growth's induced accumulation of specific trnas with characteristic nucleoside composition.

the excretion of the common ribonucleosides also shows striking differences between the analyzed cell lines: g, ratio ~1: <dig> , u , c  and a . in the latter case, the possible action of adenosine desaminase, converting adenosine to inosine  has to be considered ). the phenomenon of a reduced excretion of common nucleosides in mcf- <dig> might be related to the increased cell turnover and thus rna metabolism reported in tumor tissue  <cit>  with a higher demand for nucleoside recycling.

s-adenosylmethionine, s-adenosylhomocysteine
the elevated activity of methylases in malignant cancer diseases has to be estimated in conjunction with the ubiquitous methyldonor sam and the related metabolic compounds .

sam was solely found in the supernatants of mcf- <dig> whereas it was not detectable in mcf-10a. elevated excretion has been observed in cells showing methionine dependent growth  <cit> , like mcf- <dig> 

sah is the degradation product of sam when acting as methyldonor in most of the enzymatically induced methyl-transfer reactions, e.g. the methylation of rna-nucleosides. the inhibitory effect of sah on methylation reactions is well-documented  <cit>  and explains the elevated level in the cell culture supernatants of mcf- <dig> 

as normally the enzyme systems involved in this pathway are strictly regulated, a severe change in the cell physiology like cancer may lead to an overproduction of sam for transmethylation and thus to an elevated excretion of sam and sah out of the cell.

mta and polyamine biosynthesis
mta and its oxidized metabolite mta-so are elevated in the supernatants of mcf- <dig> cells.

mta is not a nucleoside derived from rna but a byproduct in the polyamine biosynthesis. it is generated via transfer of the propylamino moiety from decarboxylated s-adenosylmethionine  on the polyamine-compounds putrescine and spermidine . mta-so is suggested to arise from mta by in vivo oxidation with peroxides and superoxides or enzymatically by microsomes  <cit> . separate studies in our research group confirmed the enzymatically induced oxidation of mta, yielding mta-so by incubation of mta with rat liver microsomes . thus the elevated excretion of mta-so in mcf- <dig> appears to be simply in consequence to the higher mta level.

polyamines are regulatory compounds in cell growth processes. individuals with malignant cancer diseases show elevated amounts of polyamines in physiological fluids  <cit> . levels of the enzymes involved in the polyamine biosynthesis  are higher in tumors than in normal tissue  <cit> . thus the polyamine biosynthesis pathway is discussed as useful target for anticancer therapeutics since depletion in polyamine levels has been shown to inhibit cellular growth  <cit> .

the higher excreted level of mta may be interpreted as a consequence to an elevated polyamine biosynthesis proceeding in rapidly proliferating tumor cells. in human leukemic cells, the relation between the up-regulated synthesis of spermidine and spermine and excretion of mta has been well-documented  <cit> . to elucidate this process in mcf- <dig> cells, the analysis of both intra-and extracellular polyamine levels as well as the determination of the key enzyme activities has to be performed in further experiments.

another focus is directed towards the metabolic fate of mta, which is degraded to adenine and s-methyl-5'-thio-d-ribose-1-phosphate  by the enzyme mtap . in some breast cancer cell lines, including mcf- <dig>  the mtap gene is inactive  <cit> . the elevated mta level in the supernatant of mcf- <dig> compared to the supernatant of mcf-10a may be explained by this phenomenon, because mta may not be degraded.

accumulating mta is known for its inhibitory effect on polyamine aminopropyltransferase, methyltransferases  <cit>  and cell growth in general  <cit>  – processes important for the growth and development of cancer cells. thus, the elevated excretion of mta in mcf- <dig> may be related to these attributes.

furthermore, it may be assumed that in case of an inactive mtap, the methionine synthesis mainly takes place via the recycling pathway. the first step in this cycle is demethylation of sam to sah. the elevated levels of both compounds found in the supernatants of mcf- <dig> support this presumption. the methylation of rna nucleosides also depends on this cycle, so the increased excretion of methylated nucleosides in the analyzed cell culture supernatants may also be related to the described gene defect.

histidine metabolism and purine de novo biosynthesis
a significant difference was observed in the excretion of 1-ribosyl-4-carboxamido-5-aminoimidazole , the dephosphorylated analog of aica ribotide , which is a crosslinked intermediate in purine de novo biosynthesis/histidine metabolism and a precursor of amp .

whereas aica riboside was found in the supernatants of mcf- <dig>  it is absent in those of mcf-10a.

a characteristic of tumor cells is the high rate of anabolic processes like lipid-, protein- and dna biosynthesis. these energy-consuming pathways are regulated by the energy status of the cell, based on the intracellular atp/amp ratio. swinnen et al demonstrated the response of exogenously added aicar riboside on invasive mda-mb- <dig> cells, a well-characterized model of breast cancer. aica riboside was taken up by the tumor cells and converted to aicar. this resulted in a distinctive inhibition of tumor-associated anabolic processes, cell proliferation and colony formation as well as an activation of amp-activated protein kinases . at high concentrations applied, apoptosis was induced  <cit> . ampks in term are suggested to be involved in the apoptosis process of cells. an activation as well as a protection against apoptosis has been reported, dependent upon the cell type  <cit> . it is not known how ampks are involved in this process in mcf- <dig> cells.

however, it may be assumed that tumor cells like mcf- <dig> excrete endogenous aicar as its cell permeable analog aica riboside to avoid the described inhibitory effects on tumor growth and development.

differences were also observed in the histidine metabolism of the analyzed cell culture supernatants. the histidine metabolite iaa-r is present in mcf-10a supernatants but not detectable in those of mcf- <dig> 

there is evidence suggesting that histamine, the precursor molecule of iaa-r, is of major importance in the development of malignant cancer. an increased enzymatic activity of histidine decarboxylase has been observed in mammary tumor tissue  <cit> . functional histamine receptors have been demonstrated in tumor cell lines  <cit> . specific inhibitors of the histamine-synthesizing enzyme, histidine decarboxylase, have been shown to inhibit tumor growth in different animal models  <cit> , and in vitro  <cit> , suggesting that de novo synthesized histamine stimulates tumor growth. an elevated biosynthesis of nascent, tumor-associated histamine is thought to be involved in the maintenance of a maximal growth and proliferation rate by unknown intracellular targets. the mimicking of the polyamine compounds putrescine and spermidine is discussed in this context.

high levels of nascent histamine have also been discussed in relation to a possible stabilization of condensed polynucleotide species, formation of nucleic acid – protein – polyamine complexes, control of aminoacyl trna and protein synthesis  <cit> .

reynolds et al suggested that the high histamine concentration in breast tumors supports the hypothesis that histamine has immunosuppressive effects  <cit> .

the fact that the histamine metabolite iaa-r was solely found in cell culture supernatants of mammary epithelial cells mcf-10a supports the assumption, that the newly synthesized, nascent histamine in mcf- <dig> is needed for certain processes in the tumor development and thus is not further metabolized in the analyzed tumor cell line.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we applied lc-it ms analysis as a valid tool for biochemical investigations of altered metabolic pathways in breast cancer cell lines. to the authors' best knowledge, this is the first time that patterns of modified nucleosides and related, ribosyl-conjugated metabolites were analyzed in cell culture supernatants of mcf- <dig> and mcf-10a cells, both well-defined models in malignant and healthy mammary cells, respectively. we observed remarkable differences in the compared metabolic signatures, concerning modified nucleosides, metabolites deriving from the polyamine/methionine cycle as well as compounds from the purine de novo biosynthesis and the histidine metabolism. the discussed metabolic pathways are all involved in the development of malignant cancer diseases.

the obtained data justify a more detailed investigation of metabolic profiles as possible tool to improve prognosis and prediction in diseases like breast cancer. as they are indicators for a changed phenotype in diseased cells, metabolite patterns in body fluids like urine and blood will influence future studies towards a potential non-invasive diagnostic system in early breast cancer.

