BACKGROUND
a number of large-scale transcriptional mapping studies have shown that the mammalian transcriptome is extremely complex not only due to alternative splicing but also  because of the abundance of noncoding and often overlapping transcriptional units  <cit> . this has raised the hypothesis of rna-based regulatory system that has allowed the elaboration and expansion of phenotypic complexity of multicellular organisms  <cit> . it appears that the transcription from both strands in eukaryotic genomes is widespread  <cit> , resulting in a large pool of complementary rnas, or natural sense-antisense transcript pairs. the diversity and extent of antisense transcription suggests that this may be an important and common mechanism of gene expression modulation .

depending on the methodological approach and criteria for antisense transcript detection, the estimates of the proportion of transcripts involved in formation of sense-antisense pairs varies from  <dig> to 40%  <cit> . majority of the natural antisense transcripts  originate from the opposite dna strand of the same locus as the sense transcript . in some cases, nats can be transcribed from different loci on the genome   <cit> . although high-throughput studies have investigated expression pattern and evolution of antisense transcripts on a genome-wide scale, the direct regulatory role of nats has been demonstrated only in a few cases. the mode of nat action includes very different mechanisms like transcriptional interference  <cit> , rna masking  <cit> , and epigenetic silencing by triggering heterochromatin formation  <cit> . in addition, other double-stranded rna dependant mechanisms like rna editing or rna interference may be involved. it has been shown that bidirectionally transcribed loci in mouse can produce endogenous sirnas  <cit>  and therefore may regulate gene expression by means of rnai. in the case of zeb <dig>  expression regulation, a nat masks one of the 5' splice sites of zeb <dig> pre-mrna, thereby causing the retention of regulatory intron that is necessary for the translation of zeb <dig> protein  <cit> . strong phenotypic effect of antisense transcription was shown in a specific case of thalassemia which is caused by a deletion leading to aberrant antisense transcription and silencing of a neighboring gene by cpg island methylation  <cit> . the potential role of nats in the regulation of gene expression raises the hypothesis that they might contribute to complex genetic human disorders such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes or mental disorders.

the goal of the present study was to investigate whether natural antisense transcripts are involved in regulation of candidate genes for hypertension. we proposed that the functional variation of candidate genes might be affected by the interaction with regulatory factors, including non-coding antisense rnas. we focused on the genes with demonstrated role in familial forms of hypo- and hypertension from a salt-water homeostasis pathway  <cit> .

we identified seven genes that are associated with cis-nats . detailed analysis was carried out for nppa  and its natural antisense transcript, nppa-as. nppa codes for a precursor of atrial natriuretic peptide  that protects the cardiovascular system from the volume and pressure overload by decreasing vascular smooth muscle tone. common genetic variants at the nppa locus that are associated with the higher anp concentration are also associated with lower blood pressure and reduced risk of hypertension  <cit> . in addition, nppa expression is tightly regulated during the embryonic heart development  <cit> , suggesting that complex regulatory mechanisms control the activity of nppa.

RESULTS
natural antisense transcripts associated with candidate genes for blood pressure regulation
we first identified candidate genes  with the evidence of antisense transcription by screening them against published sense-antisense pairs  <cit>  and scanning for expressed sequence tags  on opposite strand using ucsc genome browser . we found that seven  out of  <dig> genes tested had multiexon nats supported by a number of ests with canonical gt-ag splice donor-acceptor sites . the antisense transcripts  differ from each other in their organization and complementarity in respect to sense mrna . the 5'-most exons of antisense transcript for adducin  <dig>  add3-as, have complementarity to 5' utr exons of the sense gene . in other cases, the overlap pattern is more complex, involving one or several internal exons and intron-exon boundaries. in two cases, the transcript from opposite strand has been annotated as a protein-coding mrna:  npr <dig> 3'-most exon is partially complementary to spag <dig>  and  exod <dig> is transcribed from opposite strand of acsm <dig> . in addition, the open reading frame  is predicted for one of the isoforms of add3-as and nppa-as . taken together, these data indicate that antisense transcripts associated with blood pressure candidate genes have diverse structure and various relationships to their sense partners.

add3
nppa 
atp1a <dig> 
npr <dig> 
cyp17a <dig> 
acsm <dig> 
slc14a <dig> 
* number of sense gene exons involved in sense-antisense complementarity. § a gene symbol or a genbank accession of a representative est or mrna and a total number of ests in antisense cluster. orf – open reading frame , utr – untranslated region, aa – amino acids.

structure and expression of nppa in human tissues
for further studies we selected nppa and its antisense transcript, nppa-as . this sense-antisense pair was selected for functional studies because  nppa-as is represented by a cluster of alternatively spliced ests and overlaps with the exons, introns as well as with intron-exon boundaries of nppa, raising the hypothesis that it could have a posttranscriptional regulatory role in nppa expression and  nppa has a compact size, consisting of only three exons and spanning ~ <dig> kb on human chromosome 1p <dig>  that makes it a good model system for examination of the functional role of antisense transcription.

we investigated the expression of nppa using commercial human multiple tissue cdna panels mtc i and ii . consistent with previous studies  <cit> , the strongest expression of nppa was detected in heart, but several tissues contained additional alternative products. sequencing of these products revealed that the largest nppa band detected in many tissues  represents the isoform of nppa with retained both introns . visual inspection of the agarose gel  indicates that the expression of this unspliced form and correctly spliced nppa appear to be inversely correlated. alternative product of  <dig> bp that was observed in liver, testis and leukocytes contains the retained intron  <dig> . in addition, a product shorter than correctly spliced nppa mrna  was detected in testis. sequencing of this product revealed that its sequence and splicing pattern are similar to the transcripts originating from the opposite strand, suggesting that this is actually an isoform of nppa-as, which was not represented by any of the ests in the database. to ensure that the amplification of nppa+intr1+ <dig> is not caused by genomic dna contamination, additional pcr experiments were performed with several primers that detect only nppa-as, but not nppa . because nppa and nppa-as are both transcribed from the same genomic locus, contamination with the genomic dna should result in amplification of unspliced nppa-as as well. however, these reactions yielded only the products corresponding to correctly spliced nppa-as, indicating no presence of the genomic contamination and demonstrating that the nppa+intr1+ <dig> isoform indeed represents mrna with retained introns.

nppa-as is expressed as a collection of alternatively spliced isoforms
next, we characterized the structure and expression profile of nppa-as in human tissues using the panel of tissue-specific cdnas . sequencing of eight identified isoforms confirmed that they all are spliced according to gt-ag consensus rule . it appears that nppa-as isoforms are not a result of alternative usage of different exons, but rather almost every exon displays at least two alternative splice donor/acceptor sites . majority of the alternative splicing events occur at the acceptor site of the intron. in addition, clearly identifiable polypyrimidine tract is located close to the splice acceptor site of all introns.

next, we mapped the 3' end of nppa-as by race using rna from hela cell line. we designed the gene-specific primers that would identify the 3' variants that are important in respect of complementarity with nppa. sequencing of the 3' race products identified two alternative 3' ends of nppa-as. one of the race products confirmed the presence of 3'-terminal exon that was predicted based on est sequences cd <dig> and bu <dig> . in addition, we identified a novel 3'-terminal exon that overlaps with the second intron and third exon of nppa . expression analysis of the 3'race. <dig> isoform showed that among the sixteen tissues analysed, it is expressed only in testis . isoform 3'race. <dig> contains a suboptimal agtaaa poly signal  <dig> nucleotides upstream of the cleavage site, in the position where the majority of poly signals are located  <cit> . 3'race. <dig> isoform does not contain a detectable polyadenylation signal, but an a-rich element , similar to the element found in papolg gene  <cit> , that is also lacking any poly signal variant, is located  <dig> nucleotides upstream of polyadenylation site. this suggests that in addition to alternative splicing, the processing of the nppa-as transcript might be regulated also at the level of polyadenylation.

primary sequence of nppa-as is not evolutionarily conserved
to address the evolutionary conservation of nppa-as, we first asked whether nppa gene in mouse is associated with similar natural antisense transcript. two ests  at the nppa locus originate from the opposite strand and therefore may represent nppa-as in mouse. these ests are isolated from the brain of the mouse at embryonic day  <dig> . both ests follow the gt-ag splicing consensus, and co <dig> contains a canonical polyadenylation signal aataaa as well as a short poly tail. rt-pcr using rna isolated from mouse tissues showed weak expression of nppa-as in brain and very faint signal in liver , while the expression of nppa was present in all tissues that were tested  . exons of the mouse and human antisense transcript are not conserved at the primary structure level outside of the overlap regions with the nppa exons and are located at the different positions in the genomic sequence . however, both in mouse and in human, the antisense transcript overlaps with the intron-exon boundaries of nppa gene .

the last exon of nppa-as 3'race. <dig> isoform  contains an open reading frame  that is predicted to code for a protein of  <dig> amino acids . the multiple alignment and in silico translation demonstrate that in all organisms except human and chimpanzee, the predicted orf is interrupted by at least one frameshift and one stop codon . since the translated amino acid sequence does not contain any conserved domains and has no significant identity above 30% to any known protein, the function of the predicted protein in human and chimpanzee cannot be assessed based on the primary sequence.

positive correlation between the expression levels of intron-retained nppa and specific nppa-as isoforms
to study the correlation between the expression levels of nppa and nppa-as, we quantified the specific nppa and nppa-as isoforms using real-time pcr and commercial human multiple tissue cdna panels mtc i and ii . we focused on the nppa-as isoforms nppa-as. <dig> and  <dig>  that are complementary to the first intron and first and second exon of nppa, including intron-exon boundaries. these are the isoforms that most likely have an impact on nppa expression regulation. we detected no correlation between the expression of correctly spliced nppa and its antisense transcript , but instead observed a strong positive correlation between the expression levels of nppa-as and nppa variants with retained intron  <dig> . this result was confirmed by using an alternative set of primers detecting the same nppa-as isoforms and retained nppa intron  <dig> . such correlation further indicates a possible functional relationship between nppa-as expression and posttranscriptional regulation of nppa.

nppa-as as a modulator of expression of nppa splicing isoforms
to test the hypothesis that nppa-as has a regulatory role in the splicing of nppa mrna, we constructed expression vectors containing either nppa gene or one of the four antisense transcript isoforms with different regions of complementarity to nppa . constructs pnppa-as- <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig> and - <dig> were generated by cloning of nppa-as isoforms nppa-as. <dig> and  <dig> and3'race products 3'race. <dig> and 3'race. <dig>  respectively, into the expression vector pqm-ntag/a. generation of different constructs expressing nppa or nppa-as isoforms allows to test the effect of each antisense variant separately and eliminates the possible influence of transcriptional interference as a mechanism of antisense action.

we cotransfected nppa expression construct into the mouse embryonic fibroblast cell line nih3t <dig> in pairs with individual nppa-as constructs and quantified correctly spliced and intron-retained variants of nppa by real-time rt-pcr. mouse cell line was selected for transfection in order to eliminate the possible effect of endogenous expression of nppa and nppa-as. the expression of specific nppa-as isoforms in transfected cells was confirmed by quantitative rt-pcr . as shown in figure 4b, expression level of intron-retained nppa variant was significantly downregulated after transfection with pnppa-as- <dig> . although all constructs caused slight changes in expression levels of both spliced and intron-retained nppa, the effects did no reach statistical significance in other experiments.

to further test whether complementary sequences of nppa and nppa-as actually can form rna duplexes, we performed rt-pcr on rnase treated rna samples from cotransfections of nppa and nppa-as constructs pnppa-as- <dig> and  <dig> . in both cases, the product with the correct size from rnase-treated samples was obtained, indicating that nppa and its antisense transcript indeed form duplex rnas. pnppa-as- <dig> has complementarity only to exonic regions of nppa and can form a duplex with both spliced and unspliced nppa mrna. in the case of pnppa-as- <dig> we detected the duplex formation with the intronic region of nppa, which can occur only with unspliced pre-mrna. these results indicate that nppa and nppa-as interact at the rna level and that a specific nppa-as isoform  can modulate the proportion of intron-retained nppa.

discussion
the important regulatory role of endogenous noncoding rnas, including antisense transcripts, has been proposed based on a number of large-scale transcription profiling studies. because of the variety of functional mechanisms and lack of direct experimental support, the biological meaning of most of this noncoding transcription is still unclear. in the present study we have investigated nppa/nppa-as sense-antisense transcript pair.

several studies have addressed the question whether some fraction of antisense transcripts may in fact be artifacts of reverse transcription reaction  <cit> . to exclude such artifacts from our study, we considered only nats with two or more exons and consensus splice sequences. in addition, 3' race reactions further confirmed the strand-specificity of nppa-as by identification of two alternative polyadenylated 3' terminal exons .

nppa is a functional candidate gene for elevated blood pressure, coding for an atrial natriuretic peptide , a member of a small family of endogenous peptide hormones. it is produced primarily by atrial cardiocytes in response to increasing cardiac wall tension. association of specific nppa variants with increased anp levels as well as with lower blood pressure and reduced risk of hypertension  <cit>  strongly support the central role of nppa in the maintenance of blood pressure homeostasis. in addition, a region harbouring nppa was among the eight loci identified in the meta-analysis of blood pressure genome-wide association studies  <cit> . transcriptional regulation of nppa and maturation of anp have been studied quite extensively  and our results add further evidence to the elaborate control of nppa expression.

during the expression analysis of nppa mrna we found the strongest expression of correctly spliced nppa in heart and moderate expression in a number of human tissues, including prostate, pancreas and small intestine, for example . in addition, we observed the expression of nppa isoforms with retained introns  in several tissues . normally, anp is synthesized as a 153-amino acid preprohormone. removal of the signal peptide creates a 126-amino acid prohormone that is further cleaved to form a mature c-terminal 27-amino acid anp. in the case of nppa+intr <dig> and nppa+intr1+ <dig>  the orf that starts with the first methionine  of prepro-anp encodes only for a signal peptide region and is terminated after the frameshift caused by the intron retention. an alternative orf of intron-retained nppa isoforms, starting with the methionine met- <dig> includes the mature anp sequence, but since the peptide encoded by this putative orf does not contain a signal sequence, its proper processing and biological activity is doubtful.

the natural antisense transcript of nppa, that we named nppa-as, is widely present in human tissues and displays a complex pattern of alternative splicing . all different nppa-as splicing isoforms overlap with both exonic and intronic regions of nppa, including intron-exon boundaries . such overlap pattern raised the hypothesis that nppa-as may be involved in the regulation of nppa expression.

overlapping antisense gene pairs are preferentially co-expressed or inversely expressed in human tissues  <cit> , supporting a model of negative control by antisense rna that proposes state of balance in case of co-expression or up- or downregulation in case of inverse expression. interestingly, the expression of nppa-as was strongly correlated with the intron-retained, rather than correctly spliced form of nppa , indicating that it may play a functional role in posttranscriptional regulation of nppa expression. such correlation, however, does not necessarily indicate causal relationship, because it can be affected by many factors including regulation of transcription of both nppa and nppa-as, or modulation of nppa splicing by other factors.

conservation often reflects functional significance of a nucleotide sequence. among sense-antisense pairs, less than 7% are found to be conserved between human and mouse  <cit> . this may indicate that antisense transcripts are mostly species-specific, or alternatively, that the process of transcription, secondary structure or organization of the transcript rather than the primary sequence is functionally important. among conserved sense-antisense pairs, about one third have identical expression pattern in mouse and human  <cit> . we found that expression profile in mouse and human is different for both nppa and nppa-as . in mouse, nppa is strongly expressed in some tissues  where human nppa is expressed weakly. we did not detect any alternatively spliced or intron-retained nppa forms in mouse. in case of nppa-as, we found that neither the primary structure nor the expression pattern is conserved between mouse and human: in human it is expressed in all tissues examined, while in mouse the expression was observed only in brain . however, both mouse and human antisense transcripts overlap with the exon-intron boundaries of nppa , implying that such genomic arrangement might be functionally significant.

although many antisense transcripts overlap with the intron-exon boundaries of the sense mrna, the effect of endogenous antisense transcripts as splicing regulators is studied in detail only in a few cases  <cit> . modulation of mrna splicing by exogenous antisense oligonucleotides has gained more attention and its therapeutic potential has been established in clinical trials involving patients with duchenne's muscular dystrophy  <cit> . much less is known about the role of endogenous antisense rnas in regulation of splicing or stability of different mrna isoforms. the complementarity of nppa and its antisense exons suggests that if nppa-as has a function in regulation of nppa, it depends on the mechanisms that involve the interactions at the rna level. our results show  that at least one nppa-as isoform can modulate the ratio of unspliced and spliced nppa variants, by decreasing the levels of intron-retained nppa form. since we were using minigene expression system, we excluded the effects of such possible regulatory mechanisms like transcriptional interference and heterochromatin formation  <cit> . currently we do not know what is the exact mechanism of intron-retained nppa downregulation, but it is possible that the formation of the duplex rna due to the complementary regions can lead to post-transcriptional regulation via different mechanisms like rna masking , rna editing or rna interference  <cit> . although the role of rna interference in nat-mediated regulation in mammals has been controversial, watanabe et al.  <cit>  identified seventeen loci in mouse where sirnas arose from interaction of sense-antisense transcripts of the same locus. considering the large number of nats in mammals, the real extent of sirna biogenesis via endogenous sense-antisense rna interaction in mammalian cells remains still unknown. it is also possible that since antisense transcription extends through entire nppa locus and into the promoter region, the mechanisms like transcriptional interference and modulation of nppa promoter elements can occur and affect the expression of nppa independently.

although the biological role of nppa antisense transcription needs further investigation, the regulatory role of nppa in both adult cardiovascular system and in heart development during embryogenesis  <cit>  suggest that nppa-as may be involved in fine-tuning of nppa expression during embryonic development or in response to specific stimulus.

CONCLUSIONS
we have identified the natural antisense transcripts of human blood pressure candidate genes and provide a detailed characterization of an antisense transcript associated with the nppa gene. our data support the biological significance of nppa-as by demonstrating that it  is widely expressed as a collection of canonically spliced isoforms,  can directly interact with nppa at the rna level and  is able to influence the levels of intron-retained nppa variants.

