BACKGROUND
common bean  is one of the oldest cultivated crops in the americas and is the most important grain legume for human consumption with production more than double that of the second most important grain legume, chickpea   <cit> . common bean was domesticated in the americas by indigenous people during pre-colombian times. archeological data suggest that bean was independently domesticated in different regions of the americas including, the andean region of south america  <cit> , argentina  <cit> , and mexico  <cit> . the oldest domesticated beans were found at archeological sites in each of these regions between  <dig> and  <dig> b.p.  <cit>  changes in bean plant phenotype as a result of domestication include but are not limited to growth habit, seed size, seed retention, and maturity <cit> . however, the molecular events that underlie these differences in agronomic traits have not been elucidated.

original classification of common bean germplasm was performed by singh et al.  <cit>  into two primary centers of domestication ; namely middle american from central and north america and andean from south america. primary cods were further divided into races based on geographic origin and genetic lineage. the andean cod was subdivided into three races: nueva granada , peruvian , and chilean . the commercial market classes that represent race nueva granada in the usa, include light red kidney, dark red kidney, white kidney, and cranberry beans. andean beans such as calima, azufrado, sugar bean, and other mottled types are also widely grown in africa and the caribbean. beans from the middle american cod were domesticated in west-central mexico  <cit>  and include durango , jalisco , and mesoamerican  races. market classes grown in the us that typify race durango include pinto, great northern, small red, and pink bean. navy, small white, and black beans represent the mesoamerica landrace. the organization of common bean into cod and races is depicted in figure  <dig> 

current tools used to characterize genetic diversity within common bean include plant morphology  <cit> , seed protein allozymes  <cit> , random amplified polymorphic dna <cit> , restriction fragment length polymorphisms  <cit> , dna sequence analysis  <cit> , chloroplast dna  <cit> , and microsatellite markers  <cit> . while effective for evaluating genetic diversity of parent plants, these techniques are of limited use in breeding programs focused on crop improvement. methods that can assess potential differences in biological function among cultivars on a genome wide basis have become available in high-throughput and low-cost formats. these 'omics' platforms provide an unprecedented opportunity to ultimately identify the underlying molecular mechanisms that account for traits of agronomic and nutritional importance.

the research presented herein utilized three 'omics' platforms  to determine whether beans from middle american and andean cod differ in their patterns of gene transcription, protein expression, and/or small molecule synthesis and metabolism. to our knowledge, this is the first report that shows differences in gene transcription, protein expression, and metabolite profiles between beans from two cod using 'omics' techniques. moreover the metabolomic approach was used to evaluate whether common bean cultivars within the same gene pool, referred to as a market class, differ in their profile of metabolites. these proof-in-principle experiments herald significant opportunities for utilizing 'omic' technologies in the rapid identification of traits with agronomic and nutritional importance that could serve to guide common bean breeding programs.

RESULTS
three 'omics' platforms to distinguish common bean cod
experiments were conducted to determine whether or not the three 'omics' technology platforms  would be capable of distinguishing dry bean cultivars from each of the two cod. the approach used was sequential; transcriptomics experiments were performed first, followed by proteomics, and then metabolomics, with increasing complexity of the experimental design as work progressed to each new platform. the white kidney bean and navy bean market classes representing the andean and middle american gene pools were selected as representative of the respective cod. furthermore, both market classes are commercially important, and had a white pigmented seed coat thus limiting the likelihood of identifying qualitative differences between cod that were due solely to synthesis of different pigments.

transcript profiling
developing seeds from the middle american cod navy bean cultivar norstar and the andean cod white kidney bean cultivar silver cloud were evaluated for differential expression of transcripts. initially an affymetrix soybean microarray was used for this purpose. however, using the unmodified array, we found that the high binding specificity of affymetrix microarrays, resulted in a hybridization efficiency of p. vulgaris cdna onto the soybean microarray  that was too low for expression analysis. although it has been recently reported that the use of masking biased probes overcomes this limitation  <cit> , a spotted cdna microarray for soybean was selected as an alternative approach because of their successful use in cross-species studies  <cit> . this cdna soybean microarray, available through the keck center for comparative and functional genomics at the university of illinois, has been previously described  <cit> . principal component  analysis showed that navy and white kidney gene expression profiles differed when seeds were collected  <dig> wk after anthesis . the clones represented on the microarray were previously annotated as described by vodkin et al.  <cit>  and supplied with the microarray. based upon that annotation,  <dig> clones were identified as differentially expressed between white kidney and navy at  <dig> wk after anthesis. the clones were selected by one-way anova  and a fold change cutoff in expression of  <dig> . the majority of these clones  were up-regulated in white kidney bean and the remaining  <dig> were up-regulated in navy bean. of these  <dig> differentially expressed clones,  <dig> were up-regulated in white kidney by at least 5-fold change and only  <dig> clone was up-regulated in navy by at least 5-fold change. the clones differentially expressed by 5-fold change were annotated and displayed in table  <dig>  the majority of clones up-regulated by 5-fold change in white kidney have a role in transcription, translation, and protein synthesis/modification based on the annotations provided with the microarray. examples of up-regulated white kidney clones include: ribosomal proteins and ubiquitin. the only clone up-regulated in navy has homology to a ripening induced protein in  <dig> wk old seeds, there were  <dig> clones that were differentially expressed between the two beans by greater than 2-fold change . three clones were up-regulated in white kidney,  <dig> of which was annotated as nucleoside diphosphate kinase. ten clones were up-regulated in navy bean, but only  <dig> were identified in the annotation and are involved in metabolism. the observation that fewer genes were expressed at  <dig> wk old compared to  <dig> wk old likely reflects the reduced metabolism in the developing seed as it approached physiological maturity.

a list of annotated genes differentially expressed  by an average ratio > 5-fold change.

b function abbreviations: cb-calcium ion binding, cs-cellular structure, def-defense, en-energy, oth-other, pm-protein modification, txn-transcription, tln-translation, tln-rc-translation-ribosomal component, unk-unknown, met-metabolism.

c value under  <dig>  indicates greater than 5-fold expression in navy bean compared to white kidney bean 

alist of annotated genes differentially expressed  by an average ratio > 2-fold change.

bvalue <  <dig>  indicates > 2-fold expression in navy bean compared to white kidney bean .

proteomic profiling
based on the transcript profiling data reported in the previous section, it was predicted that the profile of expressed protein would differ between cultivars representative of cod. protein expression was assessed using a two-dimensional gel system instead of an lc-ms platform, so that a visual picture of similarities and differences in types and amounts of proteins expressed between cod could be obtained. moreover, rather than limiting the analysis to one cultivar from each market class-cod category, three cultivars from each genepool were evaluated. the list of cultivars studied can be found in the materials and methods section. master gels of the two dry bean germplasm  were created for purposes of exploratory analysis. close visual inspection showed distinct differences in both the absolute number of proteins as well as differences in concentration  between cod. with the false discovery rate set at zero,  <dig> spots were selected from the master gel using the pdquest software.

data from the three cultivars evaluated were combined and subjected to pc analysis . a heat map of spot densities showed visual differences in up- and down-regulated proteins when comparing white kidney bean and navy bean germplasm . one-way anova analysis showed that  <dig> proteins were statistically different between the two cod  with a fold change greater than  <dig>  of the  <dig> proteins,  <dig> proteins were up-regulated in white kidney bean and  <dig> proteins were up-regulated in navy bean.

metabolomic fingerprinting
while the results of proteomic analyses were consistent with genetic differences between cultivars in each cod, these findings do not address the nature of these differences. it can be argued that the majority of the proteins detected participate in the synthesis, transformation, and degradation of both primary and secondary metabolites that play a role in plant architecture, reproduction, and defense against biotic and abiotic stresses  <cit> . the focus of the metabolomic analyses reported herein was on the small molecules having a mass less than  <dig> daltons. our objective was to determine if these small molecule profiles differed between andean and middle american beans. the same market classes and cultivars evaluated in the proteomics experiments were metabolically fingerprinted. to perform unbiased metabolomic analyses, m/z values from 50- <dig> were monitored using uplc-esi-ms revealing  <dig> possible small molecules in positive mode. a heat map of differences in intensity of the small molecules between the cultivars from each cod is shown in figure  <dig> where each column in figure  <dig> corresponds to a specific cultivar. one-way anova results showed that  <dig> small molecules corresponding to 7% of the total number of features detected were a minimum of  <dig> fold higher in andean beans ;  <dig> small molecules, also approximately 7% of the total number of features detected, were  <dig> fold higher in middle american beans .

cultivated varieties distinguished by metabolomic fingerprinting
metabolomic fingerprinting was also utilized to assess differences in small molecule profiles among bean cultivars within market classes. clear metabolite clustering of the cultivars within the two germplasms was observed using pc analysis and hierarchal clustering. as shown in figure 5a, the bean cultivars were separated along pc  <dig> and pc  <dig>  while pc  <dig> separated by cod. pc  <dig> explained  <dig> % of the variation while pc <dig> and pc <dig> explained an additional  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the total variation among cultivars, respectively. hierarchal clustering using euclidian distances was used to distinguish among cultivars and between cod. the resulting dendrogram shows clustering of cultivars within cod  which mimics clustering seen in the proteomics analysis. one-way anova analysis of the  <dig> cultivated varieties grouped by market class showed  <dig> features were statistically different  with a fold change of at least  <dig> between the navy bean and white kidney market classes. the  <dig> features were further analyzed to determine which could differentiate cultivars within the market classes. in this case,  <dig> features were found to be statistically different  within the white kidney bean cultivars; whereas,  <dig> features were found to be statistically different  between the three navy bean cultivars.

discussion
the elucidation of molecular differences underlying traits that permit the division of common bean germplasm into distinct centers of domestication has been largely unexplored by high-throughput 'omic' technologies. a triad of 'omic' technologies: transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics, were used herein to determine whether differences in gene transcription, protein expression, or synthesis/metabolism of small molecules were of sufficient magnitude to distinguish among bean cultivars within and between two cod . as shown in figure 2b, 3c, and 5a, distinct differences were observed among cultivars and between the two cod in all three 'omics' signatures.

the transcript profiling experiments revealed that chronological age of the seed from anthesis has a significant impact on the number of differentially expressed genes and the functions  associated with those genes. however, examination of the gene lists in table  <dig> failed to provide a clear picture of the physiological distinctions between cod. one limitation to consider is that distinct p. vulgaris genes may exist without a soybean homologue to utilize during hybridization and thus a cross-species microarray may exclude unique dry bean transcripts. reciprocally, the chance of false positives was increased in the cross-species use of the cdna spotted arrays because of reduced hybridization stringency. the drawbacks associated with using a soybean array for common bean transcriptomics stem from reduced synteny between p. vulgaris and g. max. the most recent common ancestor for p. vulgaris and g. max was  <dig> ma. at some time point following divergence, diploidization of the g. max genome occurred making its chromosome number 2n =  <dig> compared to 2n =  <dig> of p. vulgaris  <cit> . genomic rearrangement including translocation or gene loss during diploidization of the soybean leads to reduced synteny between the two species and must be considered when attempting to determine chromosome overlap between the soybean and the common bean for genetic mapping. the use of the affymetrix array platform as reported in yang et al.  <cit>  may serve to overcome some of the noted limitations, and it is worthwhile to note that the whole-genome sequence of common bean project and the ibero-american whole genome sequencing project include both cod  <cit> . with the entire common bean genome sequenced, a complete dry bean microarray can be synthesized and annotated to advance the transcriptomics platform challenges in gene list interpretation also have been encountered using other organisms and have led to the development of alternative approaches to data analysis methods such as gene set enrichment analysis   <cit> . gsea permits the investigator to use existing knowledge to test specific hypotheses about differences in pathways and networks of gene expression between two or more treatment conditions. efforts to incorporate gsea for market class stratification were limited by cross-species hybridization and the lack of dry bean and soybean gene lists. consequently, no useful data was gained. this situation underscores the importance of current efforts to sequence the phaseolus genome. when that work is completed, it will be possible to generate hypotheses for additional testing based on observations about plant morphology  <cit>  or seed protein allozymes  <cit>  that have been used to characterize genetic diversity within common bean. in addition, as work on metabolomic analyses continues and new compound libraries are constructed, metabolomic data such as that shown in figure  <dig> and  <dig> will identify specific small molecules that distinguish cultivars within each cod and within a market class-cod grouping. that information will permit future hypothesis generation about the biosynthetic pathways that are induced or repressed to account for differences in metabolite profiles. since differences in small molecule biosynthesis are likely to result not only from differences in gene transcription but also arise from differences in the translation of transcripts and post translational modifications of proteins, the potential contributions of proteomic analyses such as those shown in figure  <dig> are clear. for future analyses, we recommend that an hplc or uplc separation approach be employed rather than 2dge to interrogate the phaseolus proteome because of the speed, throughput, and relative cost of the lc-based platform.

as one considers quantitative differences among the three 'omics' signatures that distinguished between the andean and middle american cod, it is readily apparent that marked differences exist in the number of features that distinguish between cod when tallying results across platforms. however we caution the reader that the purpose of this experimental approach was primarily the qualitative evaluation of distinguishing differences in transcript, protein, and/or metabolite expression between cod. while the next generation of experiments would be well served to use seeds matched for physiological age across all omics platforms, these initial experiments were performed using available mature seed with the exception of the initial work on transcript expression which required embryos to be harvested in the field and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.

many factors other than the biology of the system could account, at least in part, for the numeric differences observed. for example, the use of the soy-array to identify differentially expressed transcripts or the use of only one of an almost endless number of assay conditions that have been developed for proteomic or metabolomic analyses are likely to make the numeric differences noted unreliable. nonetheless, the magnitude of the observed differences indicates the potential merit of these approaches as a fertile source of information for plant breeders.

overall, the 'omics' chosen for a particular set of experiments should depend on the question being asked. while considerable information can be gleaned from each 'platform, the biological activity assessed is interactive, and accordingly, the greatest insights are likely to emerge through the integration of complimentary data sets. transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics are just three of these  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that two genetically diverse dry bean germplasm can be easily differentiated using a suite of three 'tools . using this panel of techniques we have provided a glimpse into a signature which can be used to determine cod. furthermore, known genetic distances among cultivars and between cod were validated using proteomics and metabolomics. 'omic' signatures unique to p. vulgaris germplasm may be useful to assess complex traits or reactions to biotic and abiotic stress and to incorporate genetic diversity in breeding efforts. this work compliments other techniques currently employed by breeders to assess dry bean genetic diversity. as signatures are further developed in future work, they have the potential to guide those engaged in crop improvement for selecting traits of agronomic and nutritional importance.

