BACKGROUND
microbial fuel cells  are devices that exploit microorganisms to generate electric power from organic matters and potentially applicable to wastewater treatment and energy recovery from organic wastes  <cit> . recent technical developments of mfc processes are noteworthy, and the power output of mfc has been rapidly increasing in recent several years  <cit> . some workers consider that mfcs will be practically applied in the near future, but further studies, such as stability improvements and scale-up evaluations, are necessary for that.

a conventional mfc reactor is comprised of two chambers, the anode and cathode chambers  <cit> . in the anode chamber, organic matter is oxidized to carbon dioxide by microorganisms under anaerobic conditions, reducing equivalents are discharged to the anode as electrons, and these electrons are transferred to the cathode. protons are simultaneously generated in the anode chamber, passively transferred to the cathode chamber through a membrane and react with oxygen molecules on the cathode electrode to form water molecules. all these steps influence the total efficiency  of a mfc process, and each of these steps has been a subject for technical improvement. for example, the membrane has been optimized to achieve efficient proton transfer  <cit>  and the cathode was modified to accelerate the proton-reducing reaction  <cit> .

it has been suggested that in addition to process optimization, the understanding of ecology and physiology of electricity-generating microorganisms  is necessary for further improvement and reliable operation of mfcs. in order to identify what organisms are involved in electricity generation, microbial communities established in anode chambers have been analyzed by molecular ecological approaches  <cit> . although metal-reducing bacteria, such as geobacter  <cit>  and shewanella  <cit> , have been considered as model egms, they have not always been detected in mfcs, and electrogenic populations seem to be more diverse than previously thought  <cit> . physiological studies aim to reveal how these microorganisms transfer electrons to anodes. recent studies have suggested that geobacter and shewanella use electrically conductive extracellular filaments  for transferring electrons to solid electron acceptors, such as graphite anodes  <cit> . however, it is unclear whether or not other egms occurring in mfcs also use nanowires. many important questions remain unanswered concerning microbiology of electricity generation .

in this study, electrogenic communities established in a cellulose-fed mfc were analyzed. cellulose was selected as a substrate, because it is one of the major constituents of waste biomass. previous studies have analyzed cellulolytic methanogenic communities in anaerobic digesters  <cit> ; but so far only a few studies have examined cellulolytic electrogenic communities  <cit> . our analysis here emphasizes the morphological characterization and phylogenetic identification of microorganisms in biofilms established on graphite anodes, which allowed us to suggest a bacterial lineage important for electricity generation.

RESULTS
electricity generation from cellulose
an h-type two-chamber mfc similar to those previously reported  <cit>  was constructed, and its performance was evaluated using geobacter sulfurreducens  <cit>  as a model egm. it was demonstrated that the reactor performance was equivalent to those previously  <cit> .

the anode chamber of the mfc was inoculated with the rice paddy field soil and supplemented with cellulose. current outputs of approximately  <dig>  ma were immediately detected , while no current was observed in the control mfc  . during the initial  <dig> days, acid fermentation proceeded in the anode chamber, resulting in the accumulation of acetate and propionate and a drop in the current. after the ph was adjusted to  <dig> by adding a na2co <dig> solution, methane was actively produced .

when the cation-exchange membrane cracked and the anode medium leaked into the cathode chamber due to a high gas pressure in the anode chamber, the biofilm-harbouring anode was transferred to a new anode chamber containing fresh medium. in these phases of subcultures , the mfc system also produced a current of  <dig>  ma to  <dig>  ma , while methane production was slower than that in phase i. hydrogen was not detected . production rates of electron , methane, hydrogen and volatile fatty acids  in these phases are summarized in table  <dig>  acetate was produced and accumulated constantly, while only small amounts of the other vfas were produced. short-chain alcohols  were not detected throughout the experiment. the ph in the anode chamber gradually dropped and was occasionally adjusted to  <dig> by adding a na2co <dig> solution . electric current was tightly linked to ph fluctuations. as shown in table  <dig>  the performance of the mfc became stable in phases iv and v, indicating that the enrichment of microbial populations was accomplished in these phases. when potassium ferricyanide was added to the cathode chamber , the electric current was increased to approximately  <dig>  ma. the methane-production rate decreased from  <dig>  mmol day- <dig> to  <dig>  mmol day- <dig> during this period . the coulombic efficiency was not calculated, since the rate of cellulose degradation could not be accurately determined.

resazurin and cysteine may act as electron shuttles and substrates, respectively. when resazurin was omitted from the anode medium, the same level of current was generated , suggesting that other electron-transfer mechanisms existed in our mfc. the amount of cysteine added was less than one tenth than that of cellulose. considering the results of a previous study  <cit>  where cysteine was shown to be the sole carbon source for electricity generation, it is likely that cysteine was rapidly depleted and did not largely affect methane and electricity production in latter days of each phase. in fact, cysteine was depleted within  <dig> days after commencing a new phase of enrichment culture .

a short-chain alcohols  were not detected throughout the experiment.

b data obtained in these days were used for calculation.

c acetate was consumed.

d ferricyanide was added to the cathode chamber.

biofilm morphology
in phases ii to v, most of the microorganisms adhered onto the anodes and formed biofilms. the culture media in the anode chamber became a transparent brown color, and cell concentrations were below  <dig> cells ml- <dig> . in order to examine the morphology of anode biofilms, biofilm samples were taken on day  <dig>  and subjected to field emission-scanning electron microscopy .

electron micrographs revealed unique biofilm structures and cell shapes . photos show that biofilms were sparsely distributed on the graphite fibers  along with highly complicated structures comprised of morphologically different cells and cellulose fibers . many rod-shaped cells had long filamentous appendages  that, as seen at the edge of the biofilm , bridged between microbial cells and the electrodes. in other cases, cells themselves were filamentous and occasionally intertwined with each other . rods with filamentous appendages seemed to be more abundant than filamentous cells.

magnified electron micrographs revealed the presence of large amounts of thin, thread-like appendages  that interconnected microbial cells and thick filamentous appendages . we also observed g. sulfurreducens pca cells adhering onto the anode electrodes  and found that they had an abundance of thin network filaments  that were somewhat thicker than the thin thread-like appendages in the soil-derived biofilms. these observations revealed that a variety of filamentous structures were present in the anode biofilms.

phylogenetic composition
the unique morphology of the anode biofilm prompted us to identify what organisms constituted these biofilms. for this purpose, we constructed 16s rrna gene clone libraries for the phases i to v communities, and compared them to each other. as described in previous papers, 16s rrna gene clone library analyses suffer from the biases associated with pcr amplification  <cit> . to obviate this limitation as much as possible, we selected the universal pcr primer set that has been reliably used in previous studies , and pcr cycles were minimized. in addition, we constructed clone libraries for a microbial community in the soil and those in the mfc in the different phases and compared phylotypes in these libraries, allowing us to identify sequences that specifically occurred in one library.

the rarefaction-curve analysis  showed that the biofilm communities were much less diverse than the soil community; the biofilm libraries seemed to be comprised of  <dig> to  <dig> different phylotypes. this analysis indicates that the biofilm libraries covered most organisms in the anode biofilms.

results of the sequence analysis are summarized in table  <dig> and show the phylogenetic affiliations of the major phylotypes . information regarding the minor phylotypes  is provided upon request to the authors. it was shown that most clones were affiliated with the domain bacteria, while others were affiliated with the archaea . no sequences of the eukarya were obtained. large portions  of the biofilm clones were categorized into the major phylotypes . the libraries for biofilms in the functionally stable phases  were comprised of  <dig> or  <dig> major phylotypes ; among them,  <dig> clostridiales , chloroflexi , rhizobiales  and euryarchaeota  were stably present in these libraries. mfc- <dig> increased in the phase-v library, while mfc- <dig> decreased. the stably present phylotypes may have represented important populations in these phases of mfc.

a the major phylotype was defined as a phylotype containing more than  <dig> clones.

b names for the libraries correspond to the subculture phases of mfc.

c for a list of other phylotypes , refer to the supplementary materials that may be found in the website .

d ratio in number of clones affiliated with the major phylotypes to the total clones.

fluorescence in-situ hybridization 
among the stably present phylotypes, mfc- <dig> is affiliated with chloroflexi subphylum i that is comprised of filamentous microorganisms present in anaerobic digesters  <cit> , whereas mfc- <dig> is affiliated with rhizobiales that include prosthecate bacteria  known to possess filamentous appendages called 'prosthecae'  <cit> . in order to investigate the cell morphologies of bacteria represented by these phylotypes, we carried out fish with specific oligonucleotide probes hypho <dig>  <cit>  and gnsb <dig>  <cit> . the nucleotide sequence of probe hypho <dig> was 100% matched with mfc- <dig>  and the other phylotypes obtained in the present study had more than two mismatches. gnsb <dig> was 100% matched with phylotypes affiliated with chloroflexi subphylum i, among which mfc- <dig> was the only phylotype abundantly obtained; non-chloroflexi subphylum i phylotypes had more than two mismatches. as shown in panel d in fig.  <dig>  the fish result shows that gnsb <dig> labelled filamentous cells. on the other hand, hypho <dig> labelled rod-shaped cells , and nano orange staining showed that some of these cells had filamentous appendages . cells with filamentous appendages were relatively few, probably because filamentous cells were difficult to be detached from the biofilm. nevertheless, it was shown that hypho1241-labeled cells were abundantly present .

discussion
the present study investigated the electrogenic biofilm communities established in the anode chamber of a cellulose-fed mfc. in our mfc system, methane was produced along with current . as  <dig> moles of electrons are used to biologically produce one mole of methane from carbon dioxide, it is estimated that methane production and electricity generation nearly equally contributed to the terminal electron-accepting reaction in the stable enrichments . when the cathode was supplemented with ferricyanide , however, the current was increased to  <dig>  ma, while the methane-production rate decreased. in addition, when the external resistor was changed to  <dig> Ω, the current was increased to over  <dig>  ma . these results indicate that the electricity generation was suppressed by instrumental limitations of the mfc system. we therefore conclude that electricity generation is superior to methane production in the terminal electron-accepting reaction coupled to cellulose oxidation. from the metabolite analysis, acetate was considered to be one of the major intermediate metabolites of cellulose degradation and possibly used to generate electricity.

the fe-sem observation revealed three distinctive morphological features of biofilm organisms in the cellulose-fed mfc . first, many cells were straight filaments, while some were spiral. second, many rod-shaped cells had thick filamentous appendages. third, filamentous cells and thick filamentous appendages were interconnected to each other via thin filaments. several previous studies have reported sem pictures of biofilms on anodes  <cit> , while no reports have documented the presence of filamentous cell structures in these biofilms. several factors can be considered to explain this difference. first, there were differences in the mfc operational conditions, including organic substrates, inorganic ingredients and seed inocula. in addition, our high-resolution fe-sem may have facilitated the detection of thin filaments of the biofilm microorganisms, including the network filaments of geobacter . recent studies have suggested that metal-reducing bacteria, such as geobacter and shewanella species, utilize electrically conductive nanowires to discharge electrons to extracellular electron acceptors  <cit> . interestingly, we found that the naturally occurring electrogenic biofilm  produced an abundance of filaments that connected the microbial cells to the electrode and interconnected to each other. there have been several reports presenting microscopic observations of microbial communities engaged in methanogenic cellulose degradation  <cit> ; however, filamentous structures were not abundant in these communities. in addition, methanogenic biofilms enriched on graphite fibers from the same soil did not include filamentous appendages . from these data, we postulate that the filamentous structures should be important for electron transfer to the anode, although other mechanisms, such as the use of electron shuttles  <cit> , should also be taken into account.

environmental rrna gene sequences have been used to infer properties and ecological roles of organisms that they represent  <cit> , although this type of analysis may only be possible if some common properties are known for isolated organisms affiliated with the same phylogenetic group. this study attempted to deduce ecological roles of microorganisms represented by the major phylotypes in the stable enrichment phases . two major phylotypes, mfc- <dig> and mfc- <dig>  were affiliated with the order clostridiales and closely related to the genera clostridium  <cit>  and propionispora  <cit> , respectively. these genera have been known to include anaerobic fermentative organisms that degrade complex  and simple  carbohydrates. since the other major phylotypes were not related to cellulolytic anaerobes, we deduce that these clostridia were involved in cellulose degradation. phylotype mfc- <dig> was affiliated with chloroflexi subphylum i  <cit> . organisms affiliated with this subphylum are known to be filamentous organisms and ferment sugars  <cit> . cell morphology of this group of organisms in the mfc was confirmed by the fish analysis . mfc- <dig> and mfc- <dig> were affiliated with the orders bacteroidales and spirochaetales, respectively. organisms in these groups have commonly been detected in anaerobic digesters . although the ecological roles of these organisms in the anaerobic digestion are unclear, they are considered to ferment small carbohydrates and amino acids  <cit> . in addition, mfc- <dig> should have represented hydrogenotrophic methanogens.

mfc- <dig> was affiliated with the order rhizobiales. the database search indicated that it was closely related to strain rr <dig>  a bacterium isolated from the roots of rice plants . in addition, mfc- <dig> was also related to strains belonging to rhizobiaceae and hyphomicrobiaceae. a common feature of these organisms is that they are facultatively aerobic heterotrophs  <cit> , suggesting that they have respiratory electron-transport chains. another feature shared by many strains in this group is that they possess one or several long cylindrical appendages called 'prosthecae'  <cit> . prosthecae are sticky filaments that play important roles when prosthecate bacteria adhere onto solid surfaces  <cit> . the prosthecae-like appendages of mfc- <dig> bacteria were shown in the fish analysis . the fish data also confirmed that mfc- <dig> bacteria were abundantly present in the anode biofilms. it is also noteworthy that bacteria belonging to the rhizobiaceae are known to have efficient uptake hydrogenases that allow them to recycle hydrogen generated in the nitrogen fixation process within legume nodules  <cit> . most importantly, different from the other major phylotypes obtained in the present study, rhizobiales sequences have not been found in cellulolytic methanogenic communities in anaerobic digesters  <cit> . we have conducted the phylogenetic analysis of a biofilm community attaching onto graphite fibers that was enriched from the same paddy field soil and engaged only in methanogenic cellulose degradation; in that analysis, no rhizobiales phylotype was recovered . from these analyses, we suggest that mfc- <dig> abundantly occurred in the anode biofilm in response to electricity generation and may have been involved in the electricity generation. in order to investigate their activities and physiology, they should be isolated for pure-culture studies. in addition, we are also interested in investigating properties  and the roles of thick and thin filaments abundantly present in the anode biofilm.

CONCLUSIONS
in a mfc reactor, a microbial community enriched from rice paddy soil generated electricity of up to  <dig>  ma by utilizing cellulose as the energy source. microbiological analyses revealed that rhizobiales bacteria with filamentous appendages constituted the major population in the anode biofilm. comparative analyses based on available physiological information of closely related bacterial isolates suggest that they were possibly involved in the electricity generation. isolation of these rhizobiales bacteria will deepen our understanding of how microbes generate electricity from cellulose.

