BACKGROUND
evolutionary change in a population can be very fast, with measurable genetic change occurring over only a few generations  <cit> . however, the ability of animals to evolve to keep pace with rapid climate change remains enigmatic  <cit> . there are a number of factors that might constrain or impede such rapid adaptation. firstly, low genetic diversity, where small or homogeneous populations lack the genetic "raw material" for adaptation is commonly assumed to constrain adaptation  <cit> . secondly, ongoing gene flow is assumed to strongly constrain adaptation, where local adaptations, especially those arising in "sink" demes, are swamped by alleles from interbreeding  demes adapted to other environments  <cit> . various quantitative genetic models have attempted to predict the constraints caused by gene flow under migration - selection balance  <cit>  but clearly more empirical tests are needed. thirdly, genetic drift may strongly constrain adaptive evolution, where small populations suffer from maladaptive genetic differentiation due to influence from random processes  <cit> . lastly, there may be costs to adaptation, where agonistic pleiotropy  <cit>  or developmental integration  <cit>  limits adaptation of any given trait because of its interaction with other traits during development.

demonstrating that natural populations have adapted to climate change or novel habitats is not an easy task  <cit> . this will require data that either shows, or from which it can be inferred, that traits under study have undergone selection. also, this selection process should be linked, either directly or indirectly, via known environment and organism interaction mechanisms, to climate change or novel habitat characteristics. finally, the change in trait values has to be demonstrated to have a genetic basis that is adaptive. a recent review concluded that even though the evidence for climate- and habitat change-driven phenotypic responses in wild populations is indisputable, it is less clear what underlying mechanisms are causing these changes  <cit> . indeed, many responses perceived as adaptations to changing environmental conditions could be environmental-induced plasticity. also, plasticity itself may evolve. lande   <cit>  suggested that adaptation actually may occur in two phases, the first being rapid evolution of increased plasticity in the new environment allowing the mean phenotype to quickly approach the new optimum. this first phase is then followed by a slower genetic assimilation.

in this study, we examined the ability of a freshwater fish to adapt to conditions relevant to climate change under circumstances that, theoretically, should limit adaptation. in the early 1880s, a man-made connection to the upper reaches of the river gudbrandsdalslågen, norway, allowed grayling  to colonize the mountain lake lesjaskogsvatnet  <cit>  . later dam constructions severely reduced this opportunity for further invasions of grayling, but grayling from lesjaskogsvatnet may disperse back to the river system. the exact number of founders is unknown, but it is likely to have been a limited number due to the poor grayling habitats in the upper reaches of the river. furthermore, analyses of microsatellite dna have revealed that the source population possesses very low levels of neutral genetic variation  <cit> . when grayling colonize new lake/river systems, their homing behaviour allows rapid structuring into reproductively more or less isolated demes  <cit> . the lesjaskogsvatnet population is currently divided into ca.  <dig> demes spawning in different tributaries  <cit> . microsatellite data from lesjaskogsvatnet shows significant differentiation among many of the grayling demes in the lake with a significant isolation by distance population structure  <cit> , but the population structure is unstable with the underlying isolation by distance structure in some years being swamped by gene flow  <cit> . all demes spawning in the tributaries also show clear signatures of recent bottlenecks, but based on the available evidence it is not clear if this is a signal from the original invasion of the lake or more recent independent events  <cit> .

lesjaskogsvatnet is an elongated lake and consists of a shady and a sunny side because of high surrounding mountains. demes spawning in sunny-side tributaries spawn up to four weeks earlier and their eggs and larvae have a considerably higher development temperature as water temperatures rise much faster than in shady side tributaries , thus providing natural replicates of "warm"  and "cold"  tributaries . the young grayling stay in the tributaries for 2- <dig> months , after which they mix with other demes within the lake . once in the lake, the juveniles from both warm and cold demes will compete over the same food resources striving to access enough food to build up sufficient resources for surviving their first 6- <dig> month winter, when feeding opportunities are strongly reduced. for juvenile freshwater fish in temperate areas, large body size, and hence larger energy reserves has repeatedly been shown to increase accession of food and winter survival  <cit> . being born weeks later than warm-deme embryos, cold-deme embryos face a tremendous time-constraint as they have shorter time available for attaining a certain size and/or energy level to make it through the first winter. on top of that, the cold-deme embryos need to grow and develop faster under colder conditions .

 <dig> june- <dig> july 

 <dig> df =  <dig>  for all tests. one-way anova.

to test for genetic differentiation among demes in developmental traits, we conducted a common-garden experiment using embryos and larvae from two cold and two warm demes  exposed to 8°c and 12°c water temperature . this setup allows for testing for genetic differences among demes exposed to the two temperatures, but does not explicitly test for local adaptation. we chose 8°c as the common-garden temperature since embryos from all demes would experience this temperature in nature soon after fertilization. the 12°c treatment level was chosen to test the effect of a high incubation temperature within a potential range that may result from global warming. since growth rate in fishes, as measured in length or mass, represents primarily growth in the musculoskeletal system  <cit> , and previous studies have reported physiological or performance trade-offs in growth-rate evolved populations  <cit> , we investigated differences in musculoskeletal developmental rate evolution in more detail. we analyzed both muscle-fibre development and skeletal ossification in the four demes. the common-garden study design employed in this study allows for assessment of parallelism in divergence for pairs of demes belonging to the same temperature regime. in order to evaluate the relative role of natural selection and genetic drift to observed phenotypic differentiation, we used information about microsatellite-based fst as a measure of drift-generated genetic differentiation. these estimates were compared with the analogous trait-wise qst-estimates measuring genetic differentiation in phenotypic traits, where qst >fst suggest differentiation due to divergent selection and qst <fst suggest stabilizing selection  <cit> . by combining information on 1) degree of parallelism in trait expression between demes from same temperature group with 2) the degree of congruence between the observed and expected direction of trait differentiation and 3) pair wise qst vs fst comparisons we are able to draw inferences about signatures of local adaptation.

RESULTS
at 12°c, no embryos survived past  <dig> days post hatch, while at 8°c many embryos survived to  <dig> days post hatch .

individual growth processes
while egg diameter and dry weights were not different among demes , a comparison of mean dry weights of fertilized eggs, pre-hatch yolk and embryos , and pre-feeding larvae revealed that the cold deme embryos grew faster and absorbed yolk faster than warm deme embryos . yolk conversion efficiencies  were significantly and consistently greater in cold demes than in warm demes . notochord length  measurements from digital images of all daily samples from each deme  confirmed that size-at-age differences were found throughout larval development, replicated in both cold demes and warm demes . a generalized additive model fitting size-at-age as a function of days post fertilization  and temperature group, revealed that all demes had parallel growth trajectories  where cold-deme embryos started out as  <dig>  mm longer  at  <dig> dpf and ended up as  <dig>  mm longer after  <dig> days.

developmental trait trade-offs
in histological cross-sections of muscle made at a homologous point , we found that faster-growing cold deme individuals had a significantly larger average muscle fibre area at a given age and size  ± 2s.e.m. from generalized linear model : nl =  <dig> mm: lsmcold =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm <dig>  lsmwarm =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm2) . in contrast, rate of skeletal developmental was delayed in cold deme fish when compared with similar-sized fish from warm demes. both axial and cranial skeletal features developed faster in cold demes . hence, cold deme individuals reached a certain trait expression probability earlier than warm-deme individuals. however, in  <dig> out of  <dig> traits , the skeletal development did not "keep up" proportionately with notochord length in the cold demes .

qst vs fst
pair-wise differences in analogous fst and qst values are displayed, for three traits, in additional file  <dig>  in total, 88%  of the warm vs cold deme pair wise comparisons are consistent with divergent natural selection and 12% could not be distinguished from the pattern expected under genetic drift. for comparisons between demes within the same temperature group only 19%  of the comparisons indicated divergent selection, whereas 81% could be attributed to convergent evolution or drift. because  <dig> out of  <dig> fst values had confidence bounds that overlapped with zero, inferences on eventual convergent evolution  could not be made.

discussion
this study provides compelling evidence that individual growth- and developmental rate and efficiency can evolve over fewer than  <dig> generations under conditions widely theorized to impede local adaptation. in particular, the degree of parallelism in the direction of divergence for most of the traits investigated reveals compelling signals of adaptation-driven differentiation. cold deme individuals were shown  to consistently have a more efficient yolk-to-body-mass conversion efficiency, a higher somatic growth rate and a higher skeletal- and muscle mass developmental rate compared to warm-deme individuals. all of this is in accordance with predictions on expected direction of divergence caused by temperature differences between deme habitats. since some divergence has take place and also since this divergence is according to the predicted direction of trait evolution, we conclude they are not severely constrained or limited in their adaptation to temperature differences - even under conditions with substantial gene flow. however, we cannot rule out that they may have been constrained below what would be the optimum divergence. one should bear in mind the spatial scale for this particular study system - the demes are separated by just 2- <dig> km during the reproductive period. as a consequence, any spawning site can easily be accessed by any adult grayling individual in the lake during just one day . still, we know from previous studies that local adaptation can occur within such spatio-temporal scales  <cit> . in fact, our findings of temperature-related divergence of developmental and ontogenetic timing traits are very much in agreement with findings in other salmonid systems with recent origin. very similar to our findings, in a system very comparable to our grayling system, hendry et al.  <cit>  found that development rate was fastest for progeny of late spawning sockeye salmon  demes in lake washington. further, yolk conversion efficiency was related to natural incubation temperatures. this adaptive divergence pattern had arisen in only 9- <dig> generations, within the same lake system with demes separated by less than  <dig> km. similarly, kinnison et al  <cit>  found that early-life growth rates differed between recently  established populations of chinook salmon  in new zealand. however, for the same populations embryo development rates did not differ  <cit> . as a consequence, due to temperature differences, the emergence dates could differ by up to six weeks between rivers. hence, salmonids seem to have the potential to adapt to novel temperature regimes over fewer than  <dig> generations, even at spatial separation scales smaller than  <dig> km. but it is not always the same traits that diverge, and therefore one cannot claim that adaptation is inevitable.

the patterns of differentiation in larval developmental rate and efficiency in relation to temperature in the lesjaskogsvatnet grayling supports findings in a number of other studies; this include 1) the relationship between temperature environment and individual growth rate  <cit>  and development rate  <cit> , and 2) trade-offs between muscle growth and skeletal differentiation  <cit> . taken together these results suggest that differentiation of individual growth, metabolism and development according to local environmental temperature is likely due to local adaptation. however, we also show that there are trade-offs among several of the musculoskeletal traits studied here. rapid development of muscle comes at the cost of decreased development of functional structures. thus, the adaptation of the various traits to different environmental conditions seems constrained by phenotypic  correlations. such intrinsic constraints, which probably are very common in biological systems, will, potentially, lead to a slower evolutionary response to environmental change and it will make predictions about the direction and speed of change difficult.

temperatures in nordic countries are expected to rise at higher-than-average rates over the coming decades  <cit> , requiring nordic lake fish populations, with no opportunity to migrate, to adapt . recent studies from marine and terrestrial systems predict that the adaptive response to increase in temperature will be, firstly, that individuals will maximize growth and energy efficiency at the expense of ranges of thermal tolerance  <cit> . these studies also suggest that species at higher latitudes have broader thermal tolerance and are living in climates that are currently cooler than their physiological optima, and, as such, warming may even enhance their fitness  <cit> . for our specific grayling population under study, we found that the embryos were unable to successfully develop at temperatures above 12°c - indicating a narrow thermal tolerance. grayling populations elsewhere in europe clearly are able to develop successfully at these temperatures  <cit> . field observations  of high clutch mortality following spring temperature spikes support the laboratory findings of mortality at high temperatures. in addition, both common-garden rearing experiments and long-term field observations of spawning temperatures indicate that grayling embryos cannot survive below 5°c, further illustrating the narrow range of temperatures in which embryos of this grayling population can survive. hence, will the grayling in lesjaskogsvatnet be able to adapt to increasing temperatures? the apparent stenothermy suggests that phenotypic plasticity alone may not be sufficient for the grayling to cope, especially because we found no inter- or intra deme variation to successful development at 12°c. rather, the populations would need to evolve either a change in temperature responses or a change in spawning time . indeed, a change in phenology is probably the most rapid way for a population to adapt to new climatic conditions  <cit> . there are very few reported examples that have demonstrated a genetic shift in thermal optima or thermal tolerance  <cit> . however, since the change in temperature will occur over decades, a gradual adaptation to the gradually changing seasonal water temperatures is likely through both change in phenology  and change in temperature tolerance range. this mixture of changed phenology and gradual adaptation to slightly higher water temperatures is a likely evolutionary scenario since the water temperatures experienced by the embryos would be only slightly altered if the grayling start spawning earlier in spring. the prospects for an earlier spawning time is good as the current spawning time is very late  compared to other european populations .

previous studies of salmonids have shown that low temperatures may delay and prolong myogenic regulatory factor expression and muscle differentiation in the embryos  <cit> . our result showing accelerated muscle, but delayed skeletal differentiation in low-temperature demes is indicative of a heterochronic evolutionary trade-off where resources are allocated competitively between growth and developmental processes in the musculoskeletal system. these types of internal trade-offs have been hypothesized previously to affect evolutionary divergence patterns based on macroevolutionary patterns and cellular level mechanisms  <cit> . since muscle and skeletal system development is linked to swimming performance in fishes, our data also suggest a connection to the emerging theory regarding performance trade-offs with fast intrinsic growth rates  <cit> .

previous reports show that isolated grayling populations derived from a single ancestral population rapidly adapt growth rates to local environmental conditions, even under strong influence of genetic drift  <cit> . we report here that for sympatric grayling demes in lesjaskogsvatnet only a few weeks of temperature-specific isolation per year seems to have been sufficient to cause genetic differentiation. because we are working with evolution in wild populations, we cannot clearly distinguish whether temperature is directly and solely driving the divergence or whether there are indirect temperature effects . however, other salmonid studies demonstrate direct temperature effects during embryogenesis that cause growth and muscle phenotype differences that persist into adulthood - even if the later ontogeny is expressed under similar environmental conditions  <cit> . in a compelling study on two atlantic salmon populations in scotland, johnston and co-workers  <cit>  demonstrated a higher yolk-to-body mass conversion efficiency and larger muscle fiber recruitment during embryogenesis in a cold-adapted population that was compared to a warm-adapted one. the cold-adapted embryos did particularly well under thermal conditions similar to the one in their native stream - indicating that the differences observed could be attributed to local adaptation. our experimental design only allows for drawing inferences about genetic differentiation - and does not test for local adaptations directly. however, because of the replicated divergence pattern among demes observed in this study , and also the direction of the divergence , we argue that the differences observed are largely due to local adaptations. the observed divergence is not likely to be primarily due to genetic drift because microsatellite-based fst-values were generally found to be smaller than qst values between deme pairs of differential temperature origin, and not different between deme pairs of similar temperature origin . however, as pointed out in the methods section, one should interpret both the estimated fst and qst values with caution as there are many sources of bias that may substantially have affected them both  <cit> .

the ability to successfully adapt to new environments is assumed to be facilitated by large genetic variation  <cit> . hence, bottleneck situations may therefore potentially affect a population's prospects for future adaptation. however, studies suggest that bottlenecked populations with low genetic diversity have a greater chance of avoiding extinction if they have opportunity for population expansion  <cit> . annual gillnet catches of grayling in lesjaskogsvatnet include up to  <dig>  individuals, thus a post-colonization population expansion has occurred in this system. this opportunity for population expansion, following from the fact that the grayling colonized a system with available niches, may have played a major role in the observed divergence process and avoidance of local extinction. even though gene flow most often is considered to hinder local adaptation  <cit>  this is not necessarily always the case  <cit> . for instance, garant et al.  <cit>  predict that an intermediate level of gene flow will allow the greatest adaptive divergence. gene flow among inbred demes may increase the evolvability of these demes, and as such enhance the short-term adaptation  <cit> . detailed studies on not only among-deme dispersal patterns, but also offspring viability of between-deme crosses, would be needed to explore the consequences of gene flow for genetic variation and responses to selection.

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides evidence that natural selection is sufficiently powerful for temperate lake fish populations to adapt to novel temperature regimes within  <dig> generations, even under conditions with low genetic variation and under influence of gene flow. we also provide evidence pertinent to the ipcc-predicted global warming; namely that current genetic variation and constitution related to embryo development may not be sufficient to allow for adaptation to such a high temperature increase. however, by altering the spawning time the temperature during early development may change sufficiently little for adaptation to occur. these types of integrative studies, where genetic differentiation, ecological opportunities, and physiological limits are explicitly considered, will be essential in evaluating the capacity for populations to adapt to global warming.

