BACKGROUND
the factors that cause variation in parasitism and host resistance in natural populations have important implications for the ecology and evolution of both hosts and parasites. characteristics such as host population size have long been known to affect parasite population dynamics  <cit> , and attention has recently turned to the effects of host sex and age on parasitism and resistance . the effects of abiotic factors such as temperature and precipitation on host-parasite interactions also are increasingly being recognized  <cit>  and might have effects on whether or not resistance to parasites is expressed.

host resistance to parasites can be behavioral, physiological or mechanical. not all host species or populations respond immunologically to parasitism  <cit> , and there can be variation in response within a species . physiological resistance by invertebrates is commonly a cell-mediated response that involves encapsulation around a foreign invader by haemocytes. the pro-phenoloxidase enzymatic cascade then kills the parasite through the synthesis of melanin, which has cytotoxic and antimicrobial properties  <cit> . this type of resistance has been shown to vary due to biotic  <cit>  and abiotic  <cit>  factors, and can have a heritable component  <cit> . our knowledge of the genetic basis of resistance in animals is increasing  <cit> , but the degree to which resistance can be a plastic response to environmental variation in natural populations is not well understood.

maintaining immune defenses is costly  <cit> , and therefore subject to evolutionary tradeoffs with other important traits, such as competitive ability, reproductive success and survival. these tradeoffs have been demonstrated in many laboratory studies  <cit>  that have added to our understanding of life history evolution and immune defense. however, the factors affecting resistance may differ under natural conditions; resistance variation might depend on temperature, resource availability and host and parasite abundance  <cit> .

in temperate damselflies, seasonal variation in body size and timing of emergence can be associated with environmental factors such as air temperature and photoperiod  <cit> . there is also seasonal and inter-annual variation in parasitism by mites  <cit> . larval water mites can be resisted physiologically by their odonate hosts, shortly after hosts eclose from their aquatic larval stage. if melanotic encapsulation of the mite feeding tube occurs, it is initiated within  <dig> h of host emergence. there is evidence that melanotic encapsulation is affected by air temperature under controlled conditions  <cit> . it is also known that the effects of engorging mites on odonates can be severe, as they can affect perching and flight  <cit> , cause cellular and tissue damage  <cit> , reduce body fat content  <cit> , reduce mating success  <cit>  and lower fecundity  <cit> .

we examined host resistance to a specialist mite in a damselfly population over seven seasons to determine whether variation in abiotic and biotic factors was correlated with variation in resistance. larvae of the mite arrenurus pollictus are phoretic on the final aquatic larval instars of the damselfly lestes disjunctus. when the damselflies eclose, the mites pierce the host cuticle and begin to feed. when damselflies return to water to mate and oviposit, the fully engorged mites drop off their hosts to complete their development in the water.

we measured mite prevalence  and intensity  on hosts from 2002- <dig>  we monitored damselfly emergence timing and wing length . we also recorded air temperature before emergence and during the flight period each year.

RESULTS
emergence of pre-reproductive damselflies
the numbers of newly emerged damselflies caught in emergence traps varied considerably among years .  <dig> was an anomalous year with more than twice the average number of the other years . it was also the only year with a female biased sex ratio . there were no differences between the sexes in the starting dates or durations of the emergence period, so single yearly values are reported in additional file 1: table s <dig> 

numbers of parasites on hosts caught in emergence traps varied considerably over the study period . the total numbers of mites ranged from a low of  <dig>  to a high of  <dig> . a dramatic increase in the parasite population size from 2002- <dig> was followed by a decrease in host numbers in  <dig> and  <dig>  which was followed by a decline in parasite numbers in  <dig>  resistance first appeared in the host population in  <dig>  as parasite numbers reached their peak .

prevalence of mites in the l. disjunctus population increased from 86% to 100% in the second year of the study, and declined to 77% in the last year . this inter-annual variation in prevalence was significant . although there was a trend for higher parasite prevalence in females than in males each year, this was not statistically significant except in  <dig> . females were larger than males each year based on wing lengths ), and there was a significant, unexpected, increase in wing length in both females  and males  over the seven-year study period.

intensity of parasitism varied yearly, and was highest in  <dig> with an average of  <dig> mites per infested host . there was no significant sex bias in intensity in the first or the last year of the study, but infested females had significantly more mites than males in the other  <dig> years . there was a significant effect of year and of sex in explaining variation in intensity over the study period . prevalence and intensity were not correlated with either air temperature prior to emergence or with emergence period timing.

mature damselflies
on average,  <dig> mature damselflies were caught each year in net surveys . males usually outnumbered females, probably because of behavioural differences that made them more detectable. as was the case with the emergence trap samples, females were larger than males each year, and wing length increased over the study period in both males  and females .

inter-annual variation in parasitism followed the same patterns as in newly emerged damselflies, with both prevalence  and intensity  differing significantly among years. unlike the pattern in newly emerged damselflies, there were no significant sex differences in intensity among years . prevalence in males was higher than in females in  <dig> years, but this was statistically significant only in  <dig> .

resistance
in  <dig> and  <dig>  l. disjunctus did not mount a melanotic encapsulation resistance response to mites. no dead mites were seen on any of over  <dig> mature damselflies surveyed, despite the observers' extensive experience with field surveys of resistance in lestid damselflies . in  <dig>  dead mites were found on hosts for the first time, and all damselflies with dead mites in the first two years after the appearance of resistance were killed and examined with a microscope. each dead mite was associated with a feeding tube that had undergone melanotic encapsulation similar to that seen by the authors in a related damselfly, lestes forcipatus  <cit> . the percentage of the damselfly population with dead mites was highest in  <dig> , the year when the highest intensities at emergence  and in mature damselflies were also seen. resistance declined to 4% in the last year of the study .

damselflies that had resisted mites  often also had live engorging mites. although the most common pattern was to have  <dig> dead mite , damselflies that resisted had a range from  <dig> live mites and  <dig> dead mites to  <dig> live mites and  <dig> dead mite. although hosts with dead mites also tended to have high intensities , the probability of a damselfly having one or more dead mites was not significantly related to intensity within a year . there were also no significant differences in sex or in wing length between those damselflies that resisted and those that did not within a year .

there was inter-annual variation in air temperature prior to the emergence period . inter-annual variation in air temperature was also apparent during the flight period , with  <dig> being the warmest year . the duration of the emergence period also differed significantly among years . however, resistance was not affected by any of these factors.

within each sex, wing length and mite intensity in the mature population were not significant predictors of resistance. however, when the sexes were grouped using data from 2004- <dig>  intensity was significantly correlated with the probability of mature damselflies resisting mites . intensity in the newly emerged damselfly population sample was also significantly correlated with whether resistance occurred in the mature damselfly population over the study period .

discussion
whether an individual damselfly resisted mites did not appear to be affected by its mite burden. instead, investment in resistance seemed to be determined before parasitism occurred, and was largely based on the parasite population size. mite intensity in newly emerged damselflies was highest in the year that resistance appeared in the host population, when 13% of mature damselflies surveyed had dead mites on them. this declined to 4% by the last year of the study, when mite prevalence and intensity were lowest. observing this system over seven years allowed us to detect what appears to be a cycle of host resistance that is related to a cycle of parasite abundance.

the probability of hosts encountering parasites is generally thought to increase as host population size increases  <cit> . natural selection should therefore favour a strategy in hosts of increasing investment in resistance when host numbers are high. evidence for this comes from insects shown to invest more in immune defense when reared under parasite-free but crowded conditions compared to conspecifics reared at low host densities  <cit> . in the present study, resistance appeared in the host population the year after the highest numbers of damselflies were present in the emergence traps, which appears to support this scenario. however, it is unclear how high host numbers would lead to an increased probability of encountering parasites in this system since both host and parasite have one generation per season, and the parasitic phase of mites is limited to a small portion of their life cycle.

there is, however, a significant relationship  between mite intensity in newly emerged hosts and resistance in mature hosts across years. furthermore, resistance appeared in the damselfly population the year that intensity at damselfly emergence was five times as high as the previous two years. this suggests that larval damselflies that encounter high densities of mites in the water just before emerging invest more in immune response immediately after emergence. resistance in several other lestid damselfly species was also positively correlated with high prevalence and intensity of the mite arrenurus planus, although that study took place over only one season  <cit> . a similar pattern was identified in a study showing that immune responses decreased with decreasing parasite abundance across bird populations  <cit> .

the numbers of hosts and parasites captured during host emergence suggest that there is parasite-induced host mortality from year to year. for example, host numbers decreased in  <dig> and  <dig> after a dramatic increase in the parasite population size from 2002- <dig>  there also appears to be an effect of host numbers on the parasite population, as the decline in mite numbers from  <dig> to  <dig> coincides with a decline in available hosts, as well as with the appearance of resistance in the host population in  <dig> 

our data suggest that resistance in these damselflies is not only affected by the parasite population in the current year, but that there may be a year delay before parasite prevalence affects resistance levels. for example, an increase in prevalence in  <dig> is followed the next year by an increase in resistance in the host population; a decline in prevalence in  <dig> is followed in  <dig> by a decline in resistance . the mechanism for such an apparently adaptive response to inter-annual variation in parasitism is not known, but could have to do with maternal effects. mitchell and read  <cit>  showed that maternal effects in daphnia magna that were induced by environmental change were responsible for changes in resistance to bacteria in their offspring.

resistance was not correlated with air temperature at emergence or with emergence period timing, although both of these abiotic factors were correlated with seasonal increases in resistance to the generalist mite a. planus in a related damselfly  <cit> . temperature has also been identified as a factor affecting resistance in lab studies of fruit flies  <cit>  and mosquitoes  <cit> , both of which showed increased resistance when reared at higher temperatures. it is important to note that the temperature range used in these laboratory experiments was much greater than that found naturally occurring in this study . in addition, a complex suite of factors involving temperature may affect patterns of parasitism and resistance in this system. for example, prevalence and intensity were high in years with early or short damselfly emergence periods, and air temperatures were high in these years. in addition, costs of parasitism may be greater at higher temperatures because mites may engorge more quickly at higher temperatures  <cit> . the temperature that damselflies are exposed to after mounting an immune response has also been shown to affect correlates of fitness  <cit> . finally, temperature will affect resource availability, which has been shown to affect immune response in many insects  <cit> .

females tended to have higher mite prevalence and intensity than males, but there were no significant differences in resistance between sexes. in mite-odonate systems, there are several examples of sex biases in parasitism  <cit> . some authors have suggested that males should invest less in resistance to parasites than females because males increase their reproductive success through mating success, not longevity   <cit> . this view has been questioned by  <cit>  . several empirical studies with insects have failed to show a sex bias in resistance  <cit> .

trends in damselfly body size  did not explain trends in mite numbers on hosts within a season. body size was also not correlated with the probability of mounting an immune response in either males or females, a finding also reported in studies with lestes forcipatus  <cit> . wing length increased in both sexes over the study period, but whether this is related to parasitism or is due to other factors is not known.

although this correlative study suggests that parasite abundance affects resistance in damselflies, other ecological or evolutionary factors could be responsible for the pattern. a limitation of the present study is the lack of experiments to elucidate which factors contribute to the host's ability to resist mites. in addition, although genetic variation for resistance in some animals has been demonstrated  <cit> , it is not known if resistance in damselflies has a genetic component.

CONCLUSIONS
parasite population size  related to the expression of host immunity over seven years in this mite-damselfly system. resistance in the host population increased dramatically and then declined again over a period of a few years. determining which factors affect variation in immune response has important implications for understanding ecological and evolutionary questions about both host and parasite populations. our data suggest that factors such as temperature, which have been identified in related laboratory studies as contributing to resistance by similar hosts, do not appear to be important in natural populations over the degree of natural variation that we monitored in this study. the sole factor that contributed to the appearance and expression of resistance in this host population was prevalence and intensity of parasites, suggesting that resistance in these damselflies is a plastic response. this conclusion differs from  <cit> , who conclude that cyclical resistance to a virus in western tent caterpillars is probably genetically based. although cyclical patterns in parasitism have been documented before  <cit> , cycles of resistance in insects are not common , and the factors involved in this complex phenomenon deserve further study.

