BACKGROUND
mycobacterium smegmatis mc <dig>  <dig> has been extensively used as a model organism to study various processes in mycobacterium tuberculosis . it closely resembles mtb, and at the same time is non-pathogenic and has the added advantage of a much shorter doubling time than mtb, making it both safe and practical to culture in the laboratory  <cit> . resemblances between the two are seen at various levels. the two species show similar reactions to acid-fast staining, have similar cell wall structures, both synthesize mycothiol, exhibit adaptation in microaerobic conditions in absence of carbon, nitrogen and phosphorous and are capable of biofilm formation  <cit> . high levels of similarities are also seen in the individual genes between the two species  <cit> . studies have been carried out in msm to screen for probable drug candidates for tuberculosis  <cit> .

despite the use of msm for several decades now, very little is understood about it from a molecular systems perspective, principally because majority of studies have focused on individual molecules. although, the genome of msm has been sequenced, there are no published articles reporting comprehensive analysis and annotation  <cit> . it is also known that the genome has high extent of redundancy. from conventional microbiology studies, it has been well known that the bacteria can grow under a variety of nutrient conditions including several different carbon and nitrogen sources  <cit> . msm is also known to occur in many environmental niches  <cit> . there is however, no clear understanding about how the bacterium is able to exhibit such versatility. adaptability is essentially systems property and cannot be explicitly explained by studying molecules individually  <cit> . hence a systems approach is necessary to understand it  <cit> .

whole genome sequences of hundreds of bacterial species are available, providing an excellent starting point for systems level analysis  <cit> . the ease of transcriptomics has led to higher-level data for many species in terms of genome-wide gene expression values, facilitating more realistic reconstruction of systems. however, to understand physical behavior of the organism, phenotypic data becomes essential  <cit> . phenotypic microarray experiments, where growth patterns of a given system are studied under hundreds of conditions, provide a platform to record the phenotypic behaviour of the organism in a high-throughput manner. indeed phenotypic microarray data has now been reported for several species  <cit> . at present, data from each of these studies are analysed independently and inferences made based on that. in principle, data from multiple perspectives of the same system although may seem disparate at the outset, should in principle be consistent and be able to provide cross-explanations for various observations. however, connecting diverse pieces of data is a daunting task, due to difficulty in obtaining genome-to-phenome mapping. the scale in terms of number of components required to be considered for genome-wide studies increases the complexity further. there are very few studies so far in literatures that report such an integrated view of an organism  <cit> . in this study, we obtain phenotypic data for msm in  <dig> conditions, obtain transcriptome profiles for the reference condition and analyse the genome sequence for functional annotation and to identify alternate enzymes. we then integrate them together to identify feasible metabolic pathways in msm in the reference condition and rationalize phenotypic behavior of msm under different conditions.

RESULTS
description of the msm genome
mycobacterium smegmatis, a non-pathogenic, saprophytic, acid-fast, rod-shaped bacterium, has a gc rich genome of  <dig> mbp, consisting of about  <dig> genes. mc <dig>  <dig>  a reference strain of m. smegmatis is studied here, since it is widely used for experimental procedures because of its transformable morphotype  <cit> . although genome sequence of m. smegmatis mc <dig>  <dig>  has been available, its genome annotation remains highly incomplete  <cit> . however, much can be gained by carrying out sequence analysis of msm proteins and inferring function from well-annotated homologues in sequence databases, such as mtb. msm genome codes for  <dig> distinct proteins of which  <dig> are cellular enzymes. homologues with either high confidence or previously assigned function in the sequence databases were identified for  <dig> proteins, enabling transfer of tuberculist functional categories  <cit>  to the msm proteins. no homologues were identified for about  <dig> genes and hence their function remained unassigned. figure 1a illustrates distribution of functional categories assigned for the msm genome. a detailed gene locus list and the assigned functional categories for msm proteins are listed in the additional file  <dig>  the venn diagram in figure 1b depicts common and unique genes between msm and mtb, which indicate that majority of the mtb proteins have homologues in msm, leaving out only  <dig> proteins to be unique to mtb. a large number of proteins, which sum up to nearly  <dig>  majorly being classified into conserved hypotheticals, are seen to be present in msm but not in mtb. other features that stand out when msm is compared to mtb are  about  <dig> pe and ppe genes present in msm, as compared to about  <dig> proteins in mtb,  a larger proportion of genes, summing up to about  <dig>  belong to conserved hypotheticals and  a significant reduction of genes in the virulence category. about  <dig> enzymes are identified in msm as compared to about  <dig> in mtb. it can be seen in figure 1c that the distribution across ec classes are similar in mtb and msm. there appears to be a marginally higher number of isomerases  and lyases  in msm as compared to  <dig> and  <dig> in mtb. the significance of this, if any, is not readily comprehendible. however, it has been suggested by titgemeyer et al., that msm is a saprophyte unlike mtb and may have evolved more isomerases to be able to utilize a wide range of carbon sources  <cit> . in any case, the height of the msm genome is larger with an additional  <dig> genes and an increase in the some categories can be easily expected. we in fact observe several instances of gene duplications. given the difference in the genome sizes between msm and mtb, we systematically studied the extent of redundancy in the genome. figure 1d indicates the extent of duplication in the genome, which includes about  <dig> proteins functionally identified as insertion sequences and transposases.figure  <dig> 
functional categories of
m.smegmatis
mc
2
 <dig> genome and gene redundancy.  the pie chart depicts distribution of the functional categories of msm protein coding genes.  venn diagrams depicting common and unique proteins present in m. smegmatis mc <dig>  <dig> and m. tuberculosis h37rv based on sequence homology studies    the distribution of msm and mtb enzymes classified according to their ec classes  self similarity dot plot of the msm genome depicting gene redundancy. x and y-axis represent gene indices.



use of gene expression profiles to identify feasible metabolic pathways in msm
the msm transcriptome
a gene-expression profile collected for the whole genome for cells grown in reference condition indicates that nearly the entire genome was probed in the array. the reference medium is composed of middlebrook 7h <dig> broth, supplemented with glucose, glycerol and tween  <dig> and reflects a standard wild type condition. we term this as the ‘reference condition’ hereafter. the expression patterns for the  <dig> biological replicates were seen to be highly similar  with a very high correlation coefficient . hence, average gene expression was calculated for the samples and the value has been used for other analyses  <cit> . frequency distributions of normalized gene expression in the replicate arrays showing similar pattern in both, reflects a normal distribution. about  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes out of  <dig> genes probed using the microarray chip showed values higher than 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th percentile expression respectively .figure  <dig> 
microarray data analysis and correlation between the biological replicates.  gene expression profile for all genes in msm.  enlarged portion of the heat map. the expression values are colour coded based upon the extent of expression where red indicates high levels of expression  correlation plot for the biological replicates  and histograms depicting the distribution of the gene expression in the respective samples.



identifying feasible metabolic pathways
in order to identify metabolic pathways active in msm in log phase cultures in the reference condition, we map inferred enzyme abundances from gene expression values of individual genes, for all pathways in the organism listed in standard databases, kegg and biocyc  <cit> . for a pathway to be active, enzymes in it must be expressed in detectable quantities. although gene-expression does not always directly correlate with protein abundances, transcription data is clearly suggestive of whether or not a protein is present in detectable quantities. moderate correlation between expression levels and protein abundances has been reported for bacterial systems  <cit> .  <dig> pathways are identified for msm that combines knowledge of experimentally known pathways from literature along with those inferred from genome sequence analysis. genes corresponding to enzymes in expected pathways including central carbon metabolism, amino acid biosynthesis, purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis, fatty acid metabolism, mycolic acid biosynthesis are all expressed, as expected. figure 3a and b shows gene expression pattern corresponding to enzymes in some pathways , which illustrates that many pathways including those of central carbon metabolism, as expected, appear active owing to expression of all required genes. however expression levels vary from low to high, which is quite understandable owing to their individual biochemical properties. in all,  <dig> pathways can be considered to be active in the condition studied . there are about  <dig> pathways in which the genes show no expression , and about  <dig> pathways where few genes in them are expressed whereas  <dig> pathways had most of the genes expressed. the latter have implications of ease of adaptability .figure  <dig> 
representation of the feasible pathways identified from transcriptomics and phenotypic analysis.  selected metabolic pathways with enzymes vertically ordered from bottom to top. they are colored in grey scale based on the extent of normalized gene expression. multiple boxes present in a single layer depict the alternate genes encoding similar enzymes.  representative pathways with the level of gene expression in reference condition  schematic illustrating alternate enzymes being highly expressed in glycolysis, highlighted in orange  multiple sequence alignment of tpi  for mtb and two msm proteins. sequence identity and conservation along with catalytic site residues  are shown.



another interesting feature that emerges from this analysis is the identification of the active enzyme from the set of duplicates available for a given reaction. we analysed the expression patterns of  <dig> such sets of duplicate genes in terms of their contribution to their respective pathways. the trend that we observe indicates that in most cases only one of the possible alternatives is expressed , while others are not, reflecting that there is minimisation of cellular expenditure in expressing redundant enzymes. in very few cases, more than one gene at a given step are simultaneously expressed. figure 3c summarises our observations. enzymes such as glucose-6-phosphate isomerase, 6-phosphofructokinase, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase, phosphoglycerate mutase, pyruvate kinase are encoded by more than  <dig> gene. msmeg_ <dig>  msmeg_ <dig> code for triose phosphate isomerase enzyme. a multiple sequence alignment shown in figure 3d indeed indicates that they are similar to each other  <cit> . it is interesting to observe that, of these two enzymes, only msmeg_ <dig> is expressed. they are located 3674434 bp away from each other at positions in the chromosome. similarly, other sets of paralogues are also located far apart from each other in the genome, indicating different transcriptional regulation. this analysis helps in associating specific genes to individual pathways, which becomes necessary for systems level modeling of metabolism, understanding of genomic deletions and any such genotype to phenotype associations. more examples of enzymes present in central carbon metabolism are shown in additional file  <dig> 

growth profiles of msm observed using phenotypic microarray
in order to characterize the growth profile of the organism under different nutrient conditions, phenotypic microarray  analysis was carried out  <cit> . pm <dig>  pm <dig> and pm <dig> plates were utilized for the experiment .  <dig> different conditions were tested, of which  <dig> were carbon sources,  <dig> nitrogen sources and  <dig> were other nutrient supplements. as a validation exercise, batch culturing of msm in the reference medium was carried out and the growth profile compared with that obtained from the well containing glucose in the pm <dig> plate. a consistent pattern in growth profiles was observed in the batch culture as well as the pm well, containing d-glucose as the carbon source . we also observe high levels of consistency between the two biological replicates in pm plates. scatter plot of kinetic data at 48 hours growth for all the nutrient sources shows high correlation  between the biological duplicates .figure  <dig> 
phenotypic microarray analysis.  correlation plot for nutrient plate  of biological replicates at 48hrs. r value for the replicates was found to be  <dig> . in scatterplot, pearson correlation coefficient and linear regression line are shown  xy plot of carbon source plate  where x and y-axis represents time in hours and omnilog units respectively. the omnilog unit is a standard representation of respiration rate.  level plot  indicating dye reduction which is coloured based on the omnilog units. x-axis represents time in hours and y-axis represents nutrients present in the 96-well plate.



figure 4b shows xy plots of the  <dig> conditions of pm <dig> plate illustrating growth curves under different carbon sources. we observe that certain carbon sources are more preferable for growth as compared to the others. figure 4c showing level plot of pm <dig> plate capturing the extent of dye reduction and in turn the extent of respiration . correlation between the two replicates is evident from these plots as well. in the level plot, it can be seen that lyxose is a good carbon source, albeit poorer than glucose, whereas phenyl ethylamine is not. pyruvate on the other hand is seen to support growth but only moderately. few example of growth supporting compounds are summarized in table  <dig>  similar insights are obtained for all the carbon and nitrogen sources studied here, summarized in additional file  <dig> table  <dig> 
list of substrates used as carbon source, respective metabolic pathways and genes coding for enzymes catalyzing the substrates



source
source type and metabolic pathways
gene locus
enzyme catalyzing substrate utilization
msm is observed to have higher growth in presence of the carbon sources mentioned in the table. the gene locus mentioned should be read as msmeg_.



of all nutrient conditions studied,  <dig> nutrients support growth,  <dig> carbon and nitrogen sources show moderate growth, while  <dig> sources do not support any significant growth . some notable observations are:  tween is considered to be a source of fatty acids such as oleic acids. tween  <dig> is known to significantly promote aerobic growth by improving o <dig> transfer, while only a small amount is known to be degraded and metabolized through the tca cycle as part of the central metabolism for biomass synthesis  <cit> . it is utilized when given as a sole carbon source but not in combination with glucose. when supplied as a carbon source, msm has a longer log phase in the growth curve, while as a nitrogen source it is used very efficiently which is not seen in other mycobacteria .  serine is known to be converted to pyruvate in the presence of l-serine ammonia lyase. the enzyme is expected to be expressed only in the absence of glucose and the pathway becomes active in anaerobic conditions, similar to that observed in e. coli  <cit> . l-serine can be used as a carbon source by msm but not by other mycobacterial species  <cit> .  alanine is also deaminated to produce pyruvate, which is then converted to co <dig> and acetyl-coa. the reaction is known to be catalysed by alanine dehydrogenase, which is also present in mtb  <cit> .  acetic acid mediated growth is also observed in msm, indicating the presence of active gluconeogenesis pathways.  acetamide did not favour growth and is consistent with earlier reports that it supports growth only in specially constructed inducible strains with conditional expression  <cit> .  formate is typically utilized by bacteria as a carbon source in the tetrahydrofolate biosynthesis, but in msm it did not support growth, as the other required essential compounds in the central metabolism cannot be synthesized from this compound.table  <dig> 
comparison between
m. tuberculosis
and
m. smegmatis
for nutrient utilization



carbon source
mtb
msm
carbon source
mtb
msm
propanoate
d-serine
nitrogen source
allantoin
l-aspartic acid
d-glucosamine

d-malate

d-mannose

n-acetyl-glucosamine
l-threonine
the nutrient sources in bold indicate the differential utilization by msm and mtb. .



from the xy and level plots, it can be seen that some conditions yield a similar phenotype. in order to identify which conditions show similar effect on the growth of the organism, a clustering exercise was carried out, from which distinct clusters were obtained depending upon the extent of utilization of the carbon source. the clustergram shown in figure 5a indicates  <dig> major clusters as observed for pm <dig>  the first referring to those conditions that do not support any significant growth, whereas clusters  <dig> and  <dig> refer to those showing high and moderate growth respectively. carbon sources glucose, fructose, xylose, alanine, succinic acid and sorbitol all group into the high growth cluster while tca intermediates, sucrose, maltose and tween  <dig>  tween  <dig> and tween  <dig> are found in the moderate growth category. similarly for pm <dig> and pm <dig> plates, we find  <dig> major high growth and  <dig> moderate to lower growth clusters  referring to high growth and moderate growth categories. we also compare them across plates, by clustering them all together and find that the explored set of nutrient sources all map into six growth-pattern types . overall, nutrients enhancing growth of the organism were seen to be clustered together while those that do not support growth clustered separately. the nutrients such as hydroxylamine, 2-deoxy-adenosine, guanine and formic acid form a cluster together, all of them not capable of supporting growth in msm. an enlarged portion of the figure is shown for the high growth cluster , which describes the extent of variation in cellular respiration and thus growth under different conditions. for example, thymidine, phenylethylamine, inosine, mucic acid and alpha-methyl-d-glucoside group into one low growth cluster while d-galactose, l-aspartic acid, lactulose and l-fucose group into moderate growth cluster. it is interesting to observe that carbon sources d-xylose, l-lyxose and d-ribose group along with nitrogen sources uric acid and l-cysteine indicating that they have a similar influence on metabolism in the cell. these compounds enter metabolism at different points in the network and yet yield similar phenotypes perhaps due to a similar emergent effect.figure  <dig> 
clustering analysis of pm plates.  clustering of different carbon sources. the colour bar indicates low to high utilization of different carbon sources.  clustering of the nutrient mediated growth across all the plates, each column represents a well and each row represents time point , color bar ranges from blue to red depicting low to high respiration rate.  cluster for high growth promoting nutrients. the well numbering and corresponding metabolite details for the three pm plates are given in the supplementary .



rationalizing phenotypic behaviour by integrating transcriptome data with pathways
mapping gene expression values onto different enzymes in the metabolic network illustrate the various metabolic flows that are occurring in msm in the reference condition, as shown in figure  <dig>  pathways of the central carbon metabolism, tca cycle, glyoxylate shunt, glycolysis and fatty acid biosynthesis, all appear to be feasible paths amongst the  <dig> super-pathways  <cit> . among  <dig> conditions tested in pm, around  <dig> points mapped onto the kegg metabolic network. additional file  <dig> illustrates these points in a biochemical network diagram. using this as a reference metabolic network, we attempt to rationalize observed phenotypic behaviour of msm. the mapped compounds reflect that a vast portion of the network is indeed probed.figure  <dig> 
metabolic pathway map for msm. the kegg metabolic map overlaid with gene expression data and nutrients utilized from pm analysis. the nodes represent metabolic compounds and edges represent genes involved in the reactions .



transporters for uptake of nutrients
for a compound to serve as a nutrient source, it needs to be taken up by the cell. such uptake takes place with the help of specific transporters. we identify transporters from the genome sequence and then feasibility of their activity through gene expression data. about  <dig> transporters were annotated by our analysis and amongst them we found about  <dig> to be expressed in the reference condition  . it is known that a gene cluster comprising msmeg_ <dig> to msmeg_ <dig> forms a part of the glucose-sucrose subfamily in phosphotransferase system   <cit> . the expression of this cluster seems to be lower but these are known to be constitutive as compared to other transporters. this pts also comprises of trehalose, glcnac , and dihydroxyacetone  permeases which are expressed. the transporters for fructose such as msmeg_ <dig>  msmeg_ <dig> and msmeg_ <dig> seem to be expressed in the reference condition itself. msm has glucose-6-phosphate isomerase  for its utilization. fructose is also known to have another mechanism of utilization via the expression of fructose-specific pts composed of ei , hpr , and iiabcfru  . however the expression here is lower except in the first locus. this cluster is known to be inducible in the presence of fructose as the sole carbon source. indeed, high growth is observed in the pm plate, with fructose as the carbon source. additional file  <dig> lists the possible transporters as deduced from the genome sequence and highlights those among them that are expressed under reference nutrition conditions. transporters for glucose, xylose are seen to be expressed, providing first level explanation for utilization of these compounds as carbon or nitrogen sources. it has been reported that msm can utilize different sugars indicating activation of various transporters and hence also changes in gene expression levels  <cit> .

connecting nutrient sources to metabolic pathways
next, we study, if a given source compound can be mapped onto specific pathways in msm, through which it can enter metabolism  <cit> . about  <dig> of these compounds are direct metabolites in the network and hence growth patterns with them are easily interpreted. several more compounds can be linked with a metabolite in the network with one or few steps. in such cases, we study if the enzymes corresponding to their conversion can be detected in the genome. additional file  <dig> lists these cases. one example is d-mannitol, which is known to get converted into d-fructose then to fructose 6-phosphate, thus entering glycolysis  <cit> . a transporter for this can be traced from the genome sequence . it is not expressed highly in the reference condition, but perhaps gets induced when mannitol is the sole carbon source. similar behaviour is observed for trehalose, sorbitol and d-saccharic acid sources  <cit> . there are many lines of evidence from individual molecular biology studies to support the functional roles of these molecules  <cit> . put together, they explain why these compounds serve as carbon or nitrogen sources that promote bacterial growth.

another example is the conversion of serine into many central carbon metabolites through the glycolysis pathway and then to glycine and cysteine thus supporting growth  <cit> . the central carbon metabolism in msm is represented in additional file  <dig>  utilization of the range of carbon sources shows the repertoire of possibilities for metabolic pathways in the bacterium. glycerol, arabinose, mannose, d-glucose and many other polyols, pentoses, hexose and also complex sugars enhance growth as supported by literature  <cit> . the alternate carbon sources such as l-proline, rhamnose, xylose and others are also being utilized for growth in msm indicating these can induce their uptake and successful utilization. glycerol can be taken up by a facilitator  and used by the enzyme glycerol kinase  to form glycerol 3-phosphate which can then enter central carbon metabolism. the observation about absorption and utilization of maltose is also in line with other experimental evidences, showing very low or retarded growth. galactose and lactose show only moderate growth, consistent with the observation that the corresponding enzymes and transporters show poor expression values  <cit> .

it is not clear whether there are any transporters for utilisation of trehalose from the external medium in msm. nevertheless, it seems to be enabling growth in the bacterium. it is possible that it can be involved in central carbon metabolism as well as be a component of the cell wall in the form of conjugates of mycolate, such as trehalose dimycolates and trehalose monomycolates  <cit> . many of the tca intermediates such as succinic acid, citric acid seem to promote growth. this is again consistent with the observation, that many of the central carbon metabolism genes are constitutively expressed in msm. we also observe acetate and oleic acid  being utilized for growth. this observation is consistent with known biochemical studies that glyoxylate shunt is prominent for anaplerosis in the bacterium allowing the utilization of acetate or fatty acids as the sole carbon sources while it allows the regeneration of the four-carbon malate from glyoxylate and acetyl-coa for biosynthetic processes. the shunt can also replenish amino acids such as glycine and serine  <cit> .

amino acids such as l-proline, l-alanine and dipeptides such as l-alanyl-glycine seem to promote growth as nitrogen sources  <cit> . all other amino acids tested are also able to support growth either highly or moderately, indicating the ability of msm to adapt to a wide variety of nitrogen sources and supplements. the genes involved in purine salvage pathways seem to be moderately expressed in msm. adenosine as a sole carbon source does not support growth, consistent with earlier suggestions in literature as well  <cit> . examination of the gene expression values of enzymes involved in a pathway that salvages adenosine, indicates that the pathway is infeasible since enzymes adenosine deaminase, adenosine kinase and adenine phosphoribosyltransferase are virtually non-expressed under the conditions studied. however, when adenosine is supplied as a nitrogen source along with glucose as the carbon source, small extent of utilization is observed. an enzyme unique to mycobacteria, 5-methylthioadenosine phosphorylase , that converts adenosine to adenine and alpha-d-ribose-phosphate is moderately expressed, perhaps presenting the only feasible way for adenosine utilization  <cit> . thus the low activity of purine salvage pathways makes de novo biosynthesis of purine nucleotides highly essential for the survival of the organism, presenting targets for antimycobacterial drugs  <cit> . in fact, analog-based inhibitions of the de novo biosynthesis pathway enzymes are already under consideration as anti-tubercular drugs. guanosine can be efficiently used by msm as the same enzyme  can cleave inosine and guanosine as well  <cit> . overall, the differences in growth patterns under different conditions are explained by  presence or absence of a transporter for nutrient uptake,  presence and the expression level of the utilizing enzymes.

microarray data of mtb shows about one-fourth of the genes are consistently expressed under standard nutrition conditions in in vitro cultures  <cit> . phenotypic microarray studies have been reported for mtb, using a similar biolog experimental setup  <cit> . comparison of the growth patterns in msm and mtb, as observed from phenotypic microarray experiments, reveals that the two species show similar growth behaviour in most cases. this implies similar metabolic flow for most of the studied probes . exceptions to this are compounds d-malate, d-mannose, n-acetyl glucosamine, propoanoate, allantoin, l-aspartic acid and l-threonine which serve as nutrients to msm but not to mtb, while d-serine is the only compound that serves as a nutrient to mtb but not to msm . thus, overall, msm can utilise most of the carbon sources and nutritional supplements as compared to mtb and other mycobacterial species. tween can be used as a sole carbon source in both but unlike in mtb, it cannot be utilised in combination with glucose in msm. thus, it can be seen that  <dig> nutrient sources are common and  <dig> are unique between msm and mtb.

discussion
phenotype of an organism is the cumulative effect of the genetic makeup and interaction of many composite molecules in the organism. biochemical alterations in metabolism would be necessary to support  <cit>  phenotypic variations of that organism. given the high levels of interconnectedness in organisms, as evidenced by high complexity in genome-scale networks, there are many ways by which metabolic alterations can influence a system. thus, it is important to evaluate the organism in a multitude of sets of scenarios that might occur in its environment. phenotypic microarray studies offer such a platform where such evaluation of various different arrays of nutrient supplement and chemical environments can be carried out in a high throughput manner. phenotypic microarrays have the added advantage of providing a direct readout of cellular respiration, enabling us to visualise and analyse growth patterns of the particular organism  <cit> .

most of the mycobacterial species exhibit common physiological traits such as adaptation to hypoxic conditions by maintaining itself in a dormant state. it is well known that mtb survives inside the host by altering its metabolic requirements  <cit> . msm has comparable physiological responses during dormancy as mtb, thus making it a feasible model to study metabolic alterations and gain mechanistic insights  <cit> .

knowledge inferred from transcriptomic analysis, aids in unraveling the attainable metabolic routes in the organism. adaptation to different environmental scenarios is due to induced variation in gene expression profile. however, it is a challenging task to predict phenotypic behaviour of the organism from its genotype. in order to rationalize the genome-phenome relationship, it has become essential to integrate information obtained from such high-throughput techniques. integrating knowledge of phenotypic response in different conditions with the transcriptome data, as observed in this study, leads to a bird’s eye-view of genome-transcriptome–phenome pertaining to metabolism in mycobacteria. such information can be used as direct inputs to build systems level models to comprehend large number of parameters simultaneously. the ultimate use of this systems level study is in understanding metabolic adaptations in different conditions such as in vivo environments for pathogens.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we gain comprehensive understanding of metabolic repertoire of msm and its phenotypic response to different nutrient conditions. it can be inferred that many alternate nutrients are capable of being efficiently utilized by msm as carbon and nitrogen sources when compared to mtb and m. bovis strain. the comparative study for carbohydrate import systems of mtb and msm reveals larger number of genes involved in the mechanism and also expressed in reference condition  <cit> . this suggests the possibility of msm to use alternate carbohydrates when present in the environment and also its relative faster growth when compared to the pathogenic counterparts. while the genes responsible for central metabolism are expressed in the reference medium, the expression of additional genes cannot be ruled out when provided with alternate nutrients. thus, in the present study, experiments were performed to analyse the expression profile of the organism to infer the feasible metabolic pathways and also to derive the set of nutrients favourable for its growth. integration of transcriptomic and phenotypic data along with functional annotation of the genome provides us insights into the biochemical repertoire of pathways possible when the medium is supplemented with an array of nutrients.

