BACKGROUND
polymicrogyria is a developmental malformation of the cerebral cortex, characterized by multiple small gyri with abnormal cortical lamination  <cit> . pmg can be unilateral or bilateral and its extent varies from focal pmg in otherwise normal brain to diffuse pmg with multiple other brain abnormalities. the spectrum of clinical manifestations ranges from normal individuals, with only selective impairment of cognitive function  <cit>  and no or easily controlled epilepsy, to patients with severe encephalopathy and intractable epilepsy  <cit> . motor and cognitive deficits such as a delay in development  <cit> , or congenital contractures  <cit>  are commonly described in patients suffering from pmg. microscopically, two histological types of pmg were recognized: a simplified four layered form and an unlayered form  <cit> . the two types of pmg may coexist in contiguous cortical areas  <cit> . recent report provides evidence that pmg areas are functional  <cit> .

the present report describes a case of spontaneously occurring pmg in a macaque monkey for which tracing of corticospinal projections had been obtained. moreover, the animal was involved in a study on the mechanisms of bimanual coordination, and its pmg was discovered after sacrifice. the first goal of the present report was to present in more details the general morphological traits of the pmg brain. more specifically, we sought to establish which brain regions and how the laminar pattern of the cerebral cortex have been affected by the pmg. in human patients with a unilateral pmg, the cs tract originating from the affected hemisphere presented an altered structure in dti and fmri investigations  <cit> . the second aim of the present case report in monkeys was to evaluate whether the cortical malformations affected the characteristics of the corticospinal projections. for this purpose, the anterograde tracer biotinylated dextran amine  was injected unilaterally in the electrophysiologically identified hand representation of the presumed primary motor cortex. finally, the motor capacity of the pgm macaque was compared with that of a normal macaque monkey, both trained to perform the same motor task, namely a modified version of the so-called "reach and grasp drawer" task  <cit> .

RESULTS
the pmg monkey described in this study is the only case of cortical malformation ever observed in our laboratory.

1) cortical structure
the topographical analysis of the pmg monkey brain showed an abundance of small gyri, affecting mainly the frontal and parietal lobes. in the pmg monkey, the structure of the sulci were hardly identifiable on both hemispheres , and did not display the arrangement normally observed . in contrast, the ventral aspects of the brain, particularly the occipital and the temporal lobes appeared macroscopically normal , with individual sulci exhibiting a pattern closely resembling that observed in normal monkeys . to tentatively represent the extent of cortical malformation, the border of the affected territories were superimposed on the healthy brain of mk-iu in panels b and d .

the cortical surface of the brain in the frontal and parietal lobes presented a disorganized aspect with numerous small gyri  delimited by intermingled invaginations . in large regions of the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes, only layer i was clearly identifiable in nissl stained sections, the remaining cortex failing to present a well characterized laminar organization . in ventral regions, a normal laminar organization in  <dig> layers was preserved . in some sulci, the cortical surface was not covered with a pial lamella, and the layers i of the two facing banks were fused . locally, the normal laminar organization was disrupted in nissl stained sections  as well as in smi- <dig> stained sections . indeed, in the pmg monkey, the smi- <dig> positive neurons were often located at a distance from the surface that varied over a short rostro-caudal interval, and were not always oriented perpendicularly to the brain surface .

in the cortical region where icms elicited movements of the hand and where the laminar organization was identifiable, large pyramidal neurons were observed in nissl and in smi- <dig> stained material  at a depth corresponding to layer v in normal monkeys . however, in normal monkeys, numerous layer iii pyramidal neurons were also smi- <dig> positive , whereas only few were recognizable in the pmg monkey .

when compared to normal monkeys , the frequency of sulci measured on coronal sections in the fronto-parietal as well as in the ventro-temporal cortical regions was significantly higher in the pmg monkey . furthermore, in the pmg monkey, the frequency of sulci in the fronto-parietal cortex was nearly twice as high than that of the ventro-temporal region . no statistically significant difference was observed in the three normal monkeys. these differences do not reflect changes in the volume of the cortex, as at a comparable rostro-caudal position, the measured distance between the corpus callosum and the external part of the lateral fissure is similar among all animals.

in contrast to the few smi- <dig> positive neurons detected in layer iii of the presumed m <dig> area of the pmg-monkey, injections of bda in this cortical region in the left hemisphere stained a large number of fibers in the corpus callosum  and several retrogradely labelled neurons were found in the right hemisphere in the frontal lobe. this observation suggests that a significant number of pyramidal neurons in lamina iii are present, but do not express the neurofilament recognized by the smi- <dig> antibody. as the cortical structure of the pmg brain is also disturbed in the contralateral side, it was not possible to assess the exact areas where projections were terminating and where callosal neurons were stained.

the analysis of the cross-sectional area of smi- <dig> positive pyramidal cells in the putative layer v of m <dig> showed a statistically significant difference of somatic size between the left and the right hemispheres of the pmg monkey, a difference that was not observed in normal monkeys . however, the somatic size of smi- <dig> stained pyramidal cells in the pmg monkey is comprised in the range found in normal monkeys. as m <dig> is not well defined in the pmg monkey, it is difficult to ascertain that the measures were done on neurons placed in equivalent regions. the relative number of smi- <dig> positive cells in layer v was not different among all monkeys.

2) the corticospinal  projection
2a) crossed versus uncrossed cs projections
in normal macaque monkeys, after a unilateral bda injection in m <dig>  85-95% of the cs fibers were found in the opposite dorsolateral funiculus whereas 5-15% were in the ipsilateral dorsolateral and ventral funiculi . in the pmg monkey, bda injections were placed in a cortical territory where icms elicited contralateral hand movements . this territory was later found to contain large pyramidal neurons. the proportions of bda labelled cs axons in the contralateral and ipsilateral cervical white matter of the pmg monkey were 95% and 5%, respectively , thus comprised within the range found in normal monkeys.

2b) density of cs axonal arbors in the grey matter
the macroscopic structure and general histology of the spinal cord of the pmg monkey was normal. when compared to three normal monkeys, the pmg monkey exhibited a comparable cs arborization density in the grey matter at c <dig> . the projection pattern of cs axonal arbors within the grey matter did not differ with respect to density nor to spatial distribution, as the cs arbors in the pmg monkey terminated mainly within the intermediate zone , contralateral to the side of bda injection , as in normal monkeys.

volume of bda
number of bda
survival time
survival time: number of days separating the injection of bda in the contralesional m <dig> and the day of sacrifice of the animal.

2c) cs axons crossing the midline at c5
we examined the same material to determine whether bda-labelled cs axon collaterals crossed the midline in the grey matter . the number of cs axons crossing the midline at c <dig> in each monkey was normalized to the total number of labelled cs axons, in the white matter. on average, the pmg monkey exhibited a higher number of midline crossing cs axons, comprised within the range found in normal monkeys .

3) magnocellular part of the red nucleus 
in the rnm of the pmg monkey, numerous neurons presented large vesicles , a histological feature not observed in normal monkeys. we also investigated whether the number and somatic size of smi- <dig> positive rnm neurons differed in the pmg monkey. the mean number per section and somatic size of smi- <dig> stained rnm neurons was  <dig>  <dig>  μm <dig>  +-  <dig> . these values are in the ranges obtained in normal monkeys .

4) intracortical microstimulation and manual dexterity data
during the two years of behavioral training and single neuron recording, no deficit in learning and executing the demanding reach and grasp drawer task was detected in the pmg monkey, the pathology being discovered post-mortem.

intracortical microstimulation  was conducted in the pmg monkey to confirm that single unit recordings had been obtained from the hand area of m <dig>  the general organization of this region in the pmg monkey corresponded to that of normal monkeys: icms along tracks located laterally to the hand area elicited contractions of facial muscles whereas proximal movements  were elicited along tracks located medially to the hand area . the icms thresholds to elicit joint movements were in the range observed in normal monkeys, typically at current intensities smaller than  <dig> microamps .

the extracellular single neuron activities recorded in motor areas of the left hemisphere while the pmg monkey performed the reach and grasp drawer task were similar to those obtained in normal monkeys. epileptic seizures were never observed.

after  <dig> to  <dig> months of training, the pmg monkey reached a success rate of  <dig> to 95% in the reach and grasp drawer task, a performance similar to that of the normal monkey . on the other hand, the reaction times  were significantly longer in the pmg monkey to perform the unimanual task with the fastest hand, as compared to the normal monkey  . the pmg monkey also showed significantly longer rts with the fastest hand as compared to two other monkeys  involved in a former version of the reach and grasp drawer behavioral task, as reported previously  <cit>  . the longer rt is not associated to motor impairment as in three out of four measures of motor capacity in the behavioral task , the pmg monkey was significantly faster than the intact monkey .

discussion
the present case of brain malformation in a macaque monkey can be diagnosed as a pmg according to previously reported criteria, namely disorganized cortical gyri in excessive number in both hemispheres and local loss of laminar organization in the frontal and parietal cortices  <cit> . according to the extent of the cortical malformation, the pmg corresponds to a bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria , sparing most parts of the occipital and the temporal lobes, at both macro- and microscopic levels.

however, in the pmg monkey, the cortical region stereotaxically corresponding to the motor cortex of normal monkey contained large pyramidal neurons in layer v, giving rise to corticospinal projections. moreover, icms in this region elicited movements at current thresholds similar to those reported for the motor cortex of normal monkeys  <cit> .

in contrast to normal monkeys, only few smi- <dig> positive layer iii pyramidal neurons were present in the motor cortex of the pmg monkey. despite the loss of smi- <dig> staining in layer iii in the motor cortical region, interhemispheric connections were seen between the left hemisphere  and the right hemisphere . as interhemispheric projections originate mostly from layer iii pyramidal neurons, their presence in mk-pm indicates that the loss of smi- <dig> staining rather corresponds to a phenotypical change of layer iii pyramidal neurons than to an absence of such cells.

the small but significant difference in soma size of layer v smi- <dig> positive neurons observed between both hemispheres could result from observations made in somatotopically different regions. due to the cortical disorganization in mk-pm, it is difficult to ascertain that two regions equivalently located on both hemispheres project to the same level of the spinal cord  <cit> .

after bda injections in the icms identified hand area in m <dig>  a large number of bda stained axons were observed in the white matter at cervical levels. their distribution and density were similar to that of normal monkeys  <cit> , indicating that the basic structure of the corticospinal tract was preserved in the pmg monkey. this observation contrasts with recent imaging reports showing a decreased density of cs projections in patients suffering from pmg affecting only one hemisphere  <cit> . pmg is essentially a cortical malformation. macroscopically, the subcortical structures appear entirely normal . however, one cannot exclude some minor, microscopical changes in subcortical structures, as indeed found with the large number of vesicles observed in rnm neurones. the soma size of smi- <dig> positive neurons in the rnm of the pmg monkey was however in the same range of that reported for normal monkeys  <cit> . as no motor impairment was observed, we have no direct indication that the histological changes that we observed in some rnm neurons altered the function of the red nucleus.

the absence of epileptic episodes in the pmg monkey contrasts with the study of chang and colleagues  <cit>  where all patients showed epileptic seizures or cognitive delays at different levels of severity, but is in line with the study of teixeira and colleagues  <cit> , where a majority of  <dig> patients diagnosed as suffering from pmg presented normal eeg recordings. the difference observed between these two studies in human subjects may be due to the heterogeneity of the localization of the cortical malformation.

the present study reports on a pmg monkey engaged in a sophisticated conditional delayed motor task , comprising four conditional behavioral responses instructed by  <dig> visual cues, with a direct comparison to a normal monkey engaged simultaneously in the same behavioral task. the most striking observation is that the pmg monkey, in spite of considerable malformation of the cerebral cortex , performs apparently as well as the normal monkey, both in terms of training curve and stabilized motor performance after training. however, the behavioral data derived from the reach and grasp drawer task showed that the pmg monkey  had significantly longer rts than the normal monkeys . nevertheless, after initiation of the movement sequence, the time intervals between different movement components of the overall motor response did not show any systematic variation . indeed, the first reaching time  in the unimanual task was longer in the pmg monkey but the pulling time , the second reaching time and the grasping time were slightly shorter . this observation of "normal" motor control in the pmg monkey is in line with a generally normal organization of its corticospinal tract . furthermore, "normal" motor control in the pmg monkey is also consistent with the electrophysiological data, namely the presence of low  threshold icms effects observed in the presumed hand area of the primary motor cortex . the latter icms data are also coherent with a normal density and appearance of large pyramidal neurons in layer v in the presumed motor cortex in the pmg monkey, as seen in smi- <dig> staining .

the significantly prolonged rts in the pmg monkey may be associated to a deficit of attention. it has been shown that, in a delayed conditional task instructed with visual cue signals and requiring discrimination of a specific stimulus among irrelevant distracters, attention is under the control of top-down inputs from the lateral prefrontal cortex onto visual cortical areas  <cit> . the authors found a significant increase of rts in the task after lesion of the lateral prefrontal cortex. in the present case, as the pmg involved the frontal lobe, the lateral prefrontal cortex may be affected, leading to a deficit of attention. along this line, the disorganization of some cortical layers, and the decrease of the density of smi- <dig> positive neurons in layer iii , suggests that some cortico-cortical interactions may be abnormal in the pmg monkey.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, these data suggest that the pmg pathology may have affected some cortico-cortical connections , but not the corticospinal projection as indicated by normal motor control in a well trained behavioral task.

