BACKGROUND
inselbergs are isolated rock outcrops typically harboring rupicolous vegetation and embedded within a landscape composed of contrasting plant communities. because of their disconnected geographic nature, inselbergs are frequently compared with oceanic islands, since most of them display a marked ecological isolation from the surrounding area  <cit> . the isolation and ancient age of these rock outcrops is reflected in the high number of recorded endemic species  and the strong floristic differences observed between individual inselbergs and their surrounding habitats  <cit> . some authors have also suggested that inselbergs may have acted as refugia for xerophilic or cold-adapted species during glacial/interglacial cycles  <cit> . in addition, most inselbergs maintain their typical attributes irrespective of geographic location, enabling broad-scale comparisons even between different and contrasting biomes, such as mesic forests and seasonally dry plant communities  <cit> . as biological islands, inselbergs are promising ecosystems for biogeographic and evolutionary studies, comparable to their oceanic counterparts  <cit> .

phylogeographic studies of inselberg-adapted species have provided insights into evolutionary processes leading to diversification of lineages and species  <cit> . such studies have uncovered strong phylogeographic structure, high population differentiation and extensive genetic diversity levels, supporting the view of inselbergs as centers of species diversity and endemism. species occurring in small isolated patches are expected to experience reduced gene flow, significant genetic drift and high levels of population divergence  <cit> . indeed, genetic studies of inselberg species have provided strong support for these expectations  <cit> . in isolated populations, gene flow is constrained, and genetic drift is expected to be the predominant force governing allele frequencies  <cit> .

porembsky et al.  <cit>  have noted that plant community organization on rock outcrops is driven by stochastic colonization events. thus, phylogeographic studies of multiple co-occurring species with similar biological traits  may be particularly useful for understanding the role of stochasticity  in the evolution of these naturally fragmented populations. by comparing the phylogeographic structures of different species, one can infer whether the current plant community has been historically stable as evidenced by geographically similar genetic structure. alternatively, if species distributions are ephemeral over evolutionary time and more influenced by intrinsic species preferences, a mixture of phylogeographic structures is expected  <cit> .

phylogeographic studies focused on organisms associated with mesic forest communities have indicated a strong association between the occurrence of glacial cycles and the fragmentation of forest-dwelling species, supporting the classical model of tropical refugia  <cit> . on the other hand, species associated with open biomes, such as grassland, savannas and dry forests, show variable demographic responses to past glacial cycles, suggesting a more complex scenario  <cit> . in this regard, cross validation of environmental envelope models  and molecular genetic data have confirmed different past demographic scenarios for a wide array of species. fragmentation  <cit> , expansion  <cit>  and long-term persistence  <cit>  have been detected in organisms associated with open vegetation communities. by combining eems and molecular genetic tools, different phylogeographic hypotheses depicting the role of past climatic fluctuations in lineage diversification can be tested.

the caatinga is the largest, most diverse dry seasonal tropical forest biome in the neotropical region  <cit> . despite the extensive geographic area of this biome, relatively few phylogeographic studies have been conducted using species from the caatinga  <cit> . this paucity of studies precludes broad conclusions regarding the impact of past climate oscillation events on the genetic structure of organisms. the high number of endemic species  <cit>  coupled with old lineage-divergence times  <cit>  implies an ancient origin for caatinga communities. in addition, paleoclimate models  <cit>  indicate that dry forest distribution within the caatinga was stable during the last glacial maximum . indeed, high species diversity and floristic differences have been found among caatinga rock outcrops  <cit> , supporting the hypothesis of inselbergs as ancient, stable refuges of diversity  <cit> .

in the present study, we used nuclear and plastid microsatellite markers to analyze phylogeographic structure and genetic diversity of epidendrum cinnabarinum and e. secundum , two widespread, co-occurring species commonly found on inselbergs in northeastern brazil. epidendrum cinnabarinum, a polyploid species with 2n =  <dig> chromosomes  <cit> , occurs in caatinga and brazilian atlantic forest  inselbergs and on sand dune vegetation along the seashore in northeastern brazil. epidendrum secundum exhibits a diploid chromosome count of 2n =  <dig> in most populations  <cit> ; it has a much broader geographic distribution, occurring in central america, guiana and andean ranges and the brazilian central shield  <cit> . this species occurs preferentially on rock outcrops, with abundant populations observed on caatinga and baf inselbergs. in this study, we also applied eems to explore the demography of both species during important climatic oscillation events: the lgm  and last interglacial . the following specific questions were addressed:  what is the current extent of genetic structure and the degree of isolation among disjoint populations on inselbergs?  were the current range distributions of both species stable during late quaternary climatic oscillations? and  are there phylogeographic breaks separating populations from different biomes  and ecoregions ? we also considered the phylogeographical and genetic structure of e. cinnabarinum and e. secundum in light of results based on climate modeling, paleovegetation reconstructions and the island-like nature of populations distributed on inselbergs.

RESULTS
plastid and nuclear genetic diversity of sampled populations
analysis of seven plastid loci recovered a total of  <dig> haplotypes for e. cinnabarinum and  <dig> haplotypes for e. secundum , with no haplotype sharing between species. one to five haplotypes were found within e. cinnabarinum populations, while one to six haplotypes were detected within e. secundum populations. similar diversity levels were detected for both species concerning haplotype richness  and haplotype diversity  . in two sympatric populations, to and bz, genetic diversity parameters were identical for both species .
epidendrum cinnabarinum 
and 
e. secundum 
based on plastid markers

identification code of sampled populations , number of haplotypes , haplotype richness  and haplotype diversity  for seven loci.

with respect to six nuclear markers genotyped in e. secundum, moderate levels of genetic diversity were observed in most populations . the number of alleles per population ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  and allelic richness per population varied from  <dig>  to  <dig> . expected heterozygosity per population ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . one to nine private alleles were observed within populations, with values of private allelic richness ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . inbreeding coefficients, which ranged from - <dig>  to  <dig> , were not significantly different from zero in any population. the presence of genotyping errors due to stuttering or null alleles  was ruled out using micro-checker tests  <cit> .
epidendrum secundum 
based on nuclear markers

h

e
f 

1
m-
ratio
 <dig> 
1departures of within-population inbreeding coefficients  from hwe were not detected; 2a population is considered to have undergone a bottleneck if its m-ratio value falls below the lower threshold of critical m-ratio  showed on table 4; 3no bottlenecks detected.

populations sampled, number of alleles , number of private alleles , allelic richness , private allelic richness , expected heterozygosity , the within population inbreeding coefficient f and the m-ratio values for six nuclear loci.

genetic structure of e. cinnabarinum
a haplotype network based on plastid markers showed loops , and no apparent geographic structure was observed . the most frequent haplotype in both baf and caatinga biomes  was found in  <dig> % of individuals and in  <dig> out of  <dig> sampled populations. hc <dig>  the second most frequent haplotype, was also distributed in both biomes and occupied a central position in the haplotype network . only  <dig>  out of  <dig> haplotypes were found to occur in more than one population.

high genetic differentiation was observed across populations, with fst =  <dig>  and gst =  <dig> . according to an analysis of molecular variance  , a high proportion of the genetic variability in the haplotype data resided among populations , with only  <dig> % accounted for within populations. hierarchical amova did not support a division between caatinga and baf populations . pairwise fst comparisons among populations  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , with most values found to be significant . haplotype differentiation between populations separated over short spatial scales was observed between populations qe and to  and between bz and fe  . other than the strong genetic differentiation found among populations, no among-population phylogeographic structure or isolation by distance was detected .
epidendrum cinnabarinum 
populations, using two different models

p
one model includes all populations pooled, and the other includes populations from different biomes  separated.

genetic structure of e. secundum
analysis of plastid markers yielded a network lacking clear geographic structuring . haplotype hs <dig> was shared between populations from caatinga and baf biomes, and also between chapada diamantina and planalto da borborema ecoregions . hs <dig> was also the most frequent haplotype, found in  <dig> % of individuals and in six out of nine sampled populations. seven haplotypes were restricted to chapada diamantina populations .

the only hypothesis of population differentiation significantly supported by amova was that between populations from chapada diamantina and the remaining localities . the partitioning of plastid genetic diversity and structure among e. secundum populations was also very similar to the patterns observed for e. cinnabarinum. amova results indicated that a high proportion of uncovered genetic variability was found among populations , with only  <dig> % attributed to within-population variability . genetic differentiation was high across all populations, with fst =  <dig>  and gst =  <dig> . as observed for e. cinnabarinum, contrasting haplotypes were detected between populations bz and fe. pairwise fst comparisons among populations ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , with most values significant . no phylogeographic structure was detected among populations, as rst was not significantly larger than fst . isolation by distance among populations was also not detected .
epidendrum secundum 
populations, using four different models

p
first model with all populations pooled, second model with populations from different biomes  separated, third model with populations from chapada diamantina and planalto da borborema ecoregions separated, and fourth model with populations from chapada diamantina separated from the remaining localities.

compared with plastid markers, nuclear markers exhibited lower levels of genetic differentiation as estimated by Φst , gst  and g’st . an amova also generated different results than for plastid markers, with most of the genetic variation partitioned within  rather than among  populations . differentiation between baf and caatinga populations and between chapada diamantina and planalto da borborema was not significant . no sign of phylogeographic structure was detected among populations . a mantel test did not support isolation by distance among populations based on Φst, gst or g′st .

as shown in additional file 4: figure s <dig>  simulations performed in structure consistently identified k =  <dig> clusters. most analyzed individuals showed admixed ancestry, however, and genetic subdivisions among populations were unclear . admixture proportions  for population bz showed strong assignment to cluster  <dig> , whereas specimens from the southernmost population mc showed assignment proportions  associated with cluster  <dig>  intermediate assignment proportions were observed for most individuals from remaining populations .

population size reduction and gene flow among e. secundum populations
across all sites and loci, m-ratio values ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . the lowest observed critical value  obtained from simulations performed with different values of parameter θ, proportion of single-step mutations  and average size of non-one-step mutations  was  <dig>  . according to this mc threshold, none of the populations showed signatures of past genetic bottlenecks .

pg
g
m
parameters for the two-phased mutation model  used to generate critical values of m-ratio . theta , proportion of single-step mutations  and average size of non one-step mutations  were used to infer mc thresholds.

using values of genetic differentiation among populations bz, de, to, fe and mc obtained for nuclear  and plastid  markers, the ratio of pollen flow to seed flow was estimated as  <dig> . the value of this ratio suggests that gene flow via pollen in e. secundum is >  <dig> times higher than that occurring via seeds.

potential ancient distributions of e. cinnabarinum and e. secundum
distributions under lib, lgm and current climatic conditions were successfully estimated for e. cinnabarinum and e. secundum. as indicated by high area-under-the-curve  values , the eem analysis performed well. climate variables contributed to both species models, with the e. cinnabarinum model additionally adjusted using a geological eras variable. past distribution ranges differed between the two species, mainly at their peripheral limits. from the lig to the present, e. cinnabarinum exhibited a pronounced decrease in its presence at chapada diamantina and other inland mountain ranges, with a more recent expansion towards northern planalto da borborema and coastal regions after the lgm . populations distributed in the southern portion of the northeastern brazilian seashore did not show marked demographic oscillations. a decrease in the inland distribution of e. secundum was also observed, but without any further expansion  as observed for e. cinnabarinum. during the lig and lgm, e. secundum was broadly distributed in inland mountains, being present mainly at cadeia do espinhaço  and in western portions of planalto da borborema. after the lgm, the species remained broadly distributed only within chapada diamantina and mountains to the east within the baf biome. the model representing current climatic conditions indicated that e. secundum has a fragmented distribution within planalto da borborema, where most populations are found at the border between caatinga and baf biomes. since the lig, the distribution of this species has not been continuous between chapada diamantina and planalto da borborema.

discussion
genetic studies of inselberg species can provide insights into the combined effects of genetic drift and restricted gene flow on evolution and diversification of lineages restricted to disjunct populations  <cit> . phylogeographic studies of inselberg species have indeed confirmed many hypotheses associated with such isolated habitats, such as low levels of gene flow and strong genetic drift  <cit> . in some extreme cases of isolation, within-inselberg interspecific gene flow between congeneric species has been found to be higher than intraspecific gene flow between different inselbergs  <cit> . to understand the effects of long-term disjoint distribution on genetic architecture and evolution of inselberg populations, we carried out a phylogeographic study of two rock-outcrop orchid species showing very similar life traits. the use of plastid markers revealed marked genetic differentiation among populations. in contrast, nuclear genetic differentiation was much lower in e. secundum, highlighting the important role of pollen dispersal, and consequently pollination services, in species cohesion. this result has also been observed in other plants  <cit> . results from eem analysis of e. secundum suggest long-term stability of populations from chapada diamantina and the southern portion of planalto da borborema ; in contrast, results for e. cinnabarinum imply a decrease in distribution within chapada diamantina, in agreement with its current rarity in this ecoregion. after the lgm, e. cinnabarinum expanded its distribution to northern sand dune vegetation communities. this expansion most likely occurred from inland inselberg populations, not from southern coastal ones, as extensive haplotype sharing was found among seashore and inland populations. the joint use of phylogeography and eems helped to clarify the origin of genetic diversity and population differentiation in these inselberg species, emphasizing the importance of such studies in terrestrial island-like environments.

marked genetic differentiation among inselberg populations
genetic differentiation among populations of both e. cinnabarinum and e. secundum was not significantly associated with baf and caatinga biomes . in contrast, extensive haplotype sharing was found among populations distributed in both biomes . haplotype sharing was also found between populations from inselbergs and sand dune vegetation, in agreement with floristic similarities reported in previous studies  <cit> . because of their xeric nature, inselbergs can provide suitable conditions for drought tolerant species even within humid forest patches  <cit> . inselbergs embedded in mesic forests often harbor xeric plant communities and can be considered refugia for species adapted to drier climatic conditions, highlighting their importance for comparative studies across different biomes  <cit> . paleontological evidence  <cit>  indicates that alternating dry and wet periods have influenced the baf distribution of plant species, particularly along the northeastern coast. inselberg populations within the baf  may thus represent relicts of xeric plant communities that probably extended further towards the coast during drier periods, thereby allowing gene exchange with populations currently placed in the caatinga biome.

the most outstanding pattern recovered by the use of plastid markers was the deep among-population differentiation within e. cinnabarinum and within e. secundum . even populations separated by a few kilometers exhibited strong differentiation based on the plastidial genome . the significant pairwise genetic differentiation among most populations, the absence of a pattern of isolation by distance, and the lack of significantly phylogeographically structured haplotypes suggest that genetic drift, as observed in other rock outcrop species  <cit> , has been an important force shaping plastidial genetic variation in e. cinnabarinum and e. secundum. in finite populations, such as those inhabiting inselbergs and oceanic islands, genetic drift may be the predominant force governing allele frequencies of neutral loci  <cit> . because effective population size of maternally inherited organelles is expected to be an order of magnitude lower than that of nuclear genes, genetic drift is expected to play a stronger role in shaping frequencies of organellar alleles than those of nuclear alleles  <cit> . in addition to the spatial dimension, genetic drift includes an intrapopulation temporal component in which a series of subpopulations diverge from one another over time. fine-scale genetic analysis  <cit>  coupled with long-term studies  may help to clarify the impact of drift on the genetic structure of inselberg populations.

the genetic structure observed among e. secundum populations was higher for plastid than for nuclear markers . most haplotype diversity  was found to reside among populations; this result is in contrast to nuclear markers, in which diversity among populations was not significant . this difference in genetic structure between genomic compartments was translated into a pollen/seed flow ratio of  <dig> , indicating that pollen-mediated gene dispersal is 25-fold more efficient than dispersal through seeds. the inference of extensive pollen flow between e. secundum populations is also supported by observations of low inbreeding coefficients  and a high proportion of genetic diversity within populations . in addition, bayesian assignment based on nuclear markers indicated intermediate admixture proportions for many individuals and specimens assigned to different nuclear genetic clusters in the same population ; these results also suggest higher levels of gene flow by pollen. efficient gene flow by pollen is normally expected for food-deceptive orchids  <cit> , as pollinators avoid plants in the same patch, thereby promoting pollen flow over long distances and reducing the chances of geitonogamous pollination. in general, low levels of nuclear genetic structure are observed in orchids . pollen flow has proven to be crucial to the maintenance of species cohesion in other fragmented inselberg species, highlighting the importance of pollinators in promoting gene exchange among rock outcrops  <cit> .

despite the strong genetic differentiation observed between populations from chapada diamantina and the remaining localities , phylogeographic structure was not significant in e. secundum. this surprising situation is probably due to ancestral haplotype sharing  among most populations, indicating ancient dispersal events. another explanation for the non-significance of phylogeographic structure is the fact that multiple, phylogenetically unrelated haplotypes are found in the same populations, especially in the chapada diamantina ecoregion. chapada diamantina is an old and very stable region; demographic changes in peripheral populations, such as those inhabiting the baf and from mountains south of chapada diamantina, may have contributed to the exchange of unrelated haplotypes—a pattern observed in other studies  <cit> . indeed, species distribution modeling shows a broader past geographic distribution for e. secundum, with a former range that includes mountains to the south and north of chapada diamantina.

demographic changes in e. secundum and e. cinnabarinum
for both species, results obtained using eems have shed light on whether haplotype sharing among populations is due to regular gene flow, past long-distance dispersal events or past continuous distribution. for e. cinnabarinum, a general pattern of expansion from the inland towards the seashore since the lig is suggested . this species appears to have been more commonly distributed in chapada diamantina during the lig, showing a further decrease in distribution until the present. epidendrum cinnabarinum is in fact currently very rare in chapada diamantina, where its populations are composed of only a few individuals. colonization of the northern portion of the seashore occurred during the last  <dig>  years, probably from planalto da borborema populations. the haplotype sharing detected among populations and the low diversity of mamanguape and cabo de santo agostinho populations are consistent with this hypothesis. because only ancestral haplotypes are shared among populations, recurrent gene flow is unlikely; in this case, long-distance dispersal may have been responsible for the northern seashore colonization. results from behling  <cit>  suggest that xeric vegetation replaced mesic plant communities along the northern portion of the northeastern brazilian seashore in the last  <dig>  years, a trend likely favoring the expansion of e. cinnabarinum from inland inselbergs towards dry coastal vegetation zones. haplotype sharing between inland and coastal populations and the inferred expansion of inland populations towards the seashore have also been observed in other phylogeographic studies along the brazilian coast, confirming the connection between the baf and other adjacent biomes such as the caatinga  <cit> , cerrado  <cit>  and pampas  <cit> .

analysis of eems recovered different demographic patterns for e. secundum . the long-term persistence of chapada diamantina populations is in agreement with the high levels of genetic diversity observed in morro do chapéu and palmeiras populations  and the absence of bottlenecks . the genetic differentiation of chapada diamantina and planalto da borborema populations was also confirmed by the eem analysis, which demonstrated a clear discontinuity in e. secundum distribution along these two ecoregions in the last  <dig>  years. high levels of plant endemism and biodiversity have been recorded for chapada diamantina  <cit> , and floristic results indicate different species compositions between rock outcrops from chapada diamantina and planalto da borborema  <cit> . in addition, phylogeographic studies have indicated the occurrence of older lineages  <cit>  and genetic differentiation among populations  <cit>  occurring within chapada diamantina. the patterns of genetic diversity found within chapada diamantina populations are in agreement with refuge theory, which predicts higher levels of genetic diversity and older lineages to be present in historically climate-stable regions  <cit> .

the relictual nature of inselberg populations is also evident in the structure of the haplotype networks . several mutational steps were observed in the networks calculated for e. cinnabarinum and e. secundum, suggesting substantial periods of isolation among populations of both species. deep divisions among haplotypes may be reflective of populations with long divergence histories  <cit> , as demonstrated by phylogeographic studies of caatingan vertebrate animals having fragmented distributions  <cit> . divergence times estimated for caatingan organisms indicate major crown clade splits to have occurred in the miocene , followed by divergence within these major groups during the pliocene–pleistocene  <cit> . these results are also in agreement with the long-term persistence of populations inhabiting inselbergs  <cit> . accordingly, lower levels of genetic differentiation have been observed in other epidendrum species inhabiting well-connected landscapes   <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the population genetic structure recovered for both e. cinnabarinum and e. secundum reflects the isolated nature of their inselberg habitats. similar to the results of studies of other inselberg species  <cit> , significant differentiation at plastid loci was observed between populations separated by only a few kilometers . genetic differentiation among populations was not correlated with geographic distance or ecoregions, suggesting that genetic drift may be a significant factor influencing the diversification of inselberg species. according to porembski et al.  <cit> , inselberg species composition is difficult to predict even over short distances, probably because of stochastic colonization events. long-term persistence of populations was also supported in our study, suggesting that both species have been restricted to the specific inselberg habitat over long time frames, and have not been reduced to rock outcrops because of climatic instability. the results of eem analysis indicate that fragmentation and reduction of e. secundum distribution has occurred in mountain ranges south of chapada diamantina. future studies should consequently include a broad sampling of this species over adjacent mountain ranges to explore how such distribution oscillations have affected current levels of genetic diversity in these populations. in northeastern brazil, inselbergs have different mineral origins and are distributed across different biomes and climatic clines. thus, selection for divergent habitats may also be of great importance during lineage diversification within species under restricted gene flow. given the contrasting patterns of genetic structure observed between nuclear and plastid markers, cytonuclear incompatibilities may contribute to the first stages of reproductive isolation among divergent lineages. future efforts should take advantage of next-generation sequencing approaches  <cit>  coupled with experimental studies  <cit>  to clarify the role of drift, selection and cytonuclear interactions in the diversification of inselberg species.

