BACKGROUND
real-time quantitative pcr  is the state-of-the-art technology for the quantification of nucleic acids, both in gene expression analysis and in routine dna quantification, and is becoming ubiquitous in research and diagnostics of various fields. because of its prominence, several new q-pcr detection chemistries were developed, reaching approximately  <dig> different at present  <cit> . of all taqman® and/or sybr® green chemistries are being the most widely used  <cit> . the reason could lie in the numerous data available on the performance of these two methods, while only a few comparisons of the performance of alternative chemistries have been published  <cit> .

the detection of genetically modified  components is a challenging application of q-pcr since exact quantification and the ability to detect trace amounts of gm material in food matrices is required. given that the labelling threshold for food and feed is ranging from 5% in japan  <cit>  to as low as  <dig> % in the european union  <cit> , an accurate quantification method is essential. to achieve this the efficiency of the pcr reactions must be close to the optimal efficiency of  <dig> where each pcr target is doubled in a course of one pcr cycle  <cit> . deviations from optimal amplification can crucially affect the result of quantification  <cit> . the assays need to be robust and simple for use in routine analyses and additionally highly specific, so as not to detect related plant species or non-targeted gm organisms .

in the field of gmo detection mgb, molecular beacon  <cit> , amplifluor®  <cit>  and scorpion® chemistries  <cit>  have already been compared to taqman® and sybr® green performance. to supplement the available knowledge we tested additional four new technologies: locked nucleic acid  probes , cycling probe technology  , light upon extension  fluorogenic primers  and plexor™ technology . their performance was compared to taqman® chemistry .

taqman®, lna® and cpt are all based on the design of a probe located between the two pcr primers and labelled with a reporter on the 5' and a quencher on the 3'-end. following hybridization of the taqman® or lna® probe to its complementary sequence within the pcr target, the probe is degraded due to the 5' > 3' exonuclease activity of taq dna polymerase. this separates the reporter dye from the quencher and its fluorescence intensity increases. the lna® probe differs from taqman® by inclusion of modified nucleotides – named locked nucleic acids. these nucleic acid analogues form methylene bridges after binding and lock the structure on the target dna. the melting temperature of these probes is thereby significantly increased; hence they can be designed to be shorter  <cit> . the cpt probe in contrast includes a modified rna nucleotide forming a rna-dna duplex after hybridization to the target. in the next step this duplex is recognized and cut by rnaseh, resulting in separation of the quencher from the reporter, accompanied by a fluorescence increase. in this case no exonuclease activity of taq dna polymerase is needed to get an increase in the signal  <cit> .

lux™ and plexor™ technologies do not employ a probe but rather use fluorescent labelling of one primer instead. in lux™ technology one of the primers is labelled with a fluorophore close to the 3'-end which is quenched by the hairpin structure of the primer. on formation of the pcr product, the fluorescence increases up to 8-fold due to extension of the hairpin structure  <cit> . plexor™ technology differs from the other chemistries in its strong fluorescence signal at the beginning of the reaction, which decreases proportionally to the increase of pcr products in the course of reaction. one of the primers contains a synthetic base, isocytosine, linked to the fluorophore at the 5'-end. during the amplification step the iso-dgtp from the reaction solution is preferentially incorporated in the opposite dna strand and, because linked to the quencher, the signal decreases after the binding  <cit> . both lux™ and plexor™ technologies allow for dissociation curves to be analyzed, additionally monitoring the specificity of the product.

detection systems were compared on mon  <dig> gm maize, known also as yieldgard® . it is one of the main gmo crops cultivated worldwide and especially interesting for development of quantitative methods due to its cultivation in the eu  <cit> .

RESULTS
a total of  <dig> different assays were developed for detecting the invertase reference gene and the gm maize mon  <dig>  the selected target sequence for the detection of mon  <dig> was the 5'-junction between the transformed organism's genome and inserted dna which is event specific  <cit> . two assays were developed for each of the probe based  and four for each of the primer based chemistries . their performance was then evaluated according to parameters most important for routine analysis: limit of detection , dynamic range through limit of quantification , amplification efficiency, repeatability and specificity. one of each lux™ invertase assays and lux™ mon  <dig> assays were excluded from further analysis due to low specificity and high loq, respectively. similarly one of each plexor™ invertase assays was excluded due to high loq while plexor™ mon  <dig> assay was withdrawn because of an unavoidable primer dimer formation. these data are not shown in this manuscript. methods' detailed performance was therefore studied on two assays per chemistry type, one on the invertase and the other on the 5'-junction of mon  <dig> . of the latter representative amplification plots with dissociation curves and standard curves for each of the chemistries are presented in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig>  respectively.

a +n denotes the lna® base;  stands for rna nucleotide; lowercase letters for lux™ indicate the sequence required for the hairpin structure and iso-dc is synthetic base isocytosine. b a position in the invertase gene or a distance in nucleotides between the 5'-junction and the 5'-end of the primer/probe.

lod, loq, dynamic range and efficiency of amplification
all the developed assays showed similar lod and enabled detection of at least  <dig> copies of the target dna . lna®, lux™ and plexor™ chemistries proved to be the most sensitive, as all of them detected  <dig> copies of dna in one experimental system. the loq results on the other hand were more heterogeneous . the highest loq was determined for the invertase amplicon for cpt and lux™ chemistries where reliable quantification could be achieved only when  <dig> or  <dig> copies of the target dna were present in the pcr reaction, respectively. the loq determined for these chemistries on the mon  <dig> amplicon was however comparable to other assays. the lowest loq was determined for both lna® assays, where as few as  <dig> copies of target dna could be reliably quantified. from the statistical point of view however, less than  <dig> copies cannot be precisely and accurately quantified  <cit> . this discrepancy can be attributed to the inaccuracy of copy number estimation. the upper limit of the dynamic range was additionally monitored by measuring the pcr amplification at high target copy number per reaction. in none of the assays was pcr inhibition so severe as to completely inhibit pcr amplification, which would have resulted in absence of a fluorescent signal. however, at high target copy numbers, a decrease in amplification efficiency occurred in most of event specific amplicons. plexor™ mon  <dig> amplicon was the least sensitive to inhibition at high copy numbers of all the chemistries tested, since no inhibition was detected on dilution series .

a x/x; number of positives/number of experiments, cv was not calculated when some of the parallels failed to amplify; binhibition was observed in these reactions as decrease in efficiency of amplification; c well established taqman® based amplicons were analyzed in parallel as a reference system. values within the dynamic range are shown in bold.

all the amplicons investigated showed satisfactory efficiency of amplification , with the exception of the mon  <dig> amplicon for plexor™ chemistry . in this case an efficiency of 86% was obtained. similarly, lux™ chemistry, that is also based on fluorescently labelled primers, showed somewhat lower efficiency than the probe based chemistries.

the absolute cycle threshold  values at the same dna concentration were compared at optimal baseline and threshold settings for all detection chemistries. the ct values obtained for the newly designed lna®, cpt and plexor™ assays differed from those for the taqman® assay by less then one ct. however, the same amount of dna was detected by lux™ chemistry approximately  <dig> cycles later than by taqman® chemistry, which indicates the difference in signal intensity.

specificity of the assays
the specificity of the maize endogenous gene invertase assays was confirmed by testing the amplification of dna from the plant species nicotiana tabacum, solanum lycopersicum, capsicum annuum, brassica oleracea spp. botrytis, spp. oleracea and spp. gongylodes, triticum aestivum, dianthus caryophyllus and solanum tuberosum. the cross-reactivity with dna of roundup ready gm soybean, gm cotton and gm oilseed rapes rt <dig> and topas 19/ <dig> was also tested . no cross-reactivity was detected with any of the dna samples tested. successful invertase amplification in non-transgenic maize dna and gm maize bt <dig>  bt <dig>  tc <dig>  t <dig>  mon  <dig>  nk <dig> and ga <dig> was confirmed, as expected. the only exception was the cpt assay that detected brassica oleracea spp. gongylodes, which might have resulted from probe's very short length . it was however significantly less sensitive towards brassica oleracea spp. gongylodes dna indicated by a  <dig> ct difference at the same copy number. when checking the specificity of mon  <dig> assays, no cross-reactivity was observed with a mixed sample containing  <dig> different gm maize lines . only in the case of the plexor™ chemistry based mon  <dig> assay a weak positive signal was detected, observed at only  <dig>  ct under the non-template control . therefore this assay was further tested on the set of specific gm maize lines and it was shown that it cross-reacts with bt <dig> .

nt – not tested.

repeatability of the assays
repeatability of q-pcr reactions was assessed by calculating the coefficient of variation  of parallel reactions within the dynamic range of the assay. the results for different assays show variability of  <dig>  to  <dig> % . all the chemistries showed similar repeatability at high target copy numbers per reaction, they however performed differently at low copy numbers. while primer based chemistries had higher cv values, lna® and one of the cpt amplicons showed better repeatability, being precise even below  <dig> dna copies.

comparison of trueness of different methods
the trueness for the different assays was compared on samples of 100% and  <dig> % mon  <dig> to check the performance of methods at the limits of the dynamic range. results for the 100% mon  <dig> sample show that only taqman® and lna® chemistries gave results within the 33% interval from the true value . the gm percentage estimation obtained by plexor™ and cpt chemistries differed substantially from the true result. lux™ chemistry did not perform well considering either trueness or precision.

a well established taqman® based amplicons were analyzed in parallel as a reference system.

z-scores were calculated to evaluate trueness of quantitative analysis of usda proficiency test sample , as if we would participate in december  <dig> round of proficiency testing, taking into account the results from other participating laboratories. for all chemistries calculated z-score was below  <dig> and therefore showing satisfactory trueness range. it should be borne in mind however that, at gm content below 1%, results often differ more from the true value than at the content above 1%. this can also be seen from the results of validation reports of methods . taking that into account, all the estimates are satisfactory except maybe the one with lux™ chemistry showing high measurement uncertainty. even at low gm content the precision of lna® and plexor™ chemistries were best. nevertheless these results are only an indication of the assays' trueness, and more studies should be performed to increase the reliability of these data.

in another publication, the first useful model of lux™ chemistry was reported for event-specific detection and quantification of rrs  <cit> . the obtained values of lod, loq and range of quantification were similar to ours, although primer dimer formation was observed at much higher dna concentrations  than in our case. in accuracy studies however better trueness of the method was reported while repeatability was quite low in their experiments as well.

practicability of different assays
high performance is essential to obtain a method sufficiently robust for use in different laboratories. for routine analysis some other parameters of the method also have to be considered, i.e. time needed to introduce the method into the laboratory and time required to perform the analysis. last but not least the costs of the assay are very important . yet another parameter which could be critical for wider acceptance of the chemistry is how sequence dependant is the ease of method design.

a well established taqman® based amplicons were analyzed in parallel as a reference system. b estimated costs include pcr reagent, primers and probes but exclude plastics and optical covers since they are the same for all tests. prices are stated for slovenia, european union, and may differ in other countries.

when used to working with taqman® chemistry, switching to lna® is the easiest option. the probe is designed by the provider, while the same primers, master mix and the pcr protocol can be kept. omitting a probe should in general simplify new assay design, but lux™' specific design requirements were not always easy to meet. consequently, efficient lux™ amplicon design required several repeated trials. for both primer based chemistries, extensive optimization of primer concentrations was required to minimize the formation of primer dimers. nonetheless dimers still appeared in some reactions when dna concentration was low , more often for lux™ chemistry than for plexor™, as plexor™ master mix is optimized to minimize dimer formation.

plexor™ and lux™ chemistries were the least expensive systems to establish, as there was no need to order an expensive probe with each design trial. omitting the probe can lower the price of routine analyses as well, although the influence of primers or probes on the overall reaction price is minor. the assay price depends more on the master mix, therefore price differences between taqman®, lna®, lux™ and plexor™ chemistries do not exceed 15%. the only exception is the very high price of cpt assays, which would exclude this chemistry from use in routine analyses. plexor™ seems appropriate also due to shorter experimental run duration.

what a potential user of plexor™ might dislike is that dna has to be prepared in a special buffer and that, after the run, special  software has to be used for data analysis; however we have not experienced any problems while introducing this alternative system.

CONCLUSIONS
a growing number of q-pcr detection chemistries is available to detection laboratories. in this paper four different chemistries: lna®, cpt, lux™ and plexor™ were compared to taqman® for gmo detection and quantification. their advantages and drawbacks were highlighted and their influence on the final results of quantification was demonstrated. it should however be taken into account that both taqman® methods were already proven to be robust and reliable through use in routine gmo detection, while the alternative methods were developed and optimized only to the degree described in this paper.

differences in performance of the methods were observed in regard to quantification and detection limits, amplification efficiency, specificity, trueness and practicability. these characteristics should be considered when designing new quantification assays, especially for routine analyses.

the criteria by which the methods are chosen must be carefully considered. in the case of gmo, detection methods need to perform either rapid and economically feasible screening for the presence of gmos or exact quantification of gmos in plant derived materials. high sensitivity is important for the detection of highly degraded dna in processed food products. with the increasing number of gmos in the market, the number of analyses performed per sample, and consequently the costs of analyses, increase. therefore the practicability of the assays, in terms of duration of the analysis and time investment for the design and data analysis, has to be considered.

of the probe based methods, lna® chemistry is the most promising, with excellent quantification limits and efficiency . very good repeatability, even for low copy numbers, is reflected in high precision and accuracy of measurements . lna® methods can be easily transferred from the widely used and certified taqman® methods should this prove beneficial for some applications. because lna® probes are much shorter they could be especially appropriate where high specificity is needed . they are also likely to be used where the sequences are such that the design of a common taqman® probe is difficult or even impossible, for example in detecting junctions between gm insert and plant dna.

due to some performance characteristics  it is not likely that lux™ or plexor™ chemistries would replace the probe based chemistries in the quantification of gmo content, especially for samples with multiple ingredients. with the probe absent, a perfect specificity is even harder to achieve, which also showed as slight crossreactiveness in one of plexor™ designs . plexor™ chemistry however performed well when considering lod. in addition it was the most robust against inhibitory substances of all the chemistries tested and proved practical for routine use. we believe that with additional effort put in design of specific primers plexor™ technology provides an appropriate and affordable approach for qualitative analysis.

taqman®, mgb, molecular beacon and sybr® green based detection methods were similarly compared for detection and quantification of rrs  <cit>  and none of the approaches appeared significantly better. in our experimental comparison however, results suggest that probe based taqman® and lna® technologies are best for quantitative analysis. primer based plexor™ on the other hand could be the method of choice for qualitative analysis if appropriately designed to assure specificity of the method.

