BACKGROUND
expansion of stem/progenitor cells is prerequisite for their therapeutic or research uses. mammary stem cells  are somatic stem cells that provide for the lineage of mammary epithelial cells. consequently, they are of considerable interest to developmental biologists, agricultural scientists and cancer researchers. bovine masc have received little attention despite the inherent economic importance of the species and the potential for influencing animal production by masc manipulation, and despite the similarity in cytoarchitecture of bovine mammary tissue to that of the human breast  <cit> . bovine mammary epithelial cells and their stem cells are important in agriculture production and bioengineering applications. additionally, information gained will potentially broaden our knowledge of human mammary epithelial cells and stem cells.

somatic stem cells can divide symmetrically or asymmetrically. symmetric division of stem cells produces two identical stem cells and results in expansion of the stem cell population. asymmetric division produces a stem cell and a progenitor cell of more committed cell lineage, while maintaining the existing stem cell population. a novel method of expanding somatic stem cells in vitro, based on suppression of asymmetric cell kinetics, was initially identified for rat hepatic stem cells  <cit>  and was recently expanded to include hair follicle stem cells, which renew the epidermis and other components of the skin  <cit> . several in vitro experiments indicated that p <dig> promotes asymmetric proliferation of somatic stem cells through suppression of inosine-5’-monophosphate dehydrogenase   <cit> , a rate-limiting enzyme in guanine ribonucleotide biosynthesis. a decrease in guanine ribonucleotide concentrations in these in vitro model systems promotes the non-random segregation of sister chromatids that has been shown to be characteristic of asymmetric division of many somatic stem cells. compounds like xanthosine  bypass impdh mediated guanine ribonucleotide synthesis and increase guanine ribonucleotide concentrations in the cell, thereby promoting symmetric division and expanding the stem cell population  <cit> .

earlier, we reported that xanthosine promotes expansion of label-retaining epithelial cells , putative stem or progenitor cells, in prepubertal mammary gland in vivo <cit> . in order to understand the role of xanthosine, we evaluated, in the current study, the growth characteristics of xanthosine-treated cultures of primary bovine mammary epithelial cells. the objective of this study was to investigate the impact of xanthosine on cell proliferation and the kinetics of stem/progenitor cell expansion. we show that xanthosine enhances cell proliferation, promotes symmetrical cell division and provide supportive evidence that it increases the stem/progenitor cell population. symmetric division was assessed by analyzing the distribution of prelabeled-dna between pairs of daughter cells and stem cell number was assessed by expression of a potential novel stem cell marker  and by telomerase activity.

RESULTS
growth kinetics and effect of xanthosine
the initial experiment evaluated the impact of xanthosine on growth of primary bovine mammary epithelial cells . mec plated on plastic growth surfaces in both xanthosine-treated and control cultures displayed a cobblestone-like morphology typical of epithelial cells in monolayer . this cell morphology is consistent with characteristics of bovine mammary epithelial cells as reported by others  <cit> . the viability assessed by trypan blue staining of xanthosine-treated cells and control cells did not differ . these observations suggest that neither cell morphology nor cell death rate was influenced by xanthosine treatment. the population growth rate was equivalent for both groups until day  <dig> of culture but diverged on days  <dig> –  <dig> . on days  <dig> and  <dig>  xanthosine-treated cultures showed an 18 % increase in cell number over control cultures. cell number plateaued by day  <dig> for both treatment groups, as the cultures reached confluence . doubling time was calculated during the last 3 days of the exponential phase of growth using population doubling time software   <cit> . at passage  <dig>  doubling times were 50 h vs. 66 h for xanthosine and control cultures, respectively . mec from a different cow at passage  <dig> grew more slowly and doubling times were 71 h vs. 106 h for xanthosine and control cultures, respectively . overall, the doubling time of xanthosine-treated cultures was 71 % of that for control cultures.

cell cycle
to assess the impact of xanthosine treatment on the proportion of cells in s-phase, cultures were pulse labeled with the thymidine analogue, brdu. the nuclei of brdu-labeled cells were clearly evident in both control and xanthosine-treated cultures ; but no staining was evident in negative controls for brdu staining, produced by omission of primary antibody  or omission of brdu labeling . consistent with the increased population growth rate of xanthosine-treated cells, cultures that were continuously exposed to xanthosine for five days showed an increase  in the proportion of cells in s-phase  compared with control cultures  . additionally, cell cycle analysis of xanthosine-treated and control cultures demonstrated that the percentage of cells in the s-phase plus g2/m-phases was greater in xanthosine-treated than control cultures . differences in the proliferation indices between these two experiments are likely a function of the duration of brdu labeling and the proliferation status of cells in the two experiments presented. together with the lack of effect of xanthosine on cell viability, these data indicate that xanthosine decreases the culture doubling time by promoting proliferation of mec.

symmetrical cell division and stem/progenitor cells
to evaluate the influence of xanthosine on symmetric/asymmetric division, an in situ immuno-cytochemical assay was used to visualize the distribution of brdu-labeled dna between the two daughter cells of a parental cell division. mec pre-labeled with brdu, were harvested and seeded at a very low cell density  and the distribution of label was then tracked in daughter cells of a parental division. when grown in the absence of xanthosine, 56 % of daughter pairs contained two brdu-positive cells, indicative of symmetrical cell division and the even distribution of brdu-labeled dna between the daughter cells ; whereas 44 % of daughter pairs contained a single brdu-positive cell, indicative asymmetrical parental cell division . in contrast, when cells were incubated with xanthosine, the proportion of cells undergoing symmetrical cell division increased from the 56 % observed in control cultures to 72 % in xanthosine-treated cultures . we assume that these dividing cells contain a substantial proportion of stem cells  and that their population is expanded by the symmetrical division induced by xanthosine. this is consistent with in vitro studies by sherley and colleagues, who demonstrated that in vitro treatment of cells with xanthosine increased symmetrical division of hepatocyte  <cit>  and hair follicle stem cells  <cit> .

additional support for the conclusion that xanthosine increased the population of stem/progenitor cells is provided by increased telomerase activity and fndc3b expression by xanthosine-treated cells. we observed that xanthosine-treated cultures tended to have more telomerase activity  than control cultures  . this trend toward increased telomerase activity in xanthosine-treated cells was consistently observed in repeated experiments. because telomerase activity is primarily found in stem cells and progenitor cells  <cit> , these data are consistent with a xanthosine-induced increase in the population of these cells. furthermore, we showed that xanthosine treatment increased the number of fndc3b-positive cells in culture . fndc3b is a potential marker of bovine mammary stem and progenitor cells that we recently identified by microarray analysis of lrec , which were excised by laser microdissection from cryosections of mammary tissue  <cit> . we quantified the percentage of fndc3b-positive cells at passages  <dig> and  <dig>  and found an increased percentage  of fndc3b-positive cells  in xanthosine-treated cultures compared with control cultures . the decline  in the percentage of fndc3b-positive cells  from passage  <dig> to passage  <dig>  was abrogated by treatment with xanthosine. we believe that our data generated using this putative masc marker has provided the first quantitative evidence in support of the ability of xanthosine to limit the predicted decline in the population of stem cells that was postulated to occur as a result of dilution caused by the preponderance of asymmetric cell kinetics during normal cell culture and passage  <cit> .

this in vitro study strengthens the hypothesis that xanthosine treatment increases the population of bovine mammary stem/progenitor cells. these results are consistent with an earlier in vivo study of prepubertal bovine mammary gland, wherein intramammary infusion of xanthosine increased the population of putative masc, which were identified on the basis of long-term retention of brdu-label  <cit> , the results are also consistent with a recent in vivo study. at the author’s suggestion, colleagues utilized a protocol designed to expand the masc population of transgenic goats by intramammary infusion of inosine, which, like xanthosine, is a guanine nucleotide precursor  <cit> . the treatment resulted in a 62 % increase in milk production, which emphasizes the potential benefits that may be garnered by in vivo modulation of stem cell function.

because masc provide for growth and renewal of the mammary epithelium, the ability to modulate their number provides a means to modulate tissue growth, repair and cell turnover, which in turn can significantly influence animal productivity. in face of an ever-increasing world population, a beneficial effect on animal productivity should not be underappreciated.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we evaluated the impact of xanthosine on proliferation of bovine mec in culture. we found that xanthosine enhanced proliferation of bovine mec. xanthosine increased the number of stem/progenitor cells in culture, as evidenced by an increase in the expression of fndc3b and telomerase activity, and that this was accomplished by enhancing symmetrical division of mammary stem cells. this study provides support for the ability of xanthosine to expand the mammary stem cell population and support for the exciting prospect of regulating mammary stem cell number by treatment with a naturally occurring nucleoside.

