BACKGROUND
a vast array of bacteria, archaea, viruses and eukaryotes inhabit the tract of the human gut and form its microbiome  <cit> . investigation into the composition of this densely packed community and its effect on the host have revealed several benefits derived from the microorganisms such as plant polysaccharide processing and amino acid synthesis  <cit> . the species structure of the community has also been linked to several health problems such as inflammatory bowel disease  <cit>  and obesity  <cit> .

initial studies of the human gut microbiome involved sequencing of the 16s ribosomal rna gene to determine the main constituents of the community. although many organisms observed in these studies were previously uncharacterised  <cit> , members of the phyla firmicutes and bacteroidetes comprised over 90% of the population of known bacterial species within the gut  <cit> . the human microbiome project  utilised both a 16s-based approach and a large-scale study of obese and lean twin pairs, and found that the species composition of the gut microbiome was more similar in related individuals than unrelated individuals  <cit> . however no core species group was observed in all studied individuals. a preliminary investigation of full genome sequences was also performed on a subset of samples in this study, revealing that similar taxonomic profiles were linked to similar metabolic profiles between individuals  <cit> . each of the two main phyla  was associated with enrichment of different metabolic pathways  and although the species composition differed between individuals, there was a relatively high level of functional conservation in the majority of gut microbiomes studied.

associative studies between the human gut microbiome and host factors such as inflammatory bowel disease  and weight have revealed close ties between the composition of the microorganism community and human health  <cit> . metagenomic sequencing of faecal samples from  <dig> european individuals was performed in order to study multiple portions of the community gene pool and link variation in community to ibd  <cit> . a core gut microbiome gene pool was reported along with a proposed list of possible core species. these species were primarily from the two main phyla identified previously, and taxonomic rank abundances were used to distinguish between ibd and non-ibd individuals. taxonomic differences have also been linked to obesity, especially based upon relative abundances of different phyla. turnbaugh et al. found that obese twins had a lower proportion of bacteroidetes than lean twins  <cit> . this relationship between weight and the reduction of bacteroidetes species has also been supported by other studies  <cit> . however, additional studies have found either no significant change in the firmicutes: bacteroidetes ratio  <cit>  or even an increase in bacteroidetes in obese individuals  <cit> .

the aim of our study was to investigate whether links could be made between an individual’s body mass index  and metabolic functions within the microbiome. findings indicate that multiple components of the peptides/nickel transport system show consistent differences in abundance based upon levels of obesity within the sampled individuals. this transporter is comprised of five proteins and is likely used to transport nickel into cells and regulate its intracellular concentration  <cit> , or potentially regulate the expression of cell surface molecules through selective uptake of short peptides  <cit> . despite significant differences in the abundance of complex members, the taxonomic distribution of these proteins did not differ between obese and lean individuals. however, phylogenetic analysis of abundant species, regardless of bmi, revealed that these proteins were likely laterally acquired from other gut-associated microbes, indicating that habitat-directed lgt can influence microbial metabolic systems that are linked to human health.

RESULTS
dataset processing
prediction of open reading frames  from the dataset of  <dig> patients presented in  <cit>  revealed an average of  <dig>  potential orfs per sample. use of blast sequence matching resulted in predicted protein functions for, on average, 46% of the orfs per sample. subsequent characterisation of these putative protein sequence fragments using the kegg database allowed for metabolic classification of 39% of the orfs with blast hits . each microbiome sample had an average of  <dig>  ko groupings containing at least one sequence fragment with a total of  <dig>  kos being present in at least one sample in the dataset.

distributions of predicted metabolic functions between low and high-bmi groups
sequence counts for all  <dig>  kos were compared across patients in order to identify metabolic functions that differ in abundance between low bmi  and high bmi  associated samples. present kegg orthology groups ranged in relative abundance from 4 × 10- <dig>  to  <dig> % of the total assigned proteins, with k <dig>  as the most abundant ko across all patients, regardless of bmi. fifty-two kos were found to differ significantly  in abundance levels between lean- and obese-related samples. the majority of these kos were low in frequency in both bmi categories; apart from the abc transporter mentioned above, only five of the  <dig> kos had a mean proportion in both bmi sets of  <dig> % or higher . k <dig>  in addition to being the most abundant protein in all patients, was 46% more abundant in low-bmi samples. the other four kos that were found to have significant differences in abundances all belong to the peptides/nickel transport system module . this module contains five abc transporter proteins , four of which were found to be significantly more abundant in low-bmi patients  . this transport system contains two atp-binding proteins , two permeases  and one substrate-binding protein . variation in abundances of each ko between patients in the same bmi group  was found to be low, with mean proportions at most  <dig> %. although differences in abundance of k <dig> were not found to be as statistically supported as the other subunits  it was found at similar levels of abundance between patients as the other four members of the transport system. thus k <dig> was included alongside the other subunits in the module in order to identify if specific species are associated with the complex as a whole.


taxonomic assignment of metagenomic fragments associated with nickel transporters
reference phylogenetic trees were constructed for each of the five kos within the peptides/nickel transport complex using proteins from  <dig>  sequenced genomes retrieved from img  <cit>  . habitat metadata from the img database  <cit>  was used to assign species to the human gastrointestinal tract resulting in  <dig> gut-associated species. it was found that these species were spread throughout the trees and did not appear to cluster based upon habitat . we constructed subtrees containing only gut-associated species and assessed the cohesion of taxonomic groups using the consistency index : cis close to  <dig>  indicate perfect clustering of all taxonomic groups at a particular rank, while low cis indicate intermingling of organisms from different groups and are suggestive of lgt, especially if organisms in the same cluster are from very disparate groups. the cis of all trees were less than  <dig>  when evaluated at the ranks of family, class, order and phylum , suggesting a lack of cohesion of major lineages. cis at the genus  and species  levels were higher, indicating less disruption of these groups. examples of disrupted species include faecalibacterium prausnitzii and clostridium difficile in the tree of k <dig> sequences from gut-associated species ; in this case, large evolutionary distances separated sequences associated with strains of the same species. however as such disparities were also observed within the trees containing all species, not just gut-associated strains, further analysis was required to discover whether lgt events were directed by environment.

pplacer  <cit>  was used to place metagenomic fragments onto expanded reference trees for each of the kos of interest. not all fragments were mapped down to species level and thus a proportion was assigned only to a rank of genus or higher. the quantity of reads that were unclassified at different levels due either to lack of placement confidence of the read below a certain taxonomic level or lack of ncbi taxonomy information varied between kos . taxonomic assignment was above 75% at all levels of classification with an average of 93% per rank. fragments that were not mapped below a certain level were labelled as ‘unclassified’ and disregarded in further abundance analysis at that level. in general, firmicutes were the dominant phylum associated with each ko, as is to be expected by their abundance within the gut  <cit> , with the class clostridia and order clostridiales making up the largest proportion of classified reads in each sample. several firmicute genera, including clostridium, blautia, ruminococcus and faecalibacterium, were found to be in relatively high abundance in almost every protein set . members of other phyla such as proteobacteria and actinobacteria also contributed to the species composition of proteins within this complex though these signals were less abundant and consistent than the firmicute members. thus, although correlation of assignments at higher taxonomic ranks was found between kos, this did not extend to the genus level. this could be due to incorrect taxonomic assignments as a result of a deficiency in relevant reference genomes or lack of predictive power from the metagenomic orfs. inconsistencies could also be due to recent lgt events between members of different genera, which would result in discordant taxonomic assignments associated with the recipient species. thus it is possible that this protein complex is present in a smaller, more consistent, set of genera with the human gut microbiome than is observed here.


mapping of species classifications revealed further disparate signals between the kos. within each of the proteins k02031-k <dig>  no single species was represented in more than 9% of taxonomic attributions . collectively, the top four contributing species did not comprise more than 25% of the taxonomic groups associated with any of these kos. as many of the fragments were not classified to the species level , it is difficult to determine exactly what species are most commonly associated with each protein. analysis of the peptides/nickel transport system revealed very little overlap in species composition between the individual proteins of the complex. only faecalibacterium prausnitzii was found in relatively high abundance in all five ko phylogenies, with most other highly abundant species only being highly associated with at most three components. however, all of the most abundantly associated species are resident within either the gut or the oral cavity of the human microbiome. thus, despite low overlap of species composition, fragments were found to be derived from microbes associated with the human alimentary canal as is to be expected.


the most abundant species associated with each ko within the peptides/nickel transport system are shown here. the five most abundant species in each ko are highlighted in bold and also listed for every other ko.

analysis of faecalibacterium prausnitzii strains within reference protein phylogenetic trees
the probable origin of each subunit of the peptides/nickel transport system within f. prausnitzii was examined using full-length protein trees derived from  <dig>  sequenced species. it was found that the five sequenced strains of this species  contained up to  <dig> copies of each gene, which were spread across up to six operons with an average of  <dig>  per strain . operons were classified based upon whether the strains formed a closely related group within the full protein tree of the constituent kos. up to six such groups were found within each protein tree for k02031-k <dig>  resulting in the postulation of six operon types, each with a potential separate origin. each operon type appeared to be derived from an lgt event from strains of various taxonomically spread species . however, most of these species are associated with the human gut microbiome, suggesting that habitat-direct lgt occurred. operon  <dig>  which is complete only in strain a2- <dig>  appears to have been potentially acquired from multiple bacterial species with the atp-binding proteins  separately acquired from the remaining proteins . gene neighbourhood analysis revealed preservation of operon organisation between f. prausnitzii strains and potential donors of operons, though not similarity in flanking regions, adding credence to the possibility of lgt resulting in acquisition of this function. although multiple strains of f. prausnitzii contain each type of operon, suggesting acquisition prior to strain separation, rearrangement of the gene constituents appears to be frequent with inversions observed in operon types  <dig> and  <dig> and potential loss of components in operons  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> .


although high abundance of f. prausnitzii was found in association with the peptides/nickel transport complex, regardless of bmi, analysis of the species abundance associated with changes in bmi revealed no noticeable difference between low and high bmi patients. this could be due to the high numbers of unclassified reads, several cases of lgt confusing the species abundance signals or the difference in gene copy numbers between strains of f. prausnitzii.

CONCLUSIONS
the investigation into function-species relationships undertaken here highlights some important aspects of microbiome studies and the possible inferences that can be made from such information. although there are potential pitfalls with analysis of abundance of functions within a microbiome as has been done here such as insufficient sampling depth or incomplete sequencing of all dna fragments, such approaches have revealed marked differences previously  <cit> . it was found that the abundance of components of the peptides/nickel transport system differed between low and high bmi related samples, likely indicating a link between this system and obesity although such a correlation would require validation on other datasets. taxonomic assignment of ko-associated reads showed that within the peptides/nickel transport system, there are multiple species associated with each ko, with dominance by one species being rare . there are numerous possible reasons for this inconsistency of dominant species between kos. as it is highly implausible that each protein is being created by different species and somehow incorporated separately into the transport systems, it is more likely lgt has resulted in operon or single gene transfers between organisms. this would result in conflicting phylogenetic relationships as observed here and makes determination of the true species involved in pathways difficult. this situation is likely due to the high degree of lgt known to occur in the human gut  <cit> . although the presence of f. prausnitzii in all five ko sets may indicate that this species is one of the dominant organisms involved in this pathway, such extrapolation cannot be confirmed without knowing the exact history of lgt events within the microbiome, or with much deeper sequencing that allows for assembly of large genomic fragments as was performed in  <cit> . therefore further insight into detecting lateral gene transfer within the microbiome and determining the true species involved in each pathway is required before accurate relationships between species, functions and host properties such as disease be made with confidence.

analysis of the peptides/nickel transport complex with f. prausnitzii revealed multiple operons associated with this function, each of which appeared to have been acquired through lateral gene transfer. previous work on fusobacterium nucleatum found an iron transport complex within the genome that resulted both from lgt of an entire operon and separate lgt events of single genes from multiple strains of other species resulting in two other operons of heterogeneous origins  <cit> . within f. prausnitzii it appears that a similar scenario has occurred within the peptides/nickel transporter with six operons types discovered. it was determined that each operon arose from separate lgt events through analysis of congruent gene trees within the operon , which is a strong indicator of lgt  <cit> . five of the six operon types appear to be derived from the transfer of the whole operon into strains of f. prausnitzii, though the presence of the same operon type in some but not all strains suggests such transfers occurred prior to the divergence of certain strains. the remaining operon which was only found in a complete form within strain a2- <dig> appears to have been acquired from multiple sources, with the majority of the genes derived from lachnospiraceae bacterium 3_1_57faa_ct <dig> with the two atp-binding related genes derived from other sources . this may be due to a whole operon transfer followed by subsequent orthologous replacement and demonstrates that although the complexity hypothesis suggests such interactions between a new protein and the pre-existing complex would fail  <cit> , heterogeneous integration can occur and may result in loss of fitness  <cit> , if this operon is active. thus if multiple acquisitions did take place, this could point to a system of gradual gain of novel functions from multiple sources. however, functional assays  would be required to determine if this operon is transcribed and translated into a complex within this strain.

it may be that all five strains of f. prausnitzii acquired this transport system from independent sources within their environment  via gain-of-function lgt or already possessed the operon which was subsequently overwritten by multiple orthologous replacements, making the history of the lateral gene transfers difficult to trace. the relevance of nickel or short peptide transport within this species is difficult to interpret. several enzymes such as ureases, hydrogenases, methane reductases and carbon monoxide dehydrogenases use nickel as a cofactor  <cit>  though f. prausnitzii is not known to have urease activity or many hydrolases  <cit> . however, a relationship between nickel concentration and butyrate production, a product of f. prausnitzii <cit> , has been postulated, and demonstrated in cattle  <cit> . this could indicate that these strains are influencing the levels of butyrate within the surrounding environment. concentrations of butyrate and butyrate-producing bacteria have been associated with lower carbohydrate intake  <cit>  and also reduced obesity in mice  <cit> . this suggests that a subset of the enzymatic functions associated with nickel  <cit> , specifically links to butyrate production and may be connected to levels of obesity with the host, possibly through influence of butyrate production. additionally, as this transport system can also be involved in more general transport of peptide from two to five amino acid residues in length it could be another unknown function being utilised by this species within the human digestive tract habitat. this module was characterised based upon the opp complex in salmonella typhimurium <cit> , which has been shown to be involved in modulating expression of surface-exposed proteins  <cit> . these proteins may be involved in functions such as sporulation and virulence, both of which have been shown to be important in the human gut microbiome  <cit> . thus it is possible that this transporter is not involved in nickel regulation but actually modulating the cell surface responses to the digestive tract environment. as it has been shown that low levels of f. prausnitzii are associated with crohn’s disease  <cit>  and we have shown here that f. prausnitzii may also be associated with obesity, it is likely that lgt of systems such as peptides/nickel transport may contribute to host adaptation of this species, as has been observed with lgt in other species  <cit> , or play a role in determining the importance of the species within the microbiome. however, further experimental analysis would be required to confirm the link between this membrane transport system and host obesity and also determine is precise function.

understanding the effect of habitat-directed lgt is a difficult problem. microbiome data can be utilised to address this as has been shown here. we have found that although an overall signal for clustering of gut-associated organisms was not observed, this is not indicative of a lack of lgt. each protein tree did not correlate exactly with a species tree as would be usually derived from single-gene studies based on 16s or other marker genes. subsequent analysis revealed that some species that were clustered together in the protein trees were from taxonomically distant groups . these species were usually found to be occupying similar environmental niches and were possibly associated with influencing the habitat, in this case the bmi of the host. thus these findings signify that subsets of species may share genetic information within the environment and such lgt may impact how the habitat as a whole is shaped.

