BACKGROUND
using high-throughput molecular approaches, mainly microarrays, several groups of genes have been identified to be associated with cancer  <cit> . molecular profiles have been associated with specific histologic and prognostic tumor subgroups, but the number of genes in the different profiles is too high to be used as signatures for classification. the limited amount of available human tissues and the cost of gene expression screening projects yield the search for classifiers that only depend on small sets of genes. in the pattern recognition literature, the problem of finding a subspace of variables that is enough to distinguish classes of patterns is known as dimensionality reduction. despite the existence of a large literature about dimensionality reduction  <cit> , most of it does not apply for classification from gene expression vectors due to lack of observed data. typically, we have spaces of some thousands of genes and would like to get subspaces of two or three genes from the observation of some dozens of expression vectors. to overcome this difficulty, the strong genes technique adopts a probabilistic model for the random vector distribution of each class: the union of round uniform spread functions, which are estimated from the observed data  <cit> . the strong genes technique was proposed in  <cit>  and used for glioma classification with microarrays. the estimated model is projected onto a sub-space of a small number of variables n where the error of the optimum linear classifier is computed. this procedure is repeated for all subspaces of n variables and the genes n-tuple quality is evaluated by the corresponding classification error: the best n-tuples generate the best separators and, therefore, those that have smallest errors. the original version of this procedure requires hours in a supercomputer. nevertheless, an approximation technique was recently developed which requires just some minutes in a conventional desktop computer  <cit> .

a large scale approach widely used in gene expression studies is the serial analysis of gene expression   <cit> . sage uses a very different approach compared to microarrays for measuring mrna levels. first, double stranded cdna is created from the mrna. a single  <dig> base pair "sequence tag" is cut from a specific location in each cdna. the sequence tags are concatenated into a long double stranded dna which can then be amplified and sequenced. the expression of a gene in a given experiment is estimated just by counting the number of tags in the sequence corresponding to that gene, thus providing absolute transcript numbers and allowing statistical comparisons of data from multiple laboratories.

vêncio et al.  <cit>  modeled sage gene expression measurements by a beta distribution and applied bayesian estimation to calculate the corresponding credibility interval, thus providing an important tool for statistical analysis of sage data. it is important to note that, in contrast to microarray where the data formation probabilistic model is unknown, the model representing sage gene expression provides further statistical information that allows a more robust analysis. the additional statistical information provided by the probabilistic model is incorporated in the methodology described in the paper. we explored the sage statistical model and modified the strong genes technique in order to make it suitable for distinguishing classes of patterns from sage measurements. due to important differences in the probabilistic models of microarray and sage technologies, we propose the concept of subspace credibility. this concept, based on the aforementioned credibility intervals of sage measurements introduced in  <cit> , is used to complement the application of the strong genes technique. the credibility gives a measure of the distance between the two classes according to the credibility interval model. the best chosen subspaces are those that have both minimum bolstered error  and maximum credibility. a score taking into account these two measures is proposed in the present work.

therefore, the resulting new methodology allows the application of the strong genes technique to sage data in order to select gene subspaces in a consistent way under the perspective of the aforementioned sage gene expression measurements model. the double criterion allows gene selection in a more feasible way when sage data is involved. the proposed technique was applied to distinguish glioma tumors and the results are reported. according to the world health organization  classification of brain tumors, gliomas are divided in low-grade  and high-grade  tumors. low-grade tumors are well-differentiated, slow-growing lesions. grade i tumors are well-circumscribed and often curable, whereas grade ii, iii and iv tumors are diffuse, infiltrating lesions. grade ii tumors have a marked potential overtime for progression towards a high-grade malignant tumor.

RESULTS
the introduced methodology was applied to sage data to identify genes that were putatively related to neurological tumor progression. table  <dig> shows the different anatomopathological comparisons and the number of libraries in each class.

the first  <dig> ranked triples according to the introduced approach  were considered out of about  <dig> billion possible triples. the sets of triples obtained in all comparisons ordered by the bolstered error and by the introduced score  are available at the supplemental material web-site  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows a list of the first  <dig> ranked triples in the normal × glioblastoma comparison. when the compared classes are very distant with respect to the error, it is very difficult to choose the best triple from the first  <dig> ones because either the errors are very small  or they are very similar. this fact is due to the small sample size. when the distance between classes is smaller, although the triples may be ranked using the error, it is still difficult to choose the best triple since the error variation between the triples is too small. in order to circumvent these problems, it is important to take into account the credibility measure for each expression measurement based on the total number of tags counted in each library. this is accomplished by the score measure defined by equation  <dig> which incorporates the error and the credibility measures to rank the triples. the application of the score shows that, despite of a low error and a large distance, some triples are no longer ranked in the top positions as they were by only using the error criterion because the credibility value is too low. this means that the proximity of some samples of one group with samples of the other may be large considering the location, volume and edge size of each credibility interval box. figure  <dig> shows an example of a three-dimensional plot representing the credibility interval boxes for the best triple produced by the system for the astrocytoma iii vs glioblastoma experiment. note that this triple reliably separates the two classes taking into account the credibility boxes.

according to table  <dig>  the credibility provides robustness to the selection since the standard deviation of the distances and of the bolstered errors for the  <dig> first ranked triples using the score are smaller than the counterpart using only the error. moreover, it may be observed that the  <dig> most frequent genes in the first  <dig> triples for each comparison depend on whether the score is used or not.

discussion
one of the goals for gene expression profiling is to identify signatures of tumor types or grades. attempts have been made to classify gliomas based on gene expression profiling  <cit>  using the microarray technique. some molecular functions and biological processes are over-represented in different tumor grades. due to important differences in the probabilistic models of microarray and sage techniques, the concept of a subspace credibility based on the credibility intervals of sage measurements was developed in order to complement the application of the strong genes technique. the microarray expression measurement is based on hybridization and optical phenomena while sage is based on a direct molecular counting process. therefore, they have quite different probabilistic distributions. the strong genes technique is based on a gaussian distribution model whereas sage follows a binomial distribution. in such conditions, the direct application of the strong genes technique to sage data is meaningful only for gene triples that present highly separated classes. the concept of credibility intervals was precisely created to evaluate the significance of the application of the strong genes technique to a binomial distribution expression measure. furthermore, the credibility intervals are estimated from the available sample and increase for smaller sample sizes. hence, the condition for accepting gene triples measured from small samples is very severe, i.e. they should produce very separated classes to be accepted.

the presented results revealed that, by using the score based on the spread error and the credibility, the selected triples could separate the distinct classes. the credibility analysis of strong genes was validated by comparing previous results of glioma microarray data analysis to the results of its application to glioma sage data. some genes already described as related to glioma's invasion capacity by microarray studies such as spock <dig>  <cit> , bcl2l <dig>  <cit> , eef1a <dig>  <cit>  and tmeff <dig>  <cit>  also appeared in the  <dig> first best triples. they are related to cell adhesion, regulation of apoptosis and translation elongation. it is important to notice that the pathways to which these genes belong could help understanding the disease progression. for example, it was shown that fibroblast growth factor-inducible  <dig>  is overexpressed in migrating glioma cells in vitro and in glioblastoma multiforme clinical specimens in vivo. the biological role of fn <dig> in brain cancer progression was correlated to fn <dig> activation and induction of bcl2l <dig> mrna and protein levels, and this effect depended on nfkappab transcriptional activity  <cit> . on the other hand, some retrieved genes that were never related to gliomas progression but involved in structural/extracellular matrix-related genes or growth factor-related genes, such as parva and shoc <dig>  appear among the  <dig> most frequent genes in the  <dig> best triples only when the score with credibility is applied. besides, because of the fact that structural/extracellular matrix-related genes or growth factor-related genes have an important role in glial tumors  <cit> , it was recently suggested that shoc <dig> function is essential for activation of mapk pathway by growth factors  <cit> .

however, other genes usually related to gliomas such as vegf or igfbp <dig> were not present in the first triples. there are some reasons for this fact. the first is that the vegf was excluded from the analysis by the adopted criterion of tags exclusion . even so, this gene presented low representativity . for the case of igfbp <dig>  this gene was included in the set of analyzed genes, but the discrimination power is not enough to appear in the best triples. figures 4- <dig> shows four graphics for the astrocytoma ii and iii versus glioblastoma comparison that illustrate the difference of the discrimination power of vegf and igfbp <dig> with respect to cops <dig> and zdhhc <dig>  the two last ones presented the highest frequencies in the first  <dig> best triples for the considered comparison.

the difference of the results presented by microarray and sage methods may be explained by the particularities of each method. the spearman correlation between these two methods is r =  <dig>  in both absolute expression and comparative analysis  <cit> . the microarray and sage results tend to be consistent when both samples are large enough and there are triples that produce highly separated classes. in other conditions, such results may not be consistent. in the case of the results here reported, the small sage sample size explains why some well known glioma genes were out of our best triples.

CONCLUSIONS
even using the credibility intervals, which is feasible for sage but not for microarray data, it is difficult to define the "best triple" because of the small sample size and high data variability. because of such statistical limitations, it is more realistic to identify larger sets of genes in the top position triples for posterior analysis. the introduced methodology allows ranking a given number of best candidates to be subsequently analyzed in a complementary way. the introduced method is suitable to define the triples that perform a good separation of the classes using sage since it is possible to use data from different laboratories. it is important to note that our model may also be applied for other counting methods such as massive parallel signature sequencing  or the recent sequencing-by-synthesis  technique. moreover, some of the best triples identified by the proposed method may be useful in the future to generate classifiers.

