BACKGROUND
poison frogs provide a classic example of aposematism, in that they possess warning colors and/or patterns directed towards predators and are protected by alkaloid-based chemical defenses
 <cit> . alkaloid defenses have been detected in five families of poison frogs: dendrobatidae
 <cit> , mantellidae
 <cit> , bufonidae in the genus melanophryniscus <cit> , myobatrachidae in the genus psuedophryne <cit> , and recently in diminutive cuban members of eleutherodactylidae
 <cit> . for a full review of the chemical sequestration in poison frog families see
 <cit> .

the family dendrobatidae contains a high diversity of frog species and alkaloids
 <cit> , providing a number of unique opportunities to study the link between aposematism and chemical defense. alkaloid defenses in all poison frogs  are sequestered from an arthropod diet
 <cit> , consisting primarily of mites, ants, beetles, and millipedes . accompanying the ability to sequester alkaloid defenses, many species exhibit substantial polytypism in color and pattern across their geographic range
 <cit> . the presence of such polytypisms appears to contradict certain theoretical predictions, in particular, the hypothesis that predators exert strong selective pressure to maintain monomorphism as a result of learned avoidance
 <cit> . indeed, a number of studies using clay model replicas of dendrobatid frogs have shown that natural predators exert purifying selection, and “favor” one color morph within populations
 <cit> ; however, one study indicated that at low prey densities the effect of this stabilizing selection is limited
 <cit> . in addition to phenotypic variation, many dendrobatids exhibit substantial variation in alkaloid defense, both geographically and temporally
 <cit> , and across and within populations
 <cit> .

ranitomeya imitator <cit>  is a polytypic poison frog species that appears to have gone through a rapid ‘mimetic radiation’ to adverge on to the morphological appearance of multiple congeneric species throughout its range
 <cit> ; however see
 <cit> . advergence is the process whereby one species evolves to appear similar to another  species, as opposed to convergence, a process in which two or more species evolve towards monomorphism
 <cit> . there are four described allopatric mimetic populations of r. imitator in the departments of san martin and loreto in northern peru 
 <cit> . ranitomeya imitator was described as the advergent ‘mimic’ due to extremely short branch lengths in phylogenetic trees compared to its congeneric co-mimetic species r. variabilis  and r. summersi <cit> . chouteau et al. <cit>  raised concerns about the usage of these terms based on genetic differentiation between two close populations of co-mimetic r. imitator and r. variabilis. however, phylogeographic evidence provides additional support for the advergence hypothesis, with r. imitator mimicking two other  species in other localities
 <cit> . there is also evidence for recent divergence under selection in r. imitator <cit> , and evidence for multiple independent lineages of a highland spotted morph of r. variabilis, even in areas well outside the range of r. imitator <cit> . although we typically refer to these species as “co-mimics” throughout the paper, when relevant we use the term ‘mimic’ to refer to r. imitator and ‘model’ to refer to co-mimetic congeners .

the mimetic complexes involving ranitomeya imitator are considered an example of a müllerian mimicry system in vertebrates
 <cit> , and provide a close parallel to the well-known müllerian mimicry systems of heliconius butterflies
 <cit> . however, the hypothesis of müllerian mimicry in ranitomeya was only recently tested in a study describing reciprocal learned avoidance by predators between co-mimetic r. variabilis and r. imitator <cit> . reciprocal learned avoidance is a key tenet of müllerian mimicry, and the results of stuckert et al. <cit>  support the hypothesis of a müllerian mimicry system—the first known in anurans. other putative müllerian complexes exist in anurans  and leptodactylus lineatus 
 <cit> , and among other members of the genus ranitomeya <cit> ), but these have not been experimentally verified.

another key tenet of the hypothesis of müllerian mimicry is that co-mimetic species all possess a secondary defense  against predators. learned avoidance by predators in this system is seemingly a good indication of the presence of an alkaloid defense
 <cit> . however, here, we explicitly test each mimetic species for the presence, quantity, and identity of alkaloids. the presence of alkaloids in these species would provide significant support for the hypothesis that this is a müllerian mimicry system.

because alkaloid defenses in poison frogs are sequestered from dietary sources
 <cit> , and the species we are examining are congenerics with similar ecologies, we would expect sympatric müllerian co-mimics in this system to possess similar defense profiles. alternatively, mimetic species that differ in their chemical protection may not behave as müllerian mimics, even if they are both chemically defended. instead, differences in defensive chemicals between species may decrease the efficiency of learned avoidance, in particular when predators sample prey that are less toxic  than individuals sampled previously
 <cit> ; however see
 <cit>  for counter-arguments. in the present study, we further examine the hypothesis that the co-mimetic species are müllerian mimicry systems by examining alkaloid defenses between co-mimetic species and broadening the scope of examined mimetic complexes.

to investigate the relationships between chemical defenses among co-mimetic species, we characterized the alkaloids of r. imitator and its congeneric co-mimics  in four allopatric mimetic complexes. this study covers the majority of the range of r. imitator and examines all known mimetic complexes of the species. in this paper, we present a detailed study of the chemical secondary defenses in the genus ranitomeya, as well as the only study of chemical secondary defenses in the context of müllerian mimicry in amphibians. our study provides valuable insight into the workings of the only confirmed system of müllerian mimicry in anurans. it thus has substantial implications for our understanding of mimicry in other mimetic anuran systems, for parallel systems in heliconius butterflies, and for müllerian mimicry in general.

RESULTS
alkaloid composition varied significantly among sites , and there was a significant difference in alkaloid composition between species within each site .

ranitomeya imitator had a greater number of alkaloids than the co-existing mimetic species for each site. this difference was statistically significant in the sauce banded morph of r. imitator and r. summersi  and the varadero orange-headed morph of r. imitator and r. fantastica , and was suggestive of a trend in the tarapoto spotted morph of r. imitator and r. variabilis  and the pongo de cainarachi striped population of r. imitator and r. variabilis .

ranitomeya imitator also had a greater quantity of alkaloids than its müllerian co-mimic in every site except for the varadero population . the variation in alkaloid quantity within mimetic species within a site is vast, however, and our sample size was low in an effort to reduce the number of frogs sacrificed. thus, the difference is only statistically significant between r. imitator and r. summersi from sauce  and the tarapoto site with r. imitator and r. variabilis . the pongo site  was not significant .

a total of  <dig> alkaloids, representing  <dig> different structural classes, were identified from skin extracts examined in this study. the most common and widespread alkaloids, found in at least one individual from each population, were the histrionicotoxins  235a, 259a, 261a, and 285a , the  <dig> -disubstituted decahydroquinolines  219a and 243a, and the  <dig> -disubstituted indolizidine  223ab. all of these alkaloids are likely derived from dietary ants
 <cit> , suggesting that ants play a major role in the chemical defenses of these frog populations. data on the class, type, and quantity of alkaloids present within individual frogs are available in additional file
 <dig> 

discussion
numerous authors have postulated that the mimetic complexes of ranitomeya represent a müllerian system , and recent experimental evidence supports the hypothesis of müllerian mimicry based on learned avoidance by predators
 <cit> . one key prediction of müllerian mimicry is the presence of chemical defenses in all mimetic species. our data demonstrate for the first time that all ranitomeya species involved in the mimetic complexes possess alkaloid defenses. this is a key tenet of müllerian mimicry, and chemically defended co-mimetic species are likely to contribute to learned avoidance by predators. these findings provide further support of the hypothesis of müllerian mimicry and evidence that all of these allopatric populations are likely an example of müllerian mimicry.

prior work examining mimicry among these mimetic species has posited that r. variabilis is less palatable to predators when compared to r. imitator <cit> . interestingly, the alkaloid data presented here illustrate that r. imitator contains significantly more alkaloids than its model species within most localities, suggesting that differences in palatability may not always be related to the number or quantity of alkaloids, but rather the specific types of alkaloids present in a frog. the manner in which individual alkaloids affect potential predators are virtually unknown, and similarly no data exist on the effects of complex alkaloid mixtures on potential predators. it is likely that different alkaloids possess different levels of palatability, and therefore differences in the presence or quantity of these particular alkaloids are most important to predator avoidance. stuckert et al. <cit>  found no evidence that r. imitator elicited a greater avoidance response than the co-mimetic r. variabilis, suggesting that not all the differences in alkaloids are strongly correlated with predator response and, importantly, learned avoidance by predators.

there are two possible mechanisms to explain the difference in alkaloids between r. imitator and its congeners. the first is a genetic difference that might allow for more rapid or efficient sequestration in r. imitator when compared to r. variabilis. although an intriguing possibility, this explanation seems improbable due to the close phylogenetic relationships between these species
 <cit> . it is, however, possible that genes related to alkaloid sequestration are under a strong selective force and are rapidly evolving. the second, and more likely, explanation is a difference in arthropod diet, primarily resulting from differential microhabitat usage. although these co-mimetic species frequently co-occur in the same habitats, ranitomeya imitator is more commonly found in early secondary forests or disturbed portions of forest, due to the abundance of reproductive resources , whereas the co-mimetic model species  are typically found in more pristine forest  and are more arboreal
 <cit> . the difference in microhabitat usage between these species may put r. imitator in contact with increased quantities of ant-derived toxins  more frequently than its co-mimetic species. this is similar to mantella baroni, which has been shown to possess more alkaloids in disturbed habitats
 <cit> . indeed, the data presented here indicate a significant difference in alkaloid composition between r. imitator and its model species, with much of this being driven by differences in quantity of the structurally similar ant-derived alkaloids. a detailed analysis of frog diet and arthropod abundance/distribution in this system would provide further insight on the observed differences in alkaloid defenses between species in this study.

another possibility is that an increase in abundance of r. imitator compared to its initial mimetic radiation has decreased the selective pressure on its co-mimetic model species. ranitomeya imitator adverged on to the appearance of already established congeneric species , and presumably, r. imitator was under selective pressure to mimic already established species during this mimetic radiation
 <cit> . however, since becoming established, r. imitator has become more abundant than its sympatric model species
 <cit> , thus we expect predators to come in to contact with r. imitator more frequently than the co-mimetic model species. as a result, the majority of predator learned avoidance will be driven by r. imitator, likely benefitting the rarer co-mimetic species
 <cit> . if alkaloids are in fact costly to sequester
 <cit> , and dietary specialization is associated with increased metabolic rates
 <cit> , we might expect a reduction in alkaloid defenses of the co-mimetic species. although speculative, the proliferation of r. imitator  could reduce the pressure on these less common co-mimetic species to maintain high levels of alkaloid defense, thus allowing them to allocate resources away from sequestering alkaloids and towards reaching sexual maturity and reproduction.

intriguingly, the varadero locality where r. imitator is co-mimetic with r. fantastica is the only population in which the model species possessed a slightly greater quantity of alkaloids than r. imitator . ranitomeya fantastica is present throughout much of the range of r. imitator included in this study , yet r. imitator evolved to mimic r. variabilis in these areas. near pongo de cainarachi there is a population in which r. imitator, r. variabilis, and r. fantastica have all evolved a striped morph. however, this tri-mimicry occurs over a very restricted range, and r. fantastica is highly polytypic throughout the rest of the range of the striped morph of r. variabilis and r. imitator. as a result, we think that r. variabilis is the species that drove the evolution of this tri-mimicry. given our alkaloid data, it remains unclear why r. imitator adverged on to r. variabilis throughout most of its range as opposed to r. fantastica, which possesses more alkaloids than r. imitator in the sympatric site we sampled . we propose that this occurred due to the greater phenotypic variation found in r. fantastica throughout this range, and because r. variabilis is more commonly encountered than r. fantastica in these areas
 <cit> , although it is possible that r. imitator looked more similar to the local r. variabilis than r. fantastica when they initially came in to contact. aposematism and mimicry are frequency-dependent
 <cit> , thus we would expect a more abundant  to be a better model for an advergent mimic. if r. imitator evolved to mimic r. variabilis instead of r. fantastica due to abundance, this may indicate that differences in encounter rates can significantly influence the evolution of müllerian mimicry, as predicted by theory.

our data also indicate substantial intrapopulation variation in the alkaloid defenses between individuals . similar results have been found in other poison frogs
 <cit> . it is possible that automimicry in these mimetic complexes, particularly within r. imitator, may play a major role in both educating predators and maintaining learned avoidance in predators. automimicry describes the existence of non-defended prey in sympatry with defended conspecifics
 <cit> , but the effects may be similar for species in which individuals vary greatly in their chemical defenses. poison frogs sequester alkaloids from dietary sources
 <cit>  and the accumulation of these toxins likely results in automimicry within poison frog systems
 <cit> . automimicry is perhaps unsurprising in poison frog systems given that arthropod systems also exhibit substantial variation in toxicity and are automimetic . variation in alkaloid defenses within populations of poison frogs may result from the additive effect of temporal sequestration throughout life and patchy prey availability. automimicry may be an important avenue of future research and we encourage theoretical studies of co-mimetic species that add a component of automimicry to the models.

CONCLUSIONS
this study presents the most complete examination of alkaloid defense in the genus ranitomeya to date, including analyses of four allopatric mimetic complexes of congenerics. this study demonstrates that all species from these allopatric mimetic complexes possess alkaloids, which is a key tenet of the hypothesis of müllerian mimicry. thus, these data provide further support of the hypothesis of müllerian mimicry in these allopatric complexes. coupled with prior data indicating reciprocal learned avoidance by predators in this system
 <cit>  this provides very strong evidence that these mimetic complexes are müllerian in nature. we further provide evidence that raw alkaloid data may not correlate well with unpalatability  from a predator’s perspective and additionally propose that automimicry may be acting in this system due to high levels of intrapopulation variation in alkaloid profiles.

