BACKGROUND
staphylococcus aureus is a common human pathogen. it is known to be highly adaptable, as shown in the rapid development of resistance to most known antibiotics. much research in the last decade has been devoted to discovering new broad-spectrum antibiotic agents. a large proportion of effective antibiotics act on the cell wall which has been taken as an adequate target in the development of new drugs. most cell wall active antibiotics in clinical use, for example β-lactams and glycopeptides, act by inhibiting late steps of peptidoglycan synthesis on the outer side of the cell membrane. the enzymes that catalyze the intracellular part of the peptidoglycan synthesis pathway, muramyl peptide ligases , are also good candidates for antibiotic drug targeting, because human cells do not synthesize similar enzymes. inhibition of these enzymes causes substantial impairment of bacterial cell wall biosynthesis which, at higher doses of inhibitor, leads to decreased cell growth and to cell lysis. however, only two antibiotic agents targeting mur enzymes are in clinical use, fosfomycin and cycloserine. fosfomycin is a potent irreversible inhibitor of mura, an enolpyruvyl transferase that catalyses the condensation of uridine diphosphate-n-acetylglucosamine with phosphoenolpyruvate   <cit> . this reaction is the first step in the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway.

genome-scale expression profiling, using microarray technology, can be used to determine potential drug targets  <cit> . the staphylococcus aureus microarray meta-database  contains sets of differentially expressed genes, identified by published s. aureus expression profiling experiments. this database simplifies comparison of experimental data and provides a quick overview of published experiments for this bacterium.

our goal is to develop a platform for transcriptional profiling of new mur ligase inhibitors. as a reference, the transcription profile was determined for the well characterized inhibitor of mura ligase, fosfomycin. we have focused on the pathways and processes primarily affected by fosfomycin. in contrast to other genome-wide profiling studies of pathogen responses to antimicrobial substances, we have studied the response to low concentrations of antimicrobial agent early after its addition. an innovative data analysis approach, complemented by newly devised visualization tools, pathway analysis and meta-analysis of similar experiments, enabled us to identify differentially expressed gene groups and pathways, and to conclude that the response of the bacterium to fosfomycin is not only time but also concentration dependent.

RESULTS
the experiment was designed to enable detection of primary effects of fosfomycin treatment, as opposed to the cell death related effects observed after prolonged exposure to high drug concentrations. the longest time of exposure was chosen to be  <dig> min, which is approximately one cell cycle. two concentrations of fosfomycin were used,  <dig> μg/ml and  <dig> μg/ml, which affected bacterial growth only slightly . the samples were processed and the data obtained analyzed according to strict protocol as shown schematically in figure  <dig> 

time and concentration dependent effects of fosfomycin
the profile of differentially expressed genes varied substantially with time following treatment with fosfomycin. after ten minutes, only a small proportion of genes were significantly differentially expressed . this first time point was too short to detect global changes at the level of gene expression. the reaction to fosfomycin became more evident after  <dig> min and  <dig> min of incubation. the greatest number of differentially expressed genes was found at  <dig> μg/ml fosfomycin concentration, after  <dig> min incubation  . not surprisingly, at both concentrations, the later time points were more similar to one another than to the time point  <dig> min of incubation in terms of common differentially expressed genes .

the concentration dependence of the transcriptome response was also observed at the individual gene level. for example, alanine racemase gene sa <dig>  some transporter genes  and amino acid biosynthesis genes dhom and hisc were significantly differentially expressed only at higher concentrations of fosfomycin .

metabolic pathways affected by fosfomycin treatment
analysis of gene groups and metabolic pathways is suitable for biological interpretation of microarray analysis results, where grouping is essential to retain the overview. we have chosen tigrfam functional classification to group s. aureus genes by the known or predicted biochemical role of the protein they encode. the greatest proportion of differentially expressed genes belong to the groups "cell envelope", "transport and binding proteins" and "energy metabolism", indicating that these were the processes affected most by fosfomycin . a global transcriptional response became evident after  <dig> min of incubation. interestingly, mainly the same processes were affected at both concentrations.

the results of pathway analysis obtained by the different approaches - one classifying differentially expressed genes , the other comparing the whole expression profiles by gene set enrichment analysis   - were similar, confirming the biological significance of the results. both approaches show that fosfomycin downregulated genes for amino acid biosynthesis, transport, and energy metabolism, but upregulated those for protein synthesis and protein fate . interestingly, gsea shows that for cell envelope genes, purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis, and for regulatory genes, the switch in transcription regulation, occurred  <dig> min after treatment. the upregulation of genes for cell division after  <dig> min of treatment  is important, since many components of this process are involved in cell envelope biosynthesis.

downregulation corresponds to negative correlation and upregulation corresponds to positive correlation with the fosfomycin concentration. numbers show false discovery rates . only gene sets with fdr <  <dig>  in at least one time point are shown; bold is used when fdr <  <dig> .

to strengthen the reliability of the microarray data, qpcr analysis was performed for five differentially expressed genes - two peptidoglycan biosynthesis genes, murz and sgtb, autolysin gene atl, cofactor biosynthesis gene ribb and oligopeptide transporter gene oppb .

cell envelope synthesis is strongly affected by fosfomycin treatment
the gsea results showed that specific subgroups of genes in the cell envelope group were regulated differently . genes involved in murein and peptidoglycan biosynthesis, including teichoic acid biosynthesis genes, were upregulated, while surface polysaccharide metabolism genes were downregulated.

to interpret the changes in gene expression we visualized the data in pathway studio software. since the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway is not complete in the existing metabolic network  <cit> , the pathway was complemented with literature data. the .gpc file  can be used by the scientific comunity to interpret gene expression data, enabling ready visual comparison of experimental results from different studies.

fosfomycin caused weak upregulation of several mur genes  that encode enzymes involved in the first step of peptidoglycan biosynthesis . this was observed at time point t40c <dig> only. the most strongly induced of the mur genes was that encoding murz, a mura homologue enzyme. fosfomycin inhibits both mura and murz, which are essential to gram positive bacteria  <cit> . nevertheless, the mura gene  was not found to be significantly differentially expressed. interestingly, some genes encoding enzymes acting in the final phases of peptidoglycan synthesis - pbpa, baca, and sgtb - were more induced than the gene encoding the target enzyme . this suggests that inhibition of mura and murz affects transcription of the whole metabolic pathway. in contrast to escherichia coli, peptidoglycan biosynthetic genes in s. aureus are distributed evenly throughout the chromosome and are regulated independently. as shown by sobral et al.  <cit> , there is a striking complexity of transcription level links that connect a large number of diverse cellular functions to any particular step in cell wall synthesis.

autolysin coding genes atl, lyth, sa <dig>  and sa <dig> were downregulated at t40c <dig>  whereas lytm was upregulated by fosfomycin at that point  suggesting the prevention of further degradation of peptidoglycan. as well as in cell wall stress, gene atl has been found to be downregulated in acid shock  <cit> , sos response and, cold shock, but upregulated in stringent response  <cit> .

a set of s. aureus genes responding to cell wall active antibiotics, termed the "cell wall stress stimulon", were first described by utaida et al.  <cit> . they showed an orchestrated response following treatment with antibiotics acting at different stages of cell wall biosynthesis, either intra-  or extra-cellularly , at different exposure times and concentrations. the qualitative comparison of differential expression of the cell wall stress stimulon genes in our and previously described studies is presented in table  <dig>  despite the different experimental conditions, the cell wall stress stimulon genes react in a similar manner, independently of the bacterial strain and incubation time. moreover, in our experiment, the transcriptional response of these genes is seen to be time and concentration dependent . their expression is controlled mainly by the vrasr two component system and it has been shown that the vrasr regulon is induced specifically only by cell-wall-active antibiotics  <cit> . fosfomycin strongly induced the vras  and vrar  genes and many of the genes they regulate - not only cell wall synthesis genes but also those for chaperones, heat shock proteins and osmoprotectant transporters. the rib and ure operons, involved in cofactor biosynthesis and urea degradation and, which were induced by some cell-wall-active antibiotics, were also induced at the latest time point in our experiment.

a s. aureus n <dig> genome orf locus.

b previously described gene name.

c gene expression log <dig> fold change of treated vs. non-treated bacteria. abbreviations correspond to experimental design points.

d previously reported expression increase  or decrease  of cell-wall-antibiotic treated vs. non-treated bacteria.

e gene product functional annotation.

a transcriptional response specific to mura inhibition
we performed a meta-analysis to identify groups of genes responding differently to fosfomycin and to other antibiotic treatments. for example, the transcriptional response to ciprofloxacin  <cit> , an inhibitor of bacterial dna gyrase, is clearly different from that of fosfomycin, because the cell wall stress stimulon genes were not activated. similarly, the transcriptional profile of the antiseptic compound triclosan, that targets fatty acid biosynthesis  <cit> , confirms the specificity of the cell wall stress response. the effects of fosfomycin on s. aureus metabolism, supported by our transcription data, are schematized in figure  <dig>  the inhibition of mura causes accumulation of its substrate phosphoenolpyruvate  which is known to act as a carbon starvation signal. pep accumulation was shown to be responsible for downregulation of several central metabolism genes and nucleic acid biosynthesis genes in different organisms including bacteria  <cit> . a downregulation of pur and pyr operons was observed at the latest time point. downregulation of both operons has also been reported in the sos response  <cit> , acid-shock response  <cit> , ciprofloxacin response  <cit>  and in the s. aureus murf underexpression mutant  <cit> .

in order to reach target enzymes mura and murz, fosfomycin has to cross the cell membrane. because of its hydrophilic nature it uses the active transport systems , specifically the l-α-glycerophosphate and the glucose-6-phosphate uptake systems  <cit> . the pep phosphotransferase system  mediates the uptake and phosphorylation of carbohydrates and controls metabolism in response to carbohydrate availability, and can therefore affect the whole cell metabolic rate  <cit> . gsea shows that pts was downregulated by fosfomycin  <dig> and  <dig> minutes after treatment. this downregulation could be a defense mechanism against the influx of fosfomycin. it has been reported that pts mutant bacteria are highly resistant to fosfomycin  <cit>  and that some fosfomycin-resistant e. coli isolates have altered glpt and/or uhp transport systems  <cit> . the downregulation of pts genes can also contribute to pep accumulation  <cit> . as shown in figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  transport processes in general were significantly downregulated. the majority of differentially expressed genes in this group encode proteins that transport oligopeptides , amino acids, sugars, polyamines  and cations into the cell. genes encoding iron transport and binding proteins, belonging to the isd system, were also downregulated similarly as in a murf underexpression mutant study  <cit> . however, a small proportion of transport genes were upregulated, including some amino acid and oligopeptide carrier genes and the sodium/hydrogen exchanger genes mnhbcdeg.

the energy metabolism group, consisting of genes involved in sugar metabolism, amino acid degradation and tca cycle, were generally downregulated , consistent with a starvation response. the downregulated amino acid metabolism genes include met and dap operons; additionally, the aspartate family was shown to be significantly downregulated by gsea . upregulated amino acid metabolism genes include genes involved in cysteine biosynthesis and synthesis of cystathionine. various trna synthetases, probably connected to amino acid biosynthesis, were also downregulated.

strong downregulation of virulence genes by fosfomycin was observed, especially  <dig> min after treatment. these genes include hla, spa, aur, sspabc and  <dig> cap genes  encoding capsular polysaccharide synthesis enzymes. capsular genes were also downregulated in the sos response  <cit> , but upregulated by cycloserine treatment  <cit> , sigb mutant  <cit>  and biofilm forming s. aureus  <cit> . it has been shown that cap genes and various virulence factors are regulated by sae and agr global regulatory proteins. it was shown that agr causes induction, and sae repression, of cap genes  <cit> , but in our experiments none of these regulatory genes were differentially expressed.

CONCLUSIONS
a pathway-based approach enabled us to determine that the response of s. aureus to fosfomycin is not only time but also concentration dependent, and that the major transcriptional switch occurred after  <dig> to  <dig> min of treatment. the fosfomycin response was similar to those of other cell-wall-active antibiotics in the cell envelope pathway and the cell wall stress stimulon genes. however, in contrast to previously described cell-wall-active antibiotic treatments, we have identified several pathways and genes downregulated by fosfomycin, such as transport, nucleic acid biosynthesis, energy metabolism and virulence genes. the downregulation of these pathways was explained by a starvation response induced by pep accumulation. we have shown that transcriptomic profiling, in combination with meta-analysis, is a valuable tool in determining bacterial response to a specific antibiotic.

