BACKGROUND
sediment-associated marine meiofaunal organisms inhabit one of the largest ecosystems on earth – sediment-covered ocean floors and beaches – and comprise a major part of marine biodiversity  <cit> . however, only a small fraction of the predicted species richness currently is known to science  <cit>  and recent surveys have shown a high number of new, undescribed species even in well-studied areas . minute body sizes often prohibit direct visual identification in the field; instead, morphological identification generally requires time-consuming, technologically sophisticated anatomical studies. additionally, taxonomy frequently is complicated by morphological convergence and/or pronounced intraspecific variation . in acochlidia, the most diverse group of meiofaunal slugs, the microhedylacea, shows ‘regressive evolution’  <cit> , exhibiting highly simplified organ systems and little morphological diversity even at higher taxonomic levels  <cit> . thus, it is challenging to use only morphology to delimit species boundaries in meiofaunal slugs. in consequence of the fragmentary knowledge of meiofaunal taxonomy, this fauna is frequently neglected in conservation and biogeography, and ecological analyses remain superficial despite the undoubted importance of meiofauna; e.g., in the food chain  <cit> .

for taxon-specific analyses, dna-barcoding has been advocated as a fast and efficient way to reduce the taxonomic deficit and automate taxon determination for ecological research  <cit> . dna-barcoding in its simple, similarity-based form of species identification  <cit>  is not predictive; it fails if no identical sequence has yet been determined and deposited in a voucher database, or if no limit in species boundaries has been established  <cit> . in well-known taxa with good sampling coverage, identification rates via dna-barcoding can be quite successful , but in case of meiofauna finding identical sequences in public databases for a newly collected mollusk or other under-investigated taxon is not expected to become the rule for decades to come. the application of the typical barcoding approach for species delineation - coi in conjunction with a comparison of pairwise distances - in mollusca has resulted in mixed reports: although the identification success with known taxa was generally high , the determination of a ‘barcoding gap’  and thus a delimiting threshold has been problematic, especially above local-scale approaches and in undersampled phylogenies  <cit> . doubts have also arisen concerning species identification and delimitation based on single-locus dna sequences, which frequently result in problematic under- or overestimation of species  <cit> . mitochondrial markers, especially, came under criticism due to possible inadvertent inclusion of nuclear mitochondrial pseudogenes   <cit> , and other mitochondria-specific pitfalls such as reduced effective population size or inconsistent recombination  <cit> . the risk of incorrect species delineation due to incomplete lineage sorting or introgression can be reduced by analyzing independent loci  <cit> , which is generally considered superior to single-gene approaches  <cit> . we chose a barcoding approach based on three molecular markers that have been demonstrated to provide good resolution for species delineation in some mollusca  <cit> . we included, in addition to mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit i  and 16s rrna, nuclear 28s rrna , which has performed well for species separation and was suggested as a signature gene fragment for a dna taxonomy system for meiobenthos  <cit> .

any method of species delineation is sensitive to sampling  <cit> , and rarity is almost universal when dealing with invertebrates  <cit> . rarity is not only a theoretical problem in species delineation methods, but hinders assessment of genetic variability  <cit> ; if populations with intermediate haplotype composition are left unsampled, barcoding and molecular-based species delineation approaches tend to overestimate species  <cit> . with large parts of the worldwide meiofauna still unexplored, and patchy, discrete distributions being characteristic for meiofaunal taxa  <cit> , the present-day knowledge of this fauna is prone to incomplete sampling. the rapidly spreading biodiversity crisis with the destruction of habitats and high extinction rates calls for quick surveys and realistic data for efficient conservation strategies . currently, most molecular species delineation approaches have been conducted on large datasets with dense sampling coverage or on local scales , with few exceptions using small datasets in integrative approaches . barcoding approaches using coi trees for defining species clusters and revealing gaps between intra- and intercluster distance; multi-locus tree-based methods with or without using diagnostic characters; and a couple of newly developed, tree-independent methods for species delineation, all serve as methods for dna taxonomy. however, as a solution to address the challenges of the taxonomic impediment in problematic taxa the power of these methods is still largely untested.

here, we performed thorough phylogenetic analyses of all three molecular markers and integrate available additional data from morphology and geography. in parallel, we applied four different methods of species delineation: 1) the general mixed yule coalescent model   <cit>  is a maximum likelihood approach, able to discriminate between population and speciation patterns on a given ultrametric tree; 2) statistical parsimony  <cit>  is designed to present intraspecific relationships in haplotype networks, but can also be reversed and used to detect species boundaries  <cit> ; 3) bayesian species delineation  is a method which accounts for uncertainties in gene trees and is promoted as especially useful for delineation of cryptic species in sympatry  <cit> ; 4) automatic barcoding gap discovery   <cit>  is an exploratory tool based on pairwise distances to detect automatically significant difference in intra- and interspecific variation , without an a priori species hypothesis. results are compared to a simple single-gene coi barcoding approach in conjunction with pairwise distances.

our study organism, pontohedyle, is a morphologically well-defined genus of meiofaunal slugs  with two valid species: the well described and abundant p. milaschewitchii  from the black sea and mediterranean  <cit>  and the poorly known western pacific p. verrucosa  from the solomon islands. in absence of distinguishing morphological characters jörger et al. <cit>  synonymized the tropical western atlantic ‘p. brasilensis’ with its temperate congener p. milaschewitchii. this resulted in the only meiofaunal slug with amphi-atlantic distribution, and the authors pointed out the need to subsequently test this morphological hypothesis with molecular markers to detect possible cryptic species  <cit> . sampling efforts in the course of this study revealed a worldwide distribution of the genus. in applying traditional morphological characters for species delineation  all collected material resolved into two morphospecies represented by the currently recognized species . wide-range distributions, as e.g., in p. milaschewitchii, are commonly reported for other meiofauna as well, but are treated with suspicion and known as the ‘meiofauna paradox’ <cit> : most meiofauna have low reproductive output and lack recognized dispersal stages, such as planktonic larvae  <cit> . thus, their dispersal abilities and levels of gene flow are assumed to be low  <cit> . recent molecular and advanced morphological approaches have revealed putative amphi-atlantic or even cosmopolitan meiofaunal taxa to be radiations of cryptic species . uncovering putative cryptic lineages is fundamental not only for our advances in understanding speciation processes in meiofaunal taxa, but also to understanding historical biogeography.

we present the first species-level phylogenetic analysis in meiofaunal mollusca to have a world-wide sampling, and aim to 1) establish a workflow of molecular species delineation in rare  taxa; 2) test for the presence of putative cryptic species by applying several independent approaches of molecular-based species delineations; 3) test putative wide-range distributions in a meiofaunal slug; and 4) explore the origin and diversification of pontohedyle. resulting insights into allopatric and sympatric speciation, morphological stasis and distribution are discussed for a better understanding of meiofaunal biogeography and evolution.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses and primary species hypotheses
we used a phylogenetic approach to determine molecular operational taxonomic units , i.e. preliminary molecular units unaffected by existing nomenclature serving as a starting point for further species delineation approaches. our phylogenetic analyses resulted in a stable topology with only minor changes among different analyses with individual or concatenated markers, revealing a complex picture of diversification in pontohedyle. the topology of the maximum-likelihood analyses of the concatenated three-marker dataset analyzed in three partitions is shown in figure 1a. this topology was quite stable regardless of the partitioning scheme of the dataset or the phylogenetic approach chosen  . differences in the topology referred to poorly supported sister group relationships, frequently involving singletons .


the genus pontohedyle was monophyletic with high bootstrap support . it was divided in two sister clades, one included p. verrucosa from the type locality  and the other p. milaschewitchii from the type locality . both major clades consisted of six lineages each and represented a geographical mixture across ocean boundaries . however, relationships among lineages within the major clades were not supported  in many cases.

distinguishing features traditionally used for morphological species delineation and ecological traits such as hydrographic conditions, geography and habitat were plotted onto the phylogeny . specimens of pontohedyle are externally uniform and easily distinguishable from other acochlids by the lack of rhinophores and the bow-shaped oral tentacles . no diagnostic differences in external morphology or spicules could be detected between the collected populations apart from eyes externally visible or not . comparative sem-examination of the available radulae revealed two types of the typically hook-shaped radula : a lateral tooth without a denticle  or with a denticle .

we identified our motus according to the criterion of reciprocal monophyly across different phylogenetic approaches and between single gene trees and concatenated datasets . a combination of the plotted morphological and ecological data led to diagnosable entities. we detected seven terminal clades, which are reciprocally monophyletic with moderate  to strong support  , and also showed short intra- vs. longer interspecific branch lengths. additionally,  <dig> singletons were identified as motus based on similar relative branch lengths when compared to the reciprocally monophyletic entities. parsimony analysis conducted with paup v.  <dig>  showed lower resolution among clades, which results in motu x and xi collapsing to form a single clade and motu vii being recovered outside pontohedyle both are considered an artifact, due to long branch attraction and/or respectively missing data . monophyly and relative branch lengths of the identified motus were unaffected by masking ambiguous parts of the 16s and 28s rrna alignment. our phylogenetic analyses in combination with the plotted morphological and ecological data led to a primary species hypothesis, which was subjected to the following species delineation approaches.

molecular-based species delineation and secondary species hypotheses
maximum-likelihood 
discriminating between population and speciation patterns, under single-threshold analyses, gmyc identified all motus as separate species, regardless whether based on coi , 16s rrna  or the concatenated three-marker dataset including nuclear 28s rrna . additionally, motu viii was divided into two species , or three species . in multiple-threshold analyses , gmyc based on 16s rrna further divided p. milaschewitchii  and p. brasilensis  into two species each . in the multiple-threshold gmyc-analyses of the concatenated dataset these motus formed one entity, but p. verrucosa and motu ii were divided in two species each .

statistical parsimony
haplotype networks were generated via statistical parsimony implemented in tcs  <dig> . with the 95% parsimony criterion  applied to the single-marker alignments of the mitochondrial datasets, tcs generated  <dig> networks on coi and  <dig> unconnected haplotype networks based on 16s rrna . statistical parsimony was in agreement with our psh described above and recovered all the identified motus as unconnected networks. additionally, 16s rrna analysis split populations identified above as p. milaschewitchii and p. verrucosa into unconnected haplotypes . in coi analyses p. milaschewitchii formed one entity but populations of p. verrucosa showed unconnected networks . coi results also showed motu ii and xii  each including multiple unconnected networks and the ambiguous motu viii  resulted in two , or four  unconnected haplotypes under statistical parsimony. the nuclear 28s rrna haplotype network resulted in connected haplotype networks for representatives of two different  outgroup genera . we thus considered this approach problematic for species delineation in pontohedyle and excluded it from our consensus approach.

bayesian species delineation 
we ran two sets of bayesian species delineation analyses: 1) testing the support of the motus retrieved in our primary species hypothesis  and 2) checking for putative additional species by calculating the speciation probabilities for each population . to evaluate the effect of user-incorporated prior values we tested four different prior combinations allowing for large vs. small ancestral population sizes and deep vs. shallow divergence times . when using the twelve motus from our psh as a guide tree, most nodes were supported by posterior probabilities  of  <dig>   . we consider a speciation probability value of ≥  <dig>  as strong support for a speciation event, which is recovered for all identified motus except for the speciation event between motu x and xi . the latter event however received consistent support ≥  <dig>  in the second set of analyses in which each population was treated separately . bpp also indicated high support for a split within motu xi  between populations from the mediterranean and black sea; however these results were ambiguous among analyses. in general, assumed small ancestral population size and long divergence times resulted in the highest speciation support values , while large ancestral population sizes and long divergence times resulted in the lowest pps . shallow divergence times also provided better support values  but are considered unlikely based on molecular clock data of pontohedyle <cit> . in summary, bpp resulted in  <dig> motus with pp ≥  <dig>  .



pairwise distances and automatic barcoding gap discovery 
applying the abgd with the standard settings resulted in one partition  in both our coi and 16s dataset. when lowering the x-value  to  <dig> , abgd clustered the sequences into  <dig> motus for coi  with a prior of intraspecific divergence up to  <dig> , and  <dig> motus for 16s rrna  with a prior of up to  <dig> , which was congruent with the psh. the 16s rrna results, however, contradicted all other approaches applied here in not splitting the ambiguous motu viii into two separate entities . abgd results were independent from the chosen model  and unaffected by changes of prior limit of intraspecific variation.

species identifier was then used to calculate the intra- and interspecific variability within the motus. choosing our psh as a priori species input for pairwise distance calculation, clusters were in agreement at a threshold from  <dig> % -  <dig> % for coi and  <dig> % -  <dig> % for 16s rrna. repeating the analyses and subdividing the ambiguous motu viii into two putative candidate species clusters were in full agreement starting at a threshold of  <dig> % for coi and  <dig> % for 16s rrna. within the motus, the largest intraspecific uncorrected p-distances occurred within the ambiguous motu viii with  <dig> % for coi  and  <dig> % for 16s rrna , followed by ‘p. brasilensis’  with  <dig> % for coi , and p. verrucosa  with  <dig> % for 16s rrna . among the other clades, the largest uncorrected intraspecific p-distances were lower, ranging from  <dig>  -  <dig> % for coi and  <dig>  -  <dig> % for 16s rrna. between motus, the smallest interspecific p-distances were larger than the intraspecific variation; i.e.,  <dig> % for coi ) and  <dig> % for 16s rrna , whereas the smallest mean interspecific p-distances within our dataset were  <dig> % for coi and  <dig> % for 16s rrna. with a fixed threshold of 11% – recorded as mean sequence divergence for coi in congeneric species pairs in mollusca  <cit>  – applied to our  coi dataset, species identifier recovered  <dig> clusters in comparison to the other species delineation approaches .

secondary species hypothesis 
our ssh is based on a minimum consensus approach  across species delineation approaches. it was identical to our psh and suggested at least  <dig> mainly cryptic candidate species, three of which correspond to existing names in nomenclature. pontohedyle sp.  <dig> , however, remains problematic, since nearly all molecular species delineation approaches split this unit into a minimum of two independent lineages ; only the abgd analysis based on 16s rrna did not support this split.

discussion
molecular species delineation in elusive taxa
our study demonstrates that traditional taxonomic treatment is not efficient for uncovering the true diversity in meiofaunal pontohedyle slugs. it is essential to have an operational molecular-based concept for species delineation  and species re-identification that informs future ecological, biogeographical or conservation approaches. the methods should be cost-efficient and fast, but in the first place they need to be reliable, and able to deal with rare  meiofaunal species elusive to population genetics.

puillandre et al.  <cit>  proposed a workflow for large-scale species delineation in hyperdiverse groups, starting with a coi barcoding dataset analyzed with abgd and gmyc which leads to the primary species hypothesis . independent information  is subsequently added to lead to the secondary species hypothesis   <cit> . this formalized strategy  <cit>  is linear, starting with pre-selecting samples according to a psh that depends on a single mitochondrial marker, before further information is added that might expand or contradict the psh. what is an efficient workflow for large-datasets with dense sampling coverage and thus high-quality coi barcoding output, may be inapplicable for datasets in little known and putatively under-sampled taxa. the latter would benefit from full consideration of all information already available for a psh, and a parallel, combined approach of multiple markers and multiple delimitation methods. especially when it is unfeasible to sample multiple specimens, multiple loci lead to more reliable results  <cit> . multi-marker barcoding provides an a posteriori double-check for contamination, sequencing errors or mitochondria-specific pitfalls , and the idiosyncrasies of individual markers  <cit> . our study shows that coi analyses perform well on our dataset but due to amplification problems applying universal coi barcoding primers, three candidate species would have remained unconsidered. multi-marker barcoding makes better use of rare specimens.

our global sampling is sparse rather than comprehensive, including a few singletons from distant populations. nevertheless, we are able to propose a primary species hypothesis on the evidence of a molecular phylogeny and concordance in reciprocally monophyletic entities . we use concordance to mean two things: 1) in agreement among different phylogenetic analyses , to account for the risk in false species delimitation due to errors in phylogenetic reconstruction  <cit> ; and 2) in agreement among single-gene trees  and the concatenated dataset, to avoid false signals due to recent population genetic processes  <cit> .

in this phylogenetic approach as starting point for further analyses, we consider relative branch lengths as proxies for evolutionary distance. reciprocal monophyly as a criterion for species delineation is being criticized as too stringent  <cit> , since monophyly of species in gene trees is not assured if lineages are not fully sorted  <cit> . although the absence of reciprocal monophyly might not be sufficient for lumping species, its presence with several independent markers indicates compatibility of gene and species trees and can thus be used for a psh, especially when combined with approaches capable of detecting recent speciation processes . as an example for molecular species delineation in poorly known taxa, our study benefits from divergence times, which in pontohedyle is estimated to have started in a late mesozoic timeframe . thus, recent radiations, which present a major pitfall for molecular delineation approaches  <cit> , are unlikely to hamper overall delineation success in our study; exceptions and problematic cases are discussed below. plotting available data from morphology, biogeography and hydrographic features at least partially allows the diagnosis of the motus beyond their molecular characteristics.

to date, the analyses of pairwise distances, with application of generalized universal thresholds  or relative thresholds  is the most commonly used form of molecular species delineation. this approach has however been widely criticized as arbitrary due to high variation and frequent overlap of intra- and interspecific variation  <cit> . this criticism also affects the concept of a ‘barcoding gap’, i.e., a significant gap in the distribution of intra- vs. interspecific variation  <cit> . intrapopulation variation might, in fact, exceed divergence between species  <cit> , which has been demonstrated in well-sampled groups with reliable independent datasets for species delineation such as karyology  <cit> . it is evident that intra- and interspecific variation are biased by sampling coverage  <cit>  and there is a high risk of misidentification, especially in undersampled phylogenies  <cit> . applying a fixed threshold of 11%, which has been determined as the mean sequence differentiation between species pairs in mollusca  <cit> , yields the same clusters as our complex delineation approach. however, we consider the good performance of a fixed threshold as random and due to the fact that this applies a mean distance. using the smallest interspecific distances  might- logically smaller than 11% -lead to an overestimation of species richness in our dataset. moreover, these pairwise distance approaches do not serve as an independent tool for species delineation, but depend highly on pre-defined species limits. using our psh as the a priori species hypothesis we detect a barcoding gap, which, however, shifts considerably when the e.g., motu viii is additionally split into two entities, demonstrating the circularity of the approach. the abgd method  <cit>  still suffers from limitations based on the genetic distance concept and barcoding gap discussed above, but presents a major advantage since it is applicable as an independent tool without an a priori species hypothesis. abgd analyses may be problematic on small datasets with less than three sequences per species  <cit> . when the standard settings of abgd were applied to our dataset, it failed to partition our dataset based on pairwise distances. lowering the user-defined relative-gaps width  enabled abgd to recover clusters that are congruent with the other delineation approaches for both mitochondrial markers. although we present the first study on meiofaunal slugs with representative worldwide taxon sampling, we know our dataset is likely to represent only a fragment of the hidden diversity in the genus because a) tropical sands still are largely unsampled, b) suitable habitats are patchy and disjunct, and c) the indication of accumulated diversity in geographically small areas . thus, the discovered ‘barcoding gap’ may be an artifact of limited sampling.

a series of independent tools of molecular species delineation have been developed recently  <cit> , but only few studies have tested these comparatively. in a thorough comparison, sauer & hausdorf  <cit>  report that gaussian clustering  <cit>  yielded the best performance in relation to morphological species delineation, but several sequences per population are needed to recognize reliably a separate cluster   <cit> . in contrast, the gmyc-model has shown, in a series of studies, ability to discriminate effectively between coalescent and speciation patterns. these matched species identified via independent criteria   <cit> , even in groups with little sampling coverage  <cit> . in our study gmyc congruently recognizes the same motus as separate entities as our psh and thus does not tend to oversplit data, as suspected previously  <cit> . sauer & hausdorf  <cit>  demonstrated considerable differences in gmyc results depending on the method of reconstruction of the ultrametric input tree. while this stresses the need to test the effect of different input trees, we consider the risk in our dataset as minor because all our phylogenetic approaches recover similar topologies. we conclude that gmyc in general is a delineation tool capable of dealing with data from poorly-sampled groups.

even though the performance of bpp dramatically improves when sampling at least five sequences per population, it achieves correct assignment of models also in small datasets  when a high number of loci is used  <cit> . it is especially useful to detect cryptic species in sympatry  <cit> . our bpp analyses supported all motus identified in our psh and, additionally, split the ambiguous motu viii into two entities, in agreement with gmyc analyses. given the possibility of testing the speciation support for each of the sampled populations by incorporating prior information on population size and divergence times, bpp is especially useful to avoid lumping of species. however, in its present form it is limited to dealing with small datasets .

in the present study statistical parsimony congruently recovered the same motus of the psh, but considerably oversplit the data in comparison to the other methods . whereas gmyc also resulted in additional splits and some populations in bpp resulted in ambiguous pps  that are potentially related to recent speciation processes, the comparative oversplitting in tcs might rather be an artifact of high substitution rates on mitochondrial markers  <cit> , as reported from several other molluscan taxa .

although all motus based on singletons  are clearly separated into independent lineages in all different approaches , inconsistencies arose within the dataset for motus containing 5– <dig> specimens , which clustered into one or more entities in different analyses. however, speciation is a continuous process  <cit>  and delineation approaches offer only a snapshot of this process, so we expect to encounter various stages of differentiation. recent radiations leading to incomplete lineage sorting might explain ambiguous results on different mitochondrial markers  and more data and population genetic approaches are needed to reveal the genetic structure within these entities.

most of the molecular species delineation methods currently available are not designed to incorporate the common phenomenon of rarity   <cit> . sampling efforts by us and colleagues confirm that pontohedyle and many other meiofauna taxa truly are rare and can be expected to have small effective population sizes. thus, we consider a integrative approach as most suitable for molecular species delineation in little known, putatively widespread and notoriously under-sampled taxa such as meiofauna in remote areas. available methods of species delineation should be applied in parallel on different suitable barcoding markers  and combined with phylogenetic analyses that allow mapping of additional information from morphological and ecological traits. we chose a minimum consensus approach across all methods, conservatively relying only on fully corroborated entities. sauer & hausdorf  <cit>  noted an oversplitting in all different species delineation approaches when these are compared to morphological analyses that include characters directly involved in speciation patters . we aim to minimize the risk of oversplitting , and rather put up with the risk of false negatives  and not detecting, yet, the entire diversity present in our dataset. moritz  <cit>  argued that false positives, because they are highly divergent genetically, might still present important components of biodiversity. we agree but their inclusion causes an incalculable taxonomic inflation and might lead to misinterpretations of meiofaunal biogeography and evolution. in our study, the minimum consensus approach is feasible, since results are not contradictory in recovering different entities , probably due to long periods of reproductive isolation. our scheme, however, is not applicable to studies with ambiguous results, which would call for further lines of evidence and thorough evaluation of the contradictions before delineation of candidate species could be achieved.

species delineation in pontohedyle
our results revealed a secondary species hypothesis of twelve distinct species, diagnosable by multiple methods. morphological characters traditionally used for species delineation in acochlidia, split the worldwide sampled pontohedyle populations into only two morphospecies: p. milaschewitchii  and p. verrucosa . previously used external morphological characters such as the shape of oral tentacles, body length and width, or color of the digestive gland  depend highly on the stage of contraction and nutrition, and are variable through time for each individual  <cit>  and therefore inappropriate for species delineation. pontohedyle typically bear monaxone, rodlet-like spicules distributed randomly and frequently accumulated between the oral tentacles  <cit> , which is confirmed here for members of both major clades of pontohedyle. although the presence of certain types of spicules is diagnostic for acochlidian genera or species, their absence  is not, because it can be caused by environmental influences  <cit> . using the presence of externally clearly visible eyes as a delineating character would lead to the identification of two more morphospecies : one with smooth lateral radula tooth and externally clearly visible eyes  and one without externally visible eyes and with a denticle on the lateral radula tooth . however, the presence of externally visible eyes depends on the degree of pigmentation, and was shown to be highly variable intraspecifically in other acochlids  <cit> . this is confirmed by our phylogenetic and molecular analyses, which clustered both ‘eyeless’ and eye-bearing individuals in ‘p. brasilensis’ and p. verrucosa .

in the light of our phylogenetic hypothesis, a convergent modification of the lateral radula tooth has taken place within the p. verrucosa clade in the two intertidal motus i and vi. the power of morphological species delineation is the potential to include characters directly involved in the speciation process, e.g., from the reproductive system  <cit> . based on previous histological comparisons, jörger et al. <cit>  failed to find any morphological characters justifying discrimination between the closely related western atlantic ‘p. brasilensis’  and its mediterranean congener p. milaschewitchii . details on the reproductive system of p. verrucosa are missing in the original description  <cit> , but own histological comparisons using 3d reconstruction based on serial semi-thin sections from material collected at the type locality revealed no major differences . thus, even sophisticated micro-anatomical comparisons seem unpromising for species delineation in these highly simplified and uniform slugs.

in general, morphology in meiofaunal organisms is characterized by extensive parallelism and convergent adaptations to the mesopsammic environment  <cit> , which frequently results in low interspecific morphological variability  <cit> . this is true of the microhedylacean acochlidia, which are exclusively found in interstitial spaces in sediment, and show a tendency toward reduction of complexity in major organ systems  <cit> . in contrast, hedylopsacean acochlidia, whose evolution involves several habitat shifts from marine interstitial to amphibious or freshwater benthic habitats, subsequently possess complex excretory and reproductive systems . generally, there is little morphological variation in all major organ systems even at family- and genus-level see  <cit> , but the morphological uniformity in global pontohedyle is most striking. with its vermiform body, a putatively multi-functional radula, ‘simplified’ organ systems and a special fast and imprecise mode of sperm transfer  <cit> , pontohedyle reflects a meiofaunal slug lineage highly adapted to its interstitial habitat .

integrating available data on morphology and ecology to the most conservative of our molecular results, the minimum consensus approach , suggests that pontohedyle represents a newly-discovered radiation of cryptic species. this radiation consists of at least nine candidate species plus the confirmed valid species p. milaschewitchii  and p. verrucosa , plus p. brasilensis , which is here reestablished as a valid taxon. in accord with recent findings for other microscopic taxa , our data indicates that expanded meiofaunal sampling in the future will likely uncover even more cryptic lineages. we agree with earlier authors  <cit>  in the practical benefit and importance  of describing cryptic species to give them formal taxonomic validity, rather than retaining them as numbered candidate species. a formal description based on diagnostic molecular characters  of all herein discovered candidate species is, however, beyond the scope of the present paper and will be documented in a subsequent taxonomic publication.

does the unveiling of cryptic species solve the meiofauna paradox?
for centuries taxonomy has depended on morphological distinctiveness. in the absence of distinguishing morphological characters many taxa  were described as amphi-atlantic or even cosmopolitan see . due to the predicted low dispersal abilities and limited reproductive output, long-range distribution in meiofauna is known as the ‘meiofauna paradox’  <cit> . in fact, recent re-examination has uncovered a series of radiations of cryptic species across different meiofaunal taxa . our molecular analyses show considerable geographic structure within global pontohedyle and demonstrate that the putatively amphi-atlantic meiofaunal slug, p. milaschewitchii  represent cryptic sibling species, including the eastern pacific pontohedyle sp.  <dig> . meanwhile, our data also confirms surprisingly wide ranges in distribution: in p. brasilensis , with a range from southern brazil to belize , or in p. verrucosa  from the pacific solomon islands to indo-pacific indonesia . the same scenario of long-distance dispersal on the one hand and clear spatial structuring on the other have also been recorded in other meiofaunal taxa; e.g., nematoda  <cit> , nemertea  <cit>  and rotifera  <cit> . the widespread motus in the present study span predicted barriers of gene flow for minute meiofaunal taxa, such as the amazon freshwater and sediment plume or deep-sea regions between islands. with a typically low reproductive output in acochlidia , free veliger larvae are assumed to stay in the interstices of the sand grains rather than entering the water column  <cit>  thereby avoiding long distance dispersal. fertilized eggs are attached to sand grains  and might promote dispersal via current driven sediment transport along shorelines  <cit> . data from other meiofaunal taxa suggest that the adult rather than larva serve as the main dispersal stage  <cit> . dispersal by actively entering the water column as observed, e.g., in copepods  <cit>  is considered improbable in soft-bodied acochlidian slugs  <cit> , but accidental suspension  and transport in the water column could allow a step-wise distribution along continuous coastlines and thus explain large range distribution  <cit>  as observed in p. brasilensis. neither our phylogenetic analyses  nor bayesian species delineation  offered evidence that geographical barriers  constitute a distribution barrier for these meiofaunal slugs, as the brazilian p. brasilensis clustered among individuals from the caribbean . comparably high genetic distances from mitochondrial markers between the geographically separated populations especially in p. verrucosa and p. brasilensis and unconnected haplotype networks  might indicate recent reproductive isolation and genetic diversification. more sensitive molecular markers  and more material are needed for thorough population genetic approaches to reveal the genetic structure in widespread meiofaunal slugs.

in the absence of a fossil record for meiofaunal slugs the only available estimate for divergence times derives from a molecular clock approach calibrated with shelled heterobranch fossils. jörger et al. <cit>  estimated the origin of the genus pontohedyle to the late cretaceous,  <dig> mya , providing a rough estimation of how much time was available for diversification and circum-global dispersal of pontohedyle slugs.

origin and diversification of pontohedyle
the genus pontohedyle shows a circum-tropical distribution with a single derived species  inhabiting temperate waters , confirming general trends of highest species diversity in tropical sediments  <cit> . although the distribution of co-existing mediterranean acochlids like microhedyle glandulifera or hedylopsis spiculifera extends northwards on the european atlantic coast, recorded up to 59° latitude , pontohedyle has never been found in colder waters despite a well-studied meiofauna and hydrographic conditions similar to the mediterranean. the distribution of pontohedyle might be constrained by ancestry from warm-water adapted animals.

considering the estimated mid to late mesozoic origin  <cit>  and the recent primarily tropical distribution pattern in pontohedyle, it is most likely that this meiofaunal slug clade originated in tethyan waters. the tropical radiation in both pontohedyle clades  reveals a mixture of western atlantic and indo-western pacific entities with single eastern atlantic or eastern pacific lineages. such a complex distributional pattern points to a complex historic biogeographic scenario: large-scale geological events, such as the separation of the atlantic ocean and the indo-west pacific province, sealed in the closure of the tethys seaway in the early miocene  <cit>  followed by a series of vicariant events  during the cenozoic that affected the global tropical ocean  <cit> . all of these likely contributed to allopatric speciation in pontohedyle. due to the predicted low dispersal abilities in meiofaunal taxa, relatively small-scale geological disruptive events  might form a  barrier for gene flow, proving time for ecological diversification and reproductive boundaries to evolve. two species  were collected at the same localities . sympatric speciation might be common in the marine environment  <cit>  and especially in the mesopsammic habitat, which is highly structured by gradients in chemistry, type and quantity of food resources or predation, thereby forming numerous ecological micro-niches within small areas . differences in the histology of the digestive gland content , potentially correlated with the lack of denticle on the lateral radula tooth, indicate putative different food sources and ecological micro-niches in pontohedyle .


++) approximation from google earth.

* marks the localities, which correspond to the type localities of valid pontohedyle species.

it remains stunning that circum-tropical dispersal and speciation processes in pontohedyle over a long evolutionary timeframe  are not reflected in morphological differentiation. this extreme case of morphological stasis and similar reports from other meiobenthic groups  might be explained in the light of the main physical constraints of the interstitial environment: this habitat is unstable at very short timescales  and can be split into numerous micro-niches, allowing for changes in ecological, physiological and behavioral traits. however, these are not necessarily reflected in morphological changes and the mesopsammon might be highly stable in an evolutionary perspective. our results on pontohedyle slugs show that a well-adapted body plan can be conserved for millions of years in a worldwide evolutionary success story.

CONCLUSIONS
combining traditional taxonomic, hydrographic and geographic evidence with multi-marker phylogenetic and multiple species delineation approaches herein allowed us to refute a cosmopolitan and amphi-oceanic distribution of pontohedyle species. uncovering a radiation of cryptic species partially solves the meiofaunal paradox. remaining long-range distributions in some pontohedyle species might indicate that the dispersal abilities of meiofaunal slugs are currently underestimated, or that our approach is unsuitable of detecting an even higher degree of cryptic radiation in recent times. overall, pontohedyle presents a stunning example of extreme morphological stasis and uniformity over long evolutionary timeframes, probably constrained by their simplified bodyplan and by the requirements of the meiofaunal habitat.

our study boosts diversity in pontohedyle sea slugs from  <dig> nominal to  <dig>  species, and confirms the taxonomic deficit in the mesopsammic fauna. it suggests an unexpected magnitude of diversification and cryptic speciation still exists in other small-sized, neglected taxa. our workflow of delineating minute and highly cryptic pontohedyle species included integrating phylogenetic, traditional taxonomic and any other relevant evidence towards a primary species hypothesis. this was then evaluated and refined by the consensus evidence from a selection of molecular species delineation methods, including abgd, statistical parsimony, gmyc and bayesian species delineation. both latter methods can deal with rarity as is also confirmed herein. in the age of the biodiversity crisis, we need an efficient and reliable way of addressing species diversity in rare and elusive species. our workflow still only provides a conservative estimation on species diversity and tolerates the risk of false negatives; we still hope it can serve as a starting point to uncover the hidden diversity of elusive taxa, regardless whether coastal, mesopsammic, deep sea or terrestrial.

