BACKGROUND
if parasites have large impacts on host fitness, they should play an important role in the evolution of host populations. however, examples of parasite-mediated selection on host populations are limited. furthermore, most studies document directional selection for resistant host genotypes leading to reduced genetic diversity within populations  <cit> . yet, many populations contain individuals with a wide range of susceptibilities to infection  <cit> . how is such diversity maintained in nature? one explanation involves frequency-dependent selection by parasites resulting from host-parasite genotype interactions. in this case, the most common host genotypes are also the most susceptible to parasitism, because the parasite genotypes that specialize on those host genotypes dominate. this leads to parasites driving continual selection against common genotypes, favoring rare genotypes and promoting diversity through time  <cit> . alternatively, trade-offs between resistance and other traits could promote diversity  <cit> . with particular trade-offs, theory predicts that parasitism could drive disruptive selection, favoring hosts that are either resistant but have reduced fecundity, or susceptible and highly fecund . despite these theoretical predictions, empirical evidence supporting parasitism as a diversity-promoting mechanism in natural populations is surprisingly scant  <cit> .

in this study, we look for changes in the susceptibility of a natural population of the freshwater crustacean daphnia dentifera during an epidemic of the yeast parasite metschnikowia bicuspidata. metschnikowia is highly virulent  <cit>  and has previously been suggested to affect the evolution of d. dentifera populations  <cit> . we document a large epidemic, during which instantaneous population growth rate  and infection prevalence were negatively correlated. these pronounced temporal changes in the vital rates of the population suggest the possibility of strong selection. we then use both traditional methods and a novel maximum likelihood approach to document disruptive selection on the host population during the epidemic and to show that the resulting increase in genetic variance was maintained even after a generation of sexual reproduction.

RESULTS
the metschnikowia epidemic in bristol lake in  <dig> was large, reaching a maximum infection prevalence of 32% and lasting for more than  <dig> days . metschnikowia prevalence was negatively correlated with instantaneous population growth rate ; r decreased 15-fold during the first half of the epidemic and then rebounded rapidly as the epidemic waned, increasing by nearly two orders of magnitude.

during this epidemic, the mean susceptibility of clones did not change, but variance increased greatly ; together these indicate disruptive selection  <cit> . the mean pre- and post-epidemic susceptibilities were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. a planned contrast of these two time periods was not significant  despite sufficient power  to detect a mean change of  <dig> . there was a more than threefold increase in variance  over the course of the epidemic: the pre- and post-epidemic variances were, respectively,  <dig>  and  <dig> . this increased variance in resistance was not significantly altered by the episode of sex. there was no significant difference in the mean  or variance  of the post-epidemic and post-sex clones , despite sufficient power  to detect a mean change of  <dig> . clonal variance  and broad-sense heritability  for susceptibility to infection also increased dramatically between the pre- and post-epidemic time periods , as would be expected with disruptive selection. clonal variance remained the same after sexual reproduction and heritability decreased slightly due to increased within-clone variance.

disruptive selection should not only increase a trait's variance but also can change its underlying distribution in a population. more specifically, disruptive selection can lead to a bimodal trait distribution  <cit> . to better characterize such changes in the distribution of our focal trait , we developed a maximum likelihood method that can detect and differentiate between various forms of selection . the two best fitting models  both indicated that clonal variance for susceptibility increased over the course of the epidemic. according to model  <dig>  which is more parsimonious and therefore was selected as the best fitting model, the distribution was unimodal prior to the epidemic and bimodal after. in model  <dig>  the distribution is bimodal at both times, but the pre-epidemic modes are quite similar to each other  while the post-epidemic modes are quite different . in both models, the distribution of susceptibilities of the post-epidemic and post-sex clones was the same.

the mean/mode parameter of the unimodal normal distribution is μ and the standard deviation is σ. the central tendency parameters for the modes in the bimodal normal distributions are μ <dig> and μ <dig> and the standard deviation for each mode is σi. within each model, parameters with the same subscript are constrained to be equal. parameters for the best fit model  with 95% confidence intervals based on likelihood profile  <cit>  in parentheses are μa =  <dig>  , μ1b =  <dig>  , μ2b =  <dig>  , σa =  <dig>  . parameters for model  <dig> are μ1a =  <dig>  , μ2a =  <dig>  , μ1b =  <dig>  , μ2b =  <dig>  , σa =  <dig>  . model selection is based on akaike's information criteria  which incorporates the number of estimated parameters . "uni" = unimodal; "bi" = bimodal. the evidence ratio is the odds ratio of support for the best fit model over the listed model  <cit> ; models with evidence ratios close to  <dig> are well-supported. models that allow for a change in the distribution after sexual reproduction have an asterisk  after the model number.

discussion
our data suggest that this parasite epidemic caused disruptive selection on the host population, leading to increased genetic variation  for susceptibility to infection. examples of disruptive selection of any kind on natural populations are uncommon  <cit> ; to our knowledge, parasite-mediated disruptive selection has never been detected previously. furthermore, the evolution of this population was rapid, occurring within a 70-day period . thus, this study supports theoretical predictions  <cit>  that parasitism can increase genetic variance within a host population, and suggests that this increase can occur rapidly.

theory indicates that parasitism can promote genetic variation through frequency-dependent selection by the parasite resulting from host-parasite genotype interactions  <cit> . however, in this case, the most common clones should be the most susceptible and highly susceptible clones should be selected against. our data do not support either of these patterns: the most common pre-epidemic clones had intermediate susceptibility , and the highly susceptible clones  increased in frequency. in addition, this mechanism requires host-parasite genotype  interactions. while these interactions have been found in another daphnia-microparasite system  <cit> , we have found no evidence of such interactions in this daphnia-metschnikowia system  <cit> .

thus, in this case, the most likely explanation for the changes in clonal frequencies is a trade-off associated with resistance. we propose a trade-off between susceptibility and fecundity, mediated by the relationships between these traits and body size. there is a positive correlation between body size and fecundity in daphnia, including daphnia dentifera  <cit> . in addition, there is a positive relationship between body size of d. dentifera and susceptibility to metschnikowia  <cit> . therefore, given that natural daphnia populations contain substantial genetic variation for body size  <cit> , there should be a negative correlation between resistance and fecundity, which theory predicts can result in disruptive selection  <cit> .

yet, if there is a trade-off between resistance and fecundity, why weren't all the pre-epidemic clones highly susceptible? this fundamental question motivates much research in evolutionary ecology: how do natural populations retain so much genetic variation in fitness traits? answers to the general question often focus on correlations with other traits and on how these correlations depend on environmental context  <cit> . in our specific system, both possibilities may be important. first, in daphnia, body size correlates with other traits, particularly with predation by vertebrate and invertebrate predators  <cit> . second, environmental conditions in lakes, especially resource levels, change throughout the growing season, and daphniids experience a trade-off in the ability to exploit high- and low-quality food  <cit> . thus, correlations between many traits – including susceptibility to parasites, fecundity, and vulnerability to predators – could arise through joint relationships with body size. moreover, these correlations may change depending on environmental conditions. given this context-dependency and theoretical predictions that disruptive selection requires particular trade-offs  <cit> , we do not expect that disruptive selection will always occur during metschnikowia epidemics. indeed, a previous study found evidence for directional selection associated with metschnikowia epidemics  <cit> . the large increase in heritability that occurred during this epidemic would allow the population to respond more quickly to any future directional selection.

given that there is not a "control" population in which there was not an epidemic, it remains a possibility that the evolution of this population was not in response to metschnikowia. temporal changes in clonal structure driven by other processes might also explain the observed patterns. while we cannot rule this out with our current data, this seems unlikely. this metschnikowia epidemic was quite large, and had a correspondingly large effect on population dynamics . evidence from other lake populations suggests that d. dentifera populations evolve even in response to much smaller metschnikowia epidemics that do not have detectable effects host population dynamics  <cit> . therefore, it seems likely that the change in the distribution of susceptibilities of the host population was driven by the large epidemic of this virulent parasite.

why did the distribution of clonal susceptibilities remain bimodal after sexual reproduction? after all, with random mating, we would expect an increase in the frequency of moderate-susceptibility genotypes. thus, the retention of the bimodal distribution may indicate assortative mating; however, without knowledge of the genetics underlying resistance to this parasite, this is not certain. if assortative mating did indeed occur in bristol lake, the factor by which the resistance genotypes are sorting remains to be determined. any assortative mating is unlikely to be temporal since the sexually-produced diapausing eggs used here were produced concurrently. assortative mating could also be based on spatial segregation. however, in our surveys of several lakes, we find little evidence for vertical or horizontal aggregation of infection  <cit> , which would be expected if animals were segregated by susceptibility. assortative mating based on body size or chemical cues are also possible and warrant further study.

maintenance of this bimodal distribution after sex could have important implications for maintenance of diversity in daphnia populations. in daphnia, sexually-produced eggs are dormant and are incorporated into an "egg bank" in lake sediments  <cit> . these egg banks effectively store diversity because diapausing eggs hatch over a series of years, providing a reservoir of genetic variation that can influence the long-term adaptability of the population  <cit> . thus, even if parasite-mediated disruptive selection only occurs occasionally in daphnia populations, the increased genetic variance captured in the egg bank may have long-term effects on host populations. a study on a different daphnia-parasite system also suggests that diapausing egg banks should influence the distribution of susceptibilities in the host population over longer time spans  <cit> .

our study uses a maximum likelihood method to detect disruptive selection and differentiate it from other forms of selection in nature. while traditional statistical tests suggested disruptive selection, the maximum likelihood methods allowed us to more fully characterize the change in the distribution of the trait  in the population. more specifically, our method allowed us to demonstrate that this trait's distribution shifted from unimodal to bimodal, and that the population retained this bimodal trait distribution after a generation of sexual reproduction. both of these findings are of particular interest in light of predictions of adaptive dynamics theory , and would not have been detected using earlier methods.

our approach should be particularly useful for detecting selection on populations for which the common lande-arnold  <cit>  selection gradient approach is not feasible. while the lande-arnold approach is very powerful and has been used in an extraordinary number of studies, it requires measuring both the phenotype and fitness of individuals in the field  <cit> . unfortunately, such data cannot be collected on many organisms, including daphnia, since it is not possible to track them in the environment. therefore, we propose the maximum likelihood method used in this study as a complementary approach.

CONCLUSIONS
theory has long predicted an important role of parasites in the evolution and diversification of their host populations. however, surprisingly little empirical evidence supports parasite-mediated enhancement of genetic diversity of hosts. while theory predicts that parasite-driven increases in host diversity can occur as a result of frequency-dependent selection resulting from host-parasite genotype interactions or disruptive selection, only the former had previously been supported empirically . here, aided by a generally applicable, maximum-likelihood based technique, we document disruptive selection during an epidemic of a virulent yeast parasite in a natural population of daphnia, leading to increased genetic variance of the host population. thus, these results provide important empirical support for parasite-mediated disruptive selection leading to increased host diversity.

