BACKGROUND
the goal of this research was to generate and test an innovative, cost effective antigen display and delivery system that uses micro particulate gas vesicles . although it has been long known that portions  of molecules can be recognized by the immune system and the antibodies stimulated against the correct epitope can elicit protective immunity, recently there has been significantly increased interest in the exploration of novel approaches to vaccine development and immunogen delivery. thus growth of biotechnology and development of new tools now support the important expansion to include a diversity of new aspects that support moving beyond conventional immunization approaches and obtaining new information defining vaccine components  <cit> .

halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig> is a remarkable organism that exhibits a number of characteristics that are significant to its biotechnology utility. culturing is simple, dna mediated transformation may be accomplished at high efficiency and proteins and organelles can be released from the halobacteria by simple lysis in hypotonic medium. the halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig> genome is completely sequenced  <cit>  and the genomic data supports a wide range of studies that enhance its potential for commercial uses, as well as basic biochemical analyses of adaptation to extreme conditions. in addition, both an halobacterium transformation system  <cit>  and e. coli/halobacterium sp. shuttle plasmids, developed for basic genetic studies, are directly applicable to biotechnological applications. the cell envelope of halobacterium salinarum consists of a single lipid bilayer membrane surrounded by an s-layer assembled from the cell-surface glycoprotein. this fact is important in terms of simple release of gas vesicles, or cytosolic proteins, from the organism. the gas vesicles themselves are unique organelles naturally produced by halophilic archaea and their biogenesis is inherently quality controlled by the organism. fourteen gvp genes have been identified as encoding components involved in the genesis of organelles, and the regulation of gvp gene expression has been shown to occur at the transcriptional and translational levels  <cit> .

gas vesicle organelles are cylindrical-shaped particles with conical ends about  <dig> nm long, and composed of an inflexible, thin  proteinaceous  membrane  <cit>  that encloses a gas-filled space. the lipid free membranes form a barrier to liquids but are permeable to many dissolved gases such as nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and methane. the membrane has an extremely stable, two-dimensional crystalline lattice composed of two major proteins, gvpa and gvpc. the gvpa protein is highly conserved and forms a linear crystalline array of ribs that form the cylindrical shell and conical ends of the gas vesicle. gvpc is located on the vesicle outer surfaces and adds strength, stability and shape. previous findings suggested that gvpc is present on the external surface of the vesicle and functions as a "molecular glue" to enhance the membrane stability  <cit> . with regard to peptide display, these characteristics are desirable in terms of antigen presentation and are potentially important for applications involving epitope display, a key for vaccine development. in this context, previous findings indicate there is no evidence of harmful effects from consuming native halobacteria  <cit>  so that recombinant gas vesicles should be suitable for use in oral as well as parenteral delivery.

electron microscopy has demonstrated that the surface of the gv itself is highly organized suggesting it would support organized presentation of encoded antigen, and it is known that these stable protein structures themselves can provide an intrinsic adjuvant activity. preliminary evidence demonstrated that gas vesicles can be genetically manipulated to display peptides coded by an insert of irrelevant dna that specified a sequence of six amino acids, and peptide immunogenecity and antigenicity were verified both in vitro and in vivo  <cit> . initial studies with the gag gene from sivmac have raised the possible utility as a display/delivery system using gas vesicles to present pathogen peptide sequences up to  <dig> amino acids; these results also suggested the recombinant organelles were intrinsically self-adjuvanting  <cit> . thus the preceding studies indicated the gvpc protein is sufficiently flexible to tolerate exogenous sequence inserts and thus support the principle of gas vesicles as a recombinant component for pathogen display/delivery. the studies presented below tested the generalized applicability of this technology using selected dna segments encoding pathogen peptide sequences of diverse size and native gene function. these were assessed for plasmid retention of the exogenous dna sequences, gas vesicle retention of the recombinant protein and the long term maintenance of elicited humoral responses to the exogenous peptide sequences displayed by the r-gvpc protein that had been incorporated into the organelle.

RESULTS
our earlier studies to generate recombinant gas vesicles provided evidence that when inserted into an appropriate site in the gvpc gene, this halobacterial gene would accept siv gag gene dna segments of different lengths and the resultant sub microscopic organelles would express this recombinant protein at the gas vesicle surface  <cit> . to demonstrate the potential flexibility and gene independent nature of surface expression using this cassette based system, we applied the methods outlined below and prepared a series of  <dig> different plasmids that encompassed the entire siv genome. the three gene segments selected for detailed study were used to transform the vac- mutant halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  strain sd <dig> to obtain recombinant gas vesicles. after expanding the different initial transformant populations, the functional expression of the three fragments, each representing a different insert length and a different gene, was then tested through assessments of the gas vesicles produced. functional  recombinant gas vesicles were readily isolated from each of the transformants and then tested to detect recombinant gvpc expressing the sivtat, rev or nef <dig> encoded peptide and assessed for recognition as siv genome derived using sera from an shiv infected monkey. they then were used to immunize mice in order to test for their capacity to stimulate peptide specific humoral response in the absence of exogenous adjuvant and for the retention of titers for an extended time period.

generation of dna components
the  <dig> segments constituting the siv genome were successfully amplified previously and for larger genes, e.g. nef, the multiple fragments of the same gene were numbered numerically starting at the amino terminal end. table  <dig> shows the pcr primers used to amplify the specific gene segments studied in detail here as well as the primers for the  <dig> bp internal segment amplified from the gvpc gene. the individual siv gene segments were then expanded, using puc <dig> and transformation of e. coli dh5α, followed by cloning into a second vector pfm101d shown in figure  <dig>  following the steps outlined in the methods section, the selected blunt end siv fragments were then ligated into an eco <dig> iii site in the gvpc gene at the position designated as "d" in the rightward operon in the plasmid pfm101d and used for the transformation of e. coli. after expanding e. coli transformants, rightward operons with their siv derived dna insert were harvested from the plasmids using the spe i and asis i. each recombinant operon was then ligated into plasmid pms104d using the methods described previously for pfm104d  <cit> .

dna sequences required to generate recombinant gvpc and demonstrate the successful insertion and retention of test siv dna sequences utilized pcr amplification and the forward  and reverse primers listed above.

in order to confirm that these plasmids retained the inserted siv dna sequences, the dna was isolated from each different transformant population, and from the wild type, halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  using the appropriate forward and reverse primer specific for the gvpc gene of each of the incorporated siv derived dna segments and shown in table  <dig>  the dna was pcr amplified. as shown by the agarose gel in figure  <dig>  these amplification products indeed demonstrated the expected size relative to the  <dig> kb standard and to the control , the internal  <dig> bp fragment from the native gvpc gene of halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  the electrophoretic mobility of amplification products demonstrates successive increases in base pair  sizes, fully consistent with the selected siv genomic dna inserts. as the amplicons of the dna inserts demonstrate, each of the three different exogenous dna sequences had been stably retained in the recombinant gvpc gene contained in the rightward gas vesicle operon.

transformation of vac- halobacterium strain sd109
the vac-  mutant, halobacterium strain sd <dig> lacks the entire gas vesicle gene cluster and was used for transformation following the protocols described in the methods. spheroplasts were prepared from the vac- sd <dig> strain and can be readily distinguished from the normal rod shape of these halobacteria by microscopic examination . this fact supports simple and straightforward verification that the spheroplast form required for transformation of the vac- mutant has been achieved. the spheroplasts were then transformed using pms104d::tat, ::rev or ::nef <dig> and methods described below. the putative sd <dig> transformants were cultured under mevinolin selection and could be readily assessed for gas vesicle production. as seen in the comparison of liquid cultures shown in figure  <dig>  vac- and vac+ cultures are readily distinguishable. figure 4a shows the slightly cloudy appearance of a vac- sd <dig> culture which appears brownish orange in color. in contrast, figure 4b–c show the typical milky white culture appearance of the gas vesicle containing wild type halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig> or successfully transformed sd <dig> strain. similarly, visual inspections of transformants grown on plate media, shown in figure 4d, also supports visual tracking for successful transformation to produce vac+  recombinants. figure 4e shows examples of isolated r-gv and these clearly display the characteristic pink-tinged white band of gas vesicles at the interface of the 5% nacl solution with the overlaying air; gv flotation at this interface verified that the recombinant gv are functional.

thus the initial findings have been verified and extended to transformations using inserts of diverse dna sizes and encoded gene function. this is a key step in r-gv production and the generation of functional product that can be readily harvested. the actual biosynthesis of the gas vesicle product and the retention of gas vesicle function, i.e. floatation of the isolated product, can be readily assessed visually. in combination, these findings demonstrate that the transformations with each of the selected recombinant plasmids  were successful and had conferred a functional, vac+ status to the recipient sd <dig> vac- mutants, irrespective of the insert selected for these studies, or its native function.

identification of the recombinant gv proteins by western blot
in our earlier studies the gvpc protein was clearly evident when anti-gvpc antiserum was used. recombinant sivsm-gvpc protein expressing sequences of the gag gene was identifiable using antiserum from sivsm challenged monkeys and standard elisa titration of gas vesicles containing chimeric sivsm-gvpcgag protein demonstrated the presence of recognizable siv gag gene insert expressed by r-gvpcgag  <cit> . to demonstrate that the expression of recombinant peptide originally examined using a gag sequence was not insert specific or unique, this study examined recombinant sd <dig> transformants expression of the three different siv encoded peptides within the framework of recombinant gvpc protein. gas vesicles were isolated from independent, replicate cultures of each of the different recombinant populations. these were analyzed by western blot for the presence of recombinant gvpc protein exhibiting the anticipated increase in molecular weight and recognition by the specific anti-gvpc antibody. although halobacterial proteins behave anomalously in analyses using the standard analytical technique of sds-page  <cit> , nevertheless the approximate molecular weight  can be assessed by adding the molecular weight of the siv insert to apparent molecular weight previously demonstrated in this system. the results are shown in table  <dig> and indicate that the sds-page technique should readily detect altered electrophoretic mobility reflecting insert associated size differences. gas vesicles putatively expressing recombinant gvpc containing tat, rev or nef <dig> peptides were isolated from the appropriately transformed sd <dig> cultures. gas vesicles similarly isolated from wild type organisms, halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  provided the molecular weight marker for the wild type gvpc protein used in the immuno-identifications. using standard protocols for sds-page and then western blots, all samples were transferred to immobilon membranes and probed with appropriate antibodies to detect the proteins of interest.

† expected mw is calculated as gvpc + siv insert; tat, rev and nef <dig> respectively.

‡ predicted mw is based on results for gvpc from wild type gv  where the protein band was indicated at ~  <dig> kda  <cit> . accordingly, the mw for the recombinant proteins was calculated as a sum of the specific insert and the mw for the gvpc. isoelectric points were calculated using the web page for pi/mw calculation  <cit> .

gvpc protein was identified by western blot membrane incubation with anti-gvpc rabbit serum generated by immunizations using a lacz-gvpc fusion protein and noted previously  <cit> . gas vesicle preparations were isolated from populations transformed to incorporate tat or rev amino acid sequences. as figure  <dig> demonstrates, the anti-gvpc antibody recognized gvpc contained in the putative fusion proteins. as this western blot also indicates, characteristic differences in apparent molecular weight are evident for the recombinant bands recognized by the anti-gvpc antibody. these differences allow discrimination from the wild type gvpc protein , and are consistent with an expected differentially increased molecular weight of the recombinant gvpc proteins produced by the transformants. the differences also are consistent with the anomalous behaviour of halobacterial gas vesicle proteins when analyzed by sds-page gels.

a comparison with the migration of native gvpc released from wild type gas vesicles in the lane labeled wt , a control included in figure  <dig>  shows the normal mobility of this wild type protein . at the left side of figure  <dig>  panel a shows the anti-gvpc antisera recognizes gvpc of wild type nrc- <dig> gas vesicles, while panel b demonstrates that the anti-shiv monkey sera does not recognize wild type gvpc. panel c provides evidence that this same anti-shiv monkey serum does recognize siv encoded peptides within the recombinant gvpc protein . thus, as expected based on table  <dig>  the western blots have demonstrated the expected increased apparent molecular weight of the r-gvpc proteins. more importantly, the fact that anti-shiv monkey serum fails to recognize wild type gvpc validates this plasma for specific detection of siv peptide inserts. recognition of the nef <dig> peptide contained within the chimeric gvpc protein was similarly demonstrated. panel a of figure  <dig> shows a coomassie blue stained sds page gel analysis for r-gvpcnef <dig> presence in isolated recombinant gas vesicles or lysate of sd <dig> cells transformed with the pms104d::nef <dig>  panel b of figure  <dig> is a western blot of these same samples and demonstrates that antisera from mice immunized with r-gvnef <dig> and also monkey anti-shiv sera each recognize the chimeric r-gvpcnef <dig> protein. thus the results demonstrate the nef <dig> peptide sequence is expressed and retained by the recombinant gas vesicles used in murine immunizations. equally important, recognition by the anti-shiv monkey serum demonstrates that like chimeric tat and rev peptide containing gvpc proteins, the nef <dig> chimeric protein is also perceived as containing the siv derived peptide.

elisa assessments
to verify the immunogenecity of these recombinant gas vesicles and test the critical parameter, presence of the humoral immune response, mice were immunized with recombinant gas vesicles and their antibody responses to the siv derived inserts assessed. immunizations followed the methods and injection schedule outlined in the methods and used isolated r-gvtat, rev or nef <dig>  gas vesicles produced by mutant halobacteria sd <dig> transformed with the plasmids pms104d-siv::tat, ::rev, or ::nef <dig>  the serum samples drawn at various post-immunization time points were assayed by elisa. sera samples, fully pre-adsorbed with wt-gv as described in the methods, were assayed to detect siv insert specific antibody recognition by using r-gv produced by the homologous transformants and the average absorbances at  <dig> nm were graphed. figure  <dig> presents these results in the separate three dimensional data displays and these show the sera titers at the different times during the course of immunizations. inherently these humoral responses demonstrate the immunogenecity of each of the incorporated siv peptides displayed by these three different r-gv. each r-gv elicits a solid peptide specific antibody response to the initial low dose, demonstrates a secondary response to the booster and a natural waning of antibody titer over time, as shown by assay of the  <dig> week post booster sera. in addition, the development of an immune response inherently demonstrates both the presence of the displayed r-gvpc protein and, because the sera were fully pre-adsorbed, the immune system "visibility" of the specific siv inserts. the titration data also hint that differences in the responses to the different inserts might not be closely linked to the actual size of siv encoded peptide; the responses to the tat insert  was clearly more robust than the response to the rev insert . this might provide a simple and useful method to screen peptide segments that could provide an index of inherent capacity to elicit humoral responses, although additional studies would be required to demonstrate and verify elisa based detection of inherent immunogenicity.

features critical to immunization based protection also include the continued presence of elevated antigen specific antibody and the occurrence of such responses, independent of the specific peptide tested. figure  <dig> presents elisa titration data showing the antibody levels remaining  <dig> weeks after a re-immunizing booster with the homologous r-gv. for the group immunized with r-gvrev only one animal remained at this very late time point; its serum titered at ~1: <dig>  for the animals in the groups immunized with r-gvtat or r-gvnef <dig>  very substantial insert specific antibody titers  remained at the  <dig> week time point. this finding supports the conclusion that the humoral response to diverse peptides expressed using the r-gv display/delivery system can remain notably elevated. potentially this would result from a slow release of proteins from the gas vesicle as it is degraded intracellularly and in vitro studies indicate this is the case . the system therefore exhibits a characteristic desirable in an immunizing agent. in addition, the absence of exogenous adjuvant in this system provides additional evidence of the self adjuvanting characteristic of the recombinant gas vesicle delivery vehicle.

discussion
in a previous study we demonstrated immunologic memory for the peptide expressed by r-gv was elicited, however the assessments of r-gv in that study involved only the expression of peptide sequences from a single siv gag gene  <cit> . the elisa data presented here tested quite different peptide sequences incorporated into the r-gvpc protein and the results indicate that in this context, these too are stimulatory and immune visible. the results presented above extend and strengthen the initial hypothesis that r-gv can serve as a flexible cassette based epitope display/delivery system that supports expression of genes or gene segments encoding peptides from proteins representing diverse functions in their native context. here we tested peptides encoded by three different sivsm genes. the tat protein can function indirectly to promote virus replication via receptor mediated signal transduction, while intracellularly tat normally is transported into the host cell nucleus. the protein is essential for viral replication and is currently a candidate vaccine component. rev functions as a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein normally found primarily in host cell nuclei/nucleoli. one of its functions is to "escort" unspliced viral mrna out of the nucleus. in contrast, nef is a peripheral membrane protein, and appears to have a linker function, among others. thus nef mediates a variety of protein-protein interactions via its sh <dig> binding surface and down regulates mhc class i, and cd <dig> expression, perhaps through its capacity as a linker. nef therefore can exert significant effects on the host cell functions  <cit> . from the data presented here, clearly the dna segments tested, representing sequences from proteins with significant inherent functional differences, were stably incorporated into the gvpc gene. the data also shows the insert peptide is retained in the recombinant gvpc protein, and the chimeric proteins produced are effectively incorporated to produce recombinant gas vesicles. for all three test peptide sequences the functionality of the r-gvpc was shown by the generation of gas vesicles that float, and r-gvpc release from isolated gas vesicles during sample preparation for sds-page, verifies r-gvpc were incorporation as part of the organelles themselves. likewise, immunogenicity was demonstrated through the anti-peptide responses elicited. these demonstrated r-gv effectiveness as a delivery vehicle and support the conclusion that irrespective of the gene source, the displayed peptides are immune system visible and immuno-stimulatory. the known structure of gv microparticles and their resistance to degradation, support the suggestion that these functional characteristics of this unusual display system are keys to their effectiveness as an adjuvant.

the basis of this self adjuvanting effect remains to be clarified but characteristics of certain halobacterial proteins may be relevant. molecular chaperones are essential components of organisms that function as part of the normal physiology, and in response to stress, and pathology. a molecular chaperone system also is present in halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig> and represented by the proteins dnak, dnaj, grpe, and hsps1– <dig> . the peptide-binding function of hsp's  allows chaperon proteins such as hsp <dig>  to acquire antigenic proteins within cells, even when administered outside the cell and thereby induce priming of cd8+t lymphocytes in vivo. in addition to peptide binding and delivery, hsp <dig> also can assist as a carrier of peptides or proteins that are effective immunogens for b cells, cd4+, and cd8+t cells, in the absence of an adjuvant. thus it has been shown that the c-terminal portion of hsp <dig>  induces human monocytes to produce cc chemokines , il- <dig> , tnf a , as well as stimulating the maturation of dendritic cells  <cit> . additionally there is evidence that for microbial hsp, this c-terminal portion of hsp <dig> is involved as an adjuvant in the induction of the innate and adaptive elements of the immune response  <cit> .

the slow degradation of wt- and r-gv could readily initiate hsps up-regulation in the host cell. therefore, the self-adjuvanting characteristics of gas vesicles could be analogous to the chaperon activities of hsp  <dig>  produced by the host cells in response to perturbation by the gas vesicle presence, and in fact there is a notable similarity between the gvpc protein and the dnak and dnaj proteins. in addition, or alternatively, the geometric display on gas vesicle surfaces may be analogous to the display achieved when bacterial s-layers are used. such displays are known to enhance immune responses  <cit> .

inherent features of halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig> and their biosynthesis of gas vesicles are highly relevant to biotechnological utilities and these are evident here, in the steps to generate and test the recombinant organelles. the plasmid pfm101d allows simple insertion of exogenous dna cassettes and subsequent transfer into the halobacterium strain sd <dig> transformation vector. a simple restriction digest cleavage of the rightward operon is followed by ligation into pms104d, the large  plasmid used to transfer the  <dig> genes needed for gas vesicle biogenesis. as application of simple agarose gel analysis showed, successful sd <dig> transformation can be readily assessed via etbr  staining to verify amplification products with the appropriate bp sizes. the actual transformation of plasmid recipient is readily achieved by a one step treatment of the vac- sd <dig> strain with spheroplasting solution. a cell wall, such as is characteristic of gram positive or gram negative bacteria is not present in these archaeal organisms. this fact simplifies transformation as well as the subsequent gas vesicle isolation processes. further, spheroplast formation itself can be verified by simple microscopic examination of the treated halobacterial samples. the sd <dig> cells undergo a shape change and exhibit a spherical rather than the normal rod morphology . such spheroplasts were readily transformed without additional treatments by simple incubation with isolated pms104d::tat ::rev:: or :: nef <dig> dna. similarly, successful transformation and appropriate function of the genes transferred by the transforming plasmid is also easily determined. for liquid media, the formation of "creamy-white" halobacterial cultures vs. the rust brown of vac- sd <dig> cultures is diagnostic for gas vesicle production and readily evident by simple visual inspection as seen in figure  <dig> 

the specific verifications provided here are keys in the context of validating this system and the peptides tested. first, as clearly shown, recombinant gvpc expressed by the vesicles demonstrate an expected decrease in electrophoretic mobility vis-à-vis gvpc from gas vesicles produced by wild type halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  second, in the present study, the gene segments inserted into the gvpc encode peptides from proteins exemplifying a variety of functions, and as figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> showed, when displayed by r-gvpc, each one was recognized not only by anti-gvpc antibody , validating retention of the r-gvpc protein, but also by antibody elicited in vivo during infection of monkeys with shiv virus . since the anti-shiv antibody did not recognize wild type gv protein , the incorporated siv peptides were being specifically identified when displayed as part of the r-gvpc protein which is present at sites all over the gas vesicle surface. thus the insert into the gvpc protein is both immune system visible and accessible. equally important, display of the siv peptides in this manner did not abrogate their recognition by appropriate antisera. finally, it is also highly relevant that as the titration of sera collected  <dig> weeks post re-immunization shows, titers remained for all three peptides although at 1: <dig>  the anti-rev titer was the lowest of the three. however, the titer for rev likely reflects the fact that only one animal in this group was extant. at this very late time point the titers of the animals immunized with nef <dig> and tat r-gv  were very notably higher.

from the perspective of general utility and ease of recombinant production, the characteristic inherent in the system used here and the effective incorporation of exogenous pathogen dna sequences, both were demonstrated in the course of generating the recombinant gas vesicles. the features critical to their unusual utility include characteristics inherent to the gas vesicle organelle itself as well as the halobacteria sp. in which they form. they are relevant to r-gv use in biotechnology applications such as a pathogen peptide display and/or delivery system. thus, despite the unusual intracellular environment that halophiles maintain, and the unusual nature of their native proteins  <cit> , the pathogen gene sequences were retained and also translated with fidelity in the halobacteria sd <dig> expression system as demonstrated by shiv antibody recognition. the recombinant gvpc proteins themselves are incorporated into the gas vesicle structures as demonstrated by r-gvpc release from isolated organelles and recognition by both anti-gvpc and anti-shiv antibody. inherently, the gvpc protein, as the "molecular glue" for the organelle, is present at the surface of recombinant gas vesicles  <cit> . in addition, as previously published electron micrograph show, this surface intrinsically exhibits a highly organized, patterned surface  <cit> . finally, gas vesicle formation itself is quality controlled by the gvp gene cluster carried by the transformed sd <dig> strain and release of the organelles themselves is easily achieved by simply suspending the halobacteria in water with  <dig>  mm mgso <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
the studies presented here clearly demonstrate that recombinant gvpc proteins displaying peptides encoded by sequences from the three very different siv genes each are expressed, the translated proteins are incorporated into the recombinant organelles and like native gvpc, the recombinant proteins in turn are appropriately integrated to produce functional organelles. the different chimeric r-gvpc are detected in isolated gas vesicle preparations and therefore the relevant incorporated gene sequences have been retained by transformed sd <dig>  and the r-gvpc proteins themselves, are retained by the r-gv. the elisa data demonstrate the r-gv, with their highly ordered surfaces serve as an effective display platform for peptide sequences as an integral part of the r-gv surface structure. further, as shown by the elisa data for serum samples collected at  <dig> weeks post re-immunization, notably elevated titers remained . from a practical perspective it is also relevant that the recombinant organelles also retain the natural gas vesicle functionality since they clearly float to the air/5% nacl interface. thus, like the wild type organelles, following halobacteria lysis by transfer to hypotonic medium r-gv can be readily isolated by centrifuge assisted flotation. finally, from a production standpoint, it is also significant that because a standard bacterial cell wall is not present, the recombinant sd <dig>  like the wild type halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  require a high salt environment  to maintain organism integrity. in the absence of high salt, the halobacteria lyse and therefore for this recombinant, display system, "escape" of viable halobacteria cannot occur. in addition as sub-cellular organelles the r-gv, unlike the various permutations of bacterial ghosts  <cit> , contain only a very limited number of "foreign" proteins. therefore in this they differ significantly from the complex array of protein and carbohydrate inherently present in the bacterial ghost based delivery systems. taken together, from the perspective of cost and recombinant containment, and extended retention of elevated humoral immune response elicited, the submicroscopic particles that constitute the halobacterial gas vesicle system have the potential to provide an alternative antigen display and delivery system. the ease of tailoring specific epitope presentations inherent in the surface display of peptides by the organelle would also support use of this system for displays to screen for humoral responses to specific pathogen epitopes, or as the peptide component in prime and boost immunizations  <cit> .

