BACKGROUND
multicopy gene regions such as the nuclear ribosomal dna spacers may exhibit significant heterogeneity within the same individual. such intra-individual variability can cause serious problems for phylogenetic reconstructions that use a dichotomous tree as the general model of evolution, and has been generally referred to as "paralogy"  <cit> . the internal transcribed spacers its <dig> and its <dig> of the nuclear dna region encoding for the 18s- <dig> s-25s ribosomal rna cistron, the 35s rdna are amongst the most commonly used molecular markers for plant phylogenetic studies  <cit> . as far as it has been studied, intra-individual its variability is a very common phenomenon in plants  <cit>  and has been attributed to numerous causes, such as  incomplete concerted evolution among the multiple copies of 35s rdna located within the same nucleolus organizer region ;  the general potential of the nor regions for intragenomic recombination between both parental chromosomes;  its homoeology, i.e. the persistence of two or more independently inherited arrays of 35s rdna as found for allopolyploids with more than one nor;  its pseudogeny, i.e. the occurrence of non-functional copies of rrna genes, and  gene paralogy in a strict sense, i.e. the existence of several rdna loci coding for functionally differing rrnas. whereas incomplete concerted evolution, intragenomic recombination, its homoeology and its pseudogenes have been documented in   and can be considered to be natural phenomena, paralogs have not yet been observed in the case of the 35s rdna, but have been observed in the case of "oocyte-type" and "somatic" 5s rrna genes active during early development of xenopus laevis  <cit> .

cloned sequence data that effectively cover the intra- and inter-individual its variability of morphologically defined taxa have been subject to detailed studies in angiosperm genera such as acer   <cit> , fagus   <cit>  and zelkova   <cit> . significantly high its variability not linked to pseudogeny was found particularly in species that are considered to be diploid; hence, other effects in addition to its homoeology were taken into account for the observed heterogeneity. for acer and fagus species, it could be shown that intra-individual its variability contained strong taxonomic information: morphologically distinguishable but closely related taxa  exhibited identical or highly similar  its variants in addition to taxon-specific its variants not found in the sister taxon  <cit> . in particular, intra-individual its variability in fagus was found to be as high as or higher than the overall interspecific divergence  <cit> . this puzzling observation fitted well with the fossil history of this genus, which indicates several phases of unhindered horizontal gene flow among spatially and temporarily isolated "species" during the tertiary, as well as known ecological differences between the species  <cit> . in an experimental approach, grimm et al.  <cit>  coded the occurrence or lack of a certain nucleotide polymorphism as phylogenetic characters for species-based matrices, which were analysed with maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood. a nucleotide matrix comprising several cloned its sequences per individual and a number of individuals per morphologically defined "species" was transformed into a matrix of characters of the "standard" type of the nexus format used by paup*  <cit> , with the morphologically defined taxa and biogeographically circumscribed "populations" as operational taxonomic units . sites reflecting no polymorphism  were coded as "0", whereas their polymorphic counterparts  were coded as "1". more complex variability patterns were coded using up to eight character states. as a result, grimm et al.  <cit>  inferred a more detailed molecular phylogenetic hypothesis than would have been possible by using the primary  sequence data, supporting the phylogenetic scenario predicted earlier  <cit> .

despite those promising results, the coding of the occurrence or loss of a nucleotide polymorphism as a phylogenetic character of a predefined species can be methodologically critical. the mutational constraints affecting intra- and inter-genomic competition among its variants are not as well studied as the degree of intra-genomic recombination. knowing this could allow us to decide if it makes sense to regard the occurrence  a nucleotide polymorphism as a character under maximum parsimony, and would be crucial to define the likelihood that such a polymorphism occurs quantitatively. to minimize coding bias, grimm et al.  <cit>  relied on detailed visual investigations of the nucleotide sequence motifs and general polymorphic patterns , a procedure which was extremely time-consuming and, to some extent, subjective. one could avoid such problems if one could develop a function that allows us to convert a data matrix of the clones into a data matrix of the plant individuals  directly.

however, due to the multiple reasons for its polymorphism discussed in the literature , it is, at present, hard to rely on an explicit statistical model of the evolution of multiple copies to infer the phylogeny of the individuals. for instance, joly and bruneau  <cit>  described a distance transformation method to include allelic variation in phylogenetic reconstruction, which can only be applied if exactly one or exactly two alleles are present in each individual. in contrast, our approach is based on the notion that different biological phenomena can be described in terms of hosts and their associates, and that similar methodologies can be applied to solve questions related to the different types of host-associate pairs. host-associate pairs are, for instance, areas and species, host species and their parasite or mutualist species, or individual organisms and individual genes  <cit> . methods such as brooks parsimony analysis  have been suggested as a means of inferring area cladograms from species trees as well as host trees from parasite or mutualist trees  <cit> . in the following, we thus derive and empirically test approaches that could be applied directly  to all kind of associate character data, be it morphological or sequence data of individuals in certain geographic areas or habitats, parasites or mutualists on certain host organisms, or genes and sequence variants present in certain individuals. the obvious advantage is that any method found to be useful for cloned its sequences and plant individuals may also be useful in other fields of research dealing with host-associate pairs  <cit> .

in contrast to the original formulation of bpa  <cit> , which infers host trees from single to multiple associate trees, we here will confine ourselves to distance methods in combination with phylogenetic networks for several reasons. firstly, both trees and networks can be inferred from distance matrices, but networks represent many evolutionary processes in a more comprehensive manner than trees, and evolution is not necessarily treelike  <cit> . for similar reasons, joly and bruneau  <cit>  also relied on networks in examining their distance transformation method for allelic data. whereas distance methods have already been criticized for losing phylogenetic information more than two decades ago  <cit> , they may even represent the data better than common character-based methods, particularly in combination with network analyses  <cit> , which could not yet well be combined with the maximum-likelihood criterion. secondly, the phylogenetic quality  of distance matrices may be measured directly without deriving a tree. instead, helpful but apparently underused indices such as q values  <cit> , delta values  <cit> , or additivity  can be applied. thirdly, congruence between datasets can be tested directly on distance matrices  <cit> . while concordance between trees is mostly measured with formulae, such as the robinson-foulds distance  <cit> , which disregard branch length information and do not indicate whether the similarity between the trees is significant , permutational regression approaches for distance matrices  <cit>  allow one to test the null hypothesis of no congruence between the datasets. even though permutational regression could be applied to patristic  distances derived from trees with branch lengths  <cit> , it may be more appropriate to use the "noisier" pair-wise phenetic distances , particularly if they are not well represented by a tree  <cit> . this is also more efficient, since inferring trees  can be omitted.

in principle, derivation of host from associate distance matrices can be done by two means . either  the associates' character matrix is converted to a character matrix of the hosts, the latter being used to compute host distances, or  distances between the associates are computed from the associates' character matrix and the resultant distance matrix is converted to a distance matrix of the hosts. an example of the latter approach, restricted to up to two associates per host, is presented in the study of joly and bruneau  <cit> .

in the present study, we apply such functions to compute distances between plant individuals as operational taxonomic units  from molecular data matrices that exhibit significant intra-taxon sequence heterogeneity reflected by cloned its data . the quality  of distance matrices is estimated using the delta value approach  <cit> . delta values can also be calculated for individual taxa and may be indicative of hybridization and/or recombination  <cit> . to identify the distance formulae best suited for the tasks of interest, we also investigate the correlation between the resultant distance matrices and matrices based on morphological distances as an external, independent dataset; this investigation will include permutational statistical tests  <cit> . whereas morphological data are often regarded as intrinsically inferior to molecular characters, more thorough analyses do not confirm that view  <cit> . in the context of a parsimony framework, congruence between  datasets has been suggested as a selection criterion for character change costs in sequence alignment and a subsequent tree search  <cit> ; here, we use congruence to compare associate-host transformation methods. to be able to correlate morphology and cloned its data covering the intra-individual variability of corresponding individuals, we focus on the above-mentioned datasets of acer section acer  <cit> , fagus  <cit>  and zelkova  <cit> . for these taxa, literature data indicate that the respective patterns of morphological and its differentiation fit into uniform evolutionary and systematic concepts, i.e., are qualitatively congruent . thus, correlation of morphological and transformed molecular matrices represents a natural means of quantitatively validating the proposed transformations.

we also test the sensitivity of each distance function against sample numbers of associates per hosts , making use of the above-mentioned permutational test, and against gap handling techniques . finally, the outcome of the analyses is discussed briefly in the light of the evolutionary framework for each group, as established in the original literature, using a combination of its data, morphology and fossil evidence. as additional empirical tests, we apply the transformation functions to the three datasets presented in  <cit> ; the resulting networks are compared to those obtained with the transformation formula presented in joly and bruneau  <cit> .

in addition to this empirical assessment of the distance formulae, implementations of these algorithms are provided as executables for the three most popular operating systems. regarding delta values, we also provide a comprehensive implementation that significantly extends the capabilities of the python script used in  <cit> , which is, to the best of our knowledge, the only implementation available so far.

RESULTS
sampling size bias, distance quality and correlation with morphology
correlations of the transformed distances with siz distances, which were designed for detecting a potential bias related to sampling size , were statistically significant in some cases . in acer, a significant correlation between pbc and siz distances was observed if a sampling size threshold of  <dig> was applied and gaps were treated as missing character states; the correlation disappeared if the minimum number of associates required was incremented by  <dig> . whereas molecular distances inferred from fagus sequences never displayed significant correlations with siz, the correlation of zelkova siz and ent distances as obtained by treating gaps as missing character states and by applying a threshold of  <dig> was significant, but this also became insignificant if the minimum number of associates required was increased. therefore, in the following, we confined ourselves to the results obtained with a threshold of  <dig>  which resulted in host datasets comprising  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> taxa for acer, fagus and zelkova, respectively.

regarding delta values  for entire distance matrices, results differed between data sources . acer distances showed relatively low values, indicating high treelikeness; variability between the different methods applied was low. the dv for acer distances were mostly located between  <dig>  and  <dig> , and received higher values with ent distances only. in fagus, the dv were much higher in general  and displayed more differences between the distance methods applied. in zelkova, the overall highest treelikeness was observed , but variability between the distance functions was also highest .

the different character and distance transformation functions resulted in even more pronounced differences regarding the treelikeness of the matrices . ent distances rather uniformly produced high dv . treelikeness of con matrices was even lower in some cases, whereas variability was much higher . min and pbc dv were generally much lower and similar in size to each other, but variability was more pronounced in the latter. mod and frq achieved the lowest dv and were also similar in the variance of their treelikeness. in general, dv were lower if distance matrices were inferred and gaps were treated as a 5thcharacter state .

the correlation between molecular and morphological distances was significant at p =  <dig>  in all cases except for all acer ent distances as well as zelkova ent distances combined with gaps treated as a missing character state; these distances correspond to the correlation coefficients below  <dig>  in fig.  <dig>  in contrast to the results for treelikeness, on average, correlation values are highest for fagus and lowest for acer. min/5th state for fagus , frq/missing for zelkova  and pbc/missing for acer  received the best correlation with the corresponding morphological matrices.

regarding the differences between the transformation functions, the behaviour of the correlation coefficients  paralleled that of the dv: formulae that resulted in lower dv also displayed higher correlations with the morphological distances. the correlation was lowest in the case of ent , followed by con. frq, min, mod and pbc displayed relatively high correlation values, ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . on average, correlation coefficients were higher if gaps were treated as missing character states , even though the corresponding dv were lower.

results obtained for north american rosa sequences  <cit>   were similar to those described above. with a single exception, the dv were considerably larger for ent than for the other transformation functions ; mod distance matrices  were somewhat less treelike than those of frq, min and pbc. in the case of the rosa datasets, treating gaps as a fifth state resulted in a lower dv . triose phosphate isomerase sequences resulted in less treelike matrices than glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and malate synthase sequences .

individual delta values
the individual dv  based on the best performing distance transformations  varied considerably between plant specimens . markedly increased idv in acer section acer were found in representatives of group b <dig>  and individual us  <dig> . the pattern was most pronounced in ni a  and us  <dig> . individuals of potentially hybrid origin with homoeologous its sequences showed medium to comparably low idv, e.g. a. × pseudo-heldreichii individual hd 1:  <dig>   to  <dig>  , xx  <dig> :  <dig>   to  <dig>  . in fagus, idv were generally high . above average idv were characteristic of individuals of f. hayatae, f. longipetiolata, f. lucida and f. sylvatica from turkey and georgia, whereas below average idv were typically found in f. grandifolia and subgenus engleriana . zelkova had the lowest idv . here, the min and mod transformations produced less treelike data  than frq and pbc; based on pbc, the only idv exceeding  <dig>  was confined to individual cp  <dig>  the same individual also showed the maximum idv with frq, where all idv were below  <dig> . the hybrid individual se  <dig>  had low idv with pbc and frq, and high or even maximal idv with min and mod.

plant specimens' idv inferred from distances matrices obtained with four different transformation methods are compared; gaps were treated as missing data and a minimum number of three associates per host was applied. affiliation to plant species as well as an evolutionary interpretation of particularly high idv  observed is indicated.

the idv of the plant individuals mostly reflected the idv calculated directly from p distances between the cloned sequences . for acer, all clones of the a. saccharum subspecies  exhibited the largest idv , as did the clones of the individual us  <dig> . the same is true for chimeric  clones . in fagus, a similar correlation between idv of clones and plant individuals was found; for instance, the minimal idv of  <dig>  was obtained for clones of gr- <dig>  in contrast to  <dig>  for the clone or- <dig> . for zelkova, a comparison of idv of clones with idv of plant individuals revealed that frq and pbc reflect a major feature of the original character or distance data: four of the six clones representing cp  <dig> were among the  <dig> clones with idv >  <dig> , but only one clone of either si  <dig>  and se  <dig>  were in this group.

phylogenetic networks
naturally, the similarity between the reconstructed networks correlates with the congruence between the underlying distance matrices. the four transformation methods  that resulted in high correlations with morphology and in low dv produced very similar neighbor-net splits graphs . in the following, we thus focus on the description of the networks based on pbc distances. the pbc-inferred network of acer section acer  exhibited two general elements. first, genetically unambiguous individuals  clustered according to their taxonomic affiliations  and the intra-sectional groups a <dig> to b <dig> . each group, except for group b <dig>  was characterized by prominent parallel edges and a rather treelike appearance in the corresponding portions of the graph. second, three individuals were placed as terminals of large box-like structures:  hd  <dig>  representing a putative hybrid of a. heldreichii and a. pseudoplatanus ,  of  <dig>  material from a historical herbarium sheet of a. obtusifolium from syria, and  sv4b, a morphologically unequivocal a. sempervirens individual from crete. all three individuals were characterized by potential its homoeologues  <cit> . aside these two major features, the following could be observed: the individual us  <dig>  taxonomically treated as a. cf. monspessulanum, was placed near the center of the graph; the most prominent edge bundles related it to group b <dig> or a <dig>  the center of the graph was dominated by relatively short edges; however, the two most prominent central edges related group b <dig> to group b <dig>  and group a <dig> to the  outgroup a <dig> 

in the pbc network of fagus , four major groups could be distinguished. a long edge bundle distinguished between the two subgenera engleriana  and fagus . within the latter, individuals representing the northern american f. grandifolia  were clearly separated from the remaining eurasian taxa. of the eurasian taxa, individuals of f. hayatae and f. longipetiolata  were placed next to each other as terminals of a pronounced box-like substructure. all other individuals were organized in a star-like manner; the longer proximal edge bundles further related both individuals of f. crenata .

the pbc-inferred neighbor-net splits graph based on its data of zelkova  had a "giraffe-like" general appearance, reflecting a biogeographical differentiation pattern. a prominent box-like structure  was created by z. carpinifolia from the caucasus , individuals representing the chinese z. schneideriana that made the "hind legs" and "tail", and a french z. cf. serrata cultivar  and the japanese-based z. serrata  that formed the backbone. the "head" of the splits graph giraffe was separated from the "torso" by a pronounced "neck" comprising the mediterranean zelkova individuals of the  closely related species z. abelicea and z. sicula.

regarding the neighbor-net splits graphs of the rosa data, we chose to depict the pbc network computed from malate synthase sequences  because an annotated network inferred from the same sequence alignment using a different transformation algorithm was shown in fig.  <dig> of  <cit> . the resulting network topologies are fully compatible. three lineages, alpha, beta and rosa section synstylae, were indicated in  <cit> , all of which are recovered in the pbc network . topological relationships within and between these lineages as well as with the remaining otus are also congruent with those obtained by earlier works  <cit> . as in the case of acer, fagus and zelkova, the correlation between frq, min, mod and pbc distances were high , and the resulting splits graphs were similar to each other and those obtained in  <cit>  .

discussion
general applicability of the transformation formulae
of the six character-character or distance-distance transformations examined in the course of the present study, four  performed well with respect to both treelikeness of the resulting distance matrices and correlation with morphology. in the case of the rosa datasets, the resulting network topologies are fully in agreement with those obtained by joly and bruneau  <cit> , who used a distance transformation function restricted to up to two associates per host. in the following, we will focus on the technical applicability of the six transformation formulae; we will also show that while some formulae that are characterized by a combination of reasonable performance and apparent simplicity , others are less simple, but can be justified by their relation to coefficients that are well-known from statistics . before, we note that the considerable agreement observed between four of the six transformation functions and the morphological distances also confirms the use of latter as reference datasets. this is not circular reasoning; rather, because congruence between distinct data sources is a reliable indicator that they reflect the same underlying evolutionary history , the high quality of the morphological datasets  <cit>  is a necessary condition for obtaining high correlation values.

obviously, both ent and frq can be applied to each type of discrete character data. only in the case of quantitative and continuous characters such as morphological measurements need they be replaced by other appropriate character transformations. for instance, ent could be replaced by the standard deviation or the range as typical parametric or non-parametric statistics for the variability of a sample. in fact, the statistical justification of the entropy formula  requires some considerations from information theory but is as widely used as a coefficient for the variability of discrete data as are the aforementioned statistics for continuous data . frq could be applied to quantitative, continuous characters after transforming them to discrete characters by means of partitioning them into several clusters. however, since most molecular  and morphological characters  are represented as a set of discrete character states, ent and frq can be applied directly in most cases.

the unfavourable performance of ent distances with respect to both delta values and correlation with morphology is no surprise. we presume that ent distances will always almost discard at least some phylogenetic information and that they will usually discard more information than their counterparts such as frq. thus, ent distances may not represent the best method to uncover evolutionary relationships between hosts. however, they may be of use to clarify if and to what extent the common ancestry of the hosts is reflected by the variability of associate characters alone. for instance, the correlation between acer and zelkova ent distances and the corresponding morphological distances was extremely low and mostly insignificant, whereas fagus ent distances significantly correlated with morphology . this corroborates earlier studies which concluded that the distribution and amount of intra-individual its variability in fagus directly reflects phylogenetic relationships  <cit> .

a further difference between ent and frq is that ent may be generally more susceptible to sample size, as demonstrated by the significant correlation with siz distances for our data. however, testing the correlation with siz represents an easy means to correct for a potential sample size bias, because raising the minimum required number of associates to  <dig> resulted in insignificant correlations of siz distances with all other formulae. of course, if the number of associates has a biological meaning , the correlation with siz cannot be used as a selection criterion. a drawback of ent and frq is that they cannot be combined with distance formulae  that make use of an explicit model of dna  evolution . however, both transformation methods could be combined with bootstrapping, the standard method in phylogeny to obtain branch support values , if an implementation is available to bootstrap continuous characters  in the case of frq, block bootstrapping would need to be applied, treating each sequence of character state frequencies that was computed from the same character within the original data matrix as a single, independent character. in the current study, for the reasons provided in the background section, we have preferred networks over trees and bootstrapping, and we have omitted any of the more complex models of nucleotide site substitution, as explained in the methods section.

as in the case of ent, the low performance of the con transformation is not surprising. because character states that only appear once receive the same weight than highly frequent states, a considerable loss of information may occur. if all possible character states are present in the set of associates of a single host, loss of information is total . naturally, this problem has been noted earlier  <cit> . in contrast to ent, con keeps track of the actual character states present and thus the results are better in general . however, con cannot be used to assess the correspondence between associate character variability and host phylogeny , and because character transformations that perform better regarding phylogenetic reconstruction have been found, a biological justification for the use of the con transformation of associate characters is not obvious. in fact, con has been included in the current study mainly because it makes use of the standard approach to compute consensus sequences and to compare its performance with that of other formulae qualitatively and quantitatively.

as expected, in the case of a minimum number of associates , mod considerably outperforms con. determining the mode is the standard method of obtaining a representative value from qualitative characters, as are the mean and median statistics for continuous data . most probably, the loss of information is much lower than in the case of the con transformation, except for hosts with exactly two associates  <cit> . furthermore, with very high numbers of divergent associates, mod will also result in "n" or "x" characters only , whereas frq may tend to equal proportions of each character state. on the other hand, it is reasonable to assume that, in general, mod loses more information than frq because mod disregards all character states that occur with less than maximum frequency. in case of z. carpinifolia, differences between the idv of the cloned its sequences are less well preserved by mod  than by frq , as further discussed below. this may be considered as preliminary evidence for the differences between the four transformation methods regarding the loss of information, even though all perform well with respect to overall treelikeness and correlation with independent morphological datasets. an advantage of mod  is that the same methods of phylogenetic inference can be applied to transformed as well as untransformed characters. thus, the full range of methods for phylogeny reconstruction, including maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood, are available, which could also be combined with bootstrapping  to obtain branch support values .

the general applicability of the pbc distance formula is demonstrated by its relationship to the sørensen distance  coefficient familiar to ecology . sørensen distances are frequently used to visualize relationships between habitats based on the presence and absence of species. an extension of sørensen's coefficient introduced by odum, as well as by bray and curtis, allows us to take species abundances into account  <cit> : p.  <dig> and  <dig>  sørensen's coefficient is known as an "asymmetric" distance coefficient, because double absence of a species from two habitats is not taken into account; rather, the sørensen distance dxy between two habitats  x and y relates the number of species  axy present in both habitats to the number of species present in x only  and present in y only  in the following way :

  dxy: = / 

the denominator of the sørensen distance  is always identical to that of the pbc distance , because pbc adds the number of rows to the number of columns of the reduced matrix . thus, pbc counts associates that occur in both hosts twice, and those that occur in only one of the two hosts once, respectively. importantly, the numerator of pbc  becomes identical to that of the sørensen distances if pbc is computed from a phylogenetically uninformative associate distance matrix that contains  <dig> in the diagonal and  <dig> in all remaining fields. in that case, the sum of the row minima is identical to ai because  <dig> is added for each associate being identical and  <dig> is added for each associate being different in the two hosts; the sum of the column minima is identical to aj for the same reasons. of course, if a phylogenetically uninformative distance matrix that contains any positive constant k other than  <dig> in the non-diagonal fields is used as input, the resulting distance will be identical to k times the sørensen distance; this just represents a means of rescaling.

for these theoretical reasons, we conclude that pbc is a biologically meaningful generalization of sørensen's distance coefficient to take the phylogenetic relationships between the associates into account. from the viewpoint of the more general pbc formula , sørensen distances are a special case that is based on a distance matrix that contains information only on identity  and non-identity  but no further information on phylogenetic relationships. accordingly, the new distance formula  has been christened "phylogenetic bray-curtis" after another extension of sørensen's coefficient by bray and curtis , abbreviated "pbc".

it is reasonable to assume that pbc does not suffer from the limitations of ent, frq, con and mod, as described above. even in the case of a large number of highly divergent associates, the most similar associates of the second host will be determined by the pbc algorithm. importantly, there is a difference in perspective compared to the transformation function presented by joly and bruneau  <cit> . even if the latter was extended to more than two associates per host, in the case of an equal number of associates, it would assume that each associate of the first host can only be linked to a single associate of the second host. if and only if this assumption is justified biologically, the algorithm of joly and bruneau  <cit>  or an extension of it may be the preferred transformation. however, our more general algorithms appear to work well with the rosa datasets, for which the assumption is reasonable.

like pbc, min is also justified by statistical considerations. minimum, maximum and median are standard non-parametric statistics , but only the minimum can be applied directly in transforming distances . min has an advantage over pbc because it is simpler. however, it may be hypothesized that min loses more information than pbc because the latter considers a larger proportion of values in the reduced distance matrix. as mentioned above, results obtained for the idv of z. carpinifolia are in agreement with that prediction. on the other hand, if the original dataset consisted of several clearly distinct associate lineages, pbc would be heavily influenced by the loss of all members of any of the associate lineages in one or more hosts because the row or column minima would increase considerably. this behaviour of pbc may be desirable with many datasets, such as several independent lineages of parasites on the same host lineage, as in the original bpa approach to infer the host from associate cladograms  <cit> .

to solve other biological questions, min may be the more appropriate transformation. for similar reasons, pbc is more heavily influenced by sampling size than min, as indicated by the significant correlation with siz observed with a low threshold value. both min and pbc could be integrated in an analysis pipeline that makes use of standard phylogenetic techniques such as an explicit evolutionary model and bootstrapping . in contrast to con and mod, these methods would need to be applied before transformation, not afterwards. joly and bruneau  <cit>  emphasized the combination of transformed datasets from several loci for phylogenetic analyses. min- or pbc-transformed distance matrices would require averaging  <cit> , which can be done using a perl script provided together with the transformation programs . integrating the transformed character obtained using con, mod, frq and ent for the same sets of hosts is straightforward because the datasets just need to be concatenated and the number of characters updated.

phylogenetic implications
the splits graphs based on frq, min, mod and pbc distances are in agreement with the evolutionary frameworks that have been proposed for acer section acer  <cit> , fagus  <cit>  and zelkova  <cit> . because congruence between these distance matrices and morphology is well documented by the correlation results, for more details the reader is referred to the original literature. in the following, we will focus on the evolutionary interpretation of the idv obtained from these distances and whether they are able to recover treelikeness observed within the matrices of cloned its sequences. as demonstrated below, networks based on the four character or distance transformations obviously have a high capability to deal simultaneously with a couple of "paralogy" phenomena that interfere with phylogenetic tree-building, such as "recombinant" accessions, its homoeologues and reticulate signal in general. these considerations also corroborate earlier results that dv are a valuable tool for comparative studies of biological distance functions  <cit> .

individual delta values and the recognition of ancestral taxa
two taxa in acer section acer show generally high idv, based on the original molecular distances between the cloned sequences as well as on the distance transformations. these are representatives of a. saccharum and its subspecies, and the a. cf. monspessulanum individual us  <dig>  grimm et al.  <cit>  noted that acer section acer falls into two major lineages: a. caesium and the acer core clade, which finds further support in cpdna data  <cit> . nevertheless, the its sequence structure hints towards a. caesium as the closest extant relative of the acer core clade  <cit> . according to  <cit> , a. saccharum  is at the tip of an isolated lineage that originated shortly after the formation of the acer core clade . based on motif analysis, they showed that subspecies grandidentatum is closer to the common ancestor of the whole section than its eastern relatives and that it has retained several plesiomorphic sequence characters. an extant sister clade can not be identified. the high dv mirror this finding. analogously, a. cf. monspessulanum shows a largely "primitive" its sequence, from which all its variants of group b <dig> can be derived  <cit> . in a cladistic analysis, an ancestor would be placed as sister taxon to all its offspring, thus producing a polytomy if more than one sibling is included in the dataset. in network analysis, several incompatible phylogenetic splits are promoted, reflecting a generally non-treelike mode of evolution in agreement with the high idv.

the comparably high dv found for fagus are in agreement with the observation that  evolution in this genus is non-treelike in general  <cit> . accordingly, the its data accumulated a high amount of incompatible signals  <cit> , which interfere with phylogenetic tree-building and result in high dv, but can be handled using adapted analyses, as done in  <cit>  and the present study.

morphology and its motif analyses  <cit>  have provided evidence that z. carpinifolia is a more primitive member of that genus, and could be a remainder of the evolutionary source  from which z. serrata and z. abelicea-sicula have evolved. in analogy to a. cf. monspessulanum and a. saccharum , the idv of z. carpinifolia, based on the distances between the clones, on frq and on pbc distances, are higher than those of other individuals. this pattern is not apparent with mod and min distances, which may be caused by greater loss of information in the case of the latter transformations .

transformed distances and the recognition of hybrids and recombinants
grimm et al. noted the existence of putative its homoeologues in a few individuals and documented "recombinant"  clones in the case of acer section acer  <cit> . in analyses based on the original cloned its data, the putative its homoeologues of one individual were grouped with the putative parental lineages. for example, clones of the possibly hybrid "a. ×. pseudo-heldreichii"  were grouped either with clones of a. pseudoplatanus  or of group a <dig> . potential hybrid individuals  are directly identified in the splits graphs inferred from pbc distances, as they are placed between their putative parents; a large box-like structure with two prominent edge bundles is produced .

"recombinant" clones that are likely to be the product of pcr artefacts in the case of individuals with  homoeologous rdna arrays  <cit>  can distort phylogenetic trees and can induce a systematic attraction between distantly related lineages. in the case of acer, four individuals exhibited chimeric clones, three of which are included in the present dataset . from two a. monspessulanum specimens , recombinants between a. monspessulanum-and a. opalus-typical its variants were obtained; in the case of the a. sempervirens individual sv4b, a recombinant of a. sempervirens and a. ibericum  homoeologues was obtained. the recombinant clones obtained from acer individuals do not have a distorting effect: in the case of xx  <dig> and xx  <dig>  the recombinant clones are outnumbered and compensated for by a. monspessulanum-specific clones; in the case of sv4b, the recombinant perfectly fits into the general homoeologous situation.

intra-individual its variability in fagus is often as high as inter-individual or interspecific its divergence. accordingly, the resolution of the phylogenetic trees was found to be low  <cit> ; only detailed visual investigation of selected sequence motifs and its variability patterns  <cit>  allowed us to infer a fully comprehensive evolutionary scenario in correlation with morphology and the fossil record  <cit> . the resultant pbc splits graph highlights several aspects of this data structure. as in phylogenetic trees  <cit> , f. engleriana clusters with f. japonica, and individuals of f. grandifolia are clearly distinct from the remaining representatives of subgenus fagus. in contrast to the ml phylogram based on the original clones  <cit> , the strongly its-polymorphic individuals of f. hayatae and f. longipetiolata are grouped together , which is in agreement with the results of the variability coding  <cit> . individual lo  <dig> is placed next to f. lucida, which is in agreement with  <cit> , who has noted that one f. lucida  has its characteristics that are more similar to f. crenata and f. sylvatica, whereas the other individual's  its sequences have some similarities to some clones of f. hayatae and f. longipetiolata. due to the increased intra- and inter-individual its variability in some provenances of the western eurasian f. sylvatica such as turkey and georgia  <cit> , it was difficult to distinguish it clearly from its japanese sister species, f. crenata  <cit> . this is, however, accomplished by the pbc-inferred distance networks .

ancient hybridization was assumed for the mostly diploid genus zelkova  <cit> ; however, the corresponding box-like structures are not readily visible in the pbc distance-based splits graph, because of the large box-like structure in the center of the graph . this is due to the fact that inter-taxonomic distances among clones of different zelkova species are generally lower than, for instance, in acer. in the former, apparently only a few mutations were fixed during the evolution of the modern species; accordingly, the hamming distances between the clones are comparably small, as are the resultant pbc distances between the individuals. nevertheless, the grouping of the "hybrid" and "non-hybrid" individuals is in perfect agreement with the proposed molecular evolution of zelkova its  <cit> . the z. cf. serrata cultivar se  <dig>  genetically a hybrid of z. schneideriana and z. serrata, is placed in between z. schneideriana individuals and the "true" z. serrata representative, se  <dig>  the second potential hybrid  is represented by only two sequences in the original data and, hence, is not included in figure  <dig>  the "foreleg" position  of the second z. carpinifolia individual  correlates to the finding based on motif analysis that the its of z. carpinifolia is most similar to the ancestor of all zelkova species  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
four of the six formulae introduced in our study performed well in reconstructing the evolution of three angiosperm genera from cloned its sequences and of rosa from three different coding loci. in conjunction with delta values, the formulae were also able to identify hybrids and ancestral taxa in the its datasets. the four best-performing transformation functions apparently allow us to analyse datasets that present intrinsic problems for traditional reconstruction methods due to "paralogy" in molecular data, which range from its variability as the result of incomplete concerted evolution and homoeologous data reflecting reticulation, to gene paralogs as a consequence of gene duplication, not to mention homoploid duplications, incomplete lineage sorting, fast ancient radiations, etc.

a pure distance-based framework was established in which these transformation functions were assessed using three different approaches , and the results regarding performance were in agreement with each other and also corresponded to the theoretical expectations. furthermore, results obtained with the three rosa sequence alignments were fully in agreement with an earlier study  <cit>  that used a less general transformation function. therefore, the outcome of the current study presents more than anecdotal evidence, even though only six underlying sequence datasets were examined. nevertheless, additional investigations are necessary to further our understanding of these and other host-associate transformation functions. for instance, simulation studies could clarify the relative performance of the methods under well-defined evolutionary scenarios. in any case, our study has demonstrated that treelikeness measures such as delta values are likely to be a valuable tool in future comparative studies, not only regarding entire distance matrices but also regarding the recovery of individual treelikeness values after transformation to distances between the hosts.

furthermore, due to the generality demonstrated for the transformation functions, they can be applied to a wide range of biological problems that can be interpreted in terms of hosts and associates. for instance, göker et al. are currently conducting a simulation study  to assess the suitability of the pbc function for testing global co-phylogenetic patterns between hosts and parasites. because of its closeness to the sørensen coefficient, the pbc approach lends itself to use in ecology. in contrast to sørensen distances, pbc does not require knowledge of the taxonomic affiliation of the sampled species in advance. rather, it determines the most similar specimens between two habitats automatically when computing pair-wise distances from the reduced matrices . pbc may thus be ideal for cluster analyses of habitats from which large samples of character data have been collected in a standardized manner, for instance, in the course of metagenomics projects . mod may be helpful in phylogenetic studies to limit the number of otus by replacing numerous associates  with a single host , probably losing much less information than if consensus or placeholder strategies were used. various applications are possible, and further transformation formulae are likely to be invented in future studies benefiting from the general notion of associates related to their hosts.

