BACKGROUND
schistosomiasis is an important public health problem that affects approximately  <dig> million people, mostly in developing countries, and that poses a risk to another  <dig> million  <cit> . mortality attributed to schistosomiasis is estimated to be around  <dig>  deaths/year with an added economic burden of  <dig>  million disability adjusted life-years lost per year  <cit> . the disease is transmitted when parasite eggs in human feces reach fresh water and hatch into miracidia. upon infection of an appropriate snail species, miracidia transform into sporocysts that asexually reproduce generating hundreds of thousands of cercaria. the cercaria are shed by the snail and swim until they find an appropriate vertebrate host and penetrate through its skin. the worms then undergo differentiation and migrate in the bloodstream until they reach the mesenteric veins where male and female worms pair.

eggs from paired mature schistosomes are responsible for most of the pathology caused by s. mansoni. each mature female lays on average  <dig> eggs per day, some of which are excreted in the feces  <cit> . the remaining eggs end up in the liver, intestine and other organs where they cause an inflammatory reaction, producing significant scarring which leads to a variety of symptoms depending on the organ where they lodge. for instance, eggs trapped in the bowel wall may cause bloody diarrhea, cramping, and eventually inflammatory colonic polyposis  <cit> . eggs that are swept back to the hepatic portal system cause granulomatous reaction in the portal tract which can evolve to hepatoportal fibrosis and portal hypertension. more interestingly, although immature worms may lay eggs which are occasionally shaped normally, those eggs are unable to induce the formation of granulomas  <cit> .

male schistosomes are responsible for triggering and maintaining female maturation. in absence of the male, female worms cannot migrate against the blood flow from the portal sites in the liver to the smaller mesenteric circulation where they lay their eggs  <cit> . therefore, the survival of s. mansoni couples and the maintenance of their complete life-cycle seem to be dependent on the existence of a permanent association between sexes. studies by shaw and erasmus on praziquantel  have shown some evidence that the drug disrupts the reproductive system of females and that subcurative doses cause a long-lasting regression of both ovary and vitelline gland  <dig> hours post-treatment  <cit> . popiel et al.  have shown that there is a dose-dependent and reversible effect of oxamniquine  on the female reproductive system  <cit> . although these effects on the reproductive system are usually reversible, these data might suggest that the reproductive system of female schistosomes could provide good targets for therapeutic agents against these parasites.

in contrast to male schistosomes that undergo normal morphological development regardless of their pairing status, females from single sex infection  show clear differences from those which are paired to males. virgin females are considerably smaller than paired females  <cit> . when paired females are separated from males they stop laying eggs and regress to an immature state, however if they are allowed to couple they maturate again  <cit>  showing that the maintenance of sexual maturation in the female is dependent upon the presence of the male partner. the stimulus for female maturation is independent of male sperm, species and fertilization  <cit> . in addition to the morphological modifications present in single-sex females, separation of female worms leads to a large variety of changes in the physiology of the worm, culminating in the atrophy of the ovary and vitelline gland  <cit> . for instance, there is a great increase in dna synthesis in single-sex females upon pairing with males. also, paired females utilize more glucose than unpaired ones  <cit> . in spite of their immaturity, single-sex females reach a limited level of development, allowing them to lay eggs, which are usually malformed and non-viable  <cit> . the rates of oviposition and maturation of eggs are significantly increased by pairing of the single-sex female worms with males  <cit> .

different factors have been proposed to be involved in s. mansoni sexual maturation including physical/tactile contact  <cit> , nutrition  <cit>  and chemical stimuli  <cit> . in support to the importance of tactile contact, michaels showed that when halves of worms  are allowed to mate in vitro, like halves  always mate normally while unlike halves almost always mate abnormally, postulating that both sexes of worms have linear receptors which are used to determine dating and mating position  <cit> . in support to the role of nutrition, s. mansoni female worms from single-sex infections have limited pharyngeal musculature, thin intestinal cecal walls, lack of digestive enzymes and reduced intake of red blood cells than females from paired infections  <cit> . loverde and colleagues have suggested that the muscularity of the male worm allows it to assist the weaker females with pumping host blood into their intestine by a massaging effect of the muscular walls of the gynecophoric canal   <cit> . also, cornford and huot demonstrated that there is transfer of 14c glucose from male worms to females, implying that male schistosomes indeed help feed female worms  <cit> . chemical stimuli such as acetone or ether extracts of male worms have been shown to induce female development in vitro  <cit> . also, an observed cholesterol transfer from males to females may suggest a role for hormonal factors  <cit> .

on the male parasite side, the effects of sexual pairing on male worms are very subtle and therefore have received little attention in comparison to female worms. nevertheless, some studies show that male s. mansoni and s. haematobium worms from single-sex infections are significantly smaller and have a reduction in the number of testes when compared to worms from homologous paired infections  <cit> . using the data published by basch and gupta it is possible to observe that pairing also stimulates a higher rate of cell division  in males when bisexually paired males and unisexual unpaired males are compared  <cit> . the stimulatory effect of female schistosomes on male worms has also being studied at the biochemical and molecular level. for instance, worms from single-sex infections have more glutathione than worms from paired-infections and this difference can be reversed by incubation of those worms with females  <cit> . also, female worms stimulate tyrosine incorporation, lipid accumulation and lipase utilization in males  <cit> . another interesting fact is that paired male schistosomes express a 79-kda protein in its gynecophoral canal and that this protein detection is severely limited at the surface of single-sex male worms  <cit> . this protein, which shows wide distribution on the surface of adult female worms has homology to developmentally-regulated homotypic adhesion molecules and is suspected to be essential for continued interaction between sexes and sexual development of schistosomes.

several expression analyses were recently performed in schistosomes using microarrays to study gender differences in gene expression of s. mansoni and s. japonicum, as well as stage specific, strain specific, maturation specific, and species specific differences  <cit> . microarrays were also used to investigate the vertebrate hepatic host response to infection with s. mansoni  <cit> . these studies have provided important information concerning the biology of the parasite and the host response. in this study, we describe the use of dna microarrays to study the effect of sexual pairing of s. mansoni  in the adult gene expression. to accomplish this objective we compared worms from single-sex infections with worms from paired-infections. our results reveal novel information of genes putatively involved in oogenesis and sexual maturation of schistosomes and allow the identificaton of new possible targets for therapeutic intervention.

RESULTS
evaluation of replication quality
in order to investigate the quality of our replicates we tested the correlation between different types of replicates using limma   <cit> . to generate single-sex worms we exposed multiple biomphalaria glabrata snails each to a single miracidium and harvested the cercariae shed by them after one month. multiple mice were subsequently infected with either single-sex or mixed-sex cercariae and the worms harvested  <dig> days post-infection. the experimental design included three types of replicates: biological, technical and in-slide replicates encompassing  <dig> slides in total for each experiment. in brief, single-sex and paired-infection worms were harvested from multiple mice and pooled separately in pools of  <dig> worms or more . the rna from each pool was extracted separately and then hybridized to the slides. three biological replicates were used for each experiment and each of them was hybridized twice . because each probe was printed in duplicate we computed also the correlation between in-slide replicates.

the approach used was to estimate a common correlation for all the genes within blocks corresponding to each type of replicate. as would be desired, the level of correlation between in slide technical replicates was between  <dig>  and  <dig>  for male and female experiments respectively. dye swap replicates displayed a correlation between - <dig>   to - <dig>  , indicating that the fluorescent dyes introduce a very minimal bias in hybridization intensities. the correlation between our biological replicates  was  <dig>  for the female experiment and  <dig>  for the one investigating sexual pairing on male worms. our results are in agreement with the data published by hoffmann and colleagues who found an in-slide replicate correlation of  <dig>  and a correlation ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  between slides   <cit> .

differentially expressed genes
statistical analysis of the data using a linear model to assess differential expressed genes revealed a large number of transcripts of gene products putatively related to sexual maturation in both male and female schistosomes . only genes with at least two-fold difference  and logodds ≥  <dig>  were considered differentially expressed. volcano plots, where the magnitude of the gene expression ratio is displayed on the x-axis and the significance of the difference in expression between groups on the y-axis, are shown in .  <dig> genes were observed to be differentially expressed between mature and immature female parasites and  <dig> genes between mature and immature male worms.

top  <dig> most differentially expressed genes in adult female schistosomes. m values are the log-ratio of the two expression intensities. a values are the mean log-expression of the two. genes with negative m values are down-regulated in immature females  and genes with positive m values are up-regulated in immature worms.

top  <dig> most differentially expressed genes in adult male schistosomes. m values are the log-ratio of the two expression intensities. a values are the mean log-expression of the two. genes with negative m values are down-regulated in immature females  and genes with positive m values are up-regulated in immature worms.

our results show that 55% of the genes which are differentially expressed are expressed at higher levels in paired females while the remaining 45% are more abundant in immature female worms. the differentially expressed transcripts  in female worms included many previously identified gender related genes including the p <dig> eggshell protein gene , other egg shell proteins , extracellular superoxide dismutase , tyrosinase , cathepsin b , dynein light chain , gynecophoral canal protein , aspartate aminotransferase , diacylglycerol acetyltransferase  and female specific protein fs <dig>   <cit> .

fs <dig>  has already been shown to be up-regulated in the vitelline cells during maturation of female worms and has been linked to the production and maintenance of eggs  <cit> . the gynecophoral canal protein , also previously shown to be differentially expressed between male and females, has been implicated in male/female communication or interaction  <cit> . our data showing down regulation of the small g protein ras in female is also consistent with published observations  <cit> . tyrosinase, extracellular superoxide dismutase, glucose transporter protein i, diacylglycerol acetyltransferase 2-like protein, aspartate aminotransferase and egg shell proteins are known to be differentially expressed between male and females suggesting that they might be related either to sexual determination, maturation, reproduction or other sex specific activities  <cit> . our results show that these genes, in addition to being differentially expressed between genders, are also differentially expressed in female worms in different sexual maturation stages. a great number of transcripts not previously associated with sexual maturation were also observed. these included membrane antigens, importin beta- <dig>  s. mansoni glucose transporter, myosin heavy chain, rho <dig> gtpase, lecithin-cholesterol acytransferase, apoferritin- <dig>  various ribosomal proteins and others . of the  <dig> genes we identified as differentially expressed in females,  <dig> did not contain any annotation because they did not show significant similarity with sequences contained in the ncbi at the time the array was printed  <cit> . these genes represent a multitude of unexplored proteins which might be potential targets for new therapeutic agents.

of the genes with an associated gene ontology, genes that were up-regulated in single-sex females were mostly related to energy generation  while genes that were down-regulated were related to rna metabolism, reactive oxygen species metabolism, electron transport, organelle organization and biogenesis and protein biosynthesis . the increased amount of antioxidants in mature female is in agreement with their increased need to detoxify hemoglobin byproducts associated with increased blood cell consumption  <cit> . on the other hand, one would expect that paired-infection females express more carbohydrate and protein metabolism genes than single-sex worms. the fact that we found more of those genes in single-sex females supports basch's nutritional theory of sexual maturation. if males do indeed help females to feed, this could allow mature worms to direct their metabolism to the more important egg generation  and therefore genes related to energy generation should be decreased in mature females in relation to immature. among the genes that are down-regulated there are six genes coding for eggshell proteins. this is expected since paired females are egg-laying machines capable of converting the equivalent of their own body dry weight into eggs  <cit>  and consuming about  <dig> millions erythrocytes per day. in light of this high metabolic activity of mature females, it has been proposed that female-specific gene products associated with the metabolic machinery of egg production and hemoglobin catabolism should be highly represented in molecular biological studies of gender  <cit>  which is the case in this study. the fact that genes associated with organelle organization were both up and down regulated in immature females could possibly be explained by differences in vitelline cells production among mature and immature females. it has been shown that paired female schistosomes produce several thousands vitteline cells per day  <cit> . this high mitotic activity must demand high amounts of protein synthesis and the participation of an array of proteins related to organelle biogenesis and organization. the fact that some genes related to this process were up-regulated in immature females is more difficult to explain but it could be due to some compensatory mechanism whereby immature females make up for the lack of nutritional support by males by producing new cells.

for male parasites, our results show that  <dig> % of the differentially expressed genes were present in larger quantities in mature males while the remaining  <dig> % are more expressed in males from single-sex infections. the fact that more genes were differentially expressed between females than between males is consistent with the fact that immature males present less morphological and biochemical differences than immature females. nevertheless this data does not agree with a previous study of gene expression induced by sexual maturation which found a similar number of differentially expressed genes in males and females  <cit> . this difference might have been caused by differences in the experimental design, data analysis parameters, host characteristics or differences in the parasite strain used. indeed, results from moertel and colleagues have shown that more than  <dig> genes are differentially expressed when different strains s. japonicum are compared under identical conditions  <cit> . when the gene lists of our experiments and fitzpatrick and hoffmann  <cit>  are compared  we find less than 10% of genes which are common to the two datasets and in one case  we did not find any genes in common. our data also shows that mature male worms express more genes related to the metabolism of proteins, nucleotides, macromolecules, ion transport, and metabolite/energy generation than unpaired worms, which suggests that paired worms are more metabolically active. the data agrees with fitzpatrick and hoffmann  in that more genes potentially involved in rna metabolism were differentially expressed between mature and immature male worms  <cit> , nevertheless we did not find a greater proportion of genes in the structural molecule activity go category.

interestingly, the data from khalil and mansour show that male worms from single-sex infections are in fact smaller than worms from paired-infections  <cit> . although the authors do not explain this phenomenon, our results suggest that the difference in size could be linked to the higher expression of genes involved in energy generation and accumulation . the fact that paired male worms absorb and phosphorylate glucose more rapidly than unpaired worms also reinforces this hypothesis  <cit> . nevertheless, we observed a paradoxical higher expression of cathepsin b sm <dig> in unpaired male worms. gotz and klinkert demonstrated that this protein is an enzyme which is involved in the degradation of hemoglobin in the digestive tract of schistosomes  <cit> .

another interesting observation is that unpaired male worms synthesize more lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase , acyl-coa binding proteins  and fatty acid binding protein . in humans lcat is responsible for the formation of cholesteryl esters starting from lecithin and cholesterol and it is the lcat on the surface of nascent hdl particles that convert cholesterol and phosphatidylcholine of chylomicron and vdld in cholesteryl esters. the accumulation of cholesteryl esters in the nascent hdl convert it in mature hdl and directs it back to the liver where the cholesterol is usually unloaded. the acyl-coa binding proteins are small proteins which bind to long and medium chain acyl-coa esters with high affinity and which can act as intracellular carriers of acyl-coa esters. fabps, are a members of a family of cytosolic lipid binding proteins and that have been investigated as possible vaccine candidates  <cit> . furthermore, gobert and colleagues demonstrated that the s. japonicum fapb is confined to lipid droplets in male worms that are probably involved with the nurture of female worms  <cit> .

in studies with humans and marmosets  the plasmatic levels of total cholesterol, esterified cholesterol, triglycerides and phospholipids were significantly reduced after infection with s. mansoni  <cit> . similar effect was observed by doenhoff and colleagues, who reported a reduction in atherosclerosis in rats predisposed to cardiovascular disease  after infection with s. mansoni  <cit> . they suggested that this reduction could be due to a modulatory effect of the infection by s. mansoni on lipid metabolism in the host. on the other hand, ramos and colleagues proposed that the cholesterol reduction could be caused by changes in the lcat and/or acat  activity, synthesis or secretion produced by the liver of infected animals  <cit> . taking into consideration that schistosomes are not capable of synthesizing cholesterol  <cit> , the fact that sexual pairing has an effect upon so many genes related to fatty acid and cholesterol metabolism in male worms becomes even more relevant.

validation of microarray results using real time quantitative pcr
in order to validate the microarray results we performed real-time rt pcr. contigs considered to be differentially expressed were first checked against the s. mansoni genome to evaluate the validity of the probes printed on the arrays and to remove redundant contigs .

primer pairs were designed for all genes considered as differentially expressed and then tested against the genome using electronic pcr  <cit>  and blast  <cit>  to select only those that amplified a unique region of the genome.  <dig> female and  <dig> male primer pairs qualified, of which approximately  <dig> of each were randomly selected for real time quantitative pcr. the results from the quantitative pcr for the male and female experiments were compared against the results of our microarray hybridizations using linear regression analysis  <cit>  and showed a strong correlation .

CONCLUSIONS
the results presented on this article confirm previous results related to gene expression induced by sexual maturation in schistosome worms. it also contributes a wealth of information about genes  that may be involved in this process. since most of the differentially expressed genes do not have homology to other genes, further work is necessary to characterize these transcripts and assign biological functions to them. once the schistosoma mansoni genome is fully annotated, it will be possible to extract more interesting information from our data. nevertheless, we believe that the myriad of up- and down- regulated genes we describe here open new and exciting doors for the study of the conjugal biology and the development of new drugs against schistosomes.

