BACKGROUND
the honey bee  has become an important model for genetic study, especially as its genome has been sequenced  <cit> . it is also an important economic insect as it is the world's principal crop pollinator and honey producer  <cit> . these activities have been threatened by the spread of varroa destructor  a parasite of honey bees that causes devastating harm in many countries  <cit> . varroa mites are ectoparasites of honey bees, parasitizing immature and adult bees and reproducing in cells in the honeycomb that contain brood  <cit> . varroa mites or virus associated to mites impair the honey bee immune system  <cit>  and in some cases boost the amplification of bee viruses  <cit> . the mechanisms underlying the mite's suppression of bee immunity and its impacts on pathogen virulence have not been elucidated.

there are genetic differences in the ability of honey bees to tolerate varroa parasitism . some colonies of honey bees tolerate varroa infection and survive despite the presence of the parasite in the hive  <cit> . these differences have been attributed to a variety of factors, including grooming and hygienic behavior  <cit> , and differences in the timing of larval and pupal development that impact mite reproduction  <cit> .

colonies of the asian honey bee apis cerana  suffer less damage from this parasite than a. mellifera in spite of the presence of the mite in the hives, and these two factors have been implicated  <cit> . the mechanisms underlying genetic differences for honey bee tolerance to varroa mites are unknown. insights into these mechanisms may lead to new molecular tools for both varroa diagnosis and selective breeding of mite-tolerant honey bees for the bee industry. these issues are now amenable to study thanks to new genomic resources available for honey bees. microarray analyses of differences in gene expression due to both mite parasitization and genotypic differences in bee tolerance are powerful approaches to explore the role of many genes in what are no doubt multifactorial resistance traits. microarrays have proven to be useful in the study of host-pathogen interactions in other insects  <cit> .

RESULTS
differences in bee gene expression in response to varroa infestation and bee genotype
comparisons of varroa-infected and non-infected pupae from the  <dig> colonies studied pinpointed the expression of  <dig> genes whose expression varied significantly between the two types of pupae. among them,  <dig>  of these cdnas were significantly up-regulated and  <dig>  down-regulated in bees exposed to varroa. the magnitude of the difference of expression is small in all cases. the single exception was est  which was over-expressed 20-fold in bees infected with varroa. blast searches indicated that this est matches the honey bee virus , deformed wing virus  <cit> .

there were  <dig> cdnas whose expression varied with bee genotype,  <dig>  of them up-regulated and  <dig>  down-regulated. two genes were regulated both as a function of varroa infection and bee genotype. dlic  <dig> is down-regulated in varroa-parasitized bees and up-regulated in tolerant bees, whereas strn-mlck is down-regulated both in varroa-parasitized and tolerant bees. the full list of genes with significant differences in expression is presented in additional file  <dig> 

identification of a. mellifera-regulated transcripts and assignment of biological functions
to add biological meaning to the relatively large amount of microarray-derived data, we searched the geneontology database for the putative biological processes and molecular functions for the genes that showed significant differences in expression. among these  <dig> genes,  <dig> associated with the presence of varroa and  <dig> associated with bee genotype had information in gene ontology.

to unravel functional differences related to varroa parasitism and bee genotype, we analyzed sets of genes for overrepresentation in functional go categories according to biological process and molecular function . regarding biological process, genes involved in the regulation of protein metabolism, embryonic development and reproduction show a significant enrichment among the categories tested for the genes that varied in expression with varroa infestation. a set of genes involved in cytokinesis, nervous system development, behavior, signal transduction and transcription-dna dependent emerged from the analysis of genes that varied with bee genotype. the cluster analysis showing genes sharing the same go term is shown in table  <dig>  most of the genes affected by varroa infection are involved in protein metabolism and their function is related to transferase and catalytic activity. the set of genes differentially expressed between tolerant and sensitive bees are mainly involved in transcription and neuron development. these genes have a nucleic acid binding function and are associated with pyrophosphatase gtpase, transferase and catalytic activity.

functional clustering based on gene ontology of genes that show significant differences are indicated for bees parasitized by varroa , and for varroa-tolerant bees . gene ontology terms are non-exclusive. expression patterns within these sets of genes are represented . genes with unknown biological process or molecular function are in brackets.

rt-qpcr analysis
to further evaluate our ability to detect significant variation in gene expression at low fold-difference levels, a set of  <dig> functionally annotated bee transcripts was subjected to rt-qpcr analysis . differently expressed levels of cdnas were quantified and are shown in fig.  <dig>  in accord with microarray analysis, cdnas from varroa-parasitized bees were up regulated for genes baz and cg <dig>  ; or from tolerant bees for genes alh and hr <dig> . in all cases, expression levels quantified by qpcr are represented by the mean of  <dig> measurements .

honey bee ids refer to the cdnas selected from the est microarray experiment .

krh <dig> is the housekeeping gene. forward and reverse primer sequences and the pcr product length are indicated.

aamplification efficiencies were calculated from the slope of standard curves as e =  <dig>  –  <dig> % efficiency corresponds to an amplification efficiency of 1; bregression coefficient of linear standard curve.

discussion
previous gene expression studies concerning honey bee immunity have mainly investigated responses to microbial pathogens  <cit> . yet physiological responses to macroparasites such as varroa are likely to be very different from microorganisms, as has been shown recently in a study on drosophila revealing the ability of this species to activate a systemic immune response adapted to the invader  <cit> . the results described here pinpoint several genes regulated by varroa parasitism that can be linked to honey bee responses to the presence of varroa or to differences in bee tolerance.

honey bee biological response to varroa parasitism
the pathways suggested by this study to be associated with honey bee response to varroa parasitism are schematized hypothetically in fig.  <dig>  responses to varroa can be grouped in two main categories, one related to deformed bee adults occasioned by the presence of the deformed wing virus  often associated with varroa parasitism, and a second category of genes that are related to cognitive impairment.

varroa parasitism and deformed wing virus
one of the consequences of varroa parasitism is a decline in immune capacity which appears to induce the proliferation of viruses such as deformed wings virus in bees  <cit> . the down-regulation of the autophagic-specific gene  <dig>  detected here is noticeable. autophagy is an important mechanism for innate immunity against bacteria and viruses  <cit> . the candidate innate immunity gene poly u binding factor  <dig> kd   <cit>  is also down-regulated in varroa parasitized bees. by decreasing autophagy and immunity processes in bees, varroa might favor the proliferation of dwv. interestingly, the varroa-parasitized bees displayed high levels of dwv viral rna . the boost of dwv multiplication might cause cellular and molecular damage, and thus the observed production of genes for protein repair   <cit> , and the labeling of proteins for degradation   <cit> . in contrast to these findings, we did not see a decrease on transcript abundance of immune pathway members  <cit>   found on this array. in fact, transcripts for the gene rab <dig>  a plausible regulator of immunity, were up-regulated in varroa-parasitized bees.

the most notable symptoms of varroa-parasitized bees are disfigured, small adults with deformed legs and wings  <cit> . our results show that at the transcriptome level the presence of varroa down-regulates two genes involved in developmental processes, slg and dlg <dig>  it has been shown that the drosophila sugarless  gene regulates wingless signaling  <cit> , which has a critical role in developmental processes. the gene dlg <dig> has been implicated in the control of proliferation of drosophila imaginal discs programmed to produce adult structures at metamorphosis  <cit> . although a down-regulation of these genes could have been induced by the presence of varroa , a specific link with the development of deformed adults of virus-infected bees would need to be further investigated.

cognitive impairment in bees parasitized by varroa
varroa infestation does not always cause wing deformity. adults may sometimes appear to be normal morphologically, but there are mite effects on adult bee behavior. in particular, mite-parasitized foragers display a decrease in learning capability  <cit> , prolonged absences from the nest and a lower rate of return to the colony  <cit> . a decrease in neuronal capacities involved in learning and navigation is a possible cause. although the physiological mechanisms underlying reduced performance by bees in the presence of varroa remain unknown, our results show that, the gene pale encoding tyramine hydroxylase is down-regulated in pupae parasitized by varroa. interestingly, the gene pale is needed for dopamine synthesis, which stimulates the nervous system and has many functions in the brain, including important roles in neural development, behavior and cognition, motor activity, motivation and learning. it is also interesting to note that the dlic <dig> and atg <dig> genes, both down-regulated in varroa-parasitized bees, are enhancers of the blue cheese gene  <cit> , which is up-regulated in tolerant bees . the bchs gene has been reported as preventing progressive neural degeneration in aged flies  <cit> . it is plausible, if these changes are chronic , that infested bees have a higher rate of neuronal apoptosis when aging, which might explain why foragers  have difficulties in learning and orientating in flight.

behavioral resistance of bees to varroa
grooming behavior seems to be one of the main characters involved in the tolerance of bees to varroa  <cit> . similarly, selection for tolerance to varroa seems to be possible by selecting bees with a high level of hygienic behavior  <cit> . hygienic behavior is understood as the ability of bees to uncap and remove infected brood. although the molecular mechanisms underlying this trait remain unknown, some insights are provided here based on the large-scale comparative analysis of transcriptome differences between varroa-tolerant and sensitive bees.

a disproportionately high fraction of the genes differentially expressed between tolerant and susceptible bees are involved in the development of the nervous system . a large part of these genes are down-regulated in tolerant bees compared to sensitive bees, including the genes futsch, scratch , otk, myosin heavy-chain-like , groucho , kekkon- <dig>   <cit> . fringe , also down regulated in varroa-tolerant bees, plays an important role in the positive regulation of notch signalling pathway involved in the regulation of genes that control multiple cell differentiation processes during embryonic and adult life, such as neuronal function and development  <cit> . finally, a gene involved in locomotory behavior, single-minded , is down-regulated in tolerant bees. drosophila mutant sim flies are only able to walk in circles and this phenotype is due to defects in the central brain complex  <cit> .

several genes involved in neuron excitability are up-regulated in varroa-tolerant bees compared to sensitive bees. purity of essence   is involved in neuronal excitability and may play a role in responsiveness to environmental stimuli and behavior. for example, fly mutants display behavioral defects such as sluggishness, uncoordination and defective flight  <cit> . this gene has been shown to be down-regulated in honey bees by the queen mandibular pheromone, which slows the behavioral maturation of workers, e.g. transition from inside hive work  to foraging activity  <cit> . the gluclα gene, a glutamate-gated cl- channel specific to arthropods, which is also up-expressed in tolerant bees, is known to modulate neuronal membrane excitability  <cit> . the paralytic gene , known to be important in the conducting of nerve action potentials in flies  <cit> , is also up-regulated. seen together, these genes suggest a mechanism by which varroa-tolerant bees are more sensitive to external stimuli than varroa sensitive bees. also, the dynein heavy chain 64c gene , up-regulated in tolerant bees, is required for proliferation of mushroom-body neuroblasts  <cit> . mushroom bodies have an important role in insect cognition and are known to be involved in learning and memory, particularly for smell.

interestingly, several genes involved in olfaction , poe, para, rogdi) are up-regulated in varroa-tolerant bees compared to sensitive bees  <cit> . however, the down syndrome cell adhesion molecule gene  and four wheel drive  also have a role in olfaction, and they are down-regulated in varroa-tolerant bees  <cit> . the differential expression of this group of genes depending on bee genotype is of major importance considering that in the hive, olfaction and neuronal sensitivity together may play a major role in the detection of varroa infested cells. observations made on two earlier generations of the bee stocks here studied have been shown that varroa-tolerant bees have better ability to detect the mite  <cit> . previous studies showed that hygienic bees have a higher olfactory sensitivity and responsiveness than non-hygienic bees  <cit> . they are notably able to discriminate between odors of healthy and diseased brood at a lower stimulus level, suggesting that olfaction and responsiveness play a key role in hygienic behavior. in addition, observations made on the behavior of the brood, have shown open cells containing destroyed parasitized bee pupae in tolerant experimental colonies, which is in agreement with a bee hygienic behavior against varroa. if these gene candidate pathways for varroa behavioral tolerance can be further confirmed, the results suggest that they already set up during the pupae stage.

there were differences in expression between tolerant and sensitive bees for genes involved in increased resistance to toxins like ahcy <dig>  involved in detoxification  <cit> , and para involved in resistance to insecticide pyrethroids and ddt   <cit> . two genes linked to immunity, dsam and otk, members of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily in drosophila  <cit>  were down-regulated in varroa-tolerant bees, while one galectin-family gene  appears to be upregulated.

low fold differences in gene expression
for most of the genes showing significant differences in expression in the present study, the magnitude of these differences was small. recent reports have shown that microarrays can significantly underestimate gene expression changes and therefore if a severe cut-off is applied, this approach might miss important changes in gene expression. recent reports have validated the capability of a microarray approach to detect small gene expression differences  <cit> ; 87% of a set of parasite-specific genes displayed changes 2-fold or less in d. melanogaster challenged to a protozoan parasite  <cit> . similarly, about 60% of genes of the lepidopteran, spodoptera frugiperda, revealed around  <dig> -fold changes in the transcript levels associated with virus infection  <cit> . as one possible explanation for low level gene regulation, it has been suggested in drosophila that much of the response to parasite attack probably does not involve de novo gene expression but post-transcriptional events  <cit> . another possibility is that many small differences in gene expression reflect subtle modulation by a large number of factors acting in cascade. the small changes reported here might also represent an underestimation of tissue-specific effects obscured by whole-body analysis. future studies of varroa effects on honey bees should analyze specific tissues, and our results suggest a focus on the brain would be fruitful. previous studies have demonstrated extensive regulation of brain gene expression in conjunction with honey bee behaviour  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this work is the first step towards understanding the genomic responses of honey bees to varroa parasitism. it demonstrates that honey bee pupae exhibit differences in gene expression associated either with the presence of varroa, or with tolerance to this parasite. these results highlight the potential importance of behavioral mechanisms of response to varroa and suggest that a study focused on the brain is of importance for the future. for an economically important species such as the honey bee, the identification of parasite-specific response factors might ultimately serve to identify molecules that act on bee parasites. in addition, differences between tolerant and sensitive bees could lead to developing tools to select improved strains of honey bees for beekeepers.

