BACKGROUND
rnai screening has emerged as a novel technique to functionally characterize genes in living cells. using short interfering rnas , the technique allows sequence-specific gene silencing in a high-throughput fashion. this has successfully been used in several large-scale screens, for example, focusing on genes involved in mitosis  <cit> , immune response  <cit>  or viral infection  <cit> . the platform can be combined with automated microscopy, which then allows the acquisition of multi-parametric phenotypes of hundreds of cells per knockdown in a high-throughput fashion, yielding large data sets and unprecedented opportunities for functional genomics  <cit> . unlike sirna screens using bulk measurements, microscopy-based screening offers a much more detailed view, since for each sirna single-cell observations are available. this increased information can be exploited to identify genes that cause different morphological phenotypes, for example genes that are related to focal adhesion or the cell cycle  <cit> , but offers also new possibilities to normalize data at the level of individual cells.

whilst a large variety of different normalization methods exist for microarrays, only some standard techniques have been adapted so far for rnai data  <cit> . even for microscopy-based screens, most studies calculate the mean or median fluorescence intensity of all cells in the same well, and use these summarized values to normalize within and between different experiments  <cit> . although the loess normalization is commonly used  <cit>  to normalize the average cell signal intensities against the number of cells within one spot, extensive normalization based on individual cell data has not been done so far. depending on the experimental setup, this results in a loss of information of hundreds of individual cell measurements, with associated detrimental effect on statistical power. furthermore, population context of individual cells is completely disregarded, which is in strong contrast to a recent study performed by snijder et al.  <cit> . these authors show that a cell's population context has considerable influence on endocytosis and viral infection. although their work studies population effects in the absence of sirna knockdowns, the results strongly advocate the use of high-content microscopy and appropriate cell-based data analysis methods for rnai screens.

only a few methods so far have used individual cell information from high-content microscopy-based screens, and to our knowledge none to date have used the population context for data normalization. fuchs and co-authors recently proposed the use of multiparametric phenotypic profiles of rnai screening data to cluster genes and to discover novel gene functions  <cit> . their prediction is mainly based on morphological changes of individual cells within a cell population. suratanee et al. have proposed the use of a spatial clustering approach to identify sirna knockdowns involved in viral infection  <cit> . their approach is based on the assumption that viruses mainly spread by cell-to-cell contacts. the authors assume that infected cells form clusters in microscopy images, and use ripley's k function to identify knockdowns resulting in a disturbed clustering of cells.

in this paper, we present a novel method to analyze high-throughput, high-content cellular assays, based on single cell measurements. we show results on two viral screens of hepatitis c virus  and dengue virus . we observed considerable effects of cell population context on infection, and thus normalize the measurements of each individual cell against its population context. we furthermore implement within-plate and between-plate normalization methods for microscopy screening data. we then identify statistically significant knockdowns by taking fluorescence signal measurements of all individual cells in the screen. using this approach, we were able to reconfirm several known and identify new host dependency factors for both hcv and denv. the methods are implemented in the statistical programming language r http://www.r-project.org, and are available from the journals website .

RESULTS
we conducted two different high-content rnai primary screens targeting the same set of  <dig> human kinases in a virus infection setting. the first screen aimed to identify host cell factors involved in hcv infection, the second screen focused on denv. both screens were carried out on cell arrays  <cit> . results of the hcv screen have previously been published using an analysis based on average intensities per spot  <cit> , and the screen has consequently been re-analyzed using a clustering approach on the raw microscopy data  <cit> . using this screen then, a comparison can be made between these previous approaches and the method proposed here. the denv screen has not been published before.

cell-to-cell variability in rna interference screens
we observed considerable cell-to-cell variability in both screens, even within the same spot. figure 1a shows microscopy images for a negative control  and the biological positive control cd <dig>  in the hcv screen. two color channels are shown for the same spot: cell nuclei were stained using dapi  and a gfp readout was used for viral infection of the same cells . variability between individual cells is shown in figure 1b, which plots the distribution of log-gfp signal intensity values of the single cell measurements of negative  and positive  controls. of note, in both cases two populations corresponding to infected and non-infected cells can be observed, but the positive and negative controls differ in the distribution of cells between the two groups. the solid brown line shows the log-gfp intensity distribution of all cells in the entire screen . importantly, the negative controls exactly fit the shape of the curve, whereas cd <dig> does not - indicating that the full screen can be used as a quasi-negative control, and that most knockdowns in the screen have no effect on viral infection. the number of cells in wells with positive versus negative controls is roughly the same , indicating no significant apoptotic effect of the corresponding sirna knockdowns.

to further characterize cell-to-cell variability, we fitted a gaussian mixture model to normalized log-transformed intensity values. this fit shows a clear bimodal distribution of the data with approximately normally distributed components . estimation of the mixture coefficients for the positive and negative controls confirm that there are clear differences. for the positive controls of hcv  there is an uninfected cell component probability of pu+ =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , and for the negative controls pu- =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . this confirms that sirna knockdowns of genes required for hcv and denv infection or replication  have a higher proportion of cells with weak signal intensities. clearly, under optimal conditions , only background gfp intensity for positive and maximal intensity for negative controls would be expected.

population context influences infection
we next studied the effect of population parameters on hepatitis c virus and dengue virus infection, using a procedure similar to the one proposed by snijder et al.  <cit> . notably, while the analysis done by these authors considers the effect of population context on viral infection in the absence of any rnai perturbation, we here present for the first time results including knockdowns. furthermore, results shown here are based on chambered coverglass slides , whereas snijder et al. used  <dig> well plates, with considerable differences in cell numbers and cell densities between these two platforms.

we computed six different population features for each cell based on the dapi and gfp stains:  size of the cell,  number of cells in the same spot,  location of the cell in a local population ,  local cell density and  shape of the cell nucleus . we note that since no stain for the cell cytoplasm is available, nuclear size is used as an approximation to cell size, as previously proposed by snijder et al. we furthermore calculated four technical features:  location of the cell in the spot ,  row effects of cell location ,  column effect of cell location , and  plate effect .

due to the large number of individual cells, we grouped cells with similar properties into  <dig> discrete bins per feature. for each of the  <dig> population context and  <dig> technical features, we then computed the average within-bin and between-bin standard deviation of viral infection. the ratio of these two values provides a direct measure to assess the influences of the corresponding population or technical parameter on viral infection. a similar procedure has been used by snijder et al to compute the population effects.

single cell based normalization and hit selection
due to these nonlinear effects of the population context and technical features, we used multivariate adaptive regression splines  on the full data  to estimate the influence of the features on hcv and denv infection  <cit> . the fitted model was then used to correct raw intensity values, by subtracting estimated effects from individual cell measurements.

we next developed a statistical test to identify sirna knockdowns showing a significant effect on viral replication, borrowing ideas from gene set enrichment analysis  as proposed by sweet-cordero et al.  <cit> . this procedure is essentially a kolmogorov-smirnov test on running sums over ranked intensity values, see methods  <cit> . we are looking for sirnas that lead to a shift in the distribution of individual cell signal intensities away from the distribution of negative controls, towards an increased number of non-infected cells showing only background fluorescence. the basic principle employed in this procedure is to sort all cells in the entire screen according to their measured viral signal intensity. two running sums rsgk and rsḠk are then computed, counting the fraction of cells treated or not treated with a particular sirna gk of interest as the signal intensity is gradually increased . the difference dif between these two values measures the enrichment of cells with respective intensity values in the knockdown of interest . figure 3a shows dif values of the positive and negative controls over the indices of the sorted cell intensity values of a randomly selected plate of the hcv screen, illustrating the clear differences observable between positive and negative controls. whereas the dif value for the positive controls is increasing until a maximum of about  <dig>  is reached and then decreases again, the dif value of the negative controls is fluctuating around zero. the enrichment score es is defined as the maximum deviation of dif from zero. figure 3b shows the median enrichment score es for each sirna in the whole screen. the red curve illustrates the es sorted by increasing order.

the figures 3c and 3d show the distribution of the enrichment scores es of all sirnas in the hcv and denv screens. scores of the positive controls are indicated by blue diamonds, and for the negative controls by red circles at the top of the plot. interestingly, while the positive and negative controls are perfectly separated for the hcv data, some of the positive controls in the denv screen are not working properly. since other quality indicators of the affected plates in the denv screen were fine  but we generally observed higher variability in the denv screen, we decided not to remove the full plate for the affected controls.

an interesting observation is the three peaks of the distribution in figures 3c and 3d, which seems counter-intuitive. this tri-modality comes from summarizing the replicates using the median of the es of the replicate measurements. since there is an even number of replicates  the mean of the two central elements is used as median, and gives a value around zero, if exactly one half of the replicates has positive and the other half has negative es values. the sirnas that have the majority of replicates with positive or negative es value occur in the right or left peak, respectively. this tri-modality effect is thus an artifact of summarizing an even number of replicates using the median, and does not occur when taking the mean - which however is less robust to outlier sirnas.

the es were then subjected to a nonparametric statistical test to identify gene knockdowns that significantly decrease viral replication, using a significance level of adjusted p-values of α =  <dig>  and an es larger than  <dig>  times the standard deviation of the median over the replicates for the calculated es of each labtek.

hepatitis c virus host dependency factors
using the normalization for cell population context and subsequent hit scoring as described above resulted in a list of  <dig> host dependency factors significantly reducing hcv replication . we compared identified hits to results obtained using a statistical analysis based on averaged intensity values per well , as previously published  <cit> . a z-score threshold of  <dig>  and a significance level of 5% were used for hit identification in the average method. we furthermore compared results with the analysis method based on ripley's k function recently proposed by suratanee and coauthors  <cit> , with significance level 5% and negative clustering scores .

surprisingly, there are considerable differences in identified hits, with only  <dig> gene knockdowns overlapping between all three methods, compare figure 4a . genes in the overlap consistently identified by all approaches are the positive controls hcv <dig> and hcv <dig> directly targeting the viral rna genome, and cd <dig>  the main entry receptor required by hcv. the remaining three overlapping hits are phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase alpha   <cit> , casein kinase ii subunit alpha   <cit> , which are known to be related to the hcv replication cycle and fms-related tyrosine kinase  <dig>  which has been suggested to play a role in hcv in earlier publications  <cit> . out of the  <dig> genes identified using the average approach,  <dig> genes were also found using the cell-based method presented here , accounting for an overlap of  <dig> % and indicating high agreement between cell-based and average results. on the other hand, only  <dig> of the  <dig> genes identified using the ripley approach could also be confirmed with the other methods , and only  <dig> out of  <dig> genes identified using average were also found by ripley .

most dependency factors were identified using the cell-based approach  . while we expect higher statistical power when using individual cell data, the question arises how reliable and reproducible identified hits are. we therefore first evaluated how reliably the positive and negative controls were identified with the three approaches, by computing sensitivity and specificity and analyzing receiver operator characteristic  curves for all three analysis methods based on the individual control spots on each plate. roc plots show tradeoffs between sensitivity and specificity for different thresholds on scores or p-values used for hit-calling. random guessing would correspond to a diagonal line in the roc plot, whereas a perfect predictor would yield sensitivity and specificity values of one. roc curves can be summarized further by computing the area under the curve , which is a value between  <dig>   and  <dig> . figure 4b shows roc curves for average, ripley and cell-based. although all roc curves are significantly better than random guessing, auc values show that cell-based outperforms the other two approaches in scoring controls almost perfectly . results are superior in recognizing positive and negative controls in terms of both sensitivity and specificity of. for the average method a loess normalization was used to normalize for general trends between the mean viral signal intensities and the number of cells within one spot. furthermore, b-score normalization was used to normalize against spatial plate effects. the auc values show, that the average method cannot minimize the introduction of false positive and false negative controls on a single spot level as well as the cell-based method.

since our analysis approach consists of two independent methods  we assessed which of the two methods contributed the most to the increased performance of classifying the controls. to do this, we used each of the two methods independently on the hcv data. for the first method  we took raw log virus signal intensity values and normalized them against the features. then, we used rnaither  <cit>  to summarize the cell intensities of one spot using their mean and computed z-scores for each spot. by applying a threshold of  <dig>  times the standard deviation of the z-scores of each replicate we defined hits on an individual spot level. this procedure thus exploits the single cell information for normalization, but nor for hit-calling. we note, that the calculation of significance levels for each spot is not possible in this method. for the second method  we calculated es on the raw log virus signal intensities and used the nonparametric statistical test based on permutations to calculate p-values for each spot - exploiting the full information of the individual cells in the statistical test. we used bonferroni corrected p-values ≤  <dig>  and es≥ <dig>  times the standard deviation of median summarized replicate es for finding individual spots which significantly decrease viral replication. we performed for both methods a roc analysis on individual control spots and computed auc values. mars-only results in an auc of  <dig>  and gsea-only in an auc value of  <dig> .

in summary, both individual methods are able to yield improved results in comparison to the average  and ripley  methods. the combination of mars-only and gsea-only in our cell-based approach gives the best result when compared to the stand alone methods.

in addition, we summarized replicate measurements of mars-only by taking their median and used a two-sample, two-sided welch's t-test to define significance values for the individual sirnas. we used an alpha threshold of  <dig>  on uncorrected p-values and  <dig>  times the standard deviation of z-scores to define significant sirnas. the same was done for gsea-only, although p-values for individual sirnas have been calculated based on the es using the nonparametric test. of the resulting hits for gsea-only, mars-only and cell-based there are overlapping genes  <dig> . among the  <dig> hits found using the combined cell-based method  <dig>  were also found with the two independent methods.

genes previously identified by reiss et al. using the average method were tested in a secondary validation screen by the same authors. we used this screen to further assess our method. using the subset of genes tested in the validation screen, we computed sensitivity and specificity for varying z-score thresholds for the validation screen, varying es score thresholds and adjusted p-values ≤  <dig>  for selecting hits of the cell-based method and varying p-values and negative clustering scores for the ripley method. it can be noted that an evaluation of the average method with this data is not possible, since this approach was used to select genes for the validation screen, and hence true and false negatives cannot be computed for average . figure 4c shows the auc values over different increasing z-score thresholds on the validation screen, for cell-based and ripley. again, cell-based shows superior sensitivity and specificity .

pathway analysis and functional annotation of host dependency factors
we identified  <dig> host dependency factors  for hcv and  <dig> hdfs for denv, see additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  these were further mapped to kegg and biocarta, and functional enrichment tests were carried out to select significantly enriched processes using david http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/, see additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  we identified  <dig> pathways with a p-value smaller than  <dig>  to be significantly involved in hcv using the hits identified with our cell-based approach. this is ten times the number of pathways which are identified to be significantly enriched using the hits of the average method. in this method, only two pathways were found, namely purine metabolism, which was also identified with the cell-based method, and axon guidance. using the hit list of the ripley approach no pathways could be identified as significantly enriched. this clearly shows, that our approach results not only an increased sensitivity and specificity on an individual sirna level, but also an increased sensitivity on the pathway level.

enriched pathways for hcv include endocytosis, focal adhesion, signaling in the immune system, regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, and the erbb and map kinase signaling pathways. all of these pathways have previously been reported by reiss and colleagues  <cit>  by pooling their screen with other previously published screens. notably, with the approach presented here, we identified the same pathways without the additional information of other screens, again indicating higher sensitivity of the cell-based approach. several additional pathways were also identified, including purine metabolism, tlr signaling and several cancer-associated pathways.

additional file  <dig> shows enriched pathways of the denv screen. although the overlap between hcv and denv hdfs at the gene level is only seven genes, significant overlap can be observed at the level of pathways. enriched pathways again include focal adhesion, immune signaling, and the erbb and map kinase pathways, reflecting the close evolutionary relationship of the two viruses.

population context of non-virus screens
apart from virus infection, the impact of many other- if not all- "bioactive" treatments on cells most likely depends on the properties of the individual cells and their context. a pristine and ubiquitous example is the transfection of cells using liposomal reagents. every wet lab biologist will know intuitively, that efficiency of transfection strongly depends on the confluency of the culture. while this is true and relevant for bulk measurements of larger formats, it becomes critical when dealing with the low cell counts typically found in the wells or spots of high-throughput screening formats. in an imaging-based screen of an innate immune signaling pathway, which shall be published elsewhere, cells were again reverse transfected with sirna on spots of labtek chamber slides. to determine the impact of gene silencing on the pathway under investigation, signaling was triggered by transfection of the cells with a defined stimulus and a few hours later, pathway activation in individual cells was assessed by microscopy of a fluorescent reporter. across the whole screen , we could detect a strict correlation between population context and the rate of pathway activation, due to the vastly different susceptibility for liposomal transfection among cells growing in different micro-contexts. to quantify this we calculated the explained standard deviation of the rate of pathway activation by the population context features for each plate. the mean and standard deviation across replicated plates of the individual population features are for cell size:  <dig>  ±  <dig> , cell density:  <dig>  ±  <dig> , cell number:  <dig>  ±  <dig> , cell shape:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and for population border:  <dig>  ±  <dig> . the correlation of each cell's local density for example, was already observable by the human eye and therefore had to be normalized in order to perform hit-calling.

the technical features average to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ±  <dig>   and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . analysis has been done on the individual plate level and thus, for the feature addressing the plate effect, no binning has been performed. we calculated auc values for the positive and negative controls given in the screen after normalizing against the population context and against the technical features, and applied our approach for statistical hit scoring as presented in this study. we received increased performance  in comparison to an analysis without normalizing against the features .

CONCLUSIONS
we have introduced a novel approach for the statistical processing of high-content cellular screens. we have shown that the population context of individual cells influences viral infection efficiency, and we have presented a normalization procedure to remove these effects in microscopy-based screens. we have developed a statistical testing procedure that takes into account individual cell measurements in hit-scoring, and we have demonstrated significantly improved sensitivity and specificity using this approach on two large-scale rnai infection screens.

an evaluation that is based on individual cell measurements can exploit the information contained in hundreds of cells and thereby addresses the biological variability of cells, for example, cells that are in different states of the cell cycle. obviously, the cells within one spot are treated in the same way and are not technical replicates as they are not independent of each other. nevertheless, we identified two clearly separated distributions of cells within one spot which shows that there are phenotypic differences between individual cells even if they are treated in the same way. our results show that the integration of multidimensional phenotypes from high-content screens can make data analysis much more sensitive and specific. taking the individual cell measurements within each spot into account and using the computed p-values for individual spots highly improves sensitivity and specificity values, where the number of false positives and false negatives on a single spot level is limited to a minimum resulting in an almost perfect classification.

an interesting observation from previous infection screens is that there is a very low overlap of identified hits between different screens targeting the same virus  <cit> . while the situation is somewhat improved when considering overlaps at the pathway level, there is still a surprisingly high variability in results. based on the significant influence of cell population context shown in both our screens as well as previously reported by snijder et al.  <cit> , it is very likely that population factors contribute at least partially to the problem. our comparative analysis using average signal intensities, the clustering approach based on ripley's k function and the cell-based analysis with correction for population effects shows significant differences in resulting hit lists on the same screen, strongly advocating for normalization procedures accounting for cell population context. looking at the enriched pathways identified with the hit lists using the average and cell-based approach, our results clearly show an increased sensitivity. we found substantially more pathways than when using the average  where several of them have already been shown to be related in the processes of hcv and some are newly discovered.

interestingly, snijder et al.  <cit>  showed that the location of a cell at the edge or in the middle of a local cell cluster is the main factor influencing dengue virus infection. in contrast, our results indicate that the size of the cell is the most significant population factor determining infection efficiency - both for dengue and hepatitis c virus. this difference may be due to the different platforms used, and the with associated differences in cell numbers and local cell density in each spot or well. also, cell-line specific effects may contribute to these differences. results reported by snijder et al. were acquired in hela cells using  <dig> well plates with associated large wells and high cell numbers, whereas we used huh <dig>  cells on labteks, each containing  <dig> spots and without separating walls between different spots. it should further be noted that results presented by snijder et al. did not include any effects of transfection reagents and sirna knockdown, which may further alter the behavior of the cells.

we re-analyzed a previously published hepatitis c virus screen, and provided a comparative analysis of results using three different approaches. our results show significantly improved sensitivity over previous data analyses on a single hit, as well as on the pathway level, which we attribute to both the removal of confounding population effects, as well as the exploitation of data from individual cells in hit scoring and statistical testing. using the approach presented here, we could show high overlap of host pathways involved in hepatitis c virus and dengue virus infection, underlining the close evolutionary relationship between these two viruses. our results on a non-viral screen strongly indicate that the population context not only influences infection rnai screens, but generally applies. however, virus screens are more complicated as the infection itself can induce viral phenotypic effects  which may directly influence a population context feature. an infection, for example, may lead to larger cell sizes of the infected cells and normalizing against the cell size would destroy effects of perturbations. since in the hcv and denv there are no control spots without infections, we cannot test whether the cells in our screens suffer from cytopathic effects. however, the analysis with gsea-only, where we do not normalize against cell population effects, results in similar sensitivity and specificity values on controls, with the cell-based method being even slightly better. this in combination with the increased sensitivity of the cell-based analysis on the pathway level, indicates that we do not destroy effects when normalizing against cell context features, but allow for a more sophisticated and improved type of analysis. to conclude, high-content screening offers a powerful tool to further elucidate virus-host interactions in the future, with significant advantages over high-throughput screens with low-dimensional, non-microscopy based readouts. however, great care must be exercised in analyzing and integrating data, to fully exploit the potential offered by this platform.

