BACKGROUND
as a consequence of the deluge of completely sequenced genomes belonging to a large array of species, one can expect to identify many homologues of enzymes which have been previously well studied at the experimental level. this seems to be the general rule and the public sequence databanks  are now inundated by putative amino acid sequences which have been annotated uniquely by the widely used two-step process :  detection of a homologous relationship by a pairwise sequence similarity search at the level of primary structure and  inference of functional similarity from this detected homology.

however, the opposite might be true. for various reasons one can either miss or misinterpret the actual function of a putative protein when annotating by homology, resulting in a wrong function transfer. several studies have already emphasized this point . on the other hand, beside these now well identified errors which are often due to automatic processes, more subtle mistakes may occur when some of the numerous effects of divergent evolution are overlooked. in particular, one of the insufficiently appreciated problems of functional assignment is that homologous proteins might catalyse different biochemical reactions. here, we discuss an instance of erroneous annotation  in genes of nitrogen metabolism which to our knowledge has not yet been brought up. we explain why this is so and draw attention to the fact that similar cases must actually be rather frequent.

RESULTS
annotating distant carbamoyltransferases
our group  is presently involved in deciphering the evolutionary relationships between two ubiquitous and essential proteins, aspartate carbamoyltransferase  which catalyses the first committed step of de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis and ornithine carbamoyltransferase  which plays a crucial role in both anabolism and catabolism of arginine.

in a recent study of the phylogeny of the  <dig> available otcases , we confirmed the existence of two families, otc alpha and otc beta, previously proposed on the basis of phylogenetic studies  <cit> . however, the advent of many new sequences further led to a more complex topology of the distance tree schematized on fig.  <dig>  it appears now that a significant number of sequences which have been annotated as otcases are distantly related to either family as outlined on fig.  <dig>  these sequences, which are forming several clusters emerging in different locations between the root and the two families otc alpha and otc beta, have been provisionally annotated as utc . indeed, among these utc we found two sequences which do not correspond to classical otcases.

the ygew protein encoded by escherichia coli and its close homologue from clostridium botulinum are both located on a long branch emerging at the basis of this otcases tree. ygew is annotated as belonging to the atcase/otcase family . on the branch which is next to the root we find the sequence of a protein which has been reported to be essential for arginine biosynthesis in the anaerobic bacterium bacteroides fragilis  <cit> . this protein has been crystallized and characterized as a carbamoyltransferase-like protein since it does not display otcase activity in vitro  <cit> . indeed, several of its residues have been substituted in sites which are viewed as crucial for otcase activity. moreover, dashuang et al.  <cit>  indicated that a similar protein has been found in xylella fastidiosa. our phylogenetic data are in agreement with this observation since the protein annotated as otcases in two strains of x. fastidiosa and its close relative present in two species of the xanthomonas genus are found to branch close to that of b. fragilis. therefore, the functional identification of these different utc is certainly not straightforward and requires further investigations.

furthermore, it occurred to us that, more than thirty years ago, another carbamoyltransferase was discovered by roon and barker  <cit> . a putrescine carbamoyltransferase  was found to be synthesized by the gram-positive bacterium streptococcus  faecalis when it was grown on agmatine but not arginine as primary energy source. this ptcase was easily separated from the otcase synthesized by the same organism grown on arginine  <cit> . this putrescine carbamoyltransferase had further been studied by v. stalon's group . two features of this study – which had apparently been overlooked in recent genome annotations – appear now to be crucial for the interpretation of the data shown on fig.  <dig>   wargnies et al.  <cit>  showed that the putrescine carbamoyltransferase of e. faecalis had a weak but unambiguous otcase activity ;  a short nh2-terminal sequence  was published ten years later  <cit> . since the complete genome of e. faecalis has now been sequenced  <cit> , we could identify that one of the three putative ornithine carbamoyltransferases encoded by this genome, the open reading frame ef <dig> annotated as argf- <dig>  <cit> , is actually the putrescine carbamoyltransferase previously studied by the group of stalon.

a family of putrescine carbamoyltransferases
in a second step, we extended this reannotation of a wrong otcase as a ptcase to six other sequences encoded by lactococcus lactis, streptococcus mutans, pediococcus pentosaceus, lactobacillus brevis  , listeria monocytogenes and mycoplasma mycoides, respectively. indeed, these eight sequences, which have been annotated as either argf or arcb ,  share high identity at the level of their amino acid sequence;  they form a monophyletic group  and  they match the previously published e. faecalis nh2-terminal  <dig> residues sequence  <cit> . moreover, as shown on fig.  <dig>  these sequences share several specific motifs which are not found in the homologous otcases. these motifs, especially the five longer ones, are well conserved, even in m. mycoides which is however more distant. when these motifs are used together to query either the uniprot knowledgebase  <cit>  or the nr  database using the phi-blast programme, we obtain only these putative ptcase sequences  to the exclusion of any other carbamoyltransferase.

a : draft genome b : fragment

gene context, another tool for gene reannotation
in a third step, the reannotation of this clade of otcase sequences as ptcases was confirmed by a comparative study of the neighbourhood of their encoding genes present in the four genomes completely sequenced and published . as shown on fig.  <dig>  the same set of neighbouring genes were present in these four species. we have successively a transcriptional regulator, the reannotated ptcase, an amino acid permease , a conserved hypothetical protein and finally the carbamate kinase arcc- <dig> . in a next step, we found that the so-called conserved hypothetical protein is homologous to the agmatine deiminase  of bacillus cereus  <cit> . fig.  <dig> further shows that the gene order found in e. faecalis, is completely conserved in lc. lactis and s. mutans and slightly modified in l. monocytogenes.

thus, these four clusters of genes appear to encode the full set of enzymes which are expected to form the catabolic agmatine deiminase pathway  <cit> . agmatine deiminase, ptcase and carbamate kinase were already known to become coinduced by agmatine in e. faecalis when it is used as sole energy source  <cit> , strongly suggesting that these gene clusters are functional operons. in pseudomonas aeruginosa pao <dig>  the homologous agmatine deiminase is encoded by the gene agua belonging to an operon aguba induced by agmatine and n-carbamoylputrescine  but in this species n-carbamoylputrescine is converted by a n-carbamoylputrescine amidohydrolase  into putrescine and co <dig> + ammonium rather than into putrescine and carbamoylphosphate. more recently, a similar pathway for polyamine biosynthesis has been identified by homology in higher plants  <cit> . in the alternative pathway corresponding to the analogous sets of genes shown on fig.  <dig>  it is thus a ptcase which catalyzes the second step and catabolically converts n-carbamoylputrescine to putrescine and carbamoylphosphate which can further be used to synthesize atp via carbamate kinase  <cit> .

furthermore, when we compare the clusters of genes shown in fig.  <dig> to those surrounding gene argf or arcb, encoding the catabolic otcase functioning in the arginine deiminase  pathway present in many microbial genomes , we observe a very similar distribution, namely a transcriptional regulator, the arginine deiminase , an arginine/ornithine antiporter and a  carbamate kinase. there is thus a very close analogy between the set of genes encoding the enzymes catalyzing the different steps of the agmatine deiminase pathway found in these different firmicutes and that encoding the enzymes catalyzing the different steps of the arginine deiminase pathway.

CONCLUSIONS
genome annotation requires both reliable tools for identifying gene function and manual expertise. the frustration due to the high percentage of orphan genes found in all genomes is often compounded with another – more vicious – problem which may occur when a very strong sequence similarity is obscuring the actual functional identity of another kind of orphan. the analysis described in this paper illustrates the difficulty in identifying such a potential source of misannotation and delineates at least two fundamental parameters which must be considered especially when the results appear to be straightforward. first, one must keep in mind that proteins sharing a high level of identical residues may have different functions. a routine step for challenging the functional annotation of any putative coding sequence should be a phylogenetic analysis. any cds found to branch far from its homologues in an evolutionary tree, as observed in the case of the carbamoyltransferases , should be examined with caution before assigning it a putative function. another example of the usefulness of the phylogenetic approach to correct misannotations can be found in a comparative analysis of ureohydrolases  <cit> .

the second parameter which must be considered is the striking lack of information in the various public databases. for example, in the case studied here  it is reported that there is no sequence available in various first-rate databases specialized in enzymatic and/or metabolic data such as enzyme  <cit> , brenda  <cit> , kegg  <cit> , biocyc  <cit> , etc...as well as in the gene ontology  consortium  <cit> . a significant part of this deficit of information appears to be due to not correlating biochemical data  <cit>  previously published and well recorded in brenda  <cit> , for example, with the incomplete amino acid sequence which was not taken into account although it had been published by the same group  <cit>  who studied this enzyme.

the specific point we would like to stress in this paper reflects a more general gap – which is widely ignored – between the enormous quantity of information buried in the sequence data and the refined knowledge built up over several decades of studies on gene regulation and protein biochemistry . in this respect, experimentally studied proteins not correlated with sequence data also qualify as "orphans". in the present case, such a resulting gap in knowledge could be bridged only because we used the experimental approach detailed in this paper. after being alerted by the unusual topology of the phylogenetic tree  and the rediscovery of the partial sequence  <cit> , a confirmation of the reannotation as ptcases was obtained when considering their signature  and the gene context  which differentiate them clearly from their otcase homologues.

the strategy we used to identify such orphan sequences could work in any other case where it is possible to collect a body of facts about experimental data, homology, unnoticed sequence data, and accurate informations about gene context. note that we incidentally used such a strategy to annotate the genes encoding a putative agmatine deiminase in the genomes listed in fig.  <dig>  it is highly probable that this approach can be applied to many similar cases. therefore, our community should feel encouraged to dig in old lab books, unpublished data buried in doctoral thesis and similar documents, in order to retrieve information crucial for correct genome annotation. moreover, it becomes urgent to design new approaches in order to efficiently explore what has been called the "bibliome"  <cit> . this could help to bridge important gaps in knowledge – such as exemplified in this paper- which lead to numerous errors in genome annotation. accordingly, it would become possible to annotate conserved hypothetical proteins for which there is an apparent lack of information in the various public databases.

