BACKGROUND
the non-human primate  research community has been intensely interested in obtaining whole-genome expression arrays for their work. the recent production of a rhesus macaque genechip  now satisfies this need  <cit> .

novel approaches were used to generate the dna sequence information for the rhesus genechip. in  <dig>  when the rhesus macaque genechip was in the design stage, the percent of the total genes in the rhesus macaque genome covered by the ests was quite small. in addition, the rhesus macaque genome sequences were at an early stage of assembly and with limited redundancy. to overcome these limitations, we used a targeted pcr approach to acquire necessary sequences for the probes for over  <dig>  genes  <cit> . all human last exons were identified and aligned with probe selection region  sequences obtained from affymetrix. primers were designed that flanked the psrs. these primers were used to amplify orthologous psrs in rhesus macaques from rhesus genomic dna. the pcr products were cloned, sequenced and deposited in genbank. in an in silico version of our targeted pcr approach, sequences from an early draft of the baylor rhesus genome assembly were aligned with human psrs and information for probe design extracted. using primarily these two sources of sequence information, a whole genome rhesus macaqe expression genechip was created by affymetrix. the targeted acquisition of the 3' gene sequence information used for the production of the rhesus macaque genechip is unique among the affymetrix genechips.

the rhesus macaque genechip uses  <dig>  probesets to monitor the expression of over  <dig>  transcripts, including transcripts with multiple polyadenylation sites. reliability and reproducibility are major issues that must be addressed to successfully apply microarray technology to biomedical experiments  <cit> . they are particularly important when researchers want to compare and integrate microarray experiments from multiple laboratories  <cit> . due to the time and expense associated with nhp experiments, it is critical that the results generated in one center be comparable with results at another.

given the novel strategies underlying the design of the rhesus macaque genechip, we felt it was important to test its reliability and validity. to test the reliability of the rhesus genechip across different centers, rna was isolated from five sources: cerebral cortex, pancreas, thymus, testis, and an immortalized fibroblast cell line. two aliquots of rna from each tissue type were sent to each of three centers: yerkes national primate research center, oregon national primate research center and the university of nebraska medical center. each center labeled the two aliquots individually and hybridized them to two separate rhesus macaque genechips. the results indicate that center effects were minimal and the rhesus genechip appears highly reliable. to test the validity of the rhesus genechip, five of the most differentially expressed genes among tissues identified in the reliability experiments were chosen for analysis with quantitative pcr. the results indicated the rhesus genechip provides valid information.

prior to the production of the rhesus genechip, many investigators used various human expression arrays with rhesus samples  <cit> . although useful in obtaining some information, studies indicated that performing these cross-species hybridizations were resulting in the loss of considerable data  <cit> . we wanted to determine whether more probesets would be called present when rhesus samples were hybridized with the rhesus genechip in comparison to the human genechip. we found the rhesus genechip was superior to the human genechip for use with rhesus samples in all five tested samples.

RESULTS
quality assessment
affymetrix gcos quality control parameters – the background levels, the range of the present percentage, the scaling factor values, the 3'/5' ratios of housekeeping genes and the signal intensities of spiked-in hybridization controls were all within acceptable levels as described by affymetrix for the data from the cerebral cortex, fibroblast, testis and thymus experiments. the scaling factor  and the nuse value  indicated that the data from the experiments involving pancreas samples was of lower quality than the experiments involving the other four tissues. the scaling factors of the pancreas arrays were larger than any of the other samples for each lab and some of the scaling factors for the pancreas results were three fold larger than the average, which is above the tolerance threshold suggested by affymetrix. the nuse medians and the interquartile ranges  of the pancreas arrays were larger than those of the other arrays, indicating that the data from the pancreas arrays should be treated with caution.

correlation analysis
correlation analysis is useful for detecting outlier arrays and can provide valuable information about phenotypic characteristics of the data . figure  <dig> presents a heat map of array-array correlation coefficients for the rhesus data, where the spearman rank correlation coefficient was computed to quantify the degree of similarity between each pair of arrays. this plot was generated using the bioconductor library affyqcreport  <cit> . the smallest correlation coefficient was  <dig> , indicating good quality of the data. it was observed that pairs of arrays had stronger correlation within tissues than correlation between tissues regardless of laboratories, showing good reproducibility of the hybridizations across three centers.

precision assessment
in order to assess precision, we plotted the difference between replicate probeset signals to summarize precision for the data. this procedure was done for each tissue, from each laboratory . all boxplots were centered around zero and the interquartile range  values were small, indicating good precision.

reliability of the rhesus genechip at different centers
one of the basic aims of an expression array experiment is to identify differentially expressed genes  between samples. in this study, we conducted a "significance analysis of microarrays"   <cit>  to identify genes that are differentially expressed across five tissues for each laboratory. we then evaluated the agreement between laboratories in terms of the de gene identification. many investigators consider approximately 1% of all probesets to be differentially expressed  <cit> . we therefore examined the  <dig> most differentially expressed probesets out of  <dig>  . the overall agreement between laboratories is 71% . the agreement between any two laboratories is slightly higher with the values around 80% .

to further assess the reproducibility across laboratories, we drew a correspondence at the top  plot  <cit> . a cat curve is created by plotting the proportion of genes in common between centers against the number of de genes. a cat plot provides more information than a venn diagram because it shows the "dynamic" agreement between two or more centers. figure  <dig> displays the cat plot of de genes for the three centers. the values of agreement at the sizes  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> are  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively.

validation of the rhesus genechip
to validate the rhesus macaque genechip using a different measure of gene expression, five genes, each of which was highly expressed in one tissue, were chosen for quantitative real-time pcr  analysis . a gene's relative expression  is commonly used as the metric for the validation purpose  <cit> .

the performance of the affymetrix rhesus array and the qrt-pcr assay were compared in terms of each gene's relative expression  between tissues . for each selected gene, the fold change represents the ratio of the expression of the gene in its highly-expressed tissue to its expression in each of the other tissues. all fold change measurements from the qrt-pcr assay were considerably larger than  <dig>  indicating each of the selected genes was highly expressed in one of five tissues.

for all  <dig> genes, the qpcr and genechip results were in agreement with regard to differential expression between tissues. with respect to each individual gene, on the average, the largest fold change measurements from the affymetrix rhesus array occurred in the gene prss <dig>  which was also consistent with the results from the qrt-pcr results. in most cases, the fold change measurements from the qrt-pcr assay were larger than the corresponding ones from the affymetrix rhesus array, which is often observed  <cit> .

comparison of the rhesus genechip with the human genechip for studying gene expression in rhesus macaque samples
to determine how the rhesus genechip compares with a human genechip for detecting gene expression in rhesus samples, two samples  from the same rhesus macaque sources described above  were hybridized with the affymetrix human  genechip. for every tissue and replicate, there was a much higher percent present call with the rhesus macaque genechip than with the human genechip . the mean difference between the percent present calls with the rhesus macaque and human genechips was significant at the . <dig> level.

discussion
we assessed the reliability of the affymetrix rhesus macaque genechip, between three laboratories using five tissues. the reliability of the rhesus genechip was excellent; similar to the reported reliability of the human genechip  <cit> . this is important because macaques are in short supply and quite expensive. the proven reliability of the macaque genechip will facilitate large study designs utilizing animals from different centers.

we also assessed the validity of the rhesus genechip by comparing the expression patterns of a group of genes that were found to be differentially expressed in the genechip experiments with a qrt-pcr assay. the results indicate that the rhesus genechip yields accurate and valid data. this is important because the design of this genechip was unique. the sequences that were used to choose the probes were almost all genomic. the results from this study validate the idea that, in closely related species, probes from last exons can be successfully used. exhaustive, expensive est projects are not necessary to create genome wide gene chips when last exons of the target species can be identified.

the development of a reliable, valid rhesus macaque genechip should facilitate many important studies. our results indicate that using the rhesus genechip with rhesus samples represents a significant improvement over use of the human genechip. it is expected that researchers in the fields of aids, vaccine development, transplant biology, stem cell/reproductive biology and the neurosciences will be able to use the rhesus macaque genechip to make important breakthroughs.

CONCLUSIONS
the rhesus macaque genechip is reliable across centers and is a valid tool for measuring gene expression. it offers significant advantages in sensitivity as compared to the human genechip for expression analysis.

