BACKGROUND
arabidopsis thaliana has long been considered the foremost model organism in plant biology. it is favored for its short generation time, plentiful seeds, conveniently small stature, and ease of genetic transformation using agrobacterium tumefaciens. its comparatively small genome size, estimated at  <dig> million base pairs, and low repetitive sequence content drove the choice of arabidopsis as a target for complete genome sequencing in the early nineties. ten years later, the genome sequence was completed  <cit> , providing a valuable resource for furthering the understanding of arabidopsis biology and providing a reference sequence from which results in arabidopsis could be extended to other plants.

since its publication, the arabidopsis genome has been mined for clues to numerous important metabolic pathways and biological processes, many of which are documented in peer-reviewed publications including the arabidopsis book  <cit> . additionally, the arabidopsis genome has been used extensively as a tool for comparative genomics, both for genome-wide comparisons and to study specific processes among a wide range of plant species, including the gametophytic transcriptome of mosses  <cit> , wood and secondary cell wall formation in woody gymnosperms  <cit> , and legume symbiosis  <cit> .

unlike the genomic sequence, which is mostly unambiguous and unlikely to change significantly over time, the genome annotation is dynamic and expected to improve further as we better understand the molecular biology of arabidopsis and related plants. the original arabidopsis genome annotation that accompanied the completed genome sequence in  <dig>  <cit>  represents the earliest comprehensive depiction of gene content and predicted gene functions. this original annotation was accumulated over the course of the sequencing effort in the form of individually annotated bac sequences submitted to genbank by each of the sequencing centers. due to the diversity of annotation tools and protocols employed by participating centers during this process, and continuing improvements in annotation resources over the several years of the sequencing project, preliminary gene annotations varied considerably in accuracy and quality at the level of both gene structure and gene function. this heterogeneity within the annotation was most visible in the context of gene families constructed upon completion of the entire genome sequence. related genes often had dissimilar names and predicted functions as well as incongruent gene structures. a coordinated effort was needed to provide a more useful resource to the plant scientific community.

immediately after the initial data release, the institute for genomic research  began a reannotation effort  <cit> , with the goal of improving the annotation by refining gene structure and gene function assignments, employing the latest annotation tools and resources, and applying uniform annotation protocols across the entire genome. over the course of this reannotation effort, which lasted three years and ended in january  <dig>  five milestone annotation releases were generated and provided to the public by tigr, hosted additionally by the national center for biotechnology information  and the arabidopsis information resource . the fifth annotation release  represents our final major contribution to the arabidopsis genome reannotation effort and is the main focus of this manuscript.

the primary goals of this reannotation are summarized as follows:

• refine gene structures, including the annotation of alternative splicing variants and untranslated regions ;

• manually review gene names and assign genes to gene ontology  <cit>  controlled vocabularies describing molecular function, biological process and cellular location;

• recreate chromosome sequences accurately, depicting the genome based on the most current bac tiling path.

here we present a summary of our annotation methods, efforts and history leading to the fifth and final tigr release of the arabidopsis genome annotation.

RESULTS
contents of arabidopsis genome annotation release 5
the final tigr genome reannotation release contains annotations for  <dig>  protein-coding genes,  <dig> trnas,  <dig> rdna cassettes ,  <dig> snornas, and  <dig> snrnas . of the  <dig>  protein coding genes,  <dig>  are annotated with alternative splicing isoforms and  <dig>  are annotated with utrs. genomic regions with homology to open reading frames  of transposable elements  and pseudogenes  account for an additional  <dig>  annotations, and  are now separated from the total protein coding gene count.

taking into account alternative splicing variants, the  <dig>  protein-coding genes yield  <dig>  distinct protein sequences. nearly 85% of these proteins contain a match to an interpro  <cit>  accession via prosite  <cit> , prodom  <cit> , prints  <cit> , pfam  <cit>  or tigrfam  <cit> , and nearly 30% are predicted by tmhmm  <cit>  to contain at least one transmembrane domain.

the arabidopsis genome sequence is essentially complete. the representation of the arabidopsis genome sequence as provided in release  <dig> is illustrated in fig.  <dig>  the sequenced portion of the arabidopsis genome now stands at approximately  <dig> mbp, including sequences from  <dig>  tiled bacs, pacs, yacs, cosmids and pcr products. unsequenced regions of the genome are restricted to the centromeres of each chromosome, 5s rdna clusters on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  and the nucleolar organizer regions  at the northern ends of chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  with the exception of the nors and the northern tip of chromosome  <dig>  every other chromosome terminates with either perfect copies of the telomeric repeat , or degenerate copies of this sequence that are characteristic of sub-telomeric regions. these repeats are found inverted at the bottom of chromosome  <dig>  the regions of overlap between adjacent bacs in each chromosome tiling path were reviewed extensively during our reannotation effort, and the chromosome sequences were generated based on the joining of regions of bac sequences to yield our most accurate depiction of contiguous chromosomes. a series of  <dig> 'n' characters were inserted into the chromosome sequence at positions representing the unsequenced regions described above, only to provide placeholders for the unsequenced components. the centromere of chromosome  <dig> includes two internal sequenced contigs each flanked by unsequenced regions. in addition, partially sequenced bacs mapped to centromeric locations are included in both the chromosomal tiling paths and in the representation of the chromosome sequence in order to provide the most comprehensive sequence data possible.

how complete a representation of the genome is the version  <dig> tiling path and pseudomolecules? in the sequencing phase of the arabidopsis genome project, it was agreed that each group would continue sequencing up to the region containing intractable centromeric repeats. in order to make the public version of the genome as complete as possible, centromeric bacs for which sequencing was still in progress but the position of which in the tiling path was known were included in builds of pseudomolecules. these sequences are not included in the genome annotation and consist mainly of transposon-related and other centromere-associated sequences. a minimal estimate of the extent of the genome within the centromeres is ~ <dig> mb per centromere  <cit>  although a recent new estimate of genome size  <cit>  could indicate that the amount of unsequenced genome is larger than this. as reported previously  <cit> , survey sequencing of representative centromeric bacs revealed no firm evidence for previously undetected genes in the centromeric regions.

a second view of genome completeness comes from an assessment of the representation of arabidopsis ests in the genome sequence. after removal of contaminating human and e. coli sequences, approximately 2% of all ests did had no cognate match in the genome sequence  <cit> . investigation of  <dig> of these "missing genes" by pcr on genomic dna revealed that only  <dig> could be detected and all were organellar in origin.

improvements in the annotation from release  <dig> through 5
each annotation release represents one or more milestones within our reannotation effort, providing key contributions towards annotation improvement. these are summarized below and elaborated upon in subsequent sections:

• release  <dig> .

• the incorporation and assimilation of non-tigr bac sequences and annotations into the tigr ath <dig> sybase relational database.

• tigr xml format was developed and applied to represent the structured contents of ath <dig> for public use.

• release  <dig> 

• approximately  <dig>  full length  cdnas from ceres, inc. were incorporated into gene models  <cit> 

• the annotation was used as the basis for ath1-affymetrix arabidopsis whole genome microarray chip design  <cit> .

• release  <dig> 

• incorporation of the riken arabidopsis fl-cdna sequence collection  <cit>  into gene structure annotations using the same methods as employed in the incorporation of the ceres fl-cdnas.

• comprehensive analysis of intergenic regions using the latest gene finders, incorporating previously missed gene annotations and new hypothetical genes.

• release  <dig> 

• the development and application of the fl-cdna and est alignment assembly pipeline pasa, incorporating ests and fl-cdnas into gene structure annotations, modeling alternative splicing variants, and maximizing utr annotations  <cit> .

• release  <dig> 

• improved annotation of transposon-homologous regions and pseudogenes.

• cdna sequences, provided pre-publication by genoscope  <cit> , allowed for the annotation of an additional ~ <dig> alternatively spliced genes, nearly doubling the count from the previous release.

• completion of go assignments to all annotated genes.

the overall gene density and gene structure statistics differ little from the initial genome annotation. the statistics alone, however, fail to emphasize the improvements that have been made to individual gene annotations over the course of our reannotation effort. direct comparisons of individual genes between each of the annotation releases provide a more accurate measure of the level of change. updates performed on gene structures between successive releases of the annotation include modifying individual exon boundaries, splitting single gene structures into two or more genes, merging multiple gene annotations into single genes, deleting poorly supported genes, adding utr annotations to existing gene models, and creating new gene models. in addition to structural changes, gene names were systematically refined and gene ontology assignments were applied. a summary of the contents and changes made between releases is provided in table  <dig> 

by comparing release  <dig> to release  <dig>  we find that only  <dig>   of the original gene structures  remain exactly the same. there were  <dig>  new genes modeled,  <dig>  gene models deleted,  <dig> genes merged,  <dig> genes split, and  <dig>  updates to existing gene structures. any protein-coding genes that are still not annotated are likely to be short, to lack homology to known genes, and/or to be compositionally atypical of the majority of arabidopsis protein-coding genes.

the changes in the sequenced genome size between annotation releases from  <dig>  m bp to  <dig>  m bp can be attributed to our refinement of the specification of bac overlaps, the addition of newly sequenced bacs previously absent from the tiling path, the inclusion of partially sequenced centromeric bacs within the tiling path, and the replacement of partially sequenced bacs with more fully sequenced/assembled versions in subsequent genbank releases.

improving gene structures
gene structure reannotation focused on improving the accuracy of the existing gene structure components, including the refinement of exon boundaries, annotation of utrs, and identification of alternative splicing variations and pseudogenes. this effort relied primarily on sequence homology, exploiting spliced transcript and protein alignments to infer gene structures. improved de-novo gene predictors also proved useful in the process of reviewing the annotated gene structures, especially in regard to hypothetical genes, which lack protein homology or est support.

incorporation of full-length cdnas and ests into gene structures
our initial effort to automate gene structure improvements employed ~ <dig>  fl-cdnas generated by ceres, inc  <cit> . we developed software tools for modeling genes automatically using alignments of fl-cdnas, and performed updates to existing gene structure annotations or modeled new genes where none previously existed. fl-cdna alignments supported structural modifications for approximately 30% of the previously annotated genes, as well as providing utr annotations for many genes.

our most recent effort to automate gene structure annotation improvements utilized both fl-cdnas and est sequences. we developed the program to assemble spliced alignments  annotation pipeline to maximally assemble alignments of fl-cdna and est sequences and to automatically incorporate the alignment assemblies into the existing gene structure annotations. this included updating exon structures, adding utrs, modeling new genes, and annotating alternative splice variants where supported by the transcript alignment data  <cit> .

through the use of the pasa pipeline, the majority of est and fl-cdna alignments were incorporated into the arabidopsis gene annotations. as of 10/08/ <dig>  genbank included  <dig>  fl-cdnas and  <dig>  non-fl sequences. this data set, supplemented with a transcript sequence database from genoscope comprising an additional  <dig>  fl-cdnas and  <dig>  non-fl sequences, totaled  <dig>  fl-cdnas and  <dig>  non-fl sequences. of the  <dig>  genes matching a fl-cdna,  <dig>  gene models are now consistent with the fl-cdna alignments, integrating  <dig>  of the fl-cdnas into the gene structure annotations. in addition, 90% of the ests that provide high quality alignments to the genome are also incorporated into gene structure annotations. the fl-cdnas that were not fully integrated into gene structure annotations include aberrantly spliced transcripts, antisense mrnas, polycistronic mrnas, mrnas encoding short, partial or unidentifiable orfs, mrnas with non-consensus splice sites, and mrnas that did not align well to the genome using the spliced alignment utilities employed. several of these topics are elaborated upon in subsequent sections. the annotated gene structures integrating fl-cdna sequence alignments are identified by tags  in the tigr-xml distribution of our annotation, available on our ftp site  <cit> .

of the  <dig>  arabidopsis genes matching alignment assemblies, only  <dig>   lack a fl-cdna match. thus nearly all arabidopsis genes with expression detectable using current cdna cloning methods are currently represented by a fl-cdna sequence. additional sequence-based methods for ascertaining gene expression, including massively parallel signature sequencing  and serial analysis of gene expression , have provided evidence for approximately  <dig> additional expressed genes that were previously annotated as hypothetical proteins due to lack of sequence evidence of expression  <cit> .

alternative splicing
alternative splicing of mrnas has many roles that impact biological systems. variations in protein sequence resulting from alternative splicing can result in altered structures, functions, or subcellular localizations of gene products  <cit> . alternative splicing has been given a great deal of attention in the study of mammalian genomes and is thought to be a major factor contributing to the diversity of gene products and gene functions  <cit> . given its potential biological significance  <cit> , accurate annotation of alternative splicing in arabidopsis is clearly important.

experimental investigation of splicing variations in arabidopsis has been limited to a small number of genes . over the course of our reannotation effort, analyses of ests and cdnas indicated that alternative splicing in plants is more prevalent than previously thought  <cit> . through automated and manual methods, we have identified and annotated large numbers of splicing variations in arabidopsis. of the  <dig>  protein-coding genes,  <dig>  were found to have alternatively spliced forms. comparisons between sibling transcript isoforms indicate that at least 30% of the variations result in an altered orf yielding a non-identical protein sequence . the remainder appear to lie exclusively within the utr, not affecting the annotated protein sequence. most of the alternative splicing variations are categorized as alternative donor/acceptor splice sites or unspliced introns. relatively few examples of splicing variations involved exon skipping  or alternate terminal exons. most variations affecting alternate terminal exons were restricted to the utr regions, indicative of alternate transcriptional start and/or stop sites and presumed impacts on splicing patterns. variations involving skipped exons tended to impact translations in a similar manner to unspliced introns and alternate acceptors/donors, although they occur much less frequently, with only  <dig> examples currently identified. these splicing variations would be excellent targets for further functional analyses.

unspliced, antisense and dicistronic transcripts
there are numerous transcript sequences in genbank that, when analyzed manually in the context of the genome annotation, do not appear to encode complete proteins. many of these transcripts contain unspliced introns or indicate alternate splice sites that strongly and adversely impact the presumed correct orf. it is not clear whether these perceptibly corrupted versions of the genes represent biologically meaningful isoforms, mistakes by the splicing machinery that are of no consequence, or artifacts of the cloning and sequencing methods employed. cdnas with unspliced introns are often presumed to have originated from incompletely processed mrnas. in the context of genome annotation, unspliced introns often yield stop codons and/or change the reading frame, resulting in a truncated orf. however, many of these could be the result of regulated mrna splicing. for example, an alternatively spliced transcript of rps <dig> lacks splicing of an intron, which results in the loss of a terminal protein domain. it has been shown that this incompletely spliced isoform is biologically significant and is required, in addition to the completely spliced isoforms, for wild-type disease resistance  <cit> . there are  <dig>  fl-cdnas derived from  <dig>  arabidopsis genes that appear to result from splicing aberrations, as they are incompatible with and appear to corrupt our current representations of the full-length protein coding genes, which are presumed more accurate  <cit> .

during the course of re-annotation, we identified  <dig> genes for which there are expressed sequences that align with the opposite strand and the transcribed orientation of which is confirmed by splice sites  <cit> ; approximately half of these antisense transcripts derive from fl-cdnas. independent confirmation for the existence of naturally occurring antisense transcripts comes from two sources. using an affymetrix whole genome tiling array, yamada et al.  <cit>  reported the detection of antisense transcripts from ~ <dig>  genes. using mpss, meyers et al.  <cit>  reported the expression of antisense transcripts from  <dig>  genes . although the significance of this large number of antisense transcripts in arabidopsis remains to be determined, there is a growing recognition of the existence and functional significance of antisense transcripts in a variety of systems  <cit> . the order of magnitude difference between antisense transcripts recognized in cdna/est libraries and those detected by expression analysis and mpss suggests that many of these transcripts are expressed at low levels and are not found in cdna/est libraries, or they represent unspliced transcripts that were not examined here because of a lack of confidence in the direction of their transcription.

there are at least  <dig> examples of mrnas that provide transcripts corresponding to two adjacent genes  <cit> . stop codons intervene and separate the two open reading frames within the transcript and, upon manual examination, it is clear that two distinct genes are represented by the single polycistronic transcript. in several cases, fl-cdnas corresponding to the individual genes exist as well as the unexpected transcript encoding both genes. dicistronic transcripts have previously been reported in a number of other eukaryotes including d. melanogaster  <cit> , c. elegans  <cit>  and h. sapiens  <cit> , and in some cases have been shown to have functional significance  <cit> . the small number of these polycistronic transcripts identified in arabidopsis is an indicator of their low frequency of occurrence. the finding of fl-cdnas corresponding to individual genes of the polycistronic transcripts suggests that the latter may be an aberration resulting from improper transcriptional termination and polyadenylation, although a functional role has not been ruled out. in some cases, the two genes could plausibly be part of the same pathway or process for which coordinated regulation might be advantageous. examples of genes found here as dicistronic transcripts include h+-transporting two-sector atpase  and protein phosphatase 2c , prenylated rab acceptor  family protein  and putative rna-binding protein , and putative udp-glucose 4-epimerase  and lipase class  <dig> family protein . studies are needed to ascertain their significance.

other plant ests and homologous protein alignments
the high-quality, near-perfect transcript alignments of arabidopsis cdnas/ests to their cognate genomic sequence proved largely amenable to automated incorporation into the genome annotation. lower quality alignments of homologous fl-cdna and est sequences from other plants as well as spliced alignments of homologous proteins also served as excellent sources of data from which to infer gene structures. however, they were not as easy to incorporate computationally given that the reliability of the alignment data often varies considerably across their extent. thus, identification of gene structures conflicting with these spliced alignments was performed automatically, but updates to individual genes based on these spliced alignments were carried out manually using neomorphic's annotation station  . genes supported only by homologous proteins or cdnas/ests derived from other plants can be retrieved at  <cit> .

comprehensive gene discovery employing gene prediction tools
gene prediction programs have been useful in identifying potentially novel genes, as well as missed or incorrect exons. in the original arabidopsis genome annotation, several genomic regions lacked comprehensive gene identification possibly due to the shortcomings of the programs employed. the operational criterion for instantiating a gene model in the arabidopsis genome is for a gene structure to be predicted similarly by two different gene-prediction programs. with our latest set of gene prediction programs including genscan+  <cit> , genemark.hmm  <cit> , and glimmera , we applied this criterion to all genomic regions annotated as intergenic, automatically creating new genes within each region as the minimal criterion was satisfied. to avoid the spurious promotion of numerous small gene predictions, many of which are likely to be false positives, a conservative minimum protein length cutoff of  <dig> residues was applied in this automated process. this was chosen conservatively to reflect the 5th percentile of the protein length distribution derived from the previously existing, manually curated arabidopsis protein-coding gene annotations.

since previous releases of the annotation lacked the comprehensive annotation of transposon-homologous regions, many intergenic regions were found to harbor gene predictions that matched transposon orfs. these gene models were specifically excluded from the final round of automated gene modeling and were addressed separately. through our analysis of intergenic regions we annotated  <dig> new genes, of which  <dig> had homology to other proteins. the remaining  <dig> genes were annotated as additional hypothetical genes. the newly annotated genes with homology to known sequences indicate the significant number of gene annotations missed in the original genome annotation. thus, improved gene prediction programs and increased database content provided us with an additional set of genes worthy of incorporation into the genome annotation and further study.

manual refinement of gene structures
throughout the reannotation project, significant effort has been focused on manually refining intron and exon boundaries of gene models predicted by the various automated processes. initially, the team of 4– <dig> annotators would progress along bac sequences and correct, add and delete gene models as necessary. later, the annotators assessed pre-computed gene families for consistent gene structures concurrent with functional annotation .

intron-exon boundary refinements and utr additions were performed by annotators viewing alignments generated by the eukaryotic genome control  computational pipeline  using the annotation station graphical user interface .

gene function annotation
the primary goal of the functional annotation effort was to produce a high quality, consistently named proteome. the results from numerous bioinformatics analyses such as homology matches and domain hits were made navigable via the manatee web interface  <cit> , which interacts with the annotation database. gene products were assigned descriptive names based on database matches to gene products and protein domains that have been functionally characterized to avoid problems commonly associated with circular annotation. through manatee, annotators were easily able to access the computationally derived data in a compact summary page. many of the sections in the primary manatee display page link out to supplementary pages with more detailed information or specific analysis results, such as alignments and external database descriptions.

a set of naming guidelines  was adopted to provide consistency in functional annotation, but the variable nature of gene families and types of evidence available make it difficult to mandate exact nomenclature. a critical component of the effort was regular communication and discussion of specific annotation examples among the annotators. choices among multiple possible names and occasional exceptions to the guidelines were made based on consensus decisions by the annotation group as a whole.

protein families
arabidopsis proteins were classified into protein families to facilitate and enhance their functional annotation. the identification of putative protein families enables visualization and navigation of relationships between proteins and allows annotators to curate related genes consistently and accurately as a group. once all the gene structures had been examined, annotators reexamined family members to ensure that members were consistently and appropriately named within the family context.

classification of proteins into families should produce clusters of proteins with common evolutionary history and sequence similarity and hence similar biochemical function  <cit> . there is no single standard for the classification of protein families  <cit> . our approach is based upon conserved domain composition, taking into account both previously identified domain signatures in pfam  <cit>  and tigrfam  <cit>  and any remaining potential novel domains identified in the arabidopsis proteome using independent methods . our protocol differs significantly from the homology-based approach used to calculate paralogs for the arabidopsis complete genome publication  <cit> , which relied on blastp matches between proteins with an e value <1e- <dig> and extending over at least 80% of the protein length. a benefit of our approach is that related families are easily identified by the fact that they share one or more domains.

using our domain-based protein classification and family construction methods,  <dig>   of the arabidopsis gene products are classified as members of  <dig>  protein families  <cit> . on average, a family contains  <dig> members, although large families of kinases, transducins, zinc finger proteins, hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins, myb family transcription factors, and cytochrome p450s are each represented by more than a hundred proteins and altogether comprise approximately 5% of the proteome. by contrast, the blastp method with single linkage clustering produces  <dig>  proteins built into  <dig>  families. a comparison between the results of protein family building using our domain-based classification scheme and our original blastp-based clustering approach is shown in figure  <dig>  figure 3a shows that the distribution of protein families according to size produced by the two methods is quite similar overall. figure 3b illustrates the differences in family sizes built by the two methods on a per protein basis.

while most of the proteins in domain-based families are clustered into families of about the same size using single linkage clustering , this latter approach can produce anomalously large families. for example, the largest slc family contains  <dig> proteins. using domain-based clustering  this same set of proteins resolves into  <dig> families ranging in size from  <dig> to  <dig> members. while the largest fraction of genes in the slc family are protein kinases, other families such as cytochrome p450s, ppr-repeat proteins and calmodulins are included with each group, being linked by sequence similarity to only a subset of the other groups of proteins in the family. these families are well-resolved by the dbc method. conversely, the slc method can also produce fragmented families and singletons. this occurs where the functional domain covers only a small percentage of the overall protein size, as for example with many dna binding and protein interaction domains. while the dbc method groups together proteins with these relatively small domains, the criteria of sequence identity and match length required by slc is only fulfilled for small subsets of proteins within the domain-based families. for example, one dbc family of  <dig> members, which represents proteins with a single zinc finger  family domain , is split by slc among  <dig> families ranging in size from  <dig> to  <dig> members and  <dig> singletons. clearly there is great diversity in this group of proteins that form a dbc family on the basis of a relatively short domain. however, this can be a useful grouping when no other information is available.

the dbc method also over-fragments families under different circumstances. a set of paralogous proteins can contain some members that hit pfam domains above the trusted cutoff, and some that do not because of divergence and/or lack of plant representatives in the pfam seed. this results in the creation of arabidopsis-specific domains that are, in effect, redundant with pfam domains but are considered distinct, causing inappropriate fragmentation of families. for example, there are  <dig> proteins in a single slc cluster that contain the "seven in absentia"  domain , but two of these score just below the trusted cut-off. this results in the creation of  <dig> dbc families of  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> proteins respectively. the pfam domain profile can be retuned to include the missing arabidopsis representatives and remedy any over-fragmentation resulting from the insensitivity of the original domain profile .

overall, close to 60% of clustered proteins fall into families whose sizes differ by fewer than  <dig> members between the two methods of family construction. the domain-based approach produces fewer, slightly larger families, and some anomalously large families are eliminated.

duplicated genes 
the large scale duplications of the arabidopsis genome have been extensively analyzed and documented . in addition to analyzing genes in the context of gene families, a further analysis of gene names was performed in the context of duplicated genes that may share similar or identical functions. using approaches and criteria similar to those employed by others, we developed tools to facilitate the identification of segmental and tandem duplicated genes in our latest annotation . we identified  <dig>  protein-coding genes within the segmentally duplicated regions of the genome and  <dig>  genes within tandem duplications some of which are found to be within the segmentally duplicated regions. in all, there are  <dig>  presumed paralogous protein-coding genes, representing 36% of the arabidopsis proteome. we then examined the functional annotation of these paralogous groups, verified the uniformity of their annotations and manually resolved any inconsistencies.

gene ontology
in order to maximize the usability of the annotation data set, arabidopsis protein-coding genes were further classified using the controlled vocabularies of the gene ontology   <cit> . tigr is a member of the go consortium  <cit> , a collaborative international effort to organize and define gene products using standard, species-independent terminology. go is now widely used in plant, animal and microbial genomics and has become one of the principal tools employed in the annotation of genes and their products  <cit> .

go consists of dynamic, controlled vocabularies describing three areas of biological systems: molecular function, biological process, and cellular component. each go annotation is required to contain an evidence code describing the type of evidence that supports it  <cit> . the evidence types used in manual go curation range from direct experimental evidence and published inferences based on experimental data, to annotator inferences from examination of sequence and domain similarities.

go terms were assigned to arabidopsis gene products based on similarity to functionally characterized proteins and/or functional domains. the majority of the arabidopsis go associations fall into the iss category  since there was no published experimental evidence available. these inferences were made by assessing all of the similarity evidence available, including blastp results, hmm search results, prosite and interpro membership, protein family relationships, and similarity to other gene products having go annotations. proteins that were examined and had either weak or partial similarity to functionally characterized proteins were deemed to have too little evidence to warrant functional go assignments and were given the go term "unknown". this term exists so that annotators can capture the fact that they looked at the evidence available for a specific gene product and could make no assertion about the role this gene product might play in the organism.

at tigr, all go assignments to arabidopsis genes were performed manually with emphasis on molecular function terms, but assignments to biological process and cellular component terms were added when they could easily be inferred from the evidence considered. this work was carried out in coordination with scientists at tair  <cit> . we regularly integrated the manual go curation provided by tair into our dataset in order to minimize redundancy of effort between institutes. however, tair associations made automatically through purely computational methods were excluded from our dataset. of the  <dig>  distinct curated associations between  <dig>  arabidopsis genes and go terms in the final release,  <dig>  associations were contributed uniquely by tair,  <dig>  loci are annotated with at least one tigr association, and  <dig>  loci are annotated with at least one tair association, with  <dig>  of these annotated by both centers.

leaving aside the specific go category "unknown",  <dig>  specific go terms are assigned to  <dig>  genes. of these,  <dig>  terms  are molecular function,  <dig>  terms  are biological process, and  <dig>  terms  describe cellular component. the go function term "unknown" was assigned to all other genes after confirming the lack of other evidence. the decrease in the proportion of genes with a meaningful go assignment  compared with the number of genes given a functional assignment at the time of genome completion  is most likely a reflection of the more rigorous and uniform standards applied during our whole genome reannotation effort

as a result of the reannotation effort, each protein-coding gene in the genome has been manually assigned to at least one go term . figure  <dig> provides a summary of the current state of functional characterization of the arabidopsis genome. among the most abundant functional role categories,  <dig> % of the genes are assigned catalytic functions including hydrolase, kinase, or transferase activity;  <dig> % bind nucleic acids, primarily dna, including the  <dig>  % categorized as transcription factors;  <dig>  % are categorized as protein binding, many inferred from the presence of domains implicated in protein-protein interactions such as the ring zn-finger  <cit>  and leucine-rich repeats  <cit> ; and  <dig> % are classified as transporters.

transposable element and pseudogene annotations
transposons and pseudogenes were the last categories of gene models to be systematically addressed by the re-annotation process. many gene models with similarity to transposons or transposon-related proteins were originally annotated as protein-coding genes. however, the majority of these regions are degenerate, making it difficult or impossible to model orfs across their entire extent, although shorter orfs with similarity to parts of transposons may be contained within the boundaries. thus, the legacy annotation for transposon-related sequences consisted of a mixture of genes and pseudogenes.

in release  <dig> , all transposon-related sequences were uniformly classified by searching the entire genome against a curated database of protein-coding transposon sequences  <cit>  using the dps alignment utility of the aat package and automatically applying the corresponding transposon family annotation. each transposon-related region was defined by a single pair of coordinates and classified into one of the major classes of transposable elements as described in  <cit> , shown in table  <dig>  release  <dig>  contains  <dig>  loci annotated as transposons,  <dig>  matching retrotransposons and  <dig> matching dna transposases and  these are no longer included in the count of "protein coding genes" nor are they represented in that dataset. it should be noted that our transposon annotation has been restricted to elements with protein coding potential. assimilation of the smaller elements and other classes of repeated sequences into the genome annotation remains a task for the future.

like transposons, pseudogenes are difficult to annotate accurately in an automated manner. different gene prediction programs will often generate predicted gene structures that are dissimilar to each other and inconsistent with the homologous sequence alignments, introducing introns to circumvent frameshifts and premature stop codons. pseudogenes are often detected during manual curation of these gene predictions, because the gene model cannot be modeled consistently with homologous protein alignments due to sequence degeneracy that results in stop codons that interrupt the open reading frame. pseudogenes are often found in transposon-rich regions such as those associated with the pericentromeric regions. in our annotation, pseudogenes, like transposons, are described simply as a single pair of coordinates  that span the genomic region in which they are found, and are classified on the basis of sequence homology to known proteins. in the current release,  <dig>  loci are classified as non-transposon-related pseudogenes, of which approximately one third are similar to genes of known function. these include kinases, disease resistance proteins, ribosomal proteins, and others found in large gene families in arabidopsis. the remaining pseudogenes are similar to proteins from arabidopsis or other species that have no known function and likely represent degenerate genes of hypothetical proteins yet to be characterized. like transposons, the majority of pseudogenes in the current annotation were named by an automated process.

CONCLUSIONS
with respect to the annotation of gene structure and gene function, our reannotation effort has focused mostly on the protein-coding subset of all arabidopsis genes. this reflects a combination of community interest  together with databases and gene prediction programs that are relatively effective in identifying and delineating such genes. without a doubt, the largest contribution to improved gene structure annotation over the last three years has been the generation and release of fl-cdna sequences by ceres inc.  <cit> , by the riken-ssp collaboration  <cit>  and by the inra-genoscope group  <cit> . however, because of the bias to annotate genes with presumed functional orfs, there are likely many genes for regulatory and non-coding rnas in addition to those already described  <cit>  that remain to be discovered and incorporated into the annotation.

although the accurate annotation of transposable elements is important, our approach was simply to comprehensively identify regions of the genome with homology to transposon orfs and to explicitly differentiate these from the remaining protein-coding plant genes. more work is needed in this area to improve the resolution and depth of annotation for these complex features, including the deconvolution of polyprotein orfs, classification of complete, fragmented and degenerate elements, and delineation of repeat structures including long terminal repeats, direct repeats and insertion sites.

with this final release from tigr, primary responsibility for maintaining and updating the arabidopsis annotation in north america has been assumed by tair. it can be anticipated that the annotation will continue to be both improved and enriched. one important distinction between the annotation processes at tigr and at tair is that the former has been entirely sequence-based. this is to some extent historical but also reflects our philosophy that dna sequence is a public, unambiguous and easily exchanged data type that can for the most part be incorporated into annotation using computational tools. looking ahead, additional sequence information will permit the refinement of gene structures, while the functional annotation will be enriched both by the availability of new experimental data and by tair's policy of including results from expression and other kinds of analyses to characterize each gene and its function fully.

