BACKGROUND
fruit set depends upon successful fertilization that includes regulatory interactions between fertilized ovule and ovary that are mediated by hormones  <cit> ; fruit growth is also closely related to seed growth  <cit> . seed number is positively correlated with fruit growth in many species including cucumber  <cit> , grape  <cit> , and sweet pepper  <cit> . for example, strawberry fruits fail to grow when the seeds are removed and growth can be restored upon the application of auxins to the deseeded fruits, indicating that seeds supply substances necessary for the fruit growth  <cit> . in grape, the weight of berries in the cluster may vary by a factor of two and the coefficient of variance of berry weight within a cluster can reach a maximum of 25-30%  <cit> . many factors such as assimilate supply and environmental conditions may affect variation in berry size, but external factors such as water stress have been shown to homogeneously inhibit berry growth in all berries, indicating that internal factors influence berry growth differences  <cit> . the number of seeds has been suggested to influence cell division and cell expansion in pericarp through the production of hormones during tomato fruit development  <cit> . similarly, lower growth was reported for seedless berries compared to seeded berries in pinot noir and cabernet sauvignon clusters  <cit> . based upon recent molecular evidence, auxin is synthesized in the ovule and transported to the pericarp upon fertilization, where it induces gibberellin  biosynthesis. the ga then degrades della proteins that repress ovary growth and fruit initiation . however, fruit development can be uncoupled from fertilization and seed development, as seen in parthenocarpic and stenospermocarpic fruits  <cit> . in these instances, elevated endogenous phytohormone levels in the pericarp similar to those of seeded fruits have been observed during fruit set  <cit> . this suggests that either the phytohormones could originate from sources other than seeds, or their increase in the pericarp is developmentally regulated. accordingly, parthenocarpy can be induced by the exogenous application of auxins, cytokinins, or gibberellins  <cit>  or by the expression of auxin biosynthetic genes in ovaries and ovules  <cit> . however, unseeded parthenocarpic fruits show less growth and lack the peak of auxin that occurs before the onset of ripening seen in the normal seeded fruits suggesting that, at least during the later stages of fruit development, the embryo-supplied auxin is necessary for continued fruit growth  <cit> .

even as we know much about the role of seeds during fruit set and maturation from several fruit models, the role played by seeds in the process of the ripening onset is not well understood. in strawberry, removal of achenes from immature fruit causes precocious ripening, which can be stopped by the application of auxin  <cit> , suggesting that seeds negatively affect ripening through auxins. in tomato, over-expression of a gene from capsicum chinense l. that encodes an auxin-conjugating enzyme  leads to increased sensitivity of fruit to ethylene at an earlier stage of development  <cit> . similarly, in avocado, seeds have been shown to inhibit the ripening process, and seedless fruits show higher response to ethylene even at earlier developmental stages  <cit> , probably owing to the lack of inhibitory action by the seed-supplied auxin. all of this evidence suggests that as seeds mature, auxin biosynthesis or transport to the pericarp ceases, allowing the mature fruit to ripen. this phenomenon appears to be supported across fruit species, including grape, as auxin treatment of fruit at immature and mature stages delays ripening  <cit> . it has been suggested that, as premature ripening of fruit before seed maturation is not desirable for reproductive success, seed and fruit maturation are strictly synchronized and auxin may coordinate communication between seed and pericarp  <cit> .

in grape, completion of seed growth coincides with the onset of ripening   <cit> , when fruit becomes ready to undergo ripening and there is a major switch in the relative hormone levels in the pericarp, notably auxin and aba  <cit> . in a mid-véraison cluster , uneven ripening among the individual berries indicates that the berries do not enter the ripening phase at the same time. differences in flowering times and fertilization events have been suggested to cause the differences in the timing of ripening onset among berries  <cit> . however, gorchov in  <cit>  reported that variance in the fruit-ripening times in amelanchier arborea appears more related to the developmental duration of fruit maturation rather than the flowering times. based upon evidence for the seed-to-berry growth relationship discussed above, relative seed content in the berry might influence the duration of berry maturation and its transition to the ripening.

in the present study, we examined the differences in seed content between berries that enter the ripening stage sooner or later, with the aim of understanding the effect of seed content on the timing of berry ripening initiation. we monitored the changes in ripening-related hormones in the pericarp of berries with high or low seed content during the period leading to ripening onset. we show that the differences in the relative level of auxin in the berries having low and high seed content leads to differences in the timing of ripening initiation and could possibly be the main cause for asynchronous ripening of a grape cluster.

RESULTS
observation of seed content and berry ripening phenotype
grape clusters generally transition into the ripening phase about eight weeks post-anthesis , but the timing of transition for individual berries in the cluster varies. ripening-related physiological and transcriptional differences between berries in different ripening stages  in mid-véraison clusters have been reported in several studies  <cit> . in our previous study, by examining the post-véraison progression of sugar and color accumulation in differentially ripening berries within véraison clusters, we found that green hard, green soft, or pink berries were ~ <dig>   <dig>  or 4 days delayed, respectively, in their ripening program at mid-véraison stage   <cit> . examination of the number and weight of seeds per berry revealed that green underripe berries consistently contained higher seed number and weight compared to the colored berries that had entered the ripening phase earlier even though the seeds had yet to reach their maximum weight . this suggests that the delay in the ripening onset for individual berries increases along with the increasing seed content. a number of studies have indicated that seed number and weight are related to berry growth and showed a positive correlation between growth rates of seed and pericarp tissues during the first phase of berry development  <cit> . the entry of the pericarp into the ripening phase also generally coincides with the completion of seed growth  <cit> . two studies investigated the relationship between seed content, fruit growth and ripening in grape  <cit> . in these studies lower seed weight in shiraz and low seed number in concord were associated with delayed berry ripeness and the ripening delay was attributed to incomplete seed maturation  <cit> . however, our results in pinot noir show that green underripe berries have not only higher total seed weight per berry, but also the weights of individual seeds are significantly higher compared to those of red berries, suggesting a quantitative negative influence of seed tissue on the ripening . these contrasting findings might be attributable to cultivar differences, to the method of defining berry seed content for which berry size differences were not considered, and to the exclusive use of seed weight or number in the interpretation of the results in the two studies cited in  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
relationship between seed and berry ripening in the mid-véraison cluster.  seed weight and seed numbers in the green hard, green soft, pink, and red berries of mid-véraison cluster. data represent means ± sem . different letters denote significant differences between the berries of ripening stages for each seed parameter   percentage of single-seeded green, pink and red berries in low and high seed weight-to-berry weight  groups of berries in the cluster. berries with low and high sb ranges were selected as described in methods. berries of four entire clusters from two plants were used for analysis. approximate test for equal proportions was used to identify differences in the distribution of ripening classes between the sb groups and significant differences were marked with asterisks .  differences in mean dry mass and dehydration levels per seed from green and red berries of mid-véraison cluster. water loss was obtained by subtracting the seed dry weight from the fresh weight and expressed as percentage of water in the seed. data represent means ± sem . different letters denote significant differences between red and green berry seeds .  linear relation between sb and berry sugar level in the single-seeded berry population of a cluster. sugar levels were measured as °brix. berries of ten clusters from five different plants were used for the analysis .



to examine the composition of green, pink, and red berries in the mid-véraison cluster originating from berries with low and high seed content, we segregated the berries on the basis of their “seed weight-to-berry weight ratio ”, and refer to these as the low and high-sb groups hereafter. to rule out the effect of seed number on ripening, only the single-seeded berries, which accounted for ~70% of berries in a cluster, were considered . while 86% berries with low-sb were either pink or red, 78% of high-sb berries were green at mid-véraison. this indicates that seed weight-to-berry weight ratio is a more suitable index to assess the influence of seed on the pericarp development than seed number per berry. the positive correlation between seed number and berry growth, reported in previous studies, was probably due to the fact that higher seed number generally results in higher weight. to examine whether low-sb in pink and red berries is due to dehydration of seeds, we compared the percentage of water loss between the seeds of green and red berries at mid-véraison . based upon the literature, dehydration begins in the middle of véraison  <cit> . in our data, seeds of red berries only had 3% less water content compared to those of green berries, indicating that they had just entered the dehydration phase. in addition, the dry mass of seeds was not different between green and red berries  and the decrease in fresh weight did not commence before mid-véraison between low- and high-sb berries . these results indicate that seed developmental changes in weight between green and red berries had little contribution to the observed sb ratio differences until mid-véraison. further, sb showed a good correlation with sugar levels of the berries in the mid-véraison cluster, indicating that berries with low seed content begin to accumulate sugars, the main criterion for the ripening onset, earlier than those with high-sb content .

ripening-related hormone levels in seed and pericarp tissues
during the first cycle of rapid berry growth, the rate of seed growth is assumed to have a positive effect on the rate of cell division in the pericarp  <cit> , which suggests that the seed supplies the pericarp with hormones required for cell division, and possibly cell expansion. in order to assess the relative levels of ripening-related hormones, we quantified abscisic acid  and indole-3-acetic acid , two main regulators of the ripening onset  <cit> , in skin, pulp, and seed tissues of all green prevéraison clusters and the green, pink, and red berries from the mid-véraison-stage clusters . aba levels in seeds were about  <dig> times higher than in pericarp tissues at prevéraison, but remained at a similar level until the later berry ripening-transition stage while aba levels in the pericarp increased significantly during the berry ripening transitions . aba, a key regulator of seed maturation and embryogenesis, is largely synthesized in the integuments and its level in seeds is high during mid- and late-maturation stages . unlike in pericarp, where the actions of auxin and aba are antagonistic and developmentally regulated during berry maturation and ripening phases, respectively, aba and auxin act synergistically in seed to maintain dormancy  <cit> . in grape, rapid embryo growth and the associated synthesis of auxin occur around the maturation phase  <cit> . auxin was up to 12-fold higher in the seeds during the pre-ripening phase and was maintained at significantly higher levels compared to pericarp tissues through the later ripening stages . pericarp tissues, especially pulp, show a steady decrease in iaa with progressing ripening stages. evidence for seeds as the predominant source of auxins in fruit stems from studies of diverse species  <cit> , in which synthesis of auxins in the embryo and endosperm tissues was observed  <cit> . although mainly associated with normal embryo morphogenesis, auxin from seeds is thought to be transported to other parts of the fruit to promote cell division and expansion in the pericarp tissues  <cit> . when seed maturation is complete, auxin transport to the pericarp is inhibited, allowing the fruit to ripen .figure  <dig> 
levels of ripening-related hormones  abscisic acid  and  indole-3-acetic acid  in skin, pulp, and seed tissues of berries. hormone levels were quantified in prevéraison green  and green, pink, and red stage berries of a mid-véraison  cluster. error bars represent ± sem . different letters denote significant differences between skin, pulp, and seed at each ripening stage .



differences between berries with low and high seed weight-to-berry weight ratio  within the prevéraison clusters
in most studies related to grape berry ripening, the definition of ripening progress has been based on overall cluster ripening and all green berries in prevéraison clusters were assumed to have low sugar, high auxin, and low aba levels compared to those of a véraison-stage cluster  <cit> . however, given that the low- and high-sb berries of prevéraison clusters will emerge as different ripening classes , the ripening-related biochemical and hormonal features might not be the same among all of the green prevéraison berries. therefore, the pericarp of high- and low-sb berries from clusters that were at two or one week before mid-véraison , or were at mid-véraison were analyzed separately. sb differences between low- and high-sb berries, selected for downstream hormone and gene expression analyses, were  <dig> -,  <dig> -, and 2-fold at 2-wk pv, 1-wk pv, and mid-véraison, respectively . prevéraison clusters that were two weeks before mid-véraison showed the highest correlation between seed and berry weights, followed by clusters at one week prevéraison and mid-véraison . at 2-wk pv, all berries were at the end of the first rapid growth stage of the berry, when growth rates in seed and pericarp are most related  <cit> , while at mid-véraison, the growth of the seeds concludes and the increase in pericarp weight is due to sugar import. the highest sb difference was observed at 1-wk pv and part of the rapid decrease in the ratio of the low-sb group can be attributed to pericarp expansion independent of seed influence . we observed the most rapid weight gain due to increases in sugars in high-sb berries after mid-véraison . at 2-wk pv, both low- and high-sb berries in the cluster were at the same pre-ripening stage based on similar basal sugar levels . but one week later, the low-sb berries were already in the active sugar-accumulation phase, which indicates that these berries had entered the ripening transition earlier even though berries of both sb groups were still green . in the mid-véraison cluster, low-sb berries were in pink to red stages with sugar levels at 14%, while high-sb berries were still at 8% . in grape, seed tannins increase from very early stages of seed and berry development and reach a maximum around véraison, after which they rapidly decline  <cit> . so seed extractable tannins were used to assess the seed maturity differences between low and high-sb berries. extractable tannins were at similar levels in the seeds of both low and high-sb berries in 2-wk pv clusters, but lower amounts of extractable tannins in the seeds of low-sb berries at 1-wk pv suggest that seeds were at an advanced developmental stage in these berries . these results indicate that the developmental trajectory of the immature green berries deviate at least before one week prior to mid-véraison, depending on their seed content, and that the ripening-related differences would amplify further as the cluster approaches véraison-stage.figure  <dig> 
differences between low- and high-sb berry groups in  seed weight-to-berry weight ratio ,  sugar level and visual observation, and  seed tannin level at two- and one-week prevéraison, and at mid-véraison  cluster stages. the data represent the berries selected for downstream hormone and expression analyses based upon their highest sb differential. error bars are ± sem . in panel b, the ripening phenotype of the berries of low and high-sb groups were indicated as dark green , light green , and red . the data representing low and high-sb berry populations are described in additional file  <dig>  significant differences between low and high-sb at each cluster stage are indicated by asterisks . significant differences of each sb group between the ripening stages are denoted by different letters ).



differences in auxin levels in the pericarp of low- and high-sb berries in clusters preceding the onset of ripening
during fruit development, auxins and cytokinins appear to be the key regulators during the maturation phase and when fruit becomes competent to ripen, aba and ethylene play a predominant role . in non-climacteric fruits that have little or no ethylene requirement for ripening, aba has a stronger role; the decrease in auxin and the concomittant increase in aba are significant events that signal the developmental transition to ripening  <cit> . to examine the emergence of auxin dynamics in low- and high-sb berries around the onset of ripening, we observed iaa levels in the pericarp of these berries separately in 2-wk pv clusters, when both were at a similar pre-ripening stage, and in 1-wk pv clusters, when ripening-related sugar accumulation had begun in low-sb berries . the levels of auxin in the pericarp of low-sb berries at 1-wk pv were significantly lower compared to those in high-sb berries  and had already decreased to the levels of mid-véraison green berries , while those of high-sb berries remained at higher levels. high levels of auxin in developing fruit that decline before the initiation of ripening have been reported in many climacteric and non-climacteric fruits such as tomato, pepper, banana, and strawberry . we observed the expression of tryptophan aminotransferase related  and yuc flavin monooxygenase  to determine whether the auxin levels observed follow the expression of auxin biosynthetic genes in the pericarp . these two genes were selected based upon the literature  <cit>  and our transcriptomic data for berry developmental stages  <cit> , which indicates that their expression varies the most from prevéraison to early stages of véraison. the declining trend of auxin from 2-wk pv to 1-wk pv in the pericarp of low-sb berries followed the decrease in the expression of tar <dig>  but a similar decrease in expression in high-sb berries did not result in a decrease in iaa . unlike the expression of the tar gene, the expression of the yuc <dig> gene, the rate-limiting enzyme in the ipa pathway of iaa biosynthesis  <cit> , did not differ between low- and high-sb; and its expression level in both groups was unchanged before mid-véraison . similarly, yuc <dig> also showed no difference in expression between berry groups . this suggests that local biosynthesis of auxin in the pericarp might be tapering off in both of the berry classes as they neared the ripening transition phase, more so in low-sb berries, and that the pericarp-synthesized auxin levels might not be very different.figure  <dig> 
hormone levels of indole-3-acetic acid   and its conjugate form, iaa-aspartic acid  ; and the expression levels of iaa biosynthetic genes,
tar3
, and
yuc1
, in the pericarp of low and high seed weight-to-berry weight  berries. prevéraison cluster stages were two- and one-week before véraison . iaa and iaa-asp levels were quantified by lc-ms/ms using four replicates. gene expression was measured by qrt-pcr and expression levels are relative to low-sb berries at 2-wk pv . gene expressions were also measured at mid-véraison  cluster stage. significant differences between low- and high-sb at each cluster stage are indicated by asterisks . significant differences of each sb group between the ripening stages are denoted by different letters ).



an important mechanism in auxin homeostasis is its conjugation with amino acids and sugars, and in grape berries, regulation of auxin levels through conjugation with aspartic acid  by iaa-amido synthetases  has been reported . at 2-wk pv, the levels of iaa-asp were similar in the pericarp of both low- and high-sb berries but iaa-asp increased fourfold in low-sb berries at 1-wk pv, concomitant with the decrease in free auxin and the increase in sugar . in several plants including grape, the reduction of auxin is accompanied by an increase in iaa-asp before the onset of ripening, so iaa-asp has been suggested as a ripening initiator, much like aba . in the pericarp of high-sb berries, which did not enter into active sugar accumulation phase until mid-véraison , iaa-asp levels remained low and unchanged across 2- and 1-wk pv. the peak expression levels of gh3- <dig> and − <dig> genes was at 1-wk and 2-wk pv, respectively, and decrease by mid-véraison in both groups . the increase in gh3- <dig> expression in low-sb berries from 2-wk to 1-wk pv matched the decrease in the levels of iaa and the increase in iaa-asp . however, in high-sb berries, increased gh3- <dig> expression was not followed by associated changes in iaa and iaa-asp levels . significant differences in the expression of gh <dig> genes between low- and high-sb groups was observed at 1-wk pv, but its impact on the relative iaa and iaa-asp levels in the pericarp of the two berry groups could not be ascertained, as our hormone analysis did not extend to mid-véraison stage. despite the local biosynthesis and homeostasis dynamics of auxin in the pericarp, the additional hypothesized seed-sourced auxin could add substantially to the pericarp of high-sb berries, as their seed content per berry was more than twice that of low-sb berries . this could potentially confound the actual local auxin levels during the ripening transition stage, as evidenced by the discrepancies observed between the expression of biosynthetic genes and actual hormone levels.

screening of auxin responsive genes in cultured grape cells and their induction in the pericarp of low- and high-sb berries
auxin signaling regulates cell responses to different levels of auxin. the main components of signaling are auxin response factors  that activate or repress the expression of auxin-dependent genes  <cit> . recent evidence in other models implicates specific arf proteins that mediate auxin responses at different stages of fruit development. genetic studies in tomato and arabidopsis have shown that arf <dig>  arf <dig>  arf <dig>  and aux/iaa <dig>  <cit>  function at the fruit initiation stage, while arf <dig> is important at the ripening transition stage  <cit> . to examine if any of these auxin-responsive genes function in mediating the observed auxin level changes during the ripening transition in grape, expression of these arfs was examined in the pericarp of low- and high-sb berries from 1-wk pv clusters, which had lower and higher auxin levels, respectively . further, we assessed the auxin-responsiveness of these genes in grape cultured cells and found that arf <dig> and arf <dig> genes were significantly induced in cells treated with 20 μm iaa for 2 h . while both arf <dig> and arf <dig> had higher expression in the pericarp of high-sb berries, the expression of arf <dig> was more than sixfold higher. in arabidopsis the expression of arf <dig> and arf <dig> is induced by auxin  <cit> , and the expression of arf genes that mediate auxin responses is cell- and development-context specific  <cit>  . the expression of arf <dig>  a negative regulator of auxin response that inhibits fruit set in tomato, is highest in the ovary and decreases with increasing auxin levels in this tissue  <cit> . similarly in tomato, arf <dig> is preferentially expressed in fruit around the breaker stage and its expression levels follow the ripening-related auxin changes in the tissue  <cit> . under-expressing arf <dig>  formerly designated dr <dig>  in tomato results in dark green, immature fruits and up-regulates the expression of sugar metabolism-related genes  <cit> . based upon this evidence, our results indicate that arf <dig> mediates the response to auxin changes during the grape berry ripening initiation, and is likely a negative regulator of the ripening-related changes in the pericarp during véraison.figure  <dig> 
screening for auxin response genes induced in grape cultured cells and in the pericarp of low and high seed containing berries.  induction of auxin response genes in cultured grape cells with auxin treatment . the expression level is relative to the control.  expression of auxin response genes in the pericarp of berries with low and high seed weight-to-berry weight  from one-week prevéraison clusters. expression level of high-sb is shown relative to that of low-sb.  expression of arf <dig> gene in the pericarp of low and high-sb berry groups at two- and one-week prevéraison , and at mid-véraison . expression levels of arf <dig> are relative to those of low-sb berries at 2-wk pv. gene expression was analyzed by qrt-pcr and all data represent means of five replicates and error bars indicate ± sem. significant differences between low- and high-sb berries at each cluster stage are indicated by asterisks . significant differences of each sb group between the ripening stages are denoted by different letters ).



expression trends for arf <dig> in low- and high-sb berries show the greatest difference between both berry groups at 1-wk pv , when the low-sb berries begin rapid accumulation of sugars . however, differences in arf <dig> expression between the berry groups was obvious at 2-wk pv, when the sugars were at very similar levels and both groups were presumably at the same pre-ripening stage. the down-regulation of arf <dig> in the pericarp of low-sb berries from 2- to 1-wk pv was more than twelve fold , concomitant with the steepest drop in the iaa levels and the increase of sugar . in high-sb berries the expression level of arf <dig> reached its lowest at mid-véraison . overall, the expression of arf <dig> follows the same declining trend as auxin in the pericarp, reaching its minimum level towards véraison from its maximum at 2-wk pv, and coinciding with the increased expression of ripening-promoting genes discussed in the following section. these results indicate that the role of arf <dig> during the grape berry ripening transition is similar to its reported role in tomato. its expression is also indicative of the changes in the pericarp auxin levels of high and low-sb berries. auxin transporters are known to be involved in the transport of auxin from seed to pericarp and a spatial distribution gradient of auxin flux has been shown  <cit>  . in non-climacteric strawberry, removal of achenes enhances ripening and this enhancement could be abolished by application of auxin  <cit> . these observations might suggest that auxin from seeds contributes to the differential regulation of ripening-related signaling in the pericarp of grape berries.

levels of aba and aba-related transcripts in low and high-sb berries
the consequences of changes in auxin levels in the pericarp vary depending on the stage of the fruit development. during early fruit development, seed-sourced auxin acts as a signal to initiate gibberellin  biosynthesis and signaling in the pericarp , where arf <dig> expression mediates auxin-ga crosstalk  <cit> . in the pericarp of pea, auxin application after removal of seeds restores ga biosynthesis and pericarp growth, which supports the hypothesis that auxin is transported from the seeds  <cit> . at around ripening initiation stage, auxin represses genes involved in ripening, such as cell-wall modifying proteins, and those involved in sugar metabolism, and anthocyanin biosynthesis in the pericarp  <cit> . in grape, aba is the hormone involved in the initiation of ripening-related changes, as ethylene is in climacteric fruits. changes in aba levels and the expression of the main aba biosynthetic gene, 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase , and that of an aba-responsive myba <dig>  a transcription factor involved in the anthocyanin biosynthesis, were examined in the pericarp of low- and high-sb berries . like iaa, early differences in aba were observed between low- and high-sb berries . the pericarp of low-sb berries exhibited a trend towards a higher concentration of aba, though statistically non-significant, compared to that of high-sb berries as early as two weeks prior to mid-véraison. the early increase in aba is probably in direct response to the earlier decrease in auxin in the pericarp of low-sb berries . an inhibitory influence of auxin on aba during ripening has been suggested in several fruit models, and the down-regulation of nced expression by auxin has been reported  <cit> . the expression level of nced <dig> was significantly higher in the pericarp of low-sb berries compared to that in high-sb by 1-wk pv, suggesting a higher level of aba synthesis . these results indicate that, depending on relative seed content, the differences in ripening-related hormones emerge in the pericarp much earlier than the onset of ripening, which predispose the berries with lower seed content to ripen earlier compared to those with higher seed content.figure  <dig> 
hormone level of abscisic acid  , and the expression levels of aba biosynthesis gene,
nced4
 and aba-responsive gene,
myba1
 in the pericarp of low and high seed weight-to-berry weight  groups. aba levels were quantified by lc-ms/ms using four replicates. gene expressions were measured by qrt-pcr and expression levels are relative to those of low-sb berries at 2-wk pv . error bars indicate ± sem. prevéraison stages were two- and one-week before véraison . gene expressions were also measured at mid-véraison  cluster stage. significant differences between low- and high-sb berries at each cluster stage are indicated by asterisks . significant differences of each sb group between the ripening stages are denoted by different letters ).



similar to arf <dig>  differences in the expression of the aba-responsive myba <dig> gene between low- and high-sb berries were apparent from 2-wk pv and became more pronounced at 1-wk pv. the expression of myba <dig> in the pericarp of high-sb berries was significantly lower and remained comparatively lower until mid-véraison. at this stage, auxin levels had decreased and ripening initiation had started in low-sb berries while auxin levels were still higher in relatively immature high-sb berries . in strawberry, a non-climacteric fruit like grape, expression of nced <dig> and myb <dig> are repressed by auxin and activated by aba  <cit> . further, removal of achenes, the source of auxin, increases myb expression, which can be abolished by auxin application  <cit> . similarly, tomato transgenic lines under-expressing arf <dig> show enhanced expression of golden2-like , a myb-type transcription factor  <cit> . to check whether these genes are direct targets of arf <dig>  we performed the in silico analysis of the promoters for auxre binding sites. analysis of the 2-kb promoter sequence of myba <dig> identified only the expected aba-response elements. however, nced <dig> possesses a conserved auxre, tgtctc, at position − <dig> and an auxin induction element, acttta, at position − <dig> , suggesting possible negative regulation of its expression by auxin. in the 2-wk pv cluster, both low- and high-sb berries were at a similar immature pre-ripening physiological stage with no sugar accumulation and only differed in their seed content . our results suggest a relationship between low seed content and the resulting earlier decreased auxin levels in the pericarp of low-sb berries and the observed higher expression of aba-related genes that leads to their earlier ripening.

exogenous iaa and aba treatment of prevéraison clusters and changes in the composition of green, pink, and red berries in low- and high-sb groups
to evaluate the influence of seed content on the timing of ripening initiation through hormone signals, exogenous applications of hormones were performed on clusters one week before expected véraison. the normal proportions of berries transitioning into the progressive véraison-ripening stages of green, pink, and red, which follow the sb ratio, should be perturbed when the levels of ripening-related hormones in the pericarp are altered. the emergence of normal proportions of green, pink, and red berries in iaa-treated clusters at mid-véraison was not different from that of control, while in aba-treated clusters, fewer berries stayed green and more transitioned to pink and red stages . however, when the proportions of the three ripening stages in low- and high-sb berry groups were examined separately, for which berries with low and high seed content should yield mostly colored and green berries, respectively , significant changes were observed . aba treatment disrupted the proportions of ripening stages most significantly in low-sb group, while iaa mostly affected the high-sb berry group . decreases in the pericarp iaa level and increased synthesis of aba are required for the onset of ripening in many non-climacteric fruits  <cit> . one week before véraison, at the time of hormone treatment, iaa had not reached yet its basal level in high-sb berries and berries were probably not in the irreversible phase of the ripening program. exogenous iaa likely further elevates the pericarp iaa levels and results in more berries staying green and pink that otherwise would have advanced in ripening, as shown by other studies  <cit> . ripening-related expression of genes associated with aba and pigment biosynthesis, and with cell wall loosening is generally inhibited by higher auxin levels  <cit> . on the other hand, berries with low seed content, owing to the earlier decrease in iaa in the pericarp, had already entered ripening initiation at the time of iaa treatment, which made them less responsive to exogenous iaa application. but fewer berries transitioning from pink to red stage compared to control clusters were observed. aba treatment caused enhanced green to pink and red stage transitions in low-sb berries and the treated clusters showed significantly lower number of green low-sb berries. on the other hand, no changes in the proportions of berries of each color in the high-sb group could be due to higher auxin levels. these results show that the timing of the ripening transition, which depends on both the auxin decrease and the aba increase in the pericarp, is influenced by the relative seed content and its possible auxin contribution to the pericarp, and that this mechanism can be uncoupled by external sources of auxins.figure  <dig> 
effect of indole-3-acetic acid  and abscisic acid  treatments on the composition of ripening classes in low and high seed-to-berry weight  groups. eight days before the expected mid-véraison, two clusters each on three different plants were treated with 50 mg/l hormone solutions in tween- <dig>  control plants were sprayed with  <dig> % tween- <dig> alone. sb ratio was calculated for each berry of the clusters at mid-véraison and the numbers of green, pink, and red berries in low- and high-sb groups were counted . approximate test for equal proportions was used to identify differences in the distribution of the ripening classes between control and treated and significant differences were marked with asterisks .



CONCLUSIONS
the influence of seeds on pericarp ripening through the transport of growth-regulating hormones has been demonstrated in tomato and strawberry. in grape, the influence of seed on berry growth has been extensively studied, but its influence on the ripening has not been elucidated. we investigated the role of seeds in the asynchronous nature of ripening among the berries of a grape cluster at the onset of ripening. berries with higher seed content enter the ripening phase  <dig> to  <dig> d later than berries with lower seed content. in addition, the linear correlation between the seed weight-to-berry weight ratio  and berry sugar levels implicates the seed in the regulation of the ripening transition. during this stage, 86% of berries with low sb are in the rapid sugar-accumulation stage and change color, whereas 78% of berries with high-sb remain green with basal sugar levels. differences in auxin and aba levels in the pericarp of low- and high-sb berry groups begin to emerge towards the end of the fruit maturation phase, at least two weeks pre-ripening, whereas auxin decreases and aba increases are delayed in high-sb berries. higher expression of auxin-inducible arf <dig> in the pericarp of high-sb berries compared to that in low-sb berries at ripening initiation suggests that arf <dig> might play a role in mediating the ripening-related auxin responses in grape berry. overall, the quantitative relationship between berry seed content and pericarp auxin levels, high auxin levels in seeds, the delaying effect of higher seed content on ripening initiation, and the transport of auxin from seed to pericarp reported in other fruit models together suggest that relative seed content is a major factor in the timing of entry of grape berries into the ripening phase, and provide an explanation for the asynchronous ripening nature of a grape cluster.

