BACKGROUND
there are almost  <dig> species and more than  <dig> cultivars in the genus rosa  <cit> . they are mostly shrubs, distributed in the temperate zones of the northern hemisphere  <cit> . one of the important rosa species is rosa damascena mill., which is commercially used for essential oil production and cultivated as garden rose  <cit> . in recent years, antioxidant, antibacterial and antimicrobial activities of r. damascena essential oil have been demonstrated  <cit> . three recent studies on molecular analyses of genetic diversity of rosa damascena mill. with rapd, aflp and ssr markers did not show any polymorphism among r. damascena plants from various plantations in turkey <cit>  and bulgaria <cit> , indicating that commercial production of essential oil is in fact done by large scale propagation of only one or very few genotypes.

r. damascena can now be found in the wild in morocco, andalusia, the middle east, and the caucasus. as damask roses were originally introduced from the middle east into western europe, it is thought that the origin and centre of diversity of damask roses can be found in this region. in iran, cultivation and consumption of damask roses has a long history. crude distillation of roses was probably developed in persia in the late 7th century a.d.  <cit> .

in order to study genetic diversity of r. damascena in iran, all relevant geographical regions of iran were sampled. some samples were taken from large production fields in the main rose oil production area in the centre of the country, but most of the samples were collected from smaller production fields and abandoned fields in remote and mountainous areas. in this way  <dig> damask rose accessions were collected from  <dig> provinces of iran. results on morphology and oil content variation suggest that this collection may include multiple genotypes  <cit> .

in this investigation, a microsatellite marker analysis of the iranian collection of r. damascena is reported. we show that we have obtained as much as nine different genotypes, of which some have been used for regional production of damask rose oil.

RESULTS
microsatellite analysis
in this study  <dig> accessions of rosa damascena  that showed a high level of phenotypic and oil content variation were analyzed with nine microsatellite markers. all markers detected polymorphisms among the samples. the number of alleles ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> with an average of  <dig>  . using the mac-pr method, we determined the allelic configurations at six loci  for all investigated accessions .

genotype identification
cluster analysis resulted in grouping of the  <dig> accessions into nine distinct genotypes . the main group consisted of  <dig> landraces that showed the same microsatellite profile. this group included all accessions from the main rose oil production sites of damask rose in iran. the pattern of this group was identical to that of an accession from bulgarian production areas. rusanov et al. showed that all bulgarian damask roses are this genotype  <cit> .

the other genotypes that we identified in the cluster analyses were present in much smaller numbers. some genotypes were unique ; others were present as two or four accessions . the unique accessions were from mountainous and remote areas in the northwest of iran where roses are cultivated on small scale. in addition, the accessions from the humid area near the caspian sea were different from all other accessions as well.

the accessions from fars province formed two distinct clusters in the dendrogram. they are from an environmentally very distinct region, far to the south of iran. one of these samples was hexaploid, while all other samples were tetraploid, as expected for r. damascena.

as expected, the absolute magnitude of genetic distances based on codominant scoring is much smaller than that of dominant scores, as more alleles are shared, but the topologies of the trees  are largely comparable for those samples that were not too genetically distant.

discussion
it seems that for commercial rose production only one and the same genotype is used in several countries. this makes it likely that also in turkey this genotype is being used for large-scale production, but this remains to be confirmed as samples from turkey were not included in the study of rusanov et al.  <cit>  nor in the present study.

except one plant, all genotypes identified here were tetraploid, consistent with the general literature. one plant was hexaploid. at this moment, we do not know whether this is the first of more hexaploid r. damascena plants. it may be misclassified, but cuttings from all plants have been evaluated by several experienced taxonomists after cultivation for 2– <dig> years in a common garden.

the genetic distances among accessions were not correlated with geographical distances among their places of origins . clearly, a larger sample of genotypes will be necessary to determine whether there is some relationship with geographical distance, whether there is isolation of populations due to barriers in gene flow, or whether different climatic conditions lead to differentiation within the species.

in mac-pr analysis we determined the allelic configuration based on six loci, because in the other three loci, not all alleles were present in plants in completely heterozygous configurations, which is necessary to be able to accurately determine the relative amplification of each allele  <cit> . genotype g_ii and g_iii differ by only one allele at locus rheo <dig>  this is surprising as genotypes in roses are usually identical  or very different   <cit> . remarkably, this small difference is confirmed in the mac-pr analysis, as no differences were found in allele frequencies at the other five loci. although this does not completely rule out that the two plants are close relatives, a mutation leading to an allele that is one repeat longer is a more likely possibility. genotype g_iii was from qom, which borders the three provinces in which genotype g_ii was found.

CONCLUSIONS
our analysis showed for the first time the existence of multiple genotypes within rosa damascena. we are currently performing an analysis of oil production across several years, in order to determine whether different genotypes also have a qualitative difference in production and/or composition of essential oil. if so, these genotypes may be used to broaden the production of rose oil, and they can also be used as the basis of a breeding program. as these nine genotypes were found after sampling only  <dig> large and small production fields, we expect that a more intensive sampling will be valuable in order to find more genetic diversity. for this, we will focus on the areas where we have found the unique genotypes, i.e., the western and northern provinces.

