BACKGROUND
the mechanisms underlying certain neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer's disease , parkinson's disease , and dementia with lewy bodies  remain poorly understood. one approach to further the understanding of such diseases is to study expression patterns of key genes in the affected tissue, human post-mortem brain. quantitative real-time pcr  is a fast, straightforward and reproducible technique which negates the need for post-pcr product handling and is increasingly becoming the method of choice for the accurate profiling of mrna levels  due to its accuracy, wide dynamic range and sensitivity  <cit> . rt qpcr enables the investigator to determine the expression levels of a given set of genes in a range of samples and is particularly useful when the sample quantity is limited  <cit> .

despite the many merits of rt qpcr, there are a number of inherent issues associated with its use, of which identification of a valid reference for data normalisation remains the most problematic  <cit> . at present, the most common method for such normalisation is the use of a single internal control reference gene – often referred to as a 'housekeeping gene'. the choice of genes regularly employed in rt qpcr for this purpose, such as β-actin, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase  and 18s rrna stems from their use in traditional non- or semi-quantitative methods such as northern blotting. however, there is strong evidence in the literature to suggest that whilst the expression of some such reference genes may be constant under certain conditions, in other conditions they may fluctuate significantly  <cit> . there have been cases in which commonly accepted reference genes, such as gapdh and β-actin, have been shown to be affected by in vitro experimental conditions  <cit> , as well as clinical conditions such as asthma, and therefore may not always be suitable for normalisation  <cit> . normalization of data using a non-validated reference gene may lead to inaccurate results and erroneous conclusions, and previous studies have reinforced the need to validate housekeeping genes prior to their use in a study  <cit> .

the 'ideal' reference gene for rt qpcr would be one whose mrna is consistently expressed at the same level in all samples under investigation, regardless of tissue type, disease state, medication or experimental conditions and would have expression levels comparable to that of the target  <cit> . however, the 'ideal' reference gene has yet to be discovered, and more than likely does not exist.

in addition to genorm, several other microsoft excel based applications, such as normfinder  <cit>  and bestkeeper  <cit> , are now available to asses the degree of variation in candidate reference genes. in genorm, rather than using a single reference gene, vandesompele et al.  <cit>  proposed the use of more than one validated reference gene for data normalization. use of two or more properly validated reference genes can provide improved resolution  <cit> , and genorm takes into account any differences in pcr reaction efficiencies, unlike earlier studies using the 2-ΔΔct method  <cit> , which assumes all efficiencies to be at, or close to, 100%. to identify appropriate reference genes for a particular tissue and disease state, it is necessary to examine expression profiles of candidate genes to identify the most stable. other studies have investigated this in post mortem brain tissue samples from individuals with other causes of death  <cit> , and there is at least one study of reference gene expression in post mortem brain tissue from individuals with neurodegenerative conditions  <cit> , but no previous investigations of post mortem brain tissue from individuals with ad, pd or dlb have used genorm to identify the most stable reference genes, to our knowledge.

the issue of rna quality is often raised in the context of gene expression analysis in human post mortem brain, as rna integrity can be affected by pre- and post mortem factors  <cit> . an objective rna integrity number  can now be determined using an agilent bioanalyser, replacing previous gel-based methods, and providing a better predictor of rna quality  <cit> . the degree of rna integrity required varies depending on the downstream rna analysis method, and needs to be determined empirically for each application. this is an active area of research, and a recent study  <cit>  analysed the influence of rna sample rin  on apparent gene expression levels and pcr efficiency, using rt qpcr. the study demonstrated that rt qpcr assay data based on short amplicons  were independent of rin. longer amplicons  were affected by rin, and for these, it was recommended that samples with a rin value of  <dig> or above were preferable  <cit> . the authors demonstrated that the impact of rna integrity on relative quantification of gene expression could be minimized by normalization using validated internal reference genes, and by correcting for pcr efficiency  <cit> .

in the present study, we examined the expression of candidate reference genes  in the cerebellum and medial temporal gyrus from individuals with ad, pd, dlb, and controls, in order to provide a set of validated reference genes for use in the study of gene expression patterns in these neurodegenerative diseases.

* 'm1' suffix denotes cdna specific assays.

the 'context sequence' is the nucleotide sequence surrounding the region to which the probe binds. the primer and probe sequences for the taqman assays are not available. detailed information for each taqman assay is freely available on 

RESULTS
rna integrity analysis
total rna preparations were analysed using an agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer . mean rin values  were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , indicating that rna degradation had occurred in some of these post mortem brain tissue samples, despite the efforts taken to minimise this . rins of repeat preparations of rna from the same tissue block showed a high degree of correlation with previous rna samples  indicating that this was a feature of the tissue, rather than the rna preparation method. we carried out some further analysis of this issue. firstly, we found no correlation between rna integrity  and disease progression, as indicated by sample braak score . in addition, we found no significant correlations between rin, and pmd or ph . we investigated whether any relationships existed between rin, and gene expression data, expressed as the normalised relative quantity  of each gene. there were no significant correlations between sample rin and q for any of the genes studied, in either cerebellum or medial temporal gyrus . this indicated that the measures taken to minimise the impact of partial rna degradation on the rt-qpcr assays  had been successful. this is in agreement with the fleige&pfaffl study, where rt qpcr assays based on amplicons of  <dig> bp and less were independent of rna quality  <cit> .

pcr efficiency
cdna was prepared from cerebellum and medial temporal gyrus of ad, pd, dlb, and matched control subjects. using 10-fold serial dilutions of pooled cdna, the pcr reaction efficiency of each gene assay, as listed in table  <dig>  was determined from the respective cdna v ct efficiency plots . the efficiency plots for each of the candidate genes were found to have r <dig> ≥  <dig> . all gene assays were found to have efficiencies ≥ 92%, with several being ≥ 99% .

ct values obtained from 10-fold serial dilutions of pooled cdna  were plotted against dilution factors. the reaction efficiency was calculated using the equation e =  <dig> where 'e' is the efficiency and 'slope' is the gradient of the best fit line.

expression data analysis
mrna levels of ubc, ywhaz, rp ii, hmbs, tbp, b2m, gapdh and sdha were determined in cerebellum and medial temporal gyrus from individuals with ad, pd, dlb and matched controls. the median, 25th and 75th percentiles, and range of ct values for each gene in each brain region across differing disease states are presented in figure  <dig>  illustrating the variation in expression levels between the different subject groups and brain regions. the standard deviation of gene-specific replicate samples was used to calculate the mean intra-run variation. the intra-run variation  for each candidate reference gene ranged from  <dig> % for ubc to  <dig> % for gapdh with a mean cv for all genes of  <dig> %.

in order to quantify the degree of variation in candidate reference gene, and hence obtain a measure of the most stably expressed genes, the genorm algorithm  <cit>  was employed to analyse the raw expression data for our candidate genes. using genorm, it was possible to carry out sequential elimination of the least stable gene in any given experimental group, thus resulting in the exclusion of all but the two most stable genes in each case. in future gene expression studies we intend to measure levels of target genes in differing neurodegenerative disease subjects compared to control subjects; therefore it was necessary to ascertain the stability of the candidate genes across panels of grouped disease and control subjects, rather than in disease-specific subjects alone. genorm analysis was performed on the gene expression data from the cerebellum and medial temporal gyrus of the following three groupings: controls and ad subjects, controls and pd subjects, and controls and dlb subjects. genorm analysis of the candidate genes in each of the above groupings, in each brain region; identified sets of genes appropriate for normalization of data in each group.

to determine the optimal number of genes required for geometric mean normalization, genorm calculates the pairwise variation  between sequential normalization factors  . a large variation indicates that the gene included at that stage has a significant effect and should therefore be included for normalization. in the original publication describing genorm  <cit>  a threshold of  <dig>  for the pairwise variation was established, below which the authors believe the inclusion of additional reference genes is not necessary; therefore we also adopted the same threshold as a cut-off for the inclusion of our references genes.

analysis of data for the medial temporal gyrus of the control and ad subjects using genorm produced a plot indicating the average expression stability of the remaining candidate reference genes in each round of the analysis , ranking the candidate genes from least stable to the two most stable genes . evaluation of the ad and control medial temporal gyrus group revealed a decrease in the pairwise variation with the inclusion of a fourth gene . although the pairwise variation at v3/ <dig>  does not cross the threshold of  <dig> , it can be seen from the increase in pairwise variation at v4/ <dig> that the addition of a fifth gene was of no benefit . therefore, for data normalisation of this subject group, it would be appropriate to use ubc, hmbs, sdha and ywhaz as reference genes .

candidate references genes were ranked in order of stability for each group, with the two most stable genes at the top and the least stable at the bottom. an * indicates the set of reference genes which should be employed for the normalization of rt qpcr data for each group as determined from analysis of the pairwise variation.

similar analysis of the medial temporal gyrus from controls and pd subjects ranked the candidate genes from the two most stable  to the least stable  . use of the pairwise variation for the determination of the optimal number of control genes to be included indicated v2/ <dig> =  <dig> , below the threshold of  <dig> . therefore, although the inclusion of a fourth gene decreases the pairwise variation to  <dig> , the use of three reference genes should be adequate for this group .

in the medial temporal gyrus of the dlb and control group, b2m and sdha were found to be the most stable, with ywhaz the least . as in the previous group, v2/ <dig> falls below the threshold of  <dig> , therefore the use of three reference genes  should be sufficient .

the stability of each of the candidate reference genes was determined in cerebellum tissue of each subject grouping , with a different rank order of the candidate reference genes being found for each group . analysis of the pairwise variation with the inclusion of each additional gene was carried out to determine the optimal number of reference genes required for each group .

a summary of the gene stability results for each subject grouping is presented in table 3a &3b, with the optimum number of genes for each  being indicated with asterisks. some similarities in the ranking of candidate gene stability were observed between the medial temporal gyrus of each disease state with the cerebellum of the same group.

the stability of the candidate reference genes was also examined across a larger grouping that combined the cerebellum and medial temporal gyrus of each subject group. when considering genes for data normalization from cerebellum and medial temporal gyrus together, of both control and ad subjects, the candidate reference genes were ranked in order of stability from the most stable to the least stable . calculation of the pairwise variation for the inclusion of each additional gene indicated five genes as the number of reference genes required to reach the threshold of  <dig>  . therefore, employing b2m, gapdh, sdha, ubc and hmbs as reference genes for data normalization would be necessary in the medial temporal gyrus and cerebellum of the control and ad subject group.

similar analysis for the control and pd grouped subjects showed a gradual decrease in pairwise variation to v6/ <dig> , although the inclusion of four genes produced a pairwise variation of  <dig> , just over the threshold, indicating that four genes may be sufficient.

analysis of the pairwise variation in dlb and control grouping demonstrated a v2/ <dig> =  <dig> ; therefore although the inclusion of a fourth gene was found to improve the pairwise variation , the use of three reference genes  for normalisation of data in this group would be adequate.

as expected, due to the increased number of samples in these analyses, the level of variation increased, and hence additional reference genes would be required for accurate data normalization. five, four and three reference genes were found to be the optimal number required for the cerebellum and medial temporal gyrus of the controls and ad subjects, controls and pd subjects, and controls and dlb subject groupings respectively .

in order to substantiate the findings from the genorm analysis, our data was also analysed using an alternative application, normfinder  <cit> . in addition to estimating the overall expression variation of the candidate reference genes, normfinder also estimates the variation between sample subgroups. the reference gene stability results generated by normfinder are presented in additional file  <dig> for comparison.

discussion
as far as we are aware, this is the first study of the expression stability of candidate reference genes in post mortem brain tissue from individuals with ad, pd, dlb, and controls using genorm analysis. this study identified groups of genes suitable for accurate normalization of rt qpcr data in the sample subsets. an overlap in the most suitable reference genes can be seen between disease states; for example, gapdh was one of the most stable genes in the cerebellum of all disease states examined. this is in agreement with the work of grunblatt et al. who found gapdh to be suitable for rt qpcr data normalisation in the substantia nigra pars compacta of parkinson's subjects  <cit> . b2m was found to be one of the most stable genes in the cerebellum for the ad, dlb  groups. however, b2m was found to be the least stable in the pd and control cerebellum. this emphasises the fact that having a gene that is stable in one disease state does not mean the same gene will be stable in a different disease.

the top two most stable genes identified by normfinder were also in the set recommended by genorm, for ad, pd, and dlb temporal cortex , and pd, and dlb cerebellum. in the ad and control cerebellum, normfinder identified ubc and sdha as the top two stable genes, whereas genorm identified ywaz, gapdh and b2m. this may indicate that expression of all these genes were stable enough to represent viable reference genes in the study.

there are a number of limitations to the present study that can be addressed in future work. one relates to the issue of rna quality, as degradation of rna can introduce error in this type of study, particularly if the extent of degradation varies between control and study groups  <cit> . this can be a particular problem in post mortem brain tissue obtained naturalistically. we attempted to maintain rna integrity by using samples that were snap frozen following a short pmd, handling tissue on dry ice to avoid freeze-thawing, and including rnase inhibitors during extraction. despite this, sample rins were not ideal in this study, but importantly, they did not differ between control and disease groups. in addition, several practices were adopted to minimise the effect which any rna degradation might have had on rt-qpcr assays. in the rt reactions, random nonomer primers were included in addition to the oligo dt primer, ensuring rt reaction priming at random sites along the rna strand, in addition to being primed from the polya tail, and minimising the possible influence of rna degradation. a recent investigation of the effect of rna integrity  indicated that while a value of  <dig> or above was desirable for rt-qpcr, rins  did not affect pcr efficiency, and did not correlate with normalised data  <cit> . the chances of an amplicon spanning a break in the rna increase dramatically with increasing size, and the importance of using short amplicons is highlighted in this study, which found that amplicons >  <dig> bp were strongly dependent on rna integrity, while shorter products  were 'independent' of rna quality  <cit> . a separate study of post mortem brain rna integrity and rt-qpcr assay data revealed an effect when data was normalised to β-actin , and no effect when using another reference gene, β-glucuronidase with a shorter amplicon   <cit> . our study used short amplicons throughout, of  <dig> bp or less. the lack of correlation observed between rin and q for any of the genes analysed in the present study, in either cerebellar or medial temporal gyrus tissue, indicates that these measures were successful.

we hypothesised that differential candidate reference gene expression may be observed in regions with different degrees of involvement in the neurodegenerative process. since the temporal cortex is one of the earliest affected areas in ad, the increased variation of gene expression in the medial temporal gyrus of the ad subjects relative to the corresponding controls might have been expected . conversely, the cerebellum is thought to be one of the least affected areas of the ad brain and one would therefore expect it to display similar properties to that of the cerebellum from control subjects. however, our data shows a slight increase in the variation of gene expression between the cerebellum of ad subjects and that of the controls. this may be an indication that, although the cerebellum appears relatively unaffected by ad, some cerebellar pathology is present as previously described in the literature  <cit> . interestingly, the observed range of expression of the genes in both the cerebellum and the medial temporal gyrus of the control subjects is generally much smaller than the range of expression of the same genes in the disease subjects. this observation again strengthens the argument for the need to validate reference genes for use in any given disease state.

CONCLUSIONS
as proposed by vandesompele et al.  <cit> , we have identified several distinct sets of genes appropriate for rt qpcr data normalization in ad, pd and dlb post mortem brain tissue. table 3a &3b indicate the appropriate reference genes from our panel for use in each disease state. this study has provided further evidence that candidate reference genes will not necessarily maintain their validity across differing brain regions or disease states, and that employing a single gene for data normalization would be inadequate.

