BACKGROUND
behavior involves the perception and processing of sensory information into a signaling cascade that mediates physiological and motor outputs. this complex process is influenced by an organism's environment, genetic make-up and nervous system function. social interactions influence an organism's behavior  <cit> , and these behavioral changes are associated with alterations in morphology  <cit>  and gene expression  <cit> . however, the mechanisms mediating the changes are unclear. as we work to understand responses to behavior at the transcript level, we can clarify the regulatory and intracellular processes governing nervous system function and behavior.

therefore, we are studying reproductive behaviors in the genetically tractable drosophila melanogaster, which exhibit stereotypical mating behaviors  regulated by genetics  and social interactions . the sex-determination gene hierarchy is the major regulator of drosophila reproduction . components of this pathway affect sexually dimorphic development, including the neural circuitries necessary for sex-specific courtship behaviors  <cit> . however, the behavioral functions of only a few of the downstream target genes of the hierarchy are known  <cit> .

although the potential for performing courtship behavior is under genetic control, experience with other individuals alters behavior, particularly in the context of courtship learning  <cit> . during courtship and mating, the male is inundated with sensory information that must be interpreted so that the appropriate signals are sent throughout the body for a successful mating. therefore, it is reasonable to expect that a more experienced male would be better at performing some aspect of courtship to improve his mating success. in support of this idea, drosophila males experienced at courting females initiate courtship toward novel, receptive females more quickly than do inexperienced males  <cit> . in a natural setting where many flies are competing for mates, rapid courtship initiation may give an experienced male a competitive advantage that increases his mating success. simply observing courtship and mating behavior of other flies is not sufficient to decrease the male's own mating latency, indicating that this learning behavior requires active participation  <cit> . it is possible that changes in courting and mated male gene expression underlie this decreased courtship latency in subsequent interactions.

by combining behavioral assays with microarray technology, it is possible to assess behaviorally-responsive gene expression changes on a genome-wide scale  <cit>  to find loci regulating or regulated by behavior, including sex-determination hierarchy target genes. prior work in our lab demonstrated that males rapidly alter gene expression at the whole-animal level during courtship  <cit> . next, we focused on changes occurring in the male head as a result of mating since these changes likely affect function of the nervous system and other reproductively important tissues to promote reproductive success. our study demonstrates that courtship culminating in mating affects gene expression patterns in male heads and that many of the gene products are expressed in non-neural adipose tissue that may play an important modulatory role in neural function and behavior.

RESULTS
mating causes expression changes in male heads
gene expression levels change rapidly as males court females  <cit> . to determine the effects of courtship culminating in mating on male gene expression, we compared transcriptional profiles of males that mated with a female to those that were not presented with a female . labeled samples from control and treatment groups were hybridized to drosophila genome  <dig>  arrays , which are based on the flybase  <dig>  annotation, targeting nearly  <dig>  transcripts.

in the current study we focused on head expression, rather than whole body expression  <cit> , to identify gene expression changes in the nervous system and other tissues within the head  that likely modulate reproduction. we isolated male heads  since accumulating evidence from our lab  as well as from other published studies  indicates that head tissues, such as the fat body surrounding the brain , likely also have important modulatory functions in behavior. to have the potential to identify gene expression changes in these tissues as well, we elected to assay the entire male head for alterations in gene expression patterns in response to mating.

we used five algorithms to extract expression values from each array and performed paired t-test comparisons between the expression values derived from mated male head arrays and control male head arrays. using this strategy we identified  <dig> mating-responsive genes . two hours after mating with a female, males significantly up regulated  <dig> genes  and down regulated  <dig> genes . such changes are not likely to be activity-dependent since control males had locomotor levels similar to males that courted females .

twenty-five genes are significantly  up regulated in male heads  <dig> hrs after mating when compared to control male heads.

average fold changes, molecular functions and biological processes are shown for  <dig> genes that are significantly  down regulated in male heads  <dig> hrs after mating.

verification of microarray results by independent qpcr
to confirm the microarray results, we performed qpcr analysis on independently collected mated and control male head rna samples. we tested a subset of genes whose expression levels changed significantly in mated male heads compared to control male heads. eight out of  <dig> up-regulated genes and  <dig> out of  <dig> down-regulated genes had the expected directional change . we did not verify up regulation of cg <dig> and fit or down regulation of cg <dig> by qpcr. however, increased fit expression in the fat body lining the brain was confirmed by in situ hybridization .

* indicates a significant  difference between the average relative expression level in control male heads and mated male heads. sem = standard error of the mean.

expression of candidate genes is not restricted to the brain
we hypothesized that examining gene expression in head tissue instead of whole bodies would uncover genes that function in reproduction by regulating nervous system signaling. this could be via direct effects on neural gene expression or by effects on other tissues in the head that receive or respond to courtship and mating signals. we found that expression of many mating-responsive genes is enriched in the head but not the brain   <cit> , indicating expression occurs outside of the brain. while some of the genes are expressed in the eye, others appear enriched in tissues other than the brain and eye.

data was compiled from flyatlas  <cit> .

one possibility is that they are expressed in an adipose tissue called the fat body that lines the head cavity surrounding the brain  and is implicated in courtship behavior modulation . data showing that mating-responsive genes enriched in the head are also enriched in the adult fat body   <cit>  support this hypothesis. in situ hybridization confirmed that several mating-responsive loci , prx2540- <dig>  cg <dig> and cg4825) are expressed in male fat body tissue .

flyatlas data indicate that the fat-expressed genes cg <dig>  bgm, and prx2540- <dig> are expressed at very low levels in brains, while cg <dig> and cg <dig> are expressed at low to moderate levels in the brain  <cit> . by in situ we did not detect brain expression of these five transcripts , although we cannot rule out the possibility that low levels of message are present.

to test the hypothesis that mating-induced changes in gene expression occur in the fat body, we compared fit expression in the heads of mated and control heads. fit expression increased in the adipose tissue surrounding the male brain after courtship culminating in mating .

juvenile hormone esterases are important for male reproductive behaviors
we hypothesized that if a gene is up regulated after mating, that gene likely affects some aspect of reproductive behavior. therefore, we assayed the percentage of time a male spent courting a female, known as the courtship index , of candidate mating-responsive gene mutants. a jhe p-element insertion, jhee <dig>  resulted in significantly reduced ci values in homozygous mutant males compared to heterozygous or wild-type controls . heterozygous males showed similar courtship activity compared to wild-type males, ruling out heterozygous effects on ci levels. though jhe males court females less vigorously, they perform standard courtship steps, eventually culminating in copulation.

in addition to jhe there are three other candidate juvenile hormone esterase genes in the drosophila genome  <cit> . one of the genes, cricklet , also had an available p-element insertion, so we tested cltbg <dig> mutants to see if they had a similar phenotype to jhe mutants. we found that clt mutants also have decreased cis relative to controls . there is also a strong genetic interaction between jhe and clt. transheterozygous mutant males had significantly reduced courtship compared to controls .

we predicted that mating-responsive loci would function to prime the male for subsequent mating encounters by regulating courtship or mating latency and duration. therefore, we predicted that decreasing jhe, which was up regulated in mated male heads, would increase courtship or mating latency. to test this hypothesis we examined the courtship and mating kinetics of mutants for jhe and the related esterase clt. courtship latency  did not differ among mutants and controls. though jhe and clt males mated with females, they had a significant  increase in mating latency  , while mating duration was unaffected. the increased mating latency was not dependent on the mating trial . however, as we increased the number of mating attempts, the mating success  of jhe and clt mutant males was significantly reduced   compared to heterozygous controls. since we ruled out a heterozygous effect on ci values we did not test for heterozygous effects on mating latency or mating success. females mated to jhe or clt mutant males laid equivalent numbers of eggs regardless of the mating trial and day of egg laying , and neither jhe nor clt mutant females had detectable fertility defects.

CONCLUSIONS
changes in gene expression upon mating
the complex reproductive behaviors exhibited by drosophila require the interaction between genetics and environment. courtship is an innate and stereotypical process under control of the somatic sex-determination hierarchy and is influenced by social interactions. courtship and mating elicit gene expression changes in females  <cit> , and courtship affects transcript profiles in males  <cit> . the female post-mating effects occur rapidly  or can be detected several hours after mating  <cit> . within  <dig> min of courtship, whole-male gene expression profiles also change rapidly  <cit> . in this study we expanded on our earlier studies in whole males to show that courtship culminating in mating causes changes in gene expression in the male head as well. expression levels likely change rapidly in response to sensory cues received during courtship, while the physiological changes from mating  <cit>  may mediate long-term expression level changes in the nervous system or elsewhere in the fly that can feed back to the nervous system.

the expression profile of a  <dig> min courting male differs from that of a  <dig> hr post-mating male. this is not surprising since we expected that the process of mating would have major effects on male physiology that would be reflected in altered transcriptional profiles. of the  <dig> genes with altered expression  <dig> hrs after mating , only  <dig> gene, fit, is also up regulated in males after  <dig> min of courtship  <cit> . cg <dig> is up regulated  <dig> hrs after mating but is down regulated during  <dig> min of courtship  <cit> . cg <dig> is one of several fat body-expressed immune response genes down regulated during courtship, possibly to allow energetic resources to be directed toward offspring production rather than immunity  <cit> . after mating, expression of cg <dig> may increase because contact with a female increases the likelihood of encountering a pathogen.

the fact that few genes overlap between these data sets is not surprising since we assayed different time points , different tissues  and different behaviors . we also used different approaches for analyzing the data due to the differences in experimental design for each test. the analysis strategies provide us a conservative estimate of the transcripts affected by courtship and mating.

we predict that some mating-responsive genes facilitate an increased male mating efficiency for future encounters. little is known about how repeated matings affect male mating latency, duration or fecundity. after his first mating, the male may perceive and process female stimuli more rapidly, may be more appealing to the female, or may be physiologically primed for subsequent matings by replenishment of acps, sperm or other seminal proteins, resulting in decreased courtship or mating latencies. alterations in gene expression, such as those described here and in our earlier work  <cit> , may contribute to these expected behavioral and physiological changes.

gene expression in adipose tissue
the fat body is a secretory tissue  whose effects on fly reproductive behavior have previously been described . the majority of mating-responsive genes are expressed in adult adipose tissue  , and we analyzed a subset of six up-regulated genes to show that they are expressed in adipose tissue surrounding the brain . furthermore, we observed increased expression of fit in male adipose tissue after courtship followed by mating . fit also is expressed in the head fat of females and originally was named based upon its high expression in females under the control of sex-lethal  <cit> , which is the initial regulatory gene in the somatic sex-determination hierarchy.

other studies also indicated that several mating-responsive genes identified in our study are expressed in the fat body surrounding the brain. larval serum protein  <dig>  is expressed in the head fat of both sexes  <cit> . of the  <dig> genes up regulated by courtship and mating,  <dig> are detectable  in brain and  <dig> genes are detectable in fat body based upon a microarray analysis of adult mrna expression levels  <cit> . of these  <dig> up regulated genes,  <dig> are enriched in the fat body relative to other adult tissues .

taken together, these results imply that the brain is not the only tissue responding to or regulating post-mating behavior, but that adipose tissue plays a role in this process as well. in response to mating, a signaling cascade initiated by neurosecretory cells may transmit the signal to the surrounding fat body. the fat body then could perpetuate the signal by secreting factors that influence neuronal or non-neuronal tissues. we hypothesize that expression level changes in the brain alter neuronal signaling either directly or indirectly, which impacts the processing of sensory cues and targets other reproductively important tissues.

juvenile hormone esterases and male reproductive behavior
another mating-responsive gene, jhe, is also expressed in adipose tissue  <cit>  and functions in reproductive behavior . jhe and three closely related esterase genes  have juvenile hormone esterase  activity in vitro. jhes together with juvenile hormone epoxide hydrolases hydrolyze juvenile hormone  to regulate jh levels  <cit> . since jhe expression is positively regulated by jh  <cit> , the mating-induced increase in jhe expression identified in our study may be jh dependent.

much of our understanding of physiological functions of jh comes from studies investigating its function during development . however, jh also has important post-developmental functions such as promoting accessory gland protein  synthesis  <cit> . during mating acps are transferred, along with sperm, to the female  <cit> , and the transfer of acps triggers male synthesis of new acps  <cit> . males also transfer sex-peptide to the female during mating  <cit> . sex-peptide increases jh levels in females  <cit> , which stimulates egg development  <cit> . however, possible mating-induced changes in male jh levels have not been evaluated. since ejaculate components must be replenished after mating, we hypothesize that male jh levels increase after mating to stimulate acp synthesis. the increase in jh would up regulate jhe expression which would, in turn, reduce jh levels once the ejaculate components have been replenished.

jh also has a role in modulating behavior since males with reduced jh court females less intensely  <cit> , our data suggest that an increase in jh, caused by reduction of jhe or clt, may also disrupt courtship . jhe and clt deficient males, which likely have increased levels of jh, court less vigorously , have increased mating latencies , and have reduced mating success . this situation exemplifies the complex regulation governing behavior and implies that jh levels must be tightly regulated in order to ensure appropriate behavioral and physiological responses.

gene expression in the brain
although we are particularly interested in the large number of fat-expressed genes that were identified in this and earlier screens  <cit> , we also note that several of the identified transcripts are expressed in brains as would be expected for genes that function in behavior. proper function of the nervous system relies on the appropriate cellular architecture, connections and signaling. behavior requires the sensory systems to perceive the information accurately and transmit such information to the brain for processing. the brain can then transmit the signal to the appropriate output pathways which can modify signaling in tissues such as the fat body or the brain itself. therefore the establishment and maintenance of the brain  is vital to the organism's ability to respond to its environment and experiences. it is possible that mating-responsive genes act in the development or maintenance of a mated male brain as opposed to a naïve male brain.

thirteen of the  <dig> fat-expressed genes up regulated in mated males are also expressed in brains at detectable levels  <cit> ; a single transcript, cg <dig> is detected in brains but not fat  <cit> . none of these genes have known function in behavior, but their reported mutant phenotypes or molecular functions indicate that several of the loci may have important neural maintenance functions.

for example, mutants for bgm, an enzyme involved in fatty acid metabolism that is expressed in both the brain and fat, have a neurodegeneration phenotype in response to accumulation of long chain fatty acids  <cit> . another gene that potentially functions in a neurodegeneration pathway is phosphatidyl-serine synthase, which responds to changes in polygluatmate  levels  <cit> . polyq diseases, including huntington's disease, are adult on-set progressive neural degeneration diseases caused by the accumulation of glutamate repeats  <cit> .

cellular homeostasis is important in the maintenance and function of the drosophila brain. one gene that helps maintain this homeostasis is iron regulatory protein 1b  which encodes a protein that binds to iron-responsive elements  to regulate iron metabolism  <cit> . in addition to affecting cell survival and homeostasis, neural morphology might also be regulated by mating-responsive candidates. mutants of pabp <dig> show pathfinding and targeting defects in the larval neuromuscular junction  <cit> .

mating-responsive genes and the sex-determination hierarchy
this genome-wide analysis identified known sex-determination hierarchy target genes such as fit. three other mating-responsive genes   are also regulated by the sex-determination hierarchy  <cit> . transcriptional profiling of mutants for a variety of sex-determination hierarchy genes indicates that prx2540- <dig> and cg <dig> are regulated by fruitless , while fit is downstream of transformer . cg <dig> may also function downstream of tra  <cit> .

the splicing factor squid  is up regulated in mated male heads . interestingly, primary transcripts of the sqd locus are sex-specifically spliced in the head as well as the germline, although it is not known if sqd splicing is regulated by the sex-determination hierarchy  <cit> . it is possible that sqd and other mating-responsive loci function as downstream targets of the sex-determination hierarchy to regulate morphological and behavioral differences between male and female drosophila. alternatively, there may be other pathways  that function together with the sex-determination hierarchy to regulate reproductive behavior.

we predict that mating-responsive genes also function in other aspects of reproduction and behavior; therefore, we propose this genome-wide approach as a powerful tool for determining the genetic pathways and intracellular processes regulating reproduction, both at the behavioral and physiological levels.

