BACKGROUND
plasmodium falciparum, the aetiological agent of the most severe form of human malaria, imposes a significant health and socioeconomic impact on those regions of the world where this parasite is endemic  <cit> . this malarial parasite has a lifecycle that alternates between a human host and mosquito vector, requiring multiple morphological and biological adaptations to successfully invade, colonise and divide within diverse cellular environments. progression of parasites through this complex life cycle and the manifestation of virulence within the human host are both tightly linked to the temporal and spatial control of gene expression  <cit> . over recent years we have garnered a greater appreciation of the interplay between the molecular mechanisms operating at the genetic and epigenetic levels in regulating developmentally-linked gene expression  <cit> . these insights have been provided by global analyses of the temporal programme of steady-state transcript accumulation  <cit> , mrna stability and rna polymerase ii complex activity  <cit> . yet despite these advances, and with access to a fully-annotated genome  <cit> , we know relatively little regarding the fundamental organisation of the transcriptional unit in this important pathogen. this bottleneck arises from the extreme at nucleotide bias in the intergenic regions . here at content typically exceeds 80-90%, imposing significant challenges for amplifying, cloning and sequencing of these regions as well as the application of bioinformatics tools . thus, we understand very little regarding the nature of the transcriptional unit outside of the open reading frame .

determining the coordinates of the transcriptional start and stop sites is important. sequences adjacent to transcriptional start sites likely comprise the cis-acting elements to which the regulatory and basal components of the rna polymerase ii complex bind. moreover, these coordinates identify sequences in the 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions  of the transcript. these utr similarly contain cis-acting sequences that direct translational efficiency, mrna capping and stability. knowing the number and position of transcription start sites in p. falciparum is potentially important as it may provide key clues to the different molecular mechanisms employed in the control of transcription. for example, is there a generally relaxed transcriptional activation process that relies on molecular mechanisms downstream to regulate temporal patterns of steady-state transcript accumulation? this model is certainly supported by recent reports of a global programme of temporal mrna stability during intraerythrocytic development  <cit> . or, does the parasite utilise a single predominant transcription start site that employs specific cis–trans interactions over a core promoter to drive temporal expression? this was not previously a favoured model given the apparent paucity of specific transcription factors in the parasite’s genome  <cit> , but it has recently regained support following the identification and characterisation of an expanded family of novel specific transcription factors  in apicomplexan parasites  <cit> . a combination of both models is likely at play – but resolving the issue of where these key transcriptional coordinates are located is essential.

studies on the size and organization of igr in fungal species, which share a similarly compact genome as p. falciparum, suggest that transcriptional and rna processing cis-acting regulatory sequences leave a “footprint” on the igr  <cit> . igr that contain divergent transcripts, i.e. the flanking open reading frames  are orientated in a head-to-head fashion , are larger than those igr with convergent transcriptional units where the flanking orf are organised tail-to-tail. these studies indicate that gene spacing is not random, but is instead organised to facilitate the spatial arrangement of transcriptional units, and also that 5′ utr are larger than 3′ utr. a provisional analysis of igr spaces from the incomplete chromosome  <dig> of p. falciparum indicates the same gene spacing patterning is present  <cit> . however, to date, no studies have addressed the spatial and temporal organisation of transcripts over these igr.

as indicated above, there is a critical lack of data concerning the p. falciparum transcriptional unit outside of the orf. expressed sequence tag  data from 3′ rapid amplification of cdna ends  and rna ligase mediated race  provide some coverage. for example, rlm-race provides transcription start data for  <dig> orf  and is available through the full-malaria database   <cit> . these data indicate that p. falciparum transcriptional start sites are generally located at multiple loci, often spread over several hundred basepairs, some 150-450 bp upstream of the orf. in addition to these genomic approaches, there are also a number of single-gene studies that provide transcript size data from northern blots . whilst many of these studies do not report the physical mapping of transcriptional start and stop sites, they do generally indicate two features of the p. falciparum transcript that seem at odds with the available est data. first, transcripts are typically much larger than the orf, suggesting a significant fraction of a transcript is untranslated. second, one or two major transcripts are most often observed, which would suggest either that only one or two major transcription start sites exist, or that if many transcription start sites are utilised then these are either very close together or else only one or two give rise to a major stable transcript. assays of promoter structure that are complemented with physical mapping of the transcription start site suggest that transcripts initiate at one, or at two closely located, transcription start sites and that these extend between 400-1900 bp upstream of the orf  <cit> . despite what appears to be a disparity between the size of utr predicted from est and northern blot studies, no systematic comparison of these data has been carried out to date to explore this difference.

we describe here a study that explores the size and organisation of igr in p. falciparum and correlates this with utr data available from northern blots and est databases. our findings suggest that p. falciparum transcripts have a large utr which appears preferentially apportioned to the 5′ end of the orf. as this would suggest that significant amounts of the igr that flank orf are included in transcripts, we explore how transcriptional units are spatially and temporally organised over these igr. further, by showing a similar igr arrangement in other apicomplexan parasites important for human and animal health, we suggest that our findings may impact more widely in understanding the molecular control of transcription across this phylum.

RESULTS
the size of igr is related to the transcriptional activity that occurs within that space
the sizes of all  <dig> igr in p. falciparum  were determined and categorised into one of three groups  to reflect the nature of transcriptional activity that occurs over them . group a igr contain two divergent transcripts, orientated towards the flanking head-to-head orf and thus contain two promoters . group b igr contain two tandem arrayed transcripts over the head-to-tail flanking orf with one promoter  and one terminator . the remaining type c igr contain two convergent transcripts over the flanking tail-to-tail orf and two terminators . there are  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> of types a, b and c igr, respectively, which gives a relative ratio of 1: <dig> : <dig> , close to the expected 1:2: <dig> ratio expected from the known organization of p. falciparum genes into monocistronic transcriptional units  <cit> . the sizes of igr in the three groups are significantly different  showing the relationship a > b > c  as a  <dig> :2: <dig> ratio. thus, igr size in p. falciparum clearly correlates with the orientation of transcriptional units arrayed over them with 5′ flanking igr generally larger than 3′ flanking igr.

 <dig> type c igr is always defined as  <dig> . 2% change compared to data from igr in all genome.

p. falciparum chromosomes are typically divided into subtelomeric and chromosome-internal domains; reflecting their differing heterochromatic environment, multigene family composition, sub-nuclear organization and length plasticity  <cit> . whilst we know there is a reduced gene density within subtelomeric regions, whether this is reflected in differences in the size and orientation of igr is not known. we determined the  <dig> breakpoints between the subtelomeric/chromosome-internal regions for the  <dig> chromosomes of p. falciparum  based on the loss of synteny with the related plasmodium spp. p. knowlesi and p. vivax.  <dig> igr  were defined as falling within the subtelomeric region. the ratio of types a, b and c igr in the subtelomeric region is approximately 1:3: <dig>  , reflecting the known bias for head-to-tail orientation of the numerous members of the rifin multi-gene family present in this region  <cit> . subtelomeric igr, however, were all significantly larger  than those in the chromosome internal regions . this increase in size was not equitable across the different classes of igr , resulting in an alteration of the a:b:c igr spacing ratio from approximately 3:2: <dig> to  <dig> : <dig> : <dig> 

a preliminary analysis on the sizes of igr from chromosome  <dig> of p. falciparum reported that a > b > c and that they show a relative 3: <dig> : <dig> size ratio; close to that reported here  for the entire genome  <cit> . this study also describes an analysis of the partial genome of the similarly at-rich organism dictyostelium discoideum, and concluded that a 3:2: <dig> length ratio for igr types a, b and c appears to be broadly true across moderately compact genomes . we extended this preliminary analysis to encompass the entire genomes of d. discoideum, the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae, and ten additional apicomplexan parasites  that exhibit a range of at content and genome density  to determine whether this orientation-specific effect on igr length held true on wider investigation.

1at content of the whole genome.  <dig> in all ratios, the value for type c igr is taken as  <dig>   <dig> anova test with significant difference  between different igr determined using dunn’s multiple comparison post-test.

all types of igr show a range of median sizes across the  <dig> organisms investigated . for all organisms where a> b > c, and all comparisons were significant , an apparent 3:2: <dig> relationship is maintained in these moderately compact genomes  irrespective of the at content of their genomes. interestingly, only the two coccidian parasites, toxoplasma gondii and neospora caninum, do not share this same relationship, where instead a = b > c, and gene density is greatly reduced . whilst no apparent relationship exists between the median sizes of the different types of igr and the at content , there is, as expected, a strong relationship  with the genome density, i.e. more compact genomes have proportionally smaller igr .

p. falciparum transcripts contain a long utr that is preferentially apportioned to the 5′ end of the orf
to better understand the relationship between orf and transcript size in p. falciparum, we collected a cohort of northern blot data from  <dig> orf. of these,  <dig> were gathered during a review of the published literature with the remaining  <dig> from northern blots carried out for this and other studies in our laboratory . the size of the predicted utr from these  <dig> transcripts revealed a diverse distribution between  <dig> and  <dig> bases . there was insufficient data to demonstrate a normal distribution, although there is clearly an evolving pattern of mono-modal distribution with 72% of all utr sizes falling between 800– <dig> bases. comparing utr size against the size of their respective orf reveals no significant correlation . given the apparent restricted distribution of the majority of utr size, it was not surprising to find a strong correlation between the sizes of the orf and the whole transcript , with a slope close to one  and a y-intercept of 1444 ±  <dig> bases . sorting of the northern blot data according to a range of criteria relating to its source, the organisation of the orf  and the morphological stage in which the peak of steady-state transcription occurs reveals no significant differences between the correlation, slope and y-intercept when comparing transcript against orf size .

of these  <dig> genes, both 5′ and 3′ est data are available for  <dig> . the most distal 5′ and 3′ est coordinates were secured and used together to predict a maximal utr size. the distribution of sizes of these utr was more restricted  than those predicted from northern blots. notably, the sizes of the utr from est data were always smaller  and the lack of correlation  with utr sizes predicted from northern blots suggests there is unlikely to be a systematic basis to the discrepancy in size determined from the two techniques employed.

comparison of the 5′ and 3′ est utr data revealed a bias in apportionment to the 5′ utr . however, given the discrepancy between the northern blot and est utr data, some caution must be applied to this provisional analysis. in order to better refine utr apportionment, we triaged the 3′ est sequence data  to identify those that contained a consensus canonical polyadenylation site motif that p. falciparum shares with other eukaryotes  <cit> . of the  <dig> 3′ est available,  <dig> were identified with the remainder generally appearing to result from mis-priming of 3′ race from homopolymeric adenosine tracts commonly found in these at-rich igr. taking the size of these 3′ utr  as a proportion of the total utr available from northern blots provides a more discreet set of apportionment data  with a median 5′ utr apportionment of  <dig> % .

modelling spatial transcript organisation over igr
our data would suggest that transcripts extend further into igr than has currently been predicted from est and rnaseq studies. in order to explore the spatial arrangement of transcripts in the igr flanking each orf, in the absence of extensive mrna coverage data, we developed a modelling approach. the aims of the modelling were to;  extend the evidence base for the apparent preferential 5′ utr apportionment and  explore whether transcriptional units are discrete non-overlapping entities or whether they likely overlap given the apparent large size of utr in the relatively compact p. falciparum genome. the modelling was performed by incrementally apportioning utr  of varying size over the igr available around each orf in the genome. for each orf, length of utr and % apportionment, a binary pass/fail was recorded – with the mean fail rate across all orf plotted against transcript apportionment. two scenarios were explored. the first, scenario a, considers the transcript organisation over an orf independent of transcripts organised over adjacent orf . thus, the utr to be apportioned need only fit in the total igr surrounding the orf in question, and the tested apportionment is considered to fail only when the transcript overlaps with an adjacent orf. this model therefore assumes that transcripts initiate and terminate solely within igr. this was regarded as the least constrained scenario as it does not consider the nature of the adjacent transcriptional units. a second, more constrained, scenario b  explores the potential for more than one transcript arrayed over an igr; here a fail occurs when the utr apportioned over the orf in question overlaps with a similarly apportioned transcript over either adjacent orf. this model therefore tests the assumption that transcripts arrayed over an igr exist as similarly-apportioned non-overlapping entities.

modelling of both scenarios utilised a range of fixed length utr between  <dig>  and  <dig>  kb in 200 bp increments, reflecting the distribution of the majority of utr determined above. modelling of scenario a essentially describes a series of similarly shaped curves that show the expected inverse relationship between minimum fail rate  and length of utr . for all utr lengths investigated, the best-fit was achieved when 70-80% of the utr is apportioned to the 5′ end, correlating well with the triaged est utr data described above . similarly, using the more constrained scenario b, for all utr lengths investigated the best-fit is achieved when the majority of utr is apportioned to the 5′ end, although here there is a slight increase to a 75-85% 5′ apportionment . the key difference between the two scenarios is the significant increase in fail rates obtained, irrespective of the length of utr modelled, when attempting to fit two non-overlapping transcripts over the igr space available. minimum fail rates that range between  <dig>  and  <dig> % in scenario a increase dramatically to between  <dig>  and  <dig> % in scenario b . our modelling suggests that the assumption that transcripts are arrayed over an igr as non-overlapping entities is incorrect. moreover, the high fail rates in scenario a suggest that the second assumption that transcriptional start and stop sites are solely located within igr may similarly not be true. however, it is worth noting these are mean fail rates and the data can be granulated accordingly to determine the effects of different possible orientations of types of flanking sequence around an orf. as expected, orf with large amounts of flanking sequence  have lower fail rates, with the corresponding opposite effect where less flanking sequence  is available . whilst the potential for smaller transcripts apportioned over orf with smaller igr spaces around them is possible – examination of the utr size for the different orientations of the  <dig> genes in the northern blot cohort data revealed no significant difference on this basis .

temporal organisation of transcription over igr during the intraerythrocytic development cycle
our modelling suggests that there is likely a significant programme of transcriptional overlap within igr. the premise that two transcripts are necessarily synthesised simultaneously over both template strands of an igr, however, may not generally occur given the extensive programme of stage-specific transcription that occurs during the parasite’s progression through its complex life cycle  <cit> . we therefore explored the potential for co-spatial and co-temporal transcription over the igr that flank the  <dig> orf that are transcribed during the intraerythrocytic development cycle . comprehensive stage-specific transcriptomic datasets are available and provide an opportunity to define peak transcript accumulation to defined temporal windows of the 46-48 hr idc  <cit> . we adopted the organisation of these  <dig> orf into four clusters described by jurgelenaite and colleagues  <cit> . each cluster represents a group of temporally co-transcribed genes, with peaks of steady state transcript levels in the following morphologically distinguishable intraerythrocytic developmental stages  early ring,  late ring and early trophozoite,  trophozoite and schizont, and  schizont only stages. of the total of  <dig> igr, only  <dig>  shared transcripts from both flanking orf within the same window of peak temporal transcription during the idc. specifically, these were;  <dig> type a ,  <dig> type b  and  <dig> type c , with type a igr appearing slightly overrepresented in this analysis. comparison of the median sizes of these co-transcribed igr still show that the a > b > c relationship holds true . however, whilst the sizes of types b and c cotranscribed igrs are not significantly different from those in the whole genome, those of cotranscribed type a igr are significantly smaller . we note that whilst a total of  <dig> % of spatially overlapping transcripts in p. falciparum is similar to that determined in s. cerevisiae and other eukaryotes, this value is probably an overestimate given the relatively broad windows of time used to define co-temporal transcription  in this analysis.

discussion
this study set out to address a fundamental gap in our understanding of the p. falciparum transcriptional unit outside of the orf. specifically, we examined the size and apportionment of the utr as well as the spatial and temporal organization of the transcriptional units within the igr that flank these orf. in terms of the size and apportionment of utr, our data would indicate;  that utr are long, typically some 800– <dig> bases,  that the size of the utr is independent of the size of the coding sequence and  that 70-80% of the utr is preferentially apportioned 5′ of the orf. this would indicate that transcriptional start and stop sites lay between 600-1350 bp and 200-450 bp either side of the orf. apart from lengthening our current understanding of the extent of the transcriptional landscape in p. falciparum, these more distal transcriptional coordinates have implications for our search and validation of regulatory cis-acting regions. in silico searches for sequence motifs enriched in the flanking regions of functionally related and/or cotranscribed genes typically use 1kbp of flanking sequence  <cit> . whilst this would seem suitable for searching downstream of an orf, it is perhaps not sufficient to identify all potential 5′ positioned regulatory elements. that said, a scanace analysis of at least 2kbp of flanking sequence has provided an extensive catalogue of putative apiap <dig> transcription factor binding sites  <cit> . testing of these putative sites will require functional analyses of promoter activity. our data regarding the extent of utr coverage, as well as the significant chance of transcript overlap, provides insights that may help guide selection of sites more likely to be trans-acting factor binding sites to be tested in these studies.

of note was the discrepancy between the sizes of utr predicted from northern blot and est data; with those predicted from est data invariably being shorter. this discrepancy is unlikely to result from a selection bias in the cohort of  <dig> genes used in this study as the mean size of all 5′ utr from the est data for these genes  is very similar to that published for  <dig> genes for which 5′ est data is available   <cit> . more likely, bias introduced into the est data by;  reduced processivity of reverse transcriptase over at rich sequences,  partial rnaseh activity in early generation enzymes and  the use of oligo for first strand cdna synthesis in some est datasets, are all at play. northern blot data are similarly prone to systematic error as often these are “guestimates” based on the use of a limited set of size standards during electrophoretic size fractionation. we also recognise the limitations arising from analysis of  <dig> genes by northern blot analysis . this study does, however, represent the most complete meta-analysis of northern blot data in p. falciparum to date.

assuming a range of utr between  <dig> and  <dig> bases would indicate that 40-90% of all igr space in the relatively compact genome of p. falciparum is included in at least one transcript. since it would appear likely that there is significant transcriptional unit overlap, the actual extent of this transcriptional landscape over the genome would be reduced, although our data would suggest it is still considerably more than previously predicted from the available rnaseq and est coverage. why these utr are so large in p. falciparum is intriguing. the size of the utr, in part, would require that it is long enough to contain the cis-regulatory elements necessary for rna metabolism. whilst we know relatively little about these, the high level of selective constraint throughout intergenic regions in p. falciparum provides evidence of an evolutionary “footprint” for these non-coding elements  <cit> . selective constraint is slightly, although not significantly, higher in proximal intergenic regions  <cit> , i.e. regions more likely encoded in the utr. in itself, however, the presence of these cis-regulatory elements doesn’t provide an explanation for the length of the utr. the extreme at bias of these igr, however, may provide some explanation for this phenomenon. like p. falciparum, transcripts in d. discoidium have long utr with a median length of 724 bp for the  <dig> 5′ utr sequences deposited in dictybase. both organisms share a highly biased at-rich genome, effectively resulting in a binary nucleotide code within the igr. this reduction in information content may necessarily lead to an expansion of sequences necessary to encode/utilise regulatory information, although this is perhaps an oversimplified interpretation of the observation. critically, the genomes of both organisms show evidence of extensive overrepresentation of homopolymeric poly.poly tracks  <cit> , and these tracts are more highly overrepresented within the igr . thus, a requirement to maintain non-coding cis-regulatory elements embedded within flexible poly. tracts that are prone to expansion could account for the increased length of utr in p. falciparum. this proposal would suggest that some regions within the utr are less essential than others - an observation borne out by our own  and other studies that have determined the effect on reporter gene expression following deletion of utr sequences  <cit> . deletions of several hundred bases of the proximal 5′utr appear to have a minimal effect on the absolute and temporal expression of the reporter gene, suggesting some plasticity in the size of the p. falciparum transcript.

our analysis of igr organisation in p. falciparum would indicate;  that the observed 1: <dig> : <dig> relationship for igr types a, b and c, respectively, is close to the predicted 1:2: <dig> ratio expected of independently-organised monocistronic transcriptional units and  that igr size directly correlates with the nature of the transcriptional activity that occur over them with a ratio of  <dig> : <dig> : <dig>  szafranski et al., using partial genome sequence from s. cerevisiae, d. discoidium, a. thaliana and p. falciparum, reported a provisional investigation of features of at-rich organisms that may assist in genome annotation  <cit> . in doing so, they predicted that relatively compact genomes would share a 3:2: <dig> gene spacing rule for igr types a, b and c. their study couldn’t correlate this 3:2: <dig> rule to at content due to the limited diversity of organisms investigated. here we have extended this analysis of igr to encompass the entire genomes of  <dig> organisms, exhibiting a range of at content and genome density, albeit with a focus on other apicomplexan parasites. in this larger study, we confirm that igr size does not correlate with at content, whereas we do find, perhaps not unexpectedly, that igr size does correlate with the overall genome density, with a close linear relationship  for genome densities between  <dig> - <dig>  kb/orf. this correlation, although weaker does extend out to the  <dig>  kb/orf gene density found in t. gondii, although here the 3:2: <dig> gene spacing rule apparently collapses to an approximate  <dig> : <dig> : <dig> ratio. a novel finding in this study, however, was the differing spatial arrangement of igr size within different chromosomal compartments in p. falciparum, where igr lengths, irrespective of their type, are longer in subtelomeric regions. multigene families that encode proteins likely to mediate interactions with the host environment are preferentially located in this compartment and are best exemplified by the var family that encodes the p. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein   <cit> . pfemp <dig> are exposed on the surface of infected erythrocytes where they mediate adhesion to host cell surface ligands and, through clonal variation of the pfemp <dig> expressed, help to establish a chronic infection in the face of a human immune response mounted against infected erythrocytes. we would speculate that this immune response may act a balancing selection pressure to that operating in the chromosomal internal compartment to reduce gene density through reduction in igr size  <cit> . repetitive sequence elements within the longer igr in subtelomeric regions may assist in the organisation of chromosome ends at the nuclear periphery, a necessary factor in the epigenetic regulation of clonal expression, or may promote recombination to drive the generation of antigenic diversity in these multigene families.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our data provides a theoretical framework for the spatial and temporal organisation of transcripts over the igr, data that are not available from current microarray, est and rnaseq analyses. with the potential for the next generation of directional rnaseq data to extend cdna coverage into the igr, we propose here a series of testable hypotheses that result from our theoretical framework. specifically, we would predict;  utr are typically between  <dig> and 1800 bp in size,  70-80% of utr are preferentially organised to the 5’ of the transcript,  40-90% of the igr sequences are transcribed, resulting in 70-80% of the entire genome organised within a transcript,  that whilst utr do not temporally overlap, a significant proportion will spatially overlap and  that a small number  of bidirectional promoters exist. in addition, our findings suggest that how we think about the transcriptional landscape across the p. falciparum genome should be revised to a view that is more dynamic in terms of direction, timing and extent of coverage of transcription over the genomic template. these insights should impact on how we design studies to define and characterise functional elements that govern processes such as developmentally-linked gene expression and monoallelic expression of virulence-linked multigene families. finally, since we show the organisation of igr in related apicomplexans appears to follow the same spatial rules, aspects of this work may translate more widely across this group of parasites important to human and veterinary health.

