BACKGROUND
the wetland species, cladium mariscus ssp. jamaicense  pohl  k. kenth  and typha domingensis pers.  are both native to the florida everglades and occupy similar habitats  <cit> . cladium was the dominant plant species in the historical freshwater everglades, whereas typha was a minor species occurring in small and scattered patches throughout the everglades  <cit> . however, during the past decades typha has expanded rapidly and replaced thousands of hectares of cladium marshes and aquatic slough areas in the northern part of the everglades  <cit> . numerous studies have been conducted to assess the causes and the consequences of this change in vegetation and community structure  <cit> , and the driving force for the change appears to be nutrient enrichment, particularly phosphorus , from agricultural runoff and lake okeechobee outflow  <cit> .

cladium and typha are both large, clonal species that can form monospecific communities in freshwater habitats. the two species differ, however, in morphology, growth, and life history characteristics  <cit> . cladium exhibits many characteristics of adaptation to infertile environments, such as slow growth rate, long leaf longevity, low capacity for nutrient uptake, low leaf nutrient concentrations and a relatively inflexible partitioning of biomass in response to increased nutrient availability  <cit> . typha, on the other hand, has traits of an opportunistic species from nutrient-rich habitats with high growth rates, short leaf longevity, high capacity for nutrient uptake, high leaf nutrient concentrations and flexible biomass partitioning  <cit> . both species are adapted to grow in waterlogged soils by virtue of a well-developed aerenchyma system, but convective gas flow has been documented only in typha and not in cladium  <cit> . furthermore, cladium has lower root porosity and generally higher alcoholic fermentation rates, indicating lower capacity for root aeration than typha  <cit> . these inherently different traits are considered the main explanation for the rapid spread and competitive success of typha in the p-enriched areas of the florida everglades.

cladium and typha also co-exist in the oligotrophic areas of the florida everglades where p availability is extremely low. in the interior of water conservation area 2a, an impounded area in the northern everglades, cladium and typha grow together despite soluble p concentrations of less than  <dig> μg l- <dig> in the porewaters throughout the soil profile  <cit> . typha is much less abundant than cladium and has slow growth rates in these areas  <cit> , and although nutrient enrichment and disturbance around alligator holes have been suggested to favour the proliferation of typha locally  <cit> , the traits that allow the growth of a high resource-adapted plant like typha in this low p environment are not understood.

studies at high p availability have demonstrated that typha has a greater relative growth rate, a greater allocation of biomass to leaves, and a lower p-use efficiency than cladium  <cit> . in fertile habitats, a high nutrient uptake capacity per unit of root biomass and a high growth rate and biomass allocation to leaves increase the capability to compete for light and reduce the need for a high root biomass. however, these traits are not advantageous for growth in a nutrient deficient environment where plants must acquire nutrients at low availability and minimize nutrient losses  <cit> . in such conditions, optimal features would include an extensive root system for soil exploration, a high root surface area  for acquisition of nutrients, and efficient mechanisms to capture nutrient ions at low external concentrations  <cit> .

the main research question we address here is: which characteristics of cladium and typha allow the species to grow in the oligotrophic p-deficient interior of the florida everglades, and at the same time explain why typha out-competes cladium under p-enriched conditions? as to the second part of the question, abundant evidence in the literature explains how the opportunistic features of typha can lead to complete dominance in p-enriched areas . less clear is how typha can grow and acquire p at the extreme low p-levels prevailing in the unimpacted areas of the everglades.

we hypothesized that typha has a more plastic p uptake system than cladium in relation to p availability, and this strategy will allow adequate uptake of p and better competitive ability over a wide range of external p concentrations. furthermore, we hypothesized that oxygen-deficient conditions will affect the uptake kinetics of cladium more than that of typha, as the latter species has a more efficient system for root aeration . these hypotheses were tested in a series of p uptake experiments designed to distinguish differences in p uptake kinetics between the two species.

apparent p uptake kinetics were measured for whole plants of cladium and typha grown from seeds and acclimated to identical, steady state conditions, in a factorial treatment arrangement with two levels of p  and two levels of oxygen  in hydroponic culture solutions . the p uptake kinetic parameters were estimated using a modified michaelis-menten model  <cit> .

RESULTS
plant characteristics
the plants used in the uptake studies all appeared healthy, with no visual signs of nutrient deficiencies. however, long acclimation periods in the various culture combinations  inevitably created plants with different biomass, allocation patterns, and tissue nutrient concentrations. overall the shoot height  and root length  of the two species varied little across the treatments, but the plant weights and biomass allocation differed significantly . low-p acclimated plants had less biomass than high-p acclimated plants, and significantly  more biomass allocated to roots. typha in particular allocated less biomass to roots in the high p treatment . plants in the low oxygen cultures had 25% shorter root systems than those in aerated cultures , but the oxygen treatment did not affect the proportion of biomass allocated to roots .

average  leaf and root length, total plant weight and percentage of biomass allocated to roots of the cladium mariscus spp. jamaicense and typha domingensis plants acclimated to a low and a high p level  and to aerated and low oxygen conditions  in hydroponic culture solutions

the tissue n concentrations in cladium were similar  in all treatments, and lower overall than in typha , except in the aerated, low-p treatment where plants were smaller . the tissue p concentrations were, as expected, more variable across treatments, and were generally higher  in the high p treatment  than in the low p treatment . moreover, the tissue p concentrations were consistently higher in the low oxygen treatments than in the corresponding aerated treatments . however, tissue p analyses were carried out on tissues harvested after the uptake kinetic studies, in which plants were exposed to high p concentrations  for several hours. uptake during the uptake studies may have contributed to enhance the tissue concentration by  <dig> - <dig>  mg p g- <dig> dry weight. hence, the tissue p concentrations in the low-p acclimated plants presented here are likely higher than they would have been if plants were collected for analysis before the uptake kinetic studies.

phosphorus uptake kinetics
the relationships between solution p concentrations and the net rate of p uptake of selected cladium and typha plants acclimated to low p and to high p levels are shown in figure  <dig>  generally, the modified michaelis-menten model fitted the relationships and estimated the kinetic uptake parameters with high statistical confidence. vmax was entered as a fixed parameter in the model and was estimated as the average uptake rate at solution p concentrations where uptake appeared to be saturated. at the low concentration range, where p uptake increases nearly linearly with solution p concentration, the model fitted the data very well, but the uncertainty associated with estimating cmin for high-p acclimated plants was relatively large. the cmin values presented for these conditions are therefore uncertain and should be interpreted accordingly.

p uptake capacity
the saturated rate of p uptake  differed significantly between species and was also affected by both p treatment and oxygen level, but the effects of oxygen differed between p treatments as shown by a significant interaction in the anova . across treatments the average vmax was 38% higher in typha than in cladium and the vmax of low-p acclimated plants was overall more than three-fold higher than the vmax of high-p acclimated plants . vmax was generally more than two-fold higher in the low oxygen treatment compared to the high oxygen treatment, except for typha from the high p treatment, where rates were equal.

results of analyses of variance -ratios) for p uptake kinetic parameters of cladium mariscus spp. jamaicense and typha domingensis against species, p level  and oxygen level  in the hydroponic culture solution. significant effects are in bold and indicated by *, ** and ***.

half saturation constant
the half saturation constant  differed significantly between the two species and was also affected by the p treatment, but the effects of p treatment differed between species as shown by the significant interactions in the anova . across treatments the half saturation constants were approximately 70% higher in cladium than in typha, indicating that cladium overall has a lower affinity for p uptake than typha . in typha the half saturation constants did not differ much across treatments, but in cladium the half saturation constants were  <dig> - <dig>  times higher in the high-p acclimated plants than in low p plants. oxygen did not significantly affect k <dig> .

minimum p concentration
the solution p concentration at which there was no net uptake, cmin, was significantly affected by the treatments as shown by the significant interactions in the anova . on average, low-p acclimated cladium and typha plants had a cmin of  <dig>  and  <dig>  μg p l- <dig>  whereas high-p acclimated plants had a cmin of  <dig> and  <dig> μg p l- <dig>  respectively . however, in the low p-aerated treatments both species had a low cmin . for high-p acclimated plants cmin was significantly higher  and the effects of oxygen differed between the species .

affinity for p-uptake
the slope of the initial linear part of the uptake curve at low p solution concentrations, α, as well as the ratio between vmax and k <dig> , are measures of the uptake affinity. both affinity measures were significantly affected by plant species, p acclimation and oxygen level, and effects of oxygen level differed between the p treatments . overall the affinity for p uptake by typha was two-fold higher than that of cladium, and affinities were  <dig> to  <dig> times higher for low-p acclimated plants compared to high-p acclimated plants . both species had higher p uptake affinities in low oxygen treatments, and the effects of oxygen were greatest for low-p acclimated plants. the highest affinity was found for low p and low oxygen acclimated typha plants. numerically, the affinities derived from the initial slope of the curves  were higher than the affinity measures derived from the michaelis-menten model , but the overall treatment effects were alike.

average  ratio between vmax and k <dig>  as estimated by the modified michaelis-menten model  and the slope of the initial part of the uptake curve  as a measure of the affinity for p uptake of cladium mariscus spp. jamaicense and typha domingensis plants acclimated to low and high p level  and to aerated and low oxygen conditions  in hydroponic culture solutions

discussion
ecophysiological studies on nutrient uptake kinetics must be conducted using hydroponically grown plants rather than in soil. although it is possible to mimic the porewater composition of wetland soils in terms of major nutrient ions and ph, the growth conditions in hydroponic cultures differ significantly from those of wetland soils, particularly oxygen and redox conditions  <cit> . in wetland soils, porewaters are nearly always oxygen-free and may contain variable concentrations of reduced ions and organic compounds resulting in low redox potentials depending on soil organic content, nutrient status and other factors. in hydroponic plant culture, the solution is usually aerated to ensure a good oxygen supply for roots. however, in wetland soils, the root oxygen is delivered from the atmosphere via internal transport through the aerenchyma, and so oxygen supply to support aerobic metabolism within root cells potentially differs considerably  <cit> . our experimental conditions mimicked the low oxygen conditions in wetland soils by flushing culture solutions with gaseous n <dig>  this treatment maintained oxygen in culture solutions at levels less than  <dig>  mg l- <dig> and so provided a largely anoxic, but not highly reducing, root environment. the growth of the plants was little affected by the oxygen treatments, except for typha root length, which was shorter in the low oxygen treatments.

except for typha at high p, tissue p concentrations were higher in the low oxygen treatment , and uptake kinetics were also significantly affected by oxygen . in waterlogged, anoxic soils, plants have been reported to produce less root biomass with a greater p uptake per unit of root mass than in drained soils  <cit> . this response has been ascribed to a combination of increased p availability in waterlogged soils and a higher physiological capacity of roots to absorb p, although the mechanisms are not known  <cit> . in the present study, oxygen treatment likely did not affect p availability in the solution cultures. also, root morphology did not change in response to the oxygen treatments. we, therefore, suggest that the observed differences in uptake characteristics were related to the effects of oxygen on the function and/or expression of the high affinity ion transporters in the root plasma membranes. plants acquire p in the form of phosphate anions, mostly h2po <dig> -, from the soil solution, and uptake occurs against a steep concentration gradient  across the plasmamembrane  <cit> . many uptake models have been proposed to explain the ability of plants to acquire p both under deficiency and sufficiency conditions  <cit> . a dual uptake model involving both a high affinity uptake system  operating at low  concentrations, and a low affinity uptake system  operating at high  concentrations is widely used to explain the concentration-dependent uptake of nutrient ions  <cit> . in p-deficient soils only the hats is operating, apparently with multiple phosphate transporters located in the plasmamembrane through which the energy-mediated uptake occurs  <cit> . in general, plants respond to nutrient deprivation by increasing uptake affinity as well as uptake capacity  <cit> . the lack of response to oxygen of high-p acclimated plants, however, indicates that the high affinity transporters are regulated more by p demand than oxygen.

we hypothesized that oxygen-deficient conditions would affect the uptake kinetics of cladium more than that of typha because of differences in their inherent ability to transport oxygen to the roots. this hypothesis could not be verified, because of the confounding effects of p availability. at low p, oxygen affected uptake kinetics more for typha than for cladium whereas at high p the effects were small and mostly on cladium. in earlier studies , low oxygen and particularly reducing  soil conditions significantly reduced growth and performance of both cladium and typha when p availability was low, but the effects could be largely ameliorated by high p availability. a similar tendency was observed in the present study: effects of oxygen were most pronounced at low p, and nearly disappeared at high p.

our primary aim was to assess whether differences in p uptake kinetics could explain the observed growth characteristics of the two species in the everglades. to achieve this goal, we have focused this discussion on plant responses under low oxygen, as this resembles the environmental conditions in the everglades soils better than the aerated culture solutions. under low oxygen and high p availability, vmax did not differ much between the species, but the affinity for p  was significantly lower for cladium than typha. however, cladium had a greater proportion of the biomass allocated to roots, so overall uptake capacity of the two species at high p did not differ much. root p uptake was largely controlled by the plant p demand. although we did not investigate ion transport regulation, uptake kinetics may have adjusted via regulation of the membrane-bound high affinity ion transporters  <cit> . these results imply that under p-sufficient conditions, uptake kinetics does not influence competition between the two species. with sufficient p, the plants only need to adjust their uptake system to meet their respective p demands.

at an external concentration of inorganic p of only  <dig> μg l- <dig>  p is certainly growth limiting for both species, as has been shown in many previous studies  <cit> . plants may respond to such p-deficient conditions in several ways, including allocation of greater mass to roots relative to shoots, and the production of thinner and longer roots enhancing total surface area for nutrient acquisition  <cit> . in this study, the proportion of biomass allocation to roots increased for both cladium  and typha , but there were no changes in root morphology to increase absorptive area. both species also adjusted their p uptake system in an attempt to obtain adequate p, but typha more so than cladium. the maximum uptake velocity, vmax, increased by a factor of  <dig>  and  <dig> ; the half saturation constant, k <dig> , decreased by a factor  <dig>  and  <dig> ; and the p uptake affinity, vmax/k <dig>  and α, increased by a factor  <dig> - <dig>  and  <dig> - <dig>  for typha and cladium, respectively. the estimated levels of cmin  are obviously too high, as plants were growing and taking up p at  <dig> μg l- <dig>  the depletion methodology used in this study, which included spiking with p to relatively high levels, may have resulted in the build-up of internal pools of p that interfered with the estimation of the true cmin values. when cladium and typha plants were grown for  <dig> days in solution cultures with a low supply of p, both species maintained concentrations of 2- <dig> μg p l- <dig> in the solutions . we therefore suggest that the true cmin level for the two species is in this range.

the adjustment of the p uptake system under low p conditions for cladium and typha increased the uptake velocity per unit of root mass  <dig> to 5-fold compared to the velocities for high-p acclimated plants. adding the simultaneous increased biomass allocation to roots, the adjustment would result in a 5-fold higher p uptake per plant for cladium and a 10-fold higher uptake for typha. the combined effect of these adjustments is that the p uptake per plant would be alike for low-p acclimated plants at a solution concentration of ~ <dig> μg p l- <dig> and for high-p acclimated plants at a solution concentration of ~ <dig> μg p l- <dig> for both species. actual plant uptake at  <dig> μg l- <dig> was of course much lower, as plants grew slower and had lower tissue p concentrations.

adjustment of the uptake system, particularly vmax, when plants are exposed to nutrient deficiency is a common response observed by many species and many nutrient ions. the affinity for nutrient uptake as expressed by k <dig>  is commonly assumed to be less plastic and less affected by plant growth conditions than vmax  <cit> . however, the slope of the uptake curve at low p concentrations, α, and the ratio between vmax and k <dig>   are better measures of affinity than k <dig> . in the present study, these affinity measures were clearly affected by p availability in a manner similar to vmax.

a high uptake affinity becomes increasingly important in p-deficient soils, where p uptake is controlled largely by the rate of diffusion to the depleted zones around the roots  <cit> . the fact that typha adjusts the affinity for p uptake and root biomass more than cladium and that typha has thinner root laterals than cladium  <cit> , increases this species' capacity to extract p from low p solutions relative to cladium. however, despite an apparently less efficient uptake system, cladium outperforms typha during prolonged growth under p-deficient conditions . increased allocation of biomass by typha to roots may reduce its capacity to maintain a balanced acquisition of c and other resources and result in poor growth at p-deficient conditions. hence, an efficient p uptake system alone does not ensure good performance at persistent low p availability.

besides optimising the physiology of root p uptake, plants may also increase the availability of p in the rhizosphere by releasing specialized enzymes, known as phosphatases, which hydrolyse soluble organic p derived from soil organic matter to ortho-p for plant uptake  <cit> . both cladium and typha secrete phosphatases at low p availability, but the rate of secretion is higher in cladium, enhancing hydrolysis of organic p compounds  <cit> . another means of p acquisition from p-deficient soils is symbiosis with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi  <cit> . inoculation of cladium with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in a greenhouse pot experiment increased growth and p uptake of cladium significantly  <cit> . these additional capabilities are clearly important for acquiring sufficient p from the peat-based, low-p soils of the everglades, where p is stored primarily as organic p with an additional component of ca-bound p  <cit> . the ability of cladium to access organic p fractions, in concert with its slow growth rate, long tissue life time and high p-use efficiency, likely explains why this species is prolific in the p-deficient everglades soils.

CONCLUSIONS
a main finding of our study was that typha has a more plastic p uptake system than cladium that allows uptake of p over a wide range of external p concentrations and promotes high growth rates with a relatively low investment in root mass at high p levels. both species adjust p uptake kinetics in relation to plant demand when p availability is high, but because of its opportunistic traits, typha is more likely to outcompete cladium in p-enriched areas. under p-deficient conditions typha adjusts p uptake kinetics and biomass allocation to roots more than cladium, and thereby achieves very efficient acquisition of p at low p levels. in contrast, cladium has less need to adjust its p uptake kinetics in response to low p conditions probably because it is already efficient at acquiring p from peat-based soils . these findings suggest that differential expression of a similar strategy by cladium and typha under low-p conditions explains why an opportunistic species like typha is able to grow side by side with cladium in the persistently p-deficient everglades.

