BACKGROUND
estimation of the age structure of endangered populations can facilitate their efficient management . unfortunately, an animal’s age is difficult to calculate for many species. mark-recapture analyses provide the most direct information, but require long-term studies, precluding any rapid conservation management plans  <cit> . an alternative way to estimate an individual’s age is skeletochronology, based on histological analyses of growth marks in the skeleton  <cit> . this technique relies upon seasonal variation in rates of skeletal growth, and thus is especially effective for ectothermic vertebrates that live in highly seasonal environments  <cit> .

the blue mountains water skink  is a medium-sized  viviparous scincid lizard that is restricted to less than forty small montane swamps  at  <dig> to  <dig>  m elevation in the blue mountains and newnes plateau, west of the city of sydney in south-eastern australia. this species is classified as “endangered” under the iucn red list  <cit> , the threatened species conservation act  <cit>  and the environmental protection and biodiversity conservation act  <cit> . this lizard species is an ecological specialist, and comprises isolated small populations that are subject to considerable ongoing threats. in addition, the species’ entire distribution  is listed as threatened under the threatened species conservation act  <cit>  due to impacts of nearby urbanisation, .

these threats to population persistence are exacerbated by the low vagility of the lizards. gene flow between populations is very limited, and animals within each of the two major parts of the species’ distribution  have been isolated from each other for at least a million years  <cit> . in addition, this species has low annual fecundity , further reducing the ability of populations to recover from the effects of episodes of higher-than-usual mortality  <cit> .

in the present study, we used phalangeal skeletochronology  to estimate the age structure of  <dig> populations of blue mountains water skinks. as well as clarifying basic issues such as growth rates and age at maturity, we took advantage of data from our earlier studies to explore the effects of maternal age on reproductive output and progeny quality  and to compare population age structure to various site-specific parameters .

RESULTS
our mark-recapture data show that blue mountains water skinks exhibited rapid growth in the first two years after birth . our skeletochronological estimates of age  agree well with those predicted  by the von bertalanffy function fitted to our mark-recapture data . born at approximately 30 mm snout-vent length and weighing  <dig>  g  <cit> , these lizards attained maturation at svls of about 70 mm svl and 7 g  within two to three years . growth slowed thereafter, eliminating any correlation between age and body size in lizards that were more than three years of age .

our age estimates suggest that the oldest males and females among our sample of  <dig> lizards were only six years old. about half  of the adult lizards  were two years old, and only 23% were more than three years old . most of the lizards in our study population may live to reproduce only once or twice before dying. the mean age of males that sired offspring  was  <dig>  years  and the mean age of adult males  for which juveniles were not assigned was  <dig>  years . the mean age of females that produced litters was  <dig>  years  whereas three adult  but nonreproductive females averaged  <dig>  years of age . the probability of reproducing increased with age after maturation in females  but not males .

our multiple linear regression including the age and size  of gravid females as explanatory variables and the litter size as the response variable, revealed a significant effect of a female’s body size  and of the interaction term between age and body size  on her litter size, as well as a marginally significant effect of her age . older and larger females produced larger litters.

we also found a significant effect of these parameters on mean offspring size , with larger females producing larger neonates and older females smaller neonates . similarly, larger females produced heavier neonates whereas older females gave birth to lighter neonates .

interestingly, our performance tests on offspring born in captivity showed that the progeny of older females were also slower . finally, we found no significant relationship between a mother’s age and her snout-vent length .

blue mountains water skinks are surprisingly short-lived. the mean age of individuals within populations varied from  <dig>   to  <dig>   years , and differed significantly among populations . the oldest individuals were six years old . we found no significant relationship between the mean age of individuals within populations and the elevation , longitude  or latitude  of sites of collection, or the size of the swamps . however, both the mean age of individuals, and the variance in ages within a population, were higher in larger populations .

discussion
blue mountains water skinks grow fast and die young. the largest cohort of adult females comprised those in their first reproductive year post-maturation. older females were rare, and  did not produce larger litters than their younger counterparts. also, the offspring of older females exhibited reduced locomotor performance. in combination, these traits suggest that the reproductive capacity of a population of blue mountains water skinks rests primarily upon the output of newly-matured animals. this result provides a striking contrast to the demography of a congeneric water skink that is also found at relatively high elevations . the highland water skink e. tympanum is an abundant and widely-distributed taxon that has been the subject of detailed ecological studies, including skeletochronological work . tilley  <cit>  reported females living up to at least 15 years of age in a victorian population, and blomberg & shine  <cit>  concluded that adults lived more than 10 years in a nsw population. mean ages of reproductive adults within e. tympanum populations were between four and seven years , compared to three to four years in the high-elevation e. leuraensis . offspring mass and litter size are similar in the two species. however, the proportion of females reproducing is higher in e. leuraensis than in e. tympanum .

in many lizard and snake species, reproductive output increases strongly with maternal age, primarily because continued growth translates into larger females, that reproduce more often and produce more offspring when they do so . blue mountains water skinks do not exhibit such an increase. instead, reproductive frequency is as high from the outset  as thereafter, because body size  does not increase substantially during adult life. indeed, offspring quality  may decline in older females, based on the reduced locomotor capacities and body sizes of their offspring. given a mean litter size of  <dig>   <cit> , the average lifetime production of neonates per female  is less than  <dig>  the short adult lifespan, coupled with the small litter size, must reduce the rate that a population can recover after its numbers have been reduced by events such as bushfires, heavy predation, or prolonged drought. clearly, the survival rate of the newborns will have a major impact on the rate of population recovery.

the age structure of our populations suggests that many of the lizards are semelparous: that is, they reproduce in only a single year before dying. like most cool-climate viviparous squamates, blue mountains water skinks produce only a single litter each year . although most lizards and snakes are iteroparous, semelparity is not uncommon, especially in harsh habitats such as hot and dry areas as well as at high elevations .

although the  <dig> populations that we sampled spanned a broad range in terms of abiotic factors such as elevation, geographic location and swamp size, none of these factors had any detectable effect on the age structure of lizard populations. however, a genetic estimate of the effective population size  was positively correlated with mean age and with intrapopulation variation in age. this pattern suggests that areas that confer higher survival of individual lizards  thereby result in larger effective population sizes. intuition suggests that larger swamps should contain more lizards, but our analyses show no such pattern . habitat quality may be more important than quantity. a low theta k value also reflects low genetic diversity, which could directly reduce survival rates via inbreeding effects  <cit> . future conservation efforts could usefully explore the biotic and abiotic factors that render swamps more or less favorable to blue mountains water skinks.

our skeletochronological data also identify a puzzling feature of this endangered lizard’s life history: its low adult survival rate. at a proximate level, this low survival rate must contribute to the precarious conservation status of the blue mountains water skink. if that low survival rate was driven by extrinsic factors such as local predation pressure or fire history, we would have expected to see at least some populations with much older animals. thus, our data suggest that either the entire range of this species was affected by some major catastrophe about seven years prior to our study, or else low adult survival rates are a consistent feature of the biology of this species. we know of no obvious historical catastrophe that could explain the truncation of age structures across the entire range of the species. thus, the most likely scenario is that, unlike its congeners such as e. tympanum, the blue mountains water skink is a relatively short-lived species.

CONCLUSIONS
the analysis above adds a demographic factor to the traits already identified as contributing to the endangerment of e. leuraensis. these lizards are habitat specialists, dependent upon a relatively scarce and highly fragmented set of highland swamps  <cit> . their low vagility reduces gene flow among swamps, and retards recolonisation of any swamps where local populations have been extirpated  <cit> . they live in an area that abuts australia’s largest city, and hence are exposed to myriad threats caused by the proximity of humans  <cit> . their dependence on moist habitats at high elevations means that they are at a high risk of habitat degradation due to climate change . lastly, they exhibit the unfortunate combination of low reproductive output and low rates of adult survival. in combination, these characteristics render the blue mountains water skink highly vulnerable to any additional pressures , and suggest that the future conservation and management of this species will require close scrutiny and perhaps, active intervention to maintain suitable habitat conditions.

