BACKGROUND
the development of new chemotherapeutic agents and new regimens for breast cancer therapy has led to a reduced risk of recurrence and a higher rate of survival in this patient group. the majority of breast cancer survivors receive chemotherapy but unfortunately they also report chemotherapy-associated cognitive compromise. for example, in the first of a series of cross-sectional studies in women with early breast cancer, cognitive impairment was observed in 75% of patients after cytostatic treatment  <cit> . although the results of subsequent cross-sectional trials assessing cognitive function during or after chemotherapy are less dramatic, all of them reported substantial cognitive impairment rates of 16% to 50%, suggesting detrimental cytostatic side effects on cognitive function  <cit> . the cognitive deficits reported in these studies range from very subtle to more severe and are observed in a wide range of brain functions, including memory, concentration, and speed of information processing, and can be noticed up to  <dig> years after completion of cytotoxic treatment.

although the existence of chemotherapy-induced cognitive deficits has become almost universally recognized, other recently published studies raised some doubts on this phenomenon because they failed to confirm the adverse effects of chemotherapy on cognitive function  <cit> . the inconsistent findings reported to date make conclusions regarding a link between chemotherapy and cognitive impairment tenuous and underscore the need for further research in this area. the inconsistencies reported are most probably due to the inherent methodological limitations in studies involving human subjects, which include small samples, less than adequate controls, and most importantly failure to account for other factors  that could affect cognitive performance. the inherent methodological difficulties and ethical issues associated with conducting studies in clinical settings also lead to the inability to separately identify the effects of chemotherapy and malignancy itself on cognitive function. as well, the possible mechanisms of chemotherapy-related cognitive dysfunction remain poorly understood.

currently, there are few animal studies that provide insight into the effects of chemotherapy on cognitive function. for instance, reports show that high-dose intravenously administered methotrexate reduce spontaneous activity and diminish startle response to loud noise or vibrissal stimulation  <cit>  in male rats. furthermore, high-dose intraperitoneal injections of methotrexate result in enhanced occurrence of seizures in mice and an impairment of long-term memory in a passive avoidance task  <cit> . other studies that examined cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and 5-fluorouracil given intraperitoneally also show that these drugs can cause a disruption of learning and memory across a variety of task such as water maze, avoidance conditioning, object recognition, as well as cue-specific and contextual fear conditioning tasks  <cit> . however, one study did not find any cognitive effects of treatment with 5-fluorouracil on rat behavior  <cit>  suggesting that even in animal models reported results on chemotherapy-induced cognitive impairment is far from being congruent, which may be attributed to the different drugs, dosing, and route of administration used.

to address the above issues we examined the effects of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil  on a broad range of memory processes in female rats . cmf is an adjuvant chemotherapy widely used clinically  <cit>  and together with the assessment of different memory processes, this study has the potential to serve as a model for examining whether the cognitive changes observed in breast cancer survivors are associated with chemotherapy rather than the malignancy itself. in addition, we measured activity level to determine the influence of fatigue, a symptom clinically associated with chemotherapy, on behavioral tasks performance.

hippocampal cell proliferation has been implicated in learning and memory; and memory processing requires the coordinated effort of transcription factors and numerous enzymes and coregulators that modify and remodel chromatin structure, the covalent modification of histone tails . enzymes that regulate chromatin remodeling are known as histone acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases  <cit> . thus, we also examined whether changes in hippocampal cell proliferation and histone modifications may be possible mechanisms involved in chemotherapy-related cognitive dysfunction.

RESULTS
chemotherapy induces fatigue and weight changes during treatment
because of the possible confounding influence of other factors on cognitive performance, we examined whether chemotherapy can induce fatigue and weight loss. our results showed a significant decrease in general activity during the treatment period but baseline levels were restored once the chemotherapy was discontinued  suggesting that these cytotoxic drugs can cause fatigue symptoms. we also found a significant difference in weight between the chemotherapy- and saline-treated rats, in that those in the saline group continued to gain weight over the 4-week period compared to rats that received cmf ; however, the weight of rats in the chemotherapy group did not significantly differ from their baseline values. although all rats in the study remained healthy throughout the experiment, repeated administration of cmf over the 4-week period resulted in the inability to gain weight even though no overall reduction in food intake was observed suggesting that the cytotoxic drugs might have an effect on gastrointestinal function.

chemotherapy induces memory impairment
rats were tested in a series of water maze tasks designed to assess spatial learning and long-term memory of a fixed location. a significant within-subjects effect was seen for swim latency during the acquisition phase  wherein all rats learned to perform the task efficiently over the four testing days . significant group differences were seen in mean swim latency and path length in that the chemotherapy-treated rats did not perform the task as well as the saline-treated group until the third day of testing. but despite the longer mean swim latency and path length demonstrated by the chemotherapy-treated group in the beginning days of the trial, they eventually performed as well as the saline-treated groups. however, no significant treatment × time interaction was seen. no significant differences were seen in swimming speed in the chemotherapy- and saline-treated groups across the test days. these results suggest a chemotherapy-induced transient spatial learning impairment.

on the fifth day of behavioral testing, a probe trial was performed for  <dig> seconds wherein rats were placed in the water maze without the goal/platform. time spent swimming in the quadrant of the pool where the goal/platform was located during the first  <dig> days of trial  was divided by the time spent swimming in the other three quadrants of the pool . in the probe trial  a significant difference was seen in that the chemotherapy-treated animals spent less time in the correct target quadrant area where the goal was previously located compared to the saline-treated group . these results suggest that although the cytotoxic drugs have a transient effect on learning a simple task , chemotherapy can induce some degree of persistent memory impairment as evidenced in the probe trial performance. however, no significant differences were seen in swimming speed suggesting the absence of motoric impairment. furthermore, no significant differences were seen in the cued trial  suggesting the absence of visual problems that can affect behavioral performance.

the cmf group spent significantly less time swimming in the correct quadrant of the pool during the probe trial compared to the saline group. less amount of time spent swimming in the correct quadrant illustrates deficits in recalling learned information. * p <  <dig> .

no significant differences were seen in the cmf-treated and saline groups when tested in the water maze with a visible pole suggesting the absence of visual impairments.

in the discrimination-learning task a significant within subjects effect was seen for mean swim latency across the test days as all rats learned to perform the task efficiently over the  <dig> days of testing . an overall significant main effect of treatment was also seen. specifically, chemotherapy-treated rats demonstrated longer mean swim latency compared to the saline-treated rats. analysis of the number of choices made by the rats in locating the correct platform in the discrimination-learning task also showed an overall significant main effect of treatment. saline-treated rats regularly choose p+  during the trials, while the chemotherapy-treated group made more errors by often choosing p-  in the first  <dig> trial days . although the chemotherapy-treated rats demonstrated longer mean swim latency and made more errors in the beginning days of the trial, they eventually learned to perform the task. in addition, a trend toward an interaction between treatment and time was seen. these data suggest that chemotherapy can induce transient impairment in the performance of simple learning and memory task but persistent cognitive dysfunction in the more complex test.

chemotherapy decreases cell proliferation in the hippocampus
the total number of brdu-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampal region was quantified to determine cell proliferation. a significant main effect of treatment was seen in that the number of brdu-positive cells per hippocampal volume decreased by approximately 20% in all rats subjected to the chemotherapeutic regimen compared to the saline group . these results suggest that there is a basal level of proliferative activity present in the mature nervous system evidenced by the presence of brdu-positive cells in saline-treated rats but cytotoxic drugs can reduce cell proliferation.

chemotherapy induces histone modifications in the hippocampus
since the most studied mechanism of chromatin remodeling associated with learning and memory processes is histone modifications, we examined levels of histone acetylation and hdac activity. our results show significantly increased acetylation of histone h <dig> in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of chemotherapy-treated rats compared to the saline group, whereas no significant group changes seen in the striatum . acetylation of histone h <dig> in the chemotherapy-treated rats is approximately 21% and 47% greater in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, respectively, when comparison to the saline group. in contrast, overall hdac activity was significantly inhibited in the hippocampus of chemotherapy-treated animals by approximately 37% . these results suggest that the cytotoxic drugs can influence epigenetic modifications in certain regions of the brain.

discussion
in the present study using an animal model, we show learning and memory impairment following cmf administration, a drug combination that is widely used as chemotherapeutic agents in the treatment of human breast cancer. since the behavioral tasks used in this study assess various aspects of learning and memory which can be dissociated and linked to different brain regions, the chemotherapy-induced deficits seen in both the spatial learning task and discrimination-learning tests provide insight into the areas that may be affected by the drugs. that is, the spatial memory evaluated in the water maze is a form of reference memory that depends on the functional integrity of the hippocampus while the ability to perform the discrimination-learning task depends on the functional integrity of the caudate nucleus and striatal structures. since we demonstrate that cmf treatment resulted in impaired performance in both hippocampal- and non-hippocampal-dependent tasks, our results suggest that the adverse effects of these chemotherapeutic drugs are not limited to one region of the brain. nevertheless, it is important to note that the effects of cmf on learning and memory while statistically significant are relatively small when compared to cognitive impairments that result from injury to the hippocampus and striatum. for instance, the learning and memory deficits seen in the water maze tests occurred only in the first  <dig> days of testing suggesting the transitory nature of the cognitive impairment. however, cmf-treated rats showed significant impairment in the discrimination-learning task throughout the test days when compared to the saline-treated rats suggesting the possibility that the water maze may lack sufficient complexity to detect subtle learning differences between the groups thus, behavioral performance will likely be affected by a "ceiling effect."

our behavioral testing results parallel those of others that demonstrate cognitive impairment in rats and mice following administration of either methotrexate alone, cyclophosphamide alone, or the combination of methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil  <cit> . however, our data are at odds with others that showed no evidence of impaired cognitive performance in female rats when behavioral testing was conducted  <dig> weeks after cyclophosphamide or 5-fluorouracil administration  <cit> . the discrepancy in findings between our study and those of others may be attributed to the timing of behavioral testing; namely behavioral testing in our study was conducted two weeks after the last cmf injection when chemotherapy may still be readily available in the system, thus providing information on the short-term effects of the drugs. it is also possible that because of the longer treatment-testing interval in the lee et al study  <cit> , there may be some recovery of cognitive function in their animals compared to the rats tested in our study.

general activity levels and weight was also examined in the present study to ensure that behavioral differences between chemotherapy- and saline-treated rats are due to cognitive processes rather than drug-induced effects on performance ability. although it is possible that drug-related side effects of fatigue and weight loss might have contributed to the cognitive impairment seen in the cmf-treated rats, this is unlikely for the following reasons: 1) while general activity decreased during the first  <dig> weeks of cmf administration it started to recover on the last week of treatment, and 2) even though daily food intake of the rats injected with cmf was significantly reduced for the first  <dig> days relative to the saline-treated animals, normal appetite rebounded beginning on day  <dig>  in fact, one week after starting the cmf treatment rats that received the drugs actually had an overall increase in food intake compared to their pre-chemotherapy values. thus, by the time behavioral testing was performed the transient changes in both general activity and body weight induced by cmf would likely have not contributed to the cognitive impairment seen in these rats.

the production of new neurons in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus is a well-characterized phenomenon in the mammalian brain that is related to learning and memory . in the present study, we showed that cmf treatment significantly reduced the total number of proliferating cells in the dentate gyrus using brdu-labeling and our data are in line with those reported by others that used the endogenous marker, ki- <dig>  <cit> . these results are hardly surprising because both in vitro and in vivo data suggest a susceptibility of hippocampal regions to chemotherapeutic agents even at doses lower than those used in standard treatments  <cit> . for example, increased cell death and decreased cell division in the subventricular zone have been reported with administration of chemotherapeutic agents. chemotherapeutic agents assumed to have minimal penetration into the cns actually do enter the brain in small quantities , and these quantities might be enough to cause toxicity and damage to neural progenitor cells  <cit> . since the learning and memory impairments seen in our study are associated with decreased cell proliferation in the neurogenic area of the hippocampus, it is possible that chemotherapy-related cognitive dysfunction is caused by the disruption of endogenous adult hippocampal neurogenesis. although it is possible that the decreased hippocampal cell proliferation seen in the cmf-treated rats does not have an effect on the differentiation and survival of the adult-born cells, in this study we primarily focused on potential influence of histone modifications on cell proliferation; however, the issue of cmf effects on the different phases of the neurogenesis process warrants further investigation in future studies.

epigenetic mechanisms are often associated with learning and memory  <cit>  and there is increasing evidence that histone modifications are in part responsible for regulating the process of adult hippocampal neurogenesis  <cit> . here we demonstrate increased histone h <dig> acetylation and decreased hdac activity in the hippocampus of the cmf-treated rats when compared to the saline-treated group. this is a surprising finding because histone acetylation is the post- translational modification on histones associated with enhanced learning and memory. a possible explanation for this unexpected finding is that the decreased hdac activity may have contributed to the increased histone acetylation seen in the cmf-treated rats. it is possible that chemotherapeutic agents in general have hdac inhibitor properties and this line of reasoning is supported by a recent study demonstrating that the mechanism of action of methotrexate is achieved through the downregulation of hdac activity  <cit> . moreover, our data that increased histone h <dig> acetylation in the hippocampus is not associated with enhanced cell proliferation is also surprising since epigenetic mechanisms have been implicated in neurogenesis. a possible explanation of this finding is that the method we used in the present study to measure acetylation/deacetylation only provides general information on histone modification. examining specific epigenetic regulation of transcriptional pathways may be more valuable such as whether cmf-induced acetylation of the p <dig> pathway that leads to apoptosis  <cit>  dampens the acetylation of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that regulates cell proliferation; thus, these issues warrant further investigation in future studies.

CONCLUSIONS
in sum, the present study provides evidence that anti-cancer drugs can adversely affect the self-renewal potential of neural progenitor cells and also chromatin remodeling in the hippocampus, which might be potential mechanisms in explaining chemotherapy-induced cognitive dysfunction. our results also show the negative consequences of chemotherapy on brain function, apart from its potentially confounding physical side effects. although more work is needed to establish the full extent of cognitive change following chemotherapy, our results on the degree of memory deficits seen in the cmf-treated rats parallel the human data in that clinical reports show cognitive deficits reported in chemotherapy-treated cancer patients to be typically mild to moderate in severity, and while they may impact day-to- day functioning, it is not necessarily apparent. thus, the present results show that animal models can be useful in addressing the phenomenon of 'chemobrain.'

