BACKGROUND
neural stem cells comprise a relatively quiescent, uncommitted and multipotent subpopulation in the central nervous system  <cit> . stem cells reside in multiple areas of the central nervous system including the olfactory bulb, striatum, cerebellum, hippocampus , cerebral cortex and spinal cord  <cit> . the subventricular zone  is one of the richest zones capable of generating stem cells during development and into old age  <cit> . in culture, neural stem cells and progenitor cells grow as spherical cell clusters termed neurospheres, and they provide a valuable way to investigate neuronal and glial cell lineage development in vitro. neural stem cells express egf and fgf receptors  <cit>  and the mitogens fgf and egf are used to induce mitosis in stem cells  <cit> .

during development, cell signaling facilitates cellular maturation as well as extracellular interactions between the cells and the environment  <cit> . kinases and phosphatases are regulatory proteins antagonistically controlling the phosphorylation state of molecules within cell-signaling pathways. it had been previously demonstrated that protein tyrosine phosphatases  contribute to neuronal development, influencing axon growth, trajectory, guidance, fasciculation and synapse formation  <cit> . receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase sigma , the product of the ptprs gene, is a member of the lar family of protein tyrosine phosphatases  along with lar and ptpδ  <cit> . it is comprised of a cell adhesion-like ectodomain consisting of  <dig> ig and  <dig> or  <dig> fniii repeats, a single transmembrane domain and  <dig> tandem catalytic domains, the first of which is active  <cit> . the ectodomain of ptpσ interacts with the heparan sulfate proteoglycans agrin and collagen xviii in the retina  <cit> , although it has other, yet unidentified ligands in the muscle  <cit>  and other tissues. intracellular substrate for ptpσ have not yet been described.

using ptpσ knockout mice our previous studies and those of others have focused on the spatial patterns of ptpσ expression particularly in the central and peripheral nervous system, as well as on nerve regeneration and axonal guidance  <cit> . ptpσ deficient mice exhibit neuroendocrine defects, with reduced production of growth hormone and prolactin by the pituitary, which contribute to their high rate of postnatal mortality  <cit> . surviving mice exhibit neuronal and neurobehavioral defects  <cit> , and abnormal nerve regeneration pattern following injury of the sciatic  <cit>  or facial nerves  <cit> . in addition, our analysis of the cns revealed hippocampal dysgenesis, reduction in thickness of the corpus callosum and cerebral cortex and spinal cord abnormalities  <cit> .

in our previous studies  <cit>  we observed strong expression of ptpσ immediately adjacent to the ventricles in the subventricular zone . prompted by this observation we sought to determine if neural stem cells express the ptprs gene and if this gene influenced the phenotype of the  <dig> principal lineages generated from these stem cells: astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and neurons. our results demonstrate expression of ptpσ in stem cell-derived astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and neurons. moreover, while differentiated astrocytes and oligodendrocytes from the neurospheres of ptpσ knockout mice appeared normal, the neurons showed an accelerated growth of processes, suggesting that ptpσ provides inhibitory signal that is specific for the neuronal lineage.

RESULTS
ptpσ does not affect neurosphere ontogeny and morphology
to determine the morphology of neurospheres generated from the ptpσ ,  and  mice, we recovered stem cells from the svz of each genotype and generated neurospheres in the presence of bfgf and egf. the property of self-renewal was demonstrated by the weekly passage of the spheres for several months and in some cases beyond one year. with the continued passage of the neurospheres, we were able to analyze several hundred neurospheres for each genotype. neurospheres examined by phase contrast microscopy were indistinguishable between the  <dig> groups  of mice. we established the neurosphere cultures at least  <dig> times from each genotype. while combinations of bfgf and egf generated higher numbers of neurospheres in contrast to a single growth factor, there was no difference between the three genotypes . as the neurospheres increased in size, many acquired a heterogenous cellular composition. the spheres contained cells with the progenitor cell markers nestin and ng <dig> . we observed a wide variety of markers expressed by cells in the neurospheres. individual neurospheres would commonly reveal the co-expression of two lineages . many cells were stained for  <dig> markers in addition to the generation of multiple lineages. we could localize cell markers that labeled different cell populations in the spheres as well as cells co-expressing different lineage markers . heterogeneity was most apparent in the largest spheres. there was no difference between the  <dig> genotypes regarding the single expression or co-expression of the various markers. in addition, the larger spheres also consisted of differentiated cells predominantly of a neuronal phenotype .

neural stem cells and differentiated progeny express ptpσ
to determine whether ptpσ is expressed in the neuronal stem cells, β-galactosidase expression, included in the knockout cassette and driven by the endogenous ptprs promoter, was analyzed. as seen in figure  <dig>  the neurospheres from the ptpσ  and the  mice exhibited β-galactosidase expression , demonstrating that ptpσ is normally present in these neural stem cells. neurospheres produced from the wildtype animals showed no β-galactosidase staining, as expected. the neurospheres generated from all  <dig> genotypes consisted of a heterogeneous makeup of progenitor cells and lineage committed cells. the spheres often contained cells with the ng <dig> cell progenitor marker and cells co-expressing gfap or tubulin. when the neurospheres were induced to differentiate, we observed differentiated neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes that co-expressed β-galactosidase with the appropriate end cell marker . there was no apparent difference between the different genotypes in the capacity for neurospheres to generate the  <dig> separate cell lineages, nor was there any tendency for a genotype to produce a particular lineage.

neurons lacking ptpσ show altered migration patterns and enhanced neurite outgrowth
the neuronal lineage derived from ptpσ  mice demonstrated a different migration pattern compared to both heterozygotes and wild type mice . neurons generated from the ptpσ  neurospheres migrated over large areas of the laminin substrate. these neurons, identified by β iii-tubulin expression, moved long distances from the center of the neurospheres to often create overlapping zones of migration between adjacent neurospheres. the neurons from the ptpσ  and  mice remained close to the neurosphere of origin and were observed in closely associated groups. processes derived from ptpσ  neurons were significantly  longer than the neurons from heterozygote ptpσ  and wildtype neurons. the ptpσ  neurons tended to have one neurite that was considerably much longer than the other neurites. seven days after the induction of differentiation, the ptpσ  neurons had average neurite lengths of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm, whereas the ptpσ and wildtype neurons showed neurite lengths of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm . no differences in the migration patterns of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes derived from the ptpσ  or sibling controls were observed. these cells remained close to the neurosphere of origin.

discussion
we have demonstrated the expression of ptpσ in neural stem cells and in each of the  <dig> main lineages derived from the neural stem cell, as well as a role for this gene in neuronal lineage differentiation. to our knowledge, this is the first direct demonstration of ptp expression in neural stem cells isolated from the svz, in line with our earlier observation of strong expression of ptpσ in the svz  <cit> . moreover, it is also the first demonstration of a role for a ptp  specifically in the growth of stem cell-derived neurons, but not in the development of the other lineages  under our culture conditions. identification of glial substrates for this gene may offer insight into specific function for astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. bernabeu and coworkers have recently demonstrated the expression of lar in progenitor cells of the dentate gyrus within the hippocampus of mice, and showed increased neurogenesis in lar deficient dentate gyrus  <cit> . this is interesting given the previously documented stimulatory role of lar in neuronal growth , including hippocampal cholinergic neurons  <cit> .

the ptprs gene does not appear to influence the formation and cellular makeup of the neurosphere. however, while we did not observe any significant phenotypic differences in the astrocyte or oligodendrocyte cell lineages produced by the neurospheres derived from the ptpσ deficient mice relative to wild type mice, prominent phenotypic differences were noted in the neuronal derivatives of these neurospheres. in particular, neurite outgrowth was accelerated in the knockout animals, suggesting that ptpσ provides inhibitory stop signals for neurite growth.

a number of receptor ptps, particularly from the lar or lar-related families, have demonstrated an ability to promote neurite or axonal outgrowth in vitro. examples include lar  <cit> , ptpδ  <cit> , ptpμ <cit>  and ptpk  <cit> . regulation of neurite outgrowth by lar has also been shown in vivo  <cit> . our results suggest that unlike these ptps, ptpσ, which is highly homologous to lar and ptpδ, acts as an inhibitor of neurite outgrowth. this supports our previous studies documenting increased regeneration rate of the sciatic nerve in ptpσ deficient mice following injury in vivo  <cit> , an observation subsequently confirmed by studies of facial nerve regeneration carried out by thompson et al  <cit> . together with our present data, these findings support the notion of a role for ptpσ in inhibiting neurite outgrowth. this is in contrast to the finding that sciatic nerve crush in lar knockout mice resulted in delayed nerve regeneration  <cit> , suggesting that lar  promotes nerve regeneration and growth in vivo. mclean and colleagues  <cit>  also documented increased errors in axonal pathfinding in ptpσ knockout mice, complementing the invertebrate studies with drosophila dlar  <cit> .

in our study, differences in the neuronal migratory patterns from the neurospheres existed between ptpσ deficient mice and their sibling matched controls when differentiated on laminin coated glass coverslips. the intracellular pathway regulating ptpσ mediated control of neurite growth in the cns and pns are unknown since the substrate for this phosphatase has/have not been described. other receptor ptps , related to ptpσ, have been reported to regulate the cadherin-catenin complex. our preliminary examination of the neurite lengths of neurons grown on the n-cadherin substrate did not reveal any significant differences in neurite length between the ptpσ  mice and the siblings under our current assay conditions. these preliminary data suggest that neurite growth regulated by ptpσ is also dependent on extracellular substrata/factors, likely in addition to intrinsic factors.

our studies corroborate the growing body of evidence illustrating a very diverse make-up to the developing neurosphere  <cit> . the intrinsic complexity of the various developmental stages of neural lineages was apparent when staining with the different combinations of precursor and lineage specific antibodies. our understanding of antibodies thought to identify exclusive steps in precursor cell development, glial or neuronal lineages is constantly changing. the ng <dig> antibody, thought to identify a chondrotin sulfate proteoglycan on the surface of glial cells only, co-existed with cells expressing neuronal markers in our neurospheres. this same antibody has been used by belachew and colleagues  <cit>  to reveal similar results in vivo, including the generation of neurons from ng <dig> positive glial precursors.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have performed adult stem cell isolation procedures in mice lacking ptpσ. the combination of these techniques provides a unique and powerful opportunity to study the role of single genes on the developmental aspects of stem cell derived glial and neuronal lineages. our results support a role for ptpσ in specifically suppressing the neurite outgrowth from stem cell derived neurons  and modulating their migration patterns.

