BACKGROUND
evaluating the patterns and processes of microbial diversity is central for understanding the ecology and evolution of life on earth  <cit> . currently, morphological and molecular methods have prompted a number of alternative perspectives on these issues. the extent of global dispersal versus levels of local endemism for microbial taxa  <cit> , as well as the respective impacts of historical barriers to dispersal versus that of current conditions selecting among species in specific environments  <cit>  were debated to explain the distribution of these organisms. these perspectives have previously been difficult to evaluate for microbial eukaryotes because extensive diversity underlies many morphospecies and most species are recalcitrant to cultivation  <cit> . traditional morphological and molecular methods have also imposed temporal and financial limits on collecting data on total diversity within and among communities  <cit> .

the recent introduction of high-throughput sequencing  methodologies provided a way to push these limits to eukaryotic microbial diversity research  <cit> . it is now possible to quickly obtain hundreds of millions of sequences. however, the development of hts was one of those events in which a nascent technology rapidly progressed far beyond our ability to best collect and analyze the data. this situation encouraged developments to justify which dna region should be targeted for sequencing and which primer-pairs should be used, for example, in foraminifera  <cit> , ciliates  <cit> , dinoflagellates  <cit> , fungi  <cit> , bacteria  <cit>  and archaea  <cit> . there has also been little effort put into effectively exploiting the resulting millions of short hts sequences in a statistical framework, especially when placed into the context of previous studies. computational steps are still a major bottleneck in molecular-based environmental studies. these shortcomings have hampered the identification of novel taxa, of distribution patterns, and their biological and ecological causes.

sequence similarity network analyses, based on sequence similarity  <cit>  offer an extension to sequence clustering analyses. they should not be conflated with co-occurrence networks  <cit> . beyond a first step of clustering, sequence similarity networks allow biologists to perform fine-grained analyses of similarities between sequences, because they exploit the information provided by the topology of weighted connections between sequences within and between clusters. such networks rely on methods from graph theory that have recently been adapted to address an increasing number of biological questions using large molecular datasets  <cit> . with such analyses, combining massive sequence data produced from numerous studies becomes feasible, and diversity patterns can be inferred that otherwise would not be apparent from individual studies alone. for example, a count of phylotypes in two separate datasets provides no information about which of these phylotypes are the same, while sequences from different studies can be directly compared in a single network analysis.

phylogenetic analysis of short read data has made great strides in recent years, following the development of phylogenetic placement algorithms for incorporating short read data into a reference phylogeny . yet, multiple alignments and tree reconstructions with hundreds of thousands to millions of environmental sequences from hts are either slow  or inaccurate   <cit> . furthermore, a challenge in such tools still consists in developing appropriate visualization tools and metrics for analyzing distributions of reads on computed trees  <cit> . the network approach offers a powerful alternative in terms of comparative and visualization strategies , with the benefit of introducing several informative graph-based estimates describing the relationships between sequences , thereby offering independent ways of analyzing the distribution of microbial organisms. in other words, sequence similarity networks allow the empirical testing of aspects of the theoretical framework of microbial ecology through the exploitation of network-based properties . community clustering and louvain community analyses  <cit>  can be used to identify groups of similar sequences at various thresholds of sequence similarity. assortativity analyses  <cit>  can be used to define sets of sequences with distinctive characteristics. path analyses  <cit>  can be used to quantify divergence between sequences. all these measures offer an original path from graph theory to empirical analyses of the patterns and processes shaping microbial diversity.figure  <dig> 
mock sequence similarity networks. weighted sequence similarity networks displaying sequences as nodes , connected by edges reflecting their %id obtained from a blast analysis . the corresponding color code is used on the networks  to explore and structure the data. the mock dataset results in: a) two connected components when the minimum %id required to connect two nodes is ≥97%; b) a single giant component when the minimum %id required to connect two nodes is ≥96%; c) finer-level structure within components can be further detected using methods of community clustering, such as the louvain communities . %id, % identity.
network methods and their adaptation to biological questions



network term
term description
biological meaning in this work
listed are the most important network terms introduced into microbial ecology in the framework of this study. the table indicates how these methods can be applied to hts data to address fundamental questions on the diversity and distribution of microbial organisms. hts, high-throughput sequencing.



in this study, we analyzed a network of  <dig>  dna and cdna ciliate pyrosequences from the v <dig> region of the ssu-rdna locus collected at eight european coastal sites from three different habitats , subsurface; for sampling details see  <cit> ). we developed a protocol to: 1) detect novel diversity in our new data in the context of existing sequence data from previous environmental diversity inventories  and cultured species; and 2) test ecological theories about ciliate dispersal at multiple evolutionary levels . we conclude that ciliates in european coastal areas—just like bacteria, plants and animals—are under strong environmental and geographical selection at intermediate geographical scale, and agree with previous observations rejecting global dispersal hypotheses  <cit> . we argue that such a diversity structure calls for specific improved sampling strategies in future microbial community surveys.

RESULTS
the large scope of network analyses
sequence similarity networks are inclusive graphs, easily accommodating substantial molecular datasets . they provide a unified comparative framework for these sequences, which can be analyzed with the methods and tools of graph theory  <cit> . in such graphs, the nodes represent the objects to be compared , each pair being linked by an edge if there is significant similarity between the two corresponding nodes , e-value, length, and alignment cover spanning over the two sequences).

the resulting networks provide multiple lines of evidence to analyze genetic diversity in large molecular datasets at various sequence similarity levels, hence at various taxonomical levels, and consequently to test ecological theories . first, thresholded sequence similarity networks effectively provide a first structure of the data by partitioning it, since the continuity and discontinuity of resemblances between sequences generally produces distinct subgraphs, called connected components . when numerous sequences are highly similar, as is the case for v <dig> sequences, connected components grow to a very large size, forming giant connected components  <cit>  . second, connected components can be further partitioned to identify densely connected regions within them, known as communities in graph theory. in each community, nodes are more connected to other nodes within the given community than to external nodes . we used louvain communities  <cit>   of level  <dig> as the finer level of sequence similarity, that is, as the tightest clusters of similar sequences. we tested whether these two methods of graph partitioning  returned groups of sequences from similar locations, depths, or lab cultures, or whether no such geographical, habitat or ‘cultivability’ structure was observed in the network. to do this, nodes in sequence similarity networks were labelled based on sequence properties. preferential patterns of connections can then be analyzed in these labelled graphs, using assortativity estimates that quantify to what extent sequences with the same label  connect with each other rather than with differently labelled sequences  <cit> . for instance, geographical structuring of the data produces  ccs/lcs with sequences from only one sampling site , and  ccs/lcs with sequences from multiple sampling sites, yet with detectable patterns of preferential connections between sequences from the same geographical location, if sequences from the same sampling site are more similar to one another than they are to sequences from other sites .figure  <dig> 
mock sequence similarity networks displaying endemism and cosmopolitan distribution of ciliates. a) schematic pattern of a gcc colored to reflect the origin of sequences in case of endemism. each supernode corresponds to a lc consisting of a group of sequences. exemplary lc composition is described in the insets in squared boxes. each node color in these insets corresponds to a given hypothetical sampling depth . each supernode color represents the proportion of sequences from different sampling depths in a lc  to red . b) schematic pattern of the same gcc colored to reflect the origin of the sequences in case of a cosmopolitan distribution of ciliates. same color code as above. intermediate colors of most lcs reflect the fact that highly similar sequences were detected at different depths. c) schematic pattern of ccs, their node colors reflecting the origin of the sequences. as above, each color corresponds to a given sampling depth. some structure is visible when either all similar sequences originate from the same depth , or when sequences from a particular depth cluster together within the component . in case of a widespread dispersal across sampling depths, no structure with regard to the color code can be observed . d) schematic pattern of a cc, describing closeness and shortest path. two distinct nodes are highlighted. one in the center  and one in the periphery  of the cc, exhibiting high and low closeness, respectively. red edges connecting the highlighted nodes display the shortest path between these two particular nodes. see table  <dig> for further explanations. ccs, connected communities; gcc, giant connected components; lc, louvain communities.



a useful property of thresholded networks is that all sequences are not necessarily directly connected together within a cc or a lc. for instance, sequence  <dig> can be linked to sequence  <dig>  itself linked to sequence  <dig>  while sequences  <dig> and  <dig> are not directly connected because they do not share a greater similarity than the stringency threshold used to construct the network. in that particular case, the connected component  is a chain . in practice, ccs  display a variety of mathematical and topological properties, ranging from chains to cliques , which can be exploited in comparative analyses.

third, detailed analyses of the relationships between nodes provide additional network-based estimates of genetic diversity. in particular, the closeness of a node, quantifying its location in the graph, and the number of edges separating two given nodes can be computed  <cit>  to compare the centrality of environmental sequences with that of sequences from cultured ciliates, and to measure their relative dissimilarity, when environmental sequences are located more than one edge apart from any sequence from cultured ciliates .

in short, sequence similarity networks offer a global and inclusive framework, that allows displaying and comparing novel data with pre-existing samples and, therefore, to progress towards integrated comparative analyses of multiple data sets. using these tools, we analyzed  how environmental ssu-rdna projects have expanded our former knowledge of genetic diversity that was based on cultured ciliates,  how the results of different environmental ssu-rdna surveys of microbial eukaryotic diversity compare in terms of genetic diversity, while  enhancing our understanding of the actual global diversity of ciliates and of its ecological structure.

extensive novel diversity of environmental ciliates
previous environmental diversity studies  <cit>  have shown that it is specifically the large proportion of low-abundance taxa in a microbial consortium, in which we find most of the novel diversity. figure  <dig> shows the gcc of the dna and of the cdna networks constructed at the most inclusive threshold of ≥85% similarity. densely connected regions  of similar sequences are replaced by supernodes for display purposes. these supernodes are colored based on the percentage of sequences they comprise either from cultured organisms , from cultured and environmental sequences obtained before the biomarks project  <cit>  by sanger sequencing , or that were obtained by the biomarks project  <cit>   using  <dig> pyrosequencing. in other words, figure  <dig> reveals the similarity relationships between sequences from cultured organisms and from an increasing number of environmental projects.figure  <dig> 
sequence similarity network showing the giant connected component  of each dataset. gcc were constructed at the most inclusive sequence similarity threshold  for dna  and cdna  networks. supernodes of the gcc represent louvain communities ; the size of the supernode indicates the number of sequences in the respective lc, the color indicates the proportion of targeted sequences in the respective lc . the figure should be read along the time of data generation axis from left to right to follow the gradual discovery of ciliates by sanger sequencing  compared to previous environmental studies  and finally to the current  <dig> pyrosequencing study . color of nodes at time t- <dig> indicates the proportion of sequences from cultured ciliates in each lc; color of nodes at time t- <dig> indicates the proportion of sequences from either cultured ciliates or former environmental ciliates studies in each lc; color of nodes at time t indicates the proportion of biomarks  <dig> sequences in each lc . gcc, giant connected components; lc, louvain communities.



ciliate sequences obtained by biomarks ) substantially increase the diversity that was known from sequences of described organisms ). for cdna sequences, the number of lcs increases  <dig>  fold and for dna  <dig>  fold. when all ciliate sequences from the environmental reference database are also considered in the gcc network analyses, we find that a large proportion of biomarks diversity was, in fact, discovered previously in environmental molecular diversity surveys  and non-green nodes in figure  <dig> , respectively). the colors of these gccs show that environmental projects conducted before biomarks mostly detected ciliates sequences that were either from the same lcs as sequences from cultured organisms, or from previously untapped lcs neighboring these communities. this observation means that rather central lcs with sequences from cultured ciliates were further enriched with environmental representatives , and at the same time novel communities were discovered during these early environmental projects .

the inclusion of environmental sequences from biomarks continued this expansion in the description of genetic diversity in ciliates, identifying more environmental representatives of previously known communities , and detecting novel communities  especially at the periphery of the graph. figure  <dig> gives a more precise overview of the novel ciliate diversity revealed by the sequence similarity networks at the ≥85% threshold. our biomarks data added eight distinct and previously unknown lcs to the cdna dataset and twelve to the dna dataset . the composition of these lcs does not imply the presence of a specific hotspot for the detection of novel ciliate diversity with regard to location or habitat . although most of the lcs could be assigned to the class spirotrichea, the low sequence similarities to the closest cultured references indicate that the taxonomic assignment should be taken with care.figure  <dig> 
novel diversity identified by sequence similarity networks. novel diversity in the dataset was defined as every louvain community at the 85% similarity threshold which exclusively consisted of biomarks sequences and which sequences were on average less than 95% identical to any reference sequence of the cultured ciliate database. the first eight columns display the composition of the respective lc with regard to sampling sites and habitats. the colors of the circles indicate in which habitat the sequences had been detected. blue represents subsurface, green represents dcm and orange represents sediment samples. multicolored circles were found in more than one habitat at the same sampling site. taxonomy is displayed to the species level of the closest cultured reference if possible. whenever more than one closest reference was assigned to the lc, the last common taxonomic level  is given. all v <dig> sequences incorporated into the listed lcs are publicly available at figshare  <cit> ; separate fasta files have been deposited for dna  <cit>  and cdna data  <cit> . dcm deep chlorophyll maximum; lc, louvain community.



moreover, the structure of the sequence similarity networks also enabled us to quantify and characterize the novel diversity detected by cc analyses. at all similarity thresholds, we detected components that exclusively consisted of biomarks sequences . for example, at 97% sequence similarity, a suggested approximation to discriminate ciliate species based on the v <dig> fragment  <cit> , 60% of the cdna components and 45% of the dna components did not include any reference sequence, thus representing previously unknown ciliate diversity.

the divergence between environmental sequences and sequences from cultured ciliates was further analyzed by network path analyses  of cc and lc. these analyses also provided evidence that environmental sequences correspond to  already known sequences or are highly similar to such sequences  but also to  novel sequences, expanding the known genetic diversity of ciliates . these novel sequences only share direct connections to other environmental sequences, and are observed even at very inclusive stringency thresholds . hence, many environmental sequences cannot be directly assigned to formerly described lineages. results are similar for lcs .

likewise, the analysis of closeness values, contrasting the centrality of environmental sequences with that of sequences from cultured ciliates, provides similar conclusions. the centrality of a sequence reflects its similarity to all other sequences in the graph. the more central one sequence is, the higher its closeness and the least divergent it is with respect to all other sequences in the network. environmental sequences, which are more divergent to sequences from organisms known from cultures, occupy the periphery of the graph. in all networks and subgraphs, sequences from cultured ciliates are more centrally located than sequences from environmental projects . environmental ssu-rdna studies are thus expanding the description of genetic diversity beyond that of known sequences at all taxonomical levels, if one assumes that decreasing similarity between sequences corresponds to increasing evolutionary distance between ciliates. the only exception concerns ccs at the ≥90% similarity threshold, in which no significant differences between the closeness of sequences from cultured ciliates and from environmental studies before biomarks were observed. yet, when biomarks sequences are considered in this particular analysis, the location of cultured ciliate sequences in central positions of ccs at ≥90% similarity is statistically supported . in summary, all networks indices  point to the same conclusion: network analysis unravels novel ciliate diversity, discovered by the current survey strategy.

furthermore, our results provide an ‘historical’ perspective on the progress in diversity studies of ciliates. on one hand, they show an inherent conservative bias of environmental ssu-rdna surveys that rediscovered ‘more of what was already known’ in terms of genetic diversity. on the other hand, they show that even after two centuries of microscopy studies and about  <dig> years of molecular diversity analyses, hts sequencing approaches still reveal substantial amounts of novel diversity. sequence similarity networks provide us with the tools to recognize the degree of this novel diversity.

yet, how we increase our knowledge of genetic diversity of environmental ciliates clearly depends on our background knowledge: environmental diversity surveys using primers derived from cultured organisms catch in first place more of the well-known described diversity  <cit> , rather than detecting novel peripheral groups in the networks. this suggests that the use of different sets of primers, for example, designed from alignments of the environmental sequences in these peripheral communities , may be an efficient opportunity to expand further the discovery of novel, divergent groups of ciliates. more precisely, groups of sequences, such as cliques  <cit>  or peripheral sequences can be easily extracted from sequence similarity networks, producing sets of sequences with shared similarities. these sequences can be further aligned with each other to identify specific shared divergent regions, which can become new primers for upcoming analyses. this strategy could complement the extraction of ssu-rdna genes from pcr-free shotgun metagenomic datasets, and, within these less taxonomically biased datasets, ease the selection of ssu-rdna genes with sequence similarities to  divergent v <dig> 

geographic structuring of ciliate communities
we mapped the geographic distribution of our sequences in similarity networks to test the ecological hypothesis that ciliates are cosmopolitan organisms. assortativity analyses were used to quantify to what extent sequences from any location and depth have close homologs in more than one environmental sample of the data set. since similar sequences are directly connected in our graphs, the larger the environmental distribution of ciliates with similar sequences, the lower the assortativity of sequences from a given location or from a given depth in the graph . by contrast, if ciliates with similar sequences preferentially occupy one given depth or one given location, their sequences will tend to form clusters which exclusively group sequences from that given depth or location. sequences of ciliates with restricted geographical or habitat distribution will tend to connect with each other in our networks, and the assortativity of their respective labels will be high . hence, the proportion of connected components with significantly higher assortativity values than expected by chance for any location or depth in our graphs indicates to which extent we observed some geographical or habitat structure in the distribution of ciliates in our data set. the majority of the three tested labels for habitats, and of the eight tested labels for locations, were significantly more assortative in the analyzed networks, indicating a notable geographical and habitat structure of biomarks ciliate sequences . the structuring effect is especially emphasized in the cdna dataset for networks generated at thresholds ≥95% sequence similarity .

furthermore, the global dispersal hypothesis of individual taxa was not supported by our data. on the contrary, only a maximum of 2% of all ccs at the ≥99% similarity threshold include sequences from all sampling sites . figure  <dig> shows the abundance of sequences for each cc , the number of locations in which sequences from these clusters were found , and whether these sequences were evenly distributed across the locations in which they were detected, or rather dominant at some specific location . the vast majority of all components  is restricted to four or fewer sampling sites and is found at low abundance. only a few groups of ciliates were found in all samples at high abundance with an even distribution of sequences. this further fuels the moderate endemicity hypothesis for protists  <cit> , which was also supported in previous morphospecies-based studies  <cit>  as well as in environmental gene-based diversity inventories  <cit> . oxygen and salinity were identified in these and other studies as major dispersal barriers for protists  and also for bacteria  <cit> . indeed, oxygen-depletion may be a major factor that distinguishes the water samples from the sediment samples in our biomarks data set . likewise, salinity differences were noteworthy among the biomarks sampling sites, ranging from  <dig>  psu  in the black sea to  <dig>  psu in the mediterranean sea  <cit> . additional possibilities are discussed elsewhere as potential dispersal barriers for microbes; for example, constraints in active and passive dispersal  <cit> , and also the success rate of colonization  in the new environment  <cit> . the latter is influenced by a wealth of biotic and abiotic processes  <cit> . although there may be limits to the biogeography of many protists, ciliates, like bacteria  <cit> , may have a common core of diversity present at very low levels, a phenomenon that could be tested with hts for example. finally, while geographically widely dispersed components include slightly more abundant sequences, not all abundant sequences are widely dispersed. for instance, the component with the highest abundance in figure  <dig>  includes sequences from only three different sampling sites.figure  <dig> 
three-dimensional plots displaying abundance, occurrence and evenness of sequences in connected components. plots are based on dna  and cdna  networks at the most exclusive sequence similarity threshold . each dot  represents one cc, hence one conspecific group of ciliate sequences. color and position of a dot on the y-axis indicates its abundance . occurrence refers to the number of sampling sites  at which sequences of the cc were detected. evenness  describes whether sequences of a cc are homogenously distributed across different sampling sites . lc analyses revealed similar results . cc, connected components; lc, louvain communities.



habitat selection on ciliate populations
besides network components that are geographically restricted to one or a few specific sampling sites , the effect of environmental selection is also shaping ciliate community composition . the gcc of the dna and cdna networks at ≥85% similarity clearly illustrate this situation, in spite of their low stringency threshold , ciliates in sediments exhibit sequences that are different from ciliates detected in the water column . while subsurface and dcm sequences are often found in the same clusters, only a few of these clusters also include sediment sequences. in figure  <dig> this observation is highlighted by the large number of lcs which are non-green in both the top  and middle  graphs, compared to the increasing number of green lcs in the bottom  graphs.figure  <dig> 
sequence similarity network showing the proportion of sequences from each habitat in the gcc of dna and cdna datasets. gccs, decomposed in lcs as in figure  <dig> are shown for dna  and for cdna  networks. network graphs are organized from top to bottom to compare the proportion of sequences from subsurface and dcm habitats with those from sediment habitats. the color of nodes  indicates the proportion of sequences from subsurface habitats in each lc ; the proportion of sequences from dcm habitats in each lc ; and the proportion of sequences from sediment habitats in each lc . dcm, deep chlorophyll maximum; gcc, giant connected components; lc, louvain communities.



this result of contrasting sequences from sediments and water column also occurs for conspecific ciliates . using a sequence similarity threshold of 97% for cc analyses, we found that 50% of all sediment cdna components are exclusive to this habitat, while only 4% and 9% are exclusive to the subsurface and the dcm . a similar trend was observed in dna components, of which 30% were sediment-exclusive, 12% subsurface-exclusive and 7% dcm-exclusive . habitat specialization of marine protistan species at an even closer geographical proximity was also reported by orsi and colleagues  <cit> , who could relate their findings to a distinct geochemical gradient. in comparison, our results show a less pronounced level of habitat specialization along the water column, which we explain by the lack of a geochemical gradient and, thus, the less exigency for organisms to adapt. on the other hand, the high level of ciliate organisms which are specialized to sediment habitats is not unexpected, because a psammophilic life style requires different adaptations than a planktonic life style  <cit> . in a morphology-based approach combining publicly available ciliate data of  <dig> globally distributed marine benthic sampling sites, azovsky and mazei  <cit>  could show that one quarter of the observed ciliate species were only detected at one single sample site and every second species occurred at not more than three different sites. likewise, an environmental ssu-rdna study  <cit>  revealed that geographical structures at the sea-floor can act as biogeographical barriers and lead to distinctive benthic microbial communities. a more fragmented distribution of locally restricted benthic ciliate species, induced by geographical structures, such as the strait of gibraltar, could explain the comparably high level of exclusive ccs from the sediment observed in the current network approach.

CONCLUSIONS
network analysis in microbial biogeography
we present network analyses as highly efficient tools to exploit massive hts datasets and identify novel diversity. further, network analyses appear as a useful means to address fundamental subjects in ecology using environmental diversity inventories. such subjects include the analyses of microbial distribution patterns that allow us to draw conclusions about the underlying biological causes. for instance, while closely related ciliate sequences grouped together in our networks, the in-depth analyses of these groups showed that they are structured with regard to habitat or geographic location. with a broad ecological perspective, this can be interpreted as taxonomically closely related groups  which form distinct subcommunities in different habitats or at different geographic locations in european coastal waters. at the same time, we also find highly adapted groups which are restricted to one specific habitat or one location. this is similar to patterns observed in animals and plants  <cit>  and confirms observations on ciliate dispersal patterns from other oceanographic areas  <cit> . using network analyses of molecular markers, important theories can thus be tested: the technology for massive data production at an affordable price is in place, and powerful inclusive methods are available.

as we integrated data from multiple samples into the same comparative context, we must also conclude that surveying ciliate diversity appears more as a challenge than ever. the restriction of most taxa to one or a few different geographic locations and habitats, supported by all network estimates and for both dna and cdna sequences, means that we may have to bury our hopes to exhaust the ciliate  diversity of an environment using available ‘universal’ primers and local in-depth sequencing  <cit> . network analyses of sequence data can still contribute to explore such a structured vast microbial diversity. sequence similarity networks provide all the tools needed to detect exclusively environmental clusters  and/or groups of sequences which are distant from previously described diversity. alignment of groups of novel, peripheral, environmental sequences thus revealed by network analyses can guide the design of new sets of primers which will be useful to expand our knowledge of microbial diversity, moving it further away from the current status quo and its logical starting point: the sequences of cultured organisms.

the creation of distinct primers should compensate for the inherent tendency of recent environmental rdna surveys whose findings gravitate around the same groups of organisms  <cit> . we encourage readers who want more than ‘more of the same’ from diversity surveys, and to enhance the scale at which ecological theories about microbial diversity can be tested, to experience this kind of inclusive network-based strategy.

