BACKGROUND
plants produce an enormous variety of specialised metabolites among which terpenes are the largest and most structurally diverse class of natural products. they are the main components of plant essential oils. many of these terpenes are produced and stored in specialised secretory structures called glandular trichomes  <cit> . these terpenes provide protection for plants against a variety of herbivores and pathogens  <cit>  and are also commercially quite valuable. therefore, the processes by which they are synthesised and stored in plants are main target for genetic manipulation for increased yield. but our knowledge about the development of secretory glandular trichomes and terpene production and its regulation is very limited making it difficult to engineer these metabolic pathways  <cit> .

aromatic essential oil produced by mentha species is the source of the best known monoterpenes, menthol and carvone, which form the principal components of mint oil. they are extensively used in flavour and fragrance industries, pharmaceuticals and cosmetic products  <cit> . peppermint variety mostly produces menthol whereas in spearmint variety carvone dominates  <cit> . from the pgt of peppermint variety ,  <dig>  randomly selected cdna clones, or expressed sequence tags  were produced, which led to the identification of many genes, enzymes and substrates involved in the main menthol essential oil biosynthetic pathway  <cit> . given the technical limitations at their time of study, an est approach would possibly identify only cdnas which are abundant in pgt. a recent proteomic analysis of spearmint pgt identified  <dig>  proteins of which  <dig> were predicted to be involved in secondary metabolism  <cit> . but generation of sufficient genomic information with deep coverage is required to gain insights into the regulatory mechanism of terpene metabolism and glandular trichome development. this will promote successful engineering for improved yields or to develop mint as a platform for production of novel/altered terpenes. mint is a well-suited plant for this as it is able to produce and store large amount of oils within pgt instead of exuding it on to the leaf surface. storage within the pgts also reduces the loss of volatile oils by emission into the atmosphere.

high-throughput rna sequencing  has increasingly become the technology of choice to generate a comprehensive and quantitative profile of the gene transcription pattern of a tissue. here, we report comparative analysis of rna-seq transcriptome of different tissues of spearmint-namely pgt, leaf minus pgt  and leaf. the transcriptome data provided a genome-wide insight into the metabolic ability of pgt. comparison of pgt and leaf-pgt showed that  <dig>  unigenes were differentially expressed in pgt . many of these were related to terpene production and other secondary metabolite pathways. from the various terpene synthases  transcripts identified, we functionally characterized  <dig> of these previously uncharacterized tpss from mint and found them to be sesquiterpene synthases. key pathway unigene transcripts were verified by qrt-pcr. our results show the molecular specialisation of pgt for the production of different classes of metabolites.

RESULTS
spearmint pgt and their development
spearmint leaves produce three different types of trichomes on their surfaces: non-glandular multicellular hair like, capitate glandular trichomes with a single secretory head cell and pgts whose secretory head is composed of eight-cells with a single stalk and basal cell . these pgt glands possess a large subcuticular storage space that is formed by the separation of the cuticle from the apical cells and the essential oil is secreted into this cavity  <cit>  . it is known that new glands keep initiating on the leaf till expansion ceases and the monoterpene content and compositions change with the age of the leaf  <cit> . different studies have indicated that monoterpene biosynthesis is most active in young 12– <dig> day old leaves of peppermint after which the rate of synthesis slowly declines  <cit> . we performed gas chromatography–mass spectrometry  analysis on young spearmint leaves  and found abundance of both limonene and carvone monoterpenes . limonene is the first committed step towards carvone pathway. in addition to these monoterpenes, the presence of sesquiterpenes was also observed. this indicated the dynamic terpene biosynthetic activity of leaves at this stage of development. pgt were purified from leaves of this stage and rna isolated. the leaves of the same stage were brushed to remove all trichomes and rna extracted from them as controls .figure  <dig> 
trichomes on spearmint leaf.  scanning electron microscope image of spearmint leaf showing three types of trichomes, a, non glandular hairy trichome; b, peltate glandular trichome ; c, capitate glandular trichome.  process of secretion by pgt. a, presecretory stage; b, formation of storage cavity; c, secretion into the storage cavity; d, release of oil upon injury. the pgts were stained with toulidine blue.
gc-ms of spearmint leaf showing the presence of monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes.




sequencing, de novo assembly and annotation of transcriptome
three rna libraries were prepared and sequenced by illumina technology. more than  <dig> million high quality reads of  <dig> base pairs  were generated from pgt, leaf-pgt and leaf . using the trinity method  <cit>  the sequence reads were finally assembled into  <dig>  non-redundant unigenes, spanning a total of 101 mb of sequence with a gc content of  <dig> %. all unigenes were longer than 200 bp. the n <dig> of the final assembled transcripts was  <dig>  bp. the unigenes were annotated by performing blastx search against various protein databases. among the  <dig>  non-redundant unigenes,  <dig>   had at least one hit in blastx search with e-value < = 1e- <dig>  functional classifications of gene ontology  term of all unigenes were performed using trinotate  <cit> . in order to calculate the expression level for assembled transcripts, we first mapped reads onto them using bowtie  <cit> . rsem  was used to estimate the abundance of assembled transcripts and to measure the expression level  <cit> .

overview of expression profile of spearmint pgt
from the rna seq data about  <dig>  unigenes were observed to be expressed in spearmint pgt. the heat map in figure  <dig> exhibits some specific expression patterns to pgt. among this specific pattern for pgt we found transcripts for terpene biosynthesis, lipid transfer proteins and interesting transcription factors like mybs and wrkys. comparison of pgt and leaf-pgt showed that  <dig>  unigenes were differentially expressed in pgt . these unigenes showed a minimum of  <dig> times increase in expression level in pgt as compared to leaf-pgt. about 30% of these unigenes encoded either hypothetical proteins or remained unannotated. many of these unannotated unigenes showed none or minimal expression in leaf-pgt. they might represent novel genes that are unique to pgts development and divergent from other plants, whose genomes have been sequenced. data from proteomic analysis of spearmint pgt also showed that the largest functional category of the identified proteins was “unclear classification” and included proteins with unknown functions  <cit> . the absence or low levels of some pgt-specific transcripts from leaf rna seq data indicated the dilution of pgt-specific rnas among the total leaf rnas and reaffirms the importance of isolating these organs for analysis.figure  <dig> 
heat map of transcript expression in pgt, leaf-pgt and leaf.




among the top  <dig> differentially expressed unigenes, we identified  <dig> tpss,  <dig> cytochrome p450s,  <dig> lipid transfer proteins ,  <dig> transcription factors,  <dig> atp-binding cassette  transporters and several transcripts associated with cell wall. cytochrome p450s are involved in the hydroxylation of terpenes  <cit>  and ltps have been suggested to be involved in intracellular transport and secretion of lipids and terpenes  <cit> . ltps were among the most abundant unigenes in pgt and were confirmed by qrt-pcr . the abundance of these ltps suggests their importance in pgts metabolic function and development. abc transporters are also proposed to be involved in the active transport of secondary metabolites  <cit> . the spearmint pgt is presumed to undergo cell wall modification to form subcuticular storage space  <cit> . among the differentially expressed unigenes there were few that were related to cell wall synthesis or modifications and a subset of these were confirmed by qrt-pcr . whether they play a role in modification of cell wall layers to form the storage space remains to be investigated.

to characterize biological processes specific for pgt, go term was determined for all differentially expressed unigenes. additionally, we identified unigenes whose expression was reduced in pgt by comparing leaf-pgt and pgt. these unigenes showed a minimum of  <dig> times reduction in expression level in pgt when compared to leaf-pgt. go term was determined for them as well. figure  <dig> shows the top  <dig> go terms for the more abundant and less abundant unigenes. go terms associated with ribosome biogenesis, ribosome structural genes and translation are highly represented in pgt, which could reflect the high protein biosynthetic activity of pgts. other terms included terpene metabolism and most of the primary energy producing terms like glycolysis and tricarboxylic acid cycle. furthermore, pentose phosphate related term  was also enriched in pgt. this term provides nadph for biosynthetic processes such as fatty acid synthesis, cytochrome p <dig> mediated hydroxylation and the assimilation of inorganic nitrogen  <cit> . these results indicate that the go functions that provide energy equivalents and redox cofactors are very active in pgt. secretory trichomes are biosynthetically very active, and hence, there is a high energy requirement in these cells. unigenes from the go terms of photosynthesis, chlorophyll biosynthesis and starch biosynthesis were among the less abundant ones. this shows that our pgt sample preparation was pure and not contaminated with leaf tissues as mint pgts are non-photosynthetic.figure  <dig> 
top  <dig> go annotation of more expressed unigenes  and less expressed unigenes . x-axis: log, p-value is the hypergeometic test result for each go terms.



mint pgts being non- photosynthetic and metabolically very active would presumably rely on exogenous supply of sucrose from underlying leaf tissues to use as carbon source for energy production. we found several transcripts encoding enzymes for sucrose catabolism expressed more in pgt like sucrose synthase and neutral/alkaline invertases that are important for channelling carbon from sucrose in non-photosynthetic tissues  <cit> . these enzymes convert sucrose to hexose phosphates. plastids in the pgts are the main sites of secondary metabolism. in contrast to chloroplasts, plastids of heterotrophic tissues have to rely on the import of atp and carbon to drive their metabolic processes. we checked our set of differentially expressed unigenes to see if any known transporters are present. in most plants glucose 6-phosphate seems to be the preferred hexose phosphate taken up by nongreen plastids. the transporter proteins responsible for this import of carbon into plastids are known as glc6p–phosphate translocator  and transcript similar to gpt was seen enriched in pgt . this carbon can be used for starch biosynthesis or for the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway in plastids  <cit> . go terms for oxidative pentose phosphate pathways were seen enriched in pgt. additionally transcript similar to plastidic phosphoenolpyruvate/phosphate translocator was found to be expressed more in pgt. they are involved in the transport of phosphoenolpyruvate, an energy rich glycolytic intermediate from the cytoplasm into the plastids  <cit> . further, atp generated either by glycolysis or by oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria can be imported into non- green plastids by plastidic nucleotide transporter . transcript similar to ntt was also observed to be more abundant in pgt  <cit> .

analysis of spearmint pgt transcription factors
although the cloning and functional characterization of enzymes involved in terpene biosynthesis has been quite successful in various plants, knowledge about regulation of these secretory trichome specific pathways is very rudimentary. studies in peppermint show a close association between enzyme activity and transcript abundance for all gene/enzyme pairs, suggesting that, essential oil biosynthesis is primarily influenced at the transcriptional level  <cit> . hence, identification of transcription factors that globally control metabolic pathway will provide an attractive strategy for engineering terpene production. similarly, knowledge about the development of secretory glandular trichomes, the so-called factories of important terpenoid production, is very limited. most of the transcription factors involved with trichome development have been isolated from arabidopsis, which lacks secretory trichomes. studies in tobacco and tomato are beginning to show that multicellular secretory trichomes and unicellular trichomes of arabidopsis are not homologous structures, and they likely develop under different regulatory conditions  <cit> . our analysis of transcriptome data of young leaves or pgt did not uncover any transcripts that matched those of the major known trichome initiating gene transcripts from arabidopsis, like transparent testa glabra <dig>  glabra <dig>  glabra <dig>  <cit> . either these genes are not expressed or are expressed at a different developmental stage of leaves or pgt than the stage used in this study. table  <dig> shows the top  <dig> transcription factors that were significantly more abundant in pgt when compared to leaf-pgt.table  <dig> 
top  <dig> enriched tfs in pgt compared to leaf-pgt



name
leaf
leaf-pgt
pgt
fc
arabidopsis id
description
the value is log <dig> resm value for each assembled tfs. fc is the log  <dig> fold change in pgt when compared to leaf-pgt. arabidopsis id is the homolog id in arabidopsis protein database.



the mep  pathway is more abundant in spearmint pgt than the mva  pathway
the building blocks for all different classes of terpenes produced by plants are c <dig> units of isopentenyl diphosphate  and its allylic isomer dimethylallyl diphosphate . they are generated either by plastidial mep or cytoplasmic mva pathway. the mep pathway requires seven enzymes to synthesize ipp and dmapp from pyruvate and glyceraldehyde  <dig> phosphates which feed the monoterpene pathway  <cit> . from peppermint est studies it has been proposed that the active pathway for the formation of ipp/dmapp in the pgt is the mep pathway. this is consistent with our analysis too where mep pathway transcripts were more abundant in pgt than mva. high expression of mep pathway transcripts correlates well with the production of monoterpenes in pgt. it has been reported that 1-deoxy-d-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase , the first enzyme of this pathway is important for the overall regulation of the pathway  <cit> . multiple dxs genes have been found in plants like zea mays, medicago truncatula, oryza sativa, ginkgo biloba and pinus densiflora and picea abies  <cit> . in all these plants, two or three candidate dxs genes have been reported. from our data we were able to identify  <dig> different 1-deoxy-d-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase  unigenes showing different levels of abundance in pgt. the number of genes coding for each mep pathway enzyme varies from plant to plant  <cit> . presence of multiple genes with differential tissue-specific expression levels might contribute towards the regulation of the mep pathway, in different organs of the plant. figure  <dig> shows the number of unigenes identified for each enzyme of the mep pathway and their rna seq expression levels. in cases of enzymes with more than one unigene, the unigene with the highest abundance in pgt was taken into consideration. their expression was further validated by qrt-pcr . from our rna seq data and qrt-pcr analysis, dxr and mct transcript levels were low when compared to levels of other enzymes in mep pathway. this might suggest that possibly these two enzymes are the rate limiting steps of this pathway. a possible option to explore in future will be to enhance the expression level of various rate limiting steps to enhance the production of terpenes.figure  <dig> 
expression level of unigenes involved in mep pathway. the number in green represents the expression level of a particular unigene in pgt . the number in red represents the fold change in expression level when compared to leaf-pgt . in cases of enzymes with more than one unigene, the unigene with the highest abundance was taken into consideration. the number in brackets represents the number of unigenes identified for each enzyme in the pathway. dxs: 1-deoxy-d-xylulose-5-phosphate  synthase; dxr: dxp reductoisomerase, mct:mep cytidyltransferase, cmk:4--2-c-methyl-d-erythritol kinase mcs: 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol  <dig> -cyclodiphosphate  synthase, hds: 1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-butenyl 4-diphosphate  synthase, hdr: hmbpp reductase, ippi : isopentenyl diphosphate  delta-isomerase.



in contrast to the mep pathway, the transcript levels of mva enzymes were very low. for rna seq expression levels of unigenes involved in this pathway refer additional file  <dig>  their expression was validated by qrt-pcr . mva pathway derived ipp is generally believed to be used for the production of cytosolic sesquiterpenes, triterpenes and mitochondrial terpenes. in addition to monoterpenes, mint produces a few sesquiterpenes although at much lower quantities than monoterpenes  <cit> . lower level of mva pathway can be one of the reasons. interestingly, the transcripts of genes involved in the mep pathway are also enriched in artemisia annua trichomes, glandular trichomes of hops and in snapdragon flowers where sesquiterpene metabolism dominates  <cit>  suggesting that the mep pathway can also feed sesquiterpene production. studies with labelled substrate predict exchange of metabolites between the mva and mep pathways  <cit> . how the ipp/dmapp formed by mep pathway is utilized to synthesize sesquiterpenes in mint remains to be investigated.

monoterpene production is enriched in spearmint pgt
subsequent condensation reactions between ipp and dmapp are catalysed by gpp synthases  that leads to the formation of geranyl diphosphate  the precursor for monoterpenes. the conversion of ipp to dmapp and its equilibrium is maintained by ipp isomerase . in most plant species this enzyme is encoded by a single gene whereas arabidopsis has two ippi genes  <cit> . we found  <dig> ippi unigenes in spearmint both enriched in pgt. peppermint gpps  is a two-component heteromeric enzyme consisting of a large and a small subunit, and both the subunits are catalytically inactive by themselves  <cit> . in spearmint too, we found unigenes for both the small and large subunits of gpp synthase that showed high expression in pgt. the major constituent of spearmint essential oil is  carvone which is synthesised from gpp in a three step reaction. transcripts for all the three enzymes involved in above reaction, limonene synthase , limonene-6-hydroxylase  and carveol dehydrogenase  were highly expressed in pgt and verified by q-rt-pcr .figure  <dig> 
carvone biosynthesis pathway unigene levels. the number in green represents the expression level of a particular unigene in pgt . the number in red represents the fold change in expression level when compared to leaf-pgt . in cases of enzymes with more than one unigene, the unigene with the highest abundance was taken into consideration. the number in brackets represents the number of unigenes identified for each enzyme in the pathway. ls: limonene synthase, l6oh: limonene-6-hydroxylase, cd: carveol dehydrogenase.



interestingly, the precursor for menthol in peppermint and  carvone in spearmint is the same limonene. in peppermint it is oxygenated by -4s-limonene-3-hydroxylase  to form -trans-isopiperitenol and it enters the menthol pathway whereas in spearmint limonene is oxygenated by -4s-limonene- 6-hydroxylase  to form -trans-carveol. both these enzymes show a 70% identity at the amino acid level with major differences localized to the presumptive active sites  <cit> . the spearmint l6oh transcript is highly expressed in pgt as expected but the full set of downstream redox enzymes isopiperitenone reductase, -pulegone reductase, and menthone reductase involved in menthol pathway were also found but poorly expressed in pgt. a previous study has shown that  carvone is not an efficient substrate for the initial double-bond reductase, therefore  carvone accumulates in spearmint even though the downstream redox enzymes are present  <cit> . hence, the abundance of a single enzyme l6oh instead of l3oh changes the final monoterpene produced. this shows how simple changes in the production of a single intermediate can result in drastic changes in the metabolic profiles. when compared to heterodimeric gpp synthase, transcripts for farnesyl diphosphate synthase which is responsible for the formation of farnesyl diphosphate precursor for sesquiterpenes, is expressed around  <dig> times less in pgt. apart from low mva pathway, low levels of fpp synthase transcripts might also contribute to the reduced sesquiterpene production in mint pgt.

functional characterization of terpene synthases  from spearmint
in plants, specific tpss are responsible for the synthesis of various terpene molecules from the common precursors. our transcriptome data provides a rich resource for identifying and functionally characterizing new tpss from spearmint. from our enriched unigenes, we found  <dig> that were identified as terpene synthases; all of them were more than 1 kb and  <dig> of them were encoding full-length open reading frames . we found tpss annotated as limonene synthase, -β-farnesene synthase, bicyclogermacrene synthase and cis muuroladiene synthase being preferentially expressed in pgt. however, the exact functional annotation of a new tps requires activity characterization of the recombinant protein. in mint species, to our knowledge limonene synthase from spearmint  <cit> , -β-farnesene synthase from peppermint  <cit>  and cis-muuroladiene synthase from black peppermint  <cit>  have been previously characterised with respect to their functions. from our rna seq data we chose to characterize two unannotated full-length tps. phylogenetic comparison  showed that both mstps <dig> and mstps <dig> belonged to the tps-a subfamily of angiosperm sesquiterpene synthases. the main sesquiterpenes identified by gc-ms analysis in our spearmint variety were -β-farnesene, β-caryophyllene, α-caryophyllene , cis murola-3- <dig> diene, β-copaene, bicyclogermacrene and bicyclosesquiphellandrene.

to determine mstps <dig> and mstps <dig> enzymatic activities, the full-length open reading frame encoding these enzymes were overexpressed in e.coli, purified and used for in vitro assays with gpp or fpp as substrate. in the presence of fpp mstps <dig> catalysed the formation of β-caryophyllene in vitro  whereas mstps <dig> produced a peak from fpp that was identified as one of β-cubebene/germacrene d/β-copaene by gcms . β-copaene was observed in our mint leaf gc-ms data suggesting that mstps <dig> is most likely to be β-copaene synthase. both the tpss failed to produce a peak with gpp as substrate . thus, our in vitro studies identified them to be sesquiterpene synthases. furthermore, transient agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated plant expression  <cit>  was used to investigate the terpenes produced by mstps <dig> and mstps <dig> in planta. both mstps <dig> and mstps <dig> under the control of a 35s promoter were transiently expressed in n. benthamiana leaves by agrobacterium-mediated infiltration. the compounds were analysed  <dig> dpi  by gc-ms. both tpss failed to form any new peak when observed by gc-ms. studies have shown that overexpressing enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme a reductase , a rate limiting step of the mevalonate pathway increases heterologous plant sesquiterpene production  <cit> . accordingly, both the tpss were coexpressed with hmgr in planta to observe the production of sesquiterpenes. mstps <dig> with hmgr produced β-caryophyllene as the major peak and α-caryophyllene and caryophyllene oxide as minor peaks additional file  <dig>  mstps <dig> even with hmgr failed to produce any new peaks in planta suggesting that the compound formed by mstps <dig> might be further metabolised endogenously by the plant .figure  <dig> 
in vitro
enzymatic assays of recombinant mstpss. gst-tagged mstps recombinant enzymes were purified by glutathione-based affinity chromatography and used for in vitro assays with gpp or fpp as substrate. the final products were analysed by gc-ms. the peaks marked with an arrow in the gc traces were compared with the reference of the mass spectra library. mass spectra for the peaks formed with fpp are shown at bottom of figure. m/z, mass-to-charge ratio,  left panel, β-caryophyllene formation by gst-mstps <dig> with fpp; right panel, the control gc-ms analyses of gst with gpp or fpp.  left panel, β-cubebene/germacrene d or β-copaene formation by gst-mstps <dig> with fpp; right panel, the control gc-ms analyses of gst with gpp or fpp.



sesquiterpene synthesis is thought to take place in the cytoplasm while monoterpene synthesis is believed to occur in plastids. since our biochemical characterization shows that mstps <dig> and mstps <dig> are sesquiterpene synthases, we examined subcellular localization of these proteins in transient studies in tobacco leaves. yfp-tagged mstpss were transiently expressed in n. benthamiana leaf cells by agrobacterium-mediated infiltration and visualized  <dig> dpi using the yfp channel of a confocal microscope. both the mstpss showed cytoplasmic localization  and their sequence analysis also showed lack of plastid targeting sequences which further affirms that these tpss are sesquiterpene synthases. therefore, either by sequence similarity or by functional characterization we were able to identify all the major terpene synthases that are responsible for the formation of major spearmint essential oil components.

spearmint pgts as plants chemical defense organs
many of the secondary metabolites produced by glandular trichomes play a role in plant defence. majority of them fall into the category of terpenes, phenylpropenes, flavonoids, methyl ketones, acyl sugars and defensive proteins. apart from having a rich terpene pathway, spearmint pgt also shows presence of transcripts that are involved in the production of different secondary metabolites that may have a role in plant defense. transcripts encoding enzymes for phenylalanine ammonia lyase, cinnamate 4-hydroxylase, and 4-coumarate coa-ligase were seen expressed in pgt. these enzymes are involved in phenylpropanoid production. presence of a variety of small molecular weight phenylpropanoids like caffeic, rosmarinic and ferulic acids has been detected in leaves of different mint germplasm  <cit> . transcripts similar to caffeate o-methyltransferase, an enzyme required for the conversion of caffeic acid into ferulic acid was preferentially expressed in pgt. chalcone flavanone isomerase an enzyme in the flavonoid pathway in plants was also preferentially expressed in pgt. unigenes encoding transcripts similar to plant invertase/pectin methylesterase inhibitors were highly expressed in pgt which are important to defend against plant pathogens  <cit> . all the above transcripts were verified by qrt-pcr .

oxylipins are large family of biologically active oxidized fatty acid-derivatives that are important for plant defense responses. they are produced mainly by the combined action of lipases, lipoxygenases  and members of cytochrome p <dig>  family specialized in metabolizing fatty acids hydroperoxides . hps form the initial substrates for different branches of the oxylipin pathway  <cit> . we found enzymes involved in oxidation of fatty acids expressed more in pgts. transcripts similar to phospholipase a, lipoxygenase and allene oxide synthase and allene oxide cyclase were enriched in pgt. allene oxide synthase and allene oxide cyclase are members of the cytochrome p <dig>  family and are involved in the lox pathways  <cit> . all the above mentioned transcripts showed a minimum of  <dig> times enrichment in pgt and were confirmed by qrt-pcr. however to understand the role of these enzymes in plant defence and exact nature of oxylipins formed by them, further characterization is essential, especially in terms of their positional specificity and substrate specificity. plants possess both basal and inducible mechanisms to defend themselves against pathogens. the transcriptome data reflects the basal or constitutive state of defense mechanism existing in spearmint pgt. the changes in transcript abundance in all the above mentioned genes on stress induction will provide a better understanding of how pgt act as chemical defence organs.

CONCLUSIONS
availability of extensive genome resources in non-model plant mentha is scarce. this is the first attempt at the de novo sequencing and assembly of transcriptomes derived from various tissues of mentha spicata using ngs. comparison of pgt and leaf-pgt led to the identification of  <dig>  differentially expressed unigenes. analysis of these unigenes provides an insight into the gene expression pattern and biological processes active in spearmint pgt. further identification of various unknown pgt specific unigenes should facilitate new gene discovery. our transcriptome data provides essential information for future genetic studies in spearmint. it will also help in developing strategies to engineer the terpene metabolic process that can be further extrapolated to other commercially important plants similar to mint where no genomic resources are available.

