BACKGROUND
phylogenetic analyses of closely related species are affected by specific problems that are different from those present in phylogenies of more distant species  <cit> . the first and most obvious difficulty is that nucleotide sequences must have enough variability within and among the studied species to obtain an adequate resolution of the phylogenetic tree. for this reason, mitochondrial genes, which show a high rate of nucleotide substitution, have been the main choice for the reconstruction of phylogenetic trees at the genus and family levels in all animals  <cit> . another distinctive feature of the phylogenetic reconstruction of closely related species is that gene coalescence and the stochasticity associated with population genetic processes must be taken into account. for example, incomplete lineage sorting may cause the gene tree to have a different topology than the species tree  <cit> . this leads to the necessity of using multiple, unlinked genes, together with the integration of coalescent-based techniques, in the reconstruction of the species tree  <cit> . phylogenies based on a broad representation of the genome can also help in species delimitation or analyses of genetic variability. therefore, in these approaches it is essential to make use of the nuclear genome, where there are plenty of unlinked genes. however, nuclear genes in animals usually have much lower evolutionary rates than mitochondrial genes and, sometimes, they are not informative enough for assessing the variability within species or for phylogenetic reconstruction. in addition, due to the larger population size of nuclear genes with respect to mitochondrial genes, the former are more affected by coalescent stochasticity, so the necessity of using multiple genes is stronger  <cit> . thus, the progress of multilocus phylogenetics requires, as a first step, an important effort of developing unlinked nuclear markers able to provide enough differences within and among species  <cit> .

systematic efforts to find novel markers for phylogenetic studies have been performed in different groups of organisms  <cit> . markers selected include exons, introns and intergenic regions. exons show very little variability for the phylogenies of closely related species, whereas intergenic regions present difficulties for the design of primers of wide-specificity. on the other hand, introns are a part of the genome with large nucleotide variability and, at the same time, they can be easily amplified with primers placed in the adjacent exons  <cit> . thus, they are ideal candidates for multilocus phylogenies of closely related species. however, not all introns are equally valid for this task. some introns are highly conserved due to their involvement in certain functions and they may not show enough differences between closely related species  <cit> . in fact, introns show a wide range of evolutionary rates. for example, a comparison of human and mouse introns showed genetic distances that ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  substitutions/site  <cit> . in addition, some introns show disparate rates of evolution in some lineages but not in others  <cit> , indicating an imperfect molecular clock that may affect the measurement of genetic diversity in some species. different processes, such as a change in chromosome position of the gene or the development of a new isoform by alternative splicing in certain lineages  <cit> , may cause such variations in the evolutionary dynamics and thus in the molecular clock of the introns.

in mammals, introns have been mainly used to resolve deep groupings but also to study more recent phylogenies  <cit> . however, no attempt has been made so far to systematically select an optimal set of introns for mammals. in this work, we have devised a protocol to extract the best introns from the complete mammalian genomes of five species: human, chimpanzee, macaque, dog and cow  <cit> . we deliberately did not use the available genomes of rodents  because they have genomic features that would have made the comparisons of all mammals problematic. for example, rodents have very attenuated isochors and show very fast evolutionary rates when compared to other mammals  <cit> . this is also true for introns, as previously shown  <cit> . the high evolutionary rates of rodent introns can complicate the alignments, phylogenetic reconstructions and measurement of genetic distances. to avoid the same problems we also decided not to include marsupials and monotremes. thus, in this work we concentrated on the analysis of non-rodent eutherian genomes. from these genomes we obtained one-to-one orthologues, constructed alignments and trees from each individual intron and filtered out introns with inadequate features for shallow phylogenies. in addition, introns were selected to come from single-copy genes in order to avoid multiple bands in pcr reactions, to have an adequate length for pcr amplification, and to be surrounded by exons with enough space for primer design. from the resulting introns, we selected a small set that we used to experimentally verify that they work according to the expected features of ease of amplification and high evolutionary rate. finally, we studied the variability of intron divergence in different species pairs.

RESULTS
intron set acquisition
we extracted all introns smaller than  <dig>  nucleotides from the genomes of human, chimpanzee, macaque, cow and dog, which comprise three mammalian orders . the total number of extracted introns per genome ranged between  <dig>  in the cow and  <dig>  in the dog. using information from the ensembl database, we arrived at an initial set of  <dig>  one-to-one orthologous introns in the five mammalian species .

most of these introns had an inadequate length for their amplification and were therefore discarded in our initial filtering processes. first, we restricted the intron length in homo sapiens to a minimum of  <dig> and a maximum of  <dig> nucleotides. second, we controlled for intron length conservation among the five species used in this study, taking human as a referent and relaxing the constraints as the phylogenetic distance between the compared species increased. after the application of these size filters,  <dig> introns remained. in addition, the introns flanked by small exons  were discarded because the design of pcr primers could be difficult in them. this filter affected  <dig> % of the introns available in the previous step.

mammalian genomes have a large number of duplicated genes due to different gene or genome duplication processes  <cit> . these genes constitute a severe problem because primers could hybridize in a large number of genomic places, giving rise to multiple pcr products. thus, a crucial step was to check for the duplication of the introns using blast over the different genomes. in fact, we performed the blast searches using the flanking exons instead of the introns because the exonic sequences are easier to detect by blast, even in divergent genes  <cit> . only those introns that had both flanking exons present just once in the five genomes were considered to be single-copy. this step ruled out approximately half of the remaining introns. at this point, there were  <dig> introns with a preliminary orthology filter that can be used to study different evolutionary processes. however, for these introns to be most useful in phylogenetic studies of closely related species we applied several additional filters.

next, we eliminated introns that were too accelerated or decelerated in some lineages . that is, we selected introns whose rates of evolution were similar to the global genomic rate and therefore with a largely neutral molecular clock in mammals. furthermore, trees with large branches in particular lineages may correspond to hidden paralogues that may have remained undetected up to this point. these paralogues are very problematic for estimations of evolutionary rates and other parameters necessary for their use in phylogenetic analyses. to detect this type of introns, we first constructed a global genomic tree from the concatenation of all introns available at this step . this tree was then used as a reference to assess if the phylogenetic tree of each individual intron had a rate of evolution similar to the global one in every lineage. this calculation was performed with the k tree score measured by the ktreedist software, which reflects the topological and relative differences in branch length between a given tree and a reference tree  <cit> . that is, a high k tree score is indicative of a tree that has some highly accelerated or decelerated branches with respect to the reference tree regardless of the overall tree divergence. this score is also influenced by wrong topologies when the affected branches are large. by setting an arbitrary k tree score limit of  <dig>  we removed approximately 34% of the introns that were most different in shape from the global genomic tree.

the next step was designed to eliminate the most conserved introns, which could be involved in some function and are therefore not variable enough for the phylogeny of closely related species. to do this, we employed two different measures of divergence. first, we calculated with the ktreedist software the scaling factor from each intronic phylogenetic tree to the global genomic tree. this measure allowed us to discard the introns that showed the slowest overall evolutionary rates. second, we calculated another measure of divergence, the primates total branch length, by using the corresponding alignments and trees with only the three primate species . this measure is more accurate and less affected by alignment imperfections possibly generated when comparing sequences that are too divergent. we then selected the introns that had a scaling factor lower than  <dig>  and a primates total branch length higher than  <dig>  substitutions per position. this rendered a dataset of  <dig> introns that excluded the most conserved ones.

finally, a visual inspection step was performed to detect any poorly aligned sequences caused by wrong annotations or clearly incorrect orthology assignments. only one intron had to be eliminated in this step. the resulting final set was thus composed of  <dig> new phylogenetic markers . in the additional file  <dig> we show all relevant information for each marker. this includes the alignments of both the intron and the flanking exons, the phylogenetic tree of the five mammals constructed with the intron sequences, and the genomic location and function of the gene to which the intron belongs. the examination of this information allows the selection of optimal markers for specific purposes and the design of exon primers with different degrees of specificity. interestingly, one of the introns in our final set turned out to be intron  <dig> of transthyretin , which is one of the most widely used introns in mammalian phylogenetics  <cit> . to our knowledge, no other markers in our dataset have been used so far.

analysis of genomic features of the new set of introns
the genomic location in homo sapiens of each new marker is represented in figure  <dig>  all the human chromosomes carry at least one intron in our set, except chromosomes  <dig> and y. the latter chromosome was expected to be missing from our set because no sequence for this chromosome was present in the available genome sequences of macaque, cow and dog. regarding the x chromosome, only one intron was present in the final set. the rest of x-linked introns were discarded in the different filtering process, mainly in the single-copy test and divergence filters steps.

repetitive sequences present in the intron set were analyzed with the repeatmasker software. of the  <dig> introns,  <dig> were found to contain repetitive elements. the most frequent elements were sines, which were present in 70% of the introns that bore any kind of element, followed by lines, which were found in 26% of them. introns with repeats had, on average, 18% of their sequence corresponding to repetitive elements. these types of repetitive sequences normally evolve in a neutral way, mostly by point mutations, and therefore their presence is not a problem for sequence-based analysis methods that assume a normal nucleotide substitution model. if all species in the alignment have the repeat  this fragment can be used normally as any other sequence. when only some species have the repetitive element , we observed that alignment programs do not have problems dealing with these repetitive elements, and therefore the alignments can also be used for further sequence or phylogenetic analyses.

more problematic are microsatellites . since microsatellites evolve by a slippage mechanism instead of by point mutations  <cit> , they cannot be used with phylogenetic or coalescence methods that assume a normal point substitution model. we checked for the presence of microsatellites with the tandem repeats finder program and found that  <dig> of the  <dig> introns had at least one microsatellite in some species. microsatellites are, in general, specific for particular lineages, and their presence in one species does not mean that the intron cannot be used in other taxa. therefore, introns with some microsatellites were not eliminated from the data set. however, when these sequences are found within the introns in a species to be studied it may be better not to use this intron and rather select a new one from the set designed here. alternatively, the positions belonging to the microsatellites can be eliminated from the alignment for further processing with sequence analysis programs that assume a point mutation mechanism of evolution.

analysis of genetic distances and single nucleotide polymorphisms
in order to test the degree of variability of the  <dig> final introns with respect to the initial data sets, we estimated the genetic distance between human and chimpanzee for each intron. to do this, we constructed the alignments of the primate species , which could be used without further cleaning. then, we estimated the corresponding maximum-likelihood trees and measured the patristic distances between human and chimpanzee. we then compared the distances obtained for the final set of  <dig> introns with the sets corresponding to the different filtering processes . the mean divergence between human and chimpanzee was around  <dig>  substitutions/position in the three initial data sets: the size-constrained introns set, the single-copy gene introns set, and the set obtained after the application of the neutral evolution test. as expected, after the application of the divergence filter this distance increased, but only up to  <dig>  substitutions/position. thus, the overall gain in genetic distance in the final set was small. however, the main effect of the divergence filters was the elimination of highly conserved introns , which could be involved in some important function and would be practically useless for studies of closely related species. similarly, the analysis of human single nucleotide polymorphisms  in the introns of our final set revealed that they had  <dig>  snps on average. in comparison, the set of  <dig> size-constrained orthologous introns  contained  <dig>  snps on average. when scaling these results by the length of each intron to obtain the snp density, the difference between the means was still maintained:  <dig>  snps per nucleotide for the final set of introns versus  <dig>  for the initial set. thus, human snps also showed a slight increase in the genetic variability of the introns in the final set.

to compare the mean intronic genetic distance with the divergence of cytochrome b, which is the most popular marker for mammalian phylogenetics  <cit> , we obtained the cytochrome b distance between human and chimpanzee. to do this, we measured the patristic distance in a maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree similarly reconstructed with human, chimpanzee and macaque cytochrome b sequences obtained from genbank  <cit> . the resulting distance was  <dig>  substitutions/position, which implies that the final set of  <dig> introns has, on average,  <dig>  times less divergence than the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. furthermore, alignments containing the exons flanking the  <dig> introns were constructed for the three primates, maximum likelihood trees were built as above, and the resulting trees were used to calculate the distance between homo sapiens and pan troglodytes for both the upstream and downstream exons of each intron. the resulting mean genetic divergence was  <dig>  substitutions/position, which implies that the  <dig> selected introns have, on average,  <dig>  more divergence than their corresponding flanking exons.

experimental validation of the newly developed phylogenetic markers: primer design and pcr amplification
the intron filtering processes carried out above were designed to select a set of optimal introns for the phylogeny of closely related mammalian species. however, many unidentified factors may affect the amplification of these introns in different species. to experimentally test the real performance of these introns and the validity of the designed bioinformatic analysis we randomly selected twelve introns among the largest ones in the final data set for sequencing in different mammals.

in order to design primers of wide spectrum, the flanking exonic sequences already gathered  were complemented by  a few others from the ensembl database: horse , sumatran orangutan , little brown bat , european hedgehog , domestic cat , northern tree shrew , gray mouse lemur , african bush elephant , lesser hedgehog tenrec , nine-banded armadillo  and common shrew . these genomes mostly corresponded to low-coverage genome projects but many of them were valid for certain exons. exonic alignments, containing between  <dig> and  <dig> different species, were constructed. these alignments allowed us to design the 3' end of every primer in the most conserved part of the exonic alignment. degenerate bases  were used to make the primers suitable for as many different mammalian species as possible.

to test these primers, we used genomic dna extracted from six mammalian species: iberian mouse-bat , bornean orangutan , snow leopard , tiger , least weasel , and european polecat . this set included several closely related species in order to analyze their intronic divergence. table  <dig> shows the primers used and the amplification results for this panel of species. five out of the  <dig> introns failed to produce a single, clean pcr band of the expected size in one or more of the six analyzed species. this was due to several reasons, the main one being pcr misamplification in the form of gel smear. some other problems were the excessive length of the amplified band in some species or the generation of double bands in the pcr reaction, which can reflect the existence of gene duplications in a particular lineage . some optimizations with different primers or hybridization temperatures did not solve the problems in these introns. the seven remaining introns did produce a clear single pcr band of the expected size in the six chosen species. it should be noted that, even for the successful primers, the annealing temperature had to be optimized for different species. moreover, there were a few cases, namely slc38a7- <dig> for panthera tigris and carhsp- <dig> and pnpo- <dig> for myotis escalerai, where more specific primers had to be designed to improve the pcr band. the pcr bands of these introns were subsequently sequenced, and the sequences were compared to the known introns, which confirmed their correct amplification. in addition to the sequence of the pcr band, the exact sequence of one allele for each specimen was obtained by cloning the sequenced pcr product in a plasmid vector.

the intron name is taken from the gene name according to the hugo gene nomenclature committee followed by a dash and the intron number. in the "result" column, the  symbol indicates successful sequencing in the whole panel of species; , non-specific amplification in one species; , non-specific amplification in several species; , intron of very large size in some species; , double pcr band in some species.

we can conclude that a large part of the markers tested were valid, with a minimum optimization, for a wide variety of mammals. of course, the success rate will vary depending on the taxa of choice, but, to increase the chances that a primer works, it is important to take into account that this optimization may be necessary in all pilot studies and may include the adjustment of the hybridization temperature or the modification of the primer specificity with a different degree of degeneracy. in our experimental test of selected introns, we designed primers of broad specificity so that they could be used in a wide range of mammalian groups, but primers intended for specific taxa need not be based on such a variety of species and can have less degenerate bases. in addition to the species tested here, selected to include pairs of closely related species, we have successfully amplified other intron markers from our data set in other mammals, mainly belonging to erinaceomorpha and soricomorpha, as part of ongoing studies. they also produced the expected pcr band and the corresponding sequence, indicating again the usefulness of this set of introns.

use of the selected introns as markers for the phylogeny of closely related species
the sequenced introns were added to the introns already downloaded for human, chimpanzee, macaque, dog and cow, and this set was complemented by three additional genomes that had information for the seven successful introns: the sumatran orangutan , the horse  and the little brown bat . this extended species set allowed us to assess the variability of our introns in five pairs of closely related mammalian species, which comprised four different mammalian families: mustelidae, which included mustela nivalis and m. putorius, with an estimated divergence time of  <dig>  million years  <cit> ; felidae, with panthera tigris and uncia uncia, which diverged  <dig>  million years ago  <cit> ; hominidae, which included two pairs, namely, pongo pygmaeus and p. abelii, with  <dig>  million years of estimated divergence  <cit> , and homo sapiens and pan troglodytes, with  <dig> million years of estimated divergence  <cit> ; and vespertilionidae, with myotis lucifugus and m. escalerai, which diverged  <dig>  million years ago  <cit> .

all of the sequenced alleles for the seven introns were different in both members of every pair of closely related species, except, surprisingly, the pnpo- <dig> sequence obtained for pongo pygmaeus, which was identical to the one downloaded from ensembl for p. abelii. this can be due to several reasons such as a recent introgression, the existence of a constraint in the evolution of this particular marker in the orangutan lineage or the fact that, by mere chance, no mutations have accumulated in any of the two species since their recent divergence. all other intron pairs showed one or several substitutions between the species pairs selected, thus providing useful information for phylogenetic reconstruction.

alignments and the corresponding maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees were reconstructed for each of the seven intronic markers . the phylogenies obtained were largely congruent with the known taxonomy of the species, particularly within each order, showing that these introns have normal evolutionary dynamics, not only in the five species used for filtering the introns, but also in other mammals. in addition, it is interesting to note that we have four representative orders  within laurasiatherians that could help resolve the phylogeny of this group. however, the relationships among them were different in each tree, and the bootstrap values for the different clades were very low , indicating that individual introns may not have enough information for inter-ordinal mammalian phylogenies  <cit> . it is also important to observe that the trees estimated with the different markers show very apparent differences in their overall divergence. as can be seen from the scale of the trees, the most extreme examples were gad2- <dig> and osta- <dig>  which were the slowest introns, and jmjd5- <dig>  which was the intron with the fastest rate of evolution.

to analyze the differences in divergence among introns in more detail, we constructed new alignments for each pair of closely related species to avoid possible problems associated with the alignments of more divergent taxa. we then estimated the intron genetic distance between species pairs from the corresponding intron pairwise alignment. figure  <dig> compares the divergences between species pairs for the different introns. as expected, species pairs separated for longer times such as the two myotis species accumulate an overall higher number of substitutions than the closest species such as panthera tigris and uncia uncia. it can also be deduced from this figure that there are important differences in intron divergence in different species pairs, indicating that it is not possible to predict that one intron with a high number of variable positions in one lineage will be equally variable in other lineages. for example, the most informative introns for h. sapiens and p. troglodytes would be carhsp1- <dig> and osta- <dig> whereas for mustela the best ones would be slc38a7- <dig> and cops7a- <dig>  furthermore, the intron jmjd5- <dig>  despite being the fastest one according to the overall divergence in mammals , was not always the most variable between sister species. therefore, the most variable introns are different for every lineage. this can be due to the stochasticity of mutations, which can specially affect to short branches, and to differences in population size and ancestral polymorphisms, which may constitute a large part of the divergence among genes in closely related species  <cit> . thus, given the range of intron variability of our data set  it may not be worthwhile favoring introns with high overall rates in mammals. rather, it may be better to use several unlinked introns to overcome different stochastic processes in any phylogenetic study of closely related species.

CONCLUSIONS
the development of multilocus phylogenetics requires the availability of a large number of adequate markers for different taxa. in this study, we have designed  <dig> intronic markers with optimal conditions for the phylogeny of closely related mammalian species . among the important criteria used to select these markers were that they belonged to single-copy genes, were not highly conserved, and did not show disparate rates of evolution in different lineages. the experimental validation of these introns showed that, after some optimizations, they could be amplified in different mammalian species, yielding a single pcr band. in addition, an analysis of the genetic distances estimated in several pairs of closely related mammalian species revealed that introns may show different degrees of divergence in different pairs, and that it is not possible to predict which introns will be more variable in each group. in any case, it may be necessary to carry out initial pilot studies with several introns to decide which ones perform best for each species or group of closely related species. in addition, the use of several introns will reduce the stochasticity associated to mutational and coalescence processes, which is particularly large for nuclear sequences. the availability of a large set of introns like the one provided here will greatly facilitate this work.

