BACKGROUND
metatranscriptomic approaches based on next generation sequencing have emerged as a powerful tool to provide insight into microbial activity in complex environmental communities, such as marine , soil  or human internal organ ecosystems  <cit> . however, these studies have used many different methods for cdna synthesis, making comparison of the results difficult and highlighting the challenges of analyzing rna samples from environmental communities. indeed, due to sampling constraints, the quality and quantity of rna available for library preparation may be very heterogeneous and limited  <cit> . for these reasons, the most common strategies used for cdna synthesis rely mainly on polyadenylation of prokaryotic mrna, followed by a linear or exponential amplification of cdna . usually, an rrna removal treatment precedes the cdna synthesis, to reduce the predominant rrna fraction   <cit> . different methods for ribosomal rna removal have been reported  and compared in gc-rich transcriptomes  <cit> , and in synthetic  <cit>  and natural microbial communities  <cit> , giving an extensive overview on their efficiency and biases. by contrast, even if most studies validate the transcript abundance inferred by sequencing data using quantitative real-time reverse transcription pcr  to check for artefacts in cdna amplification , the bias introduced at this step remains poorly explored.

recently, several new cdna preparation methods especially conceived for rna-seq have been released and, for some of them, the impact on data analysis and interpretation in eukaryotic transcriptomes has been reported . our work aimed to expand upon these studies by focusing on microbial metatranscriptomics. we tested three methods that should, in principle, permit the experiment to be initiated from small inputs, equal to or lower than 100 ng total rna, a realistic quantity available from environmental sampling. we prepared libraries with smarter stranded rna-seq kit from clontech , the ovation rna-seq system v <dig>  and the encore complete prokaryotic rna-seq system  from nugen and compared them with the truseq stranded total rna library preparation from illumina , one of the most widely applied methods for rna-seq studies . whereas ts and smart cdna protocols are based on synthesis by random priming after rna fragmentation, the enc synthesis is carried out using selective primers with decreased affinity for rrna sequences, with no need for prior ribosomal depletion. finally, the ov system allows cdna synthesis by oligo and random priming. even if this protocol is not especially developed for prokaryotic rna-seq, it proved to be very efficient to detect viral rna sequences in clinical samples containing ultra-low amounts  of viral rna genomes  <cit> . therefore, we chose to test it because of its robustness in library yield when very low amounts of rna are available. this is possible because of a linear amplification step that allows the production of micrograms of double-stranded cdna from a few nanograms of rna.table  <dig> 
summary of the principal characteristics of the rna-seq library preparation kits evaluated in this study



rna input 

minimum quality

rrna depletion required

cdna synthesis

fragmentation method

strand selection

library preparation method and reagents

multiplex capacity

experiment duration
ffpe: formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue.

rin: rna integrity number.



in this study, we tested the four rna-seq methods on four well-known microbial species, individually and pooled together, and assessed their performances. we evaluated rrna depletion efficiency and bias; library complexity; alignment efficiency; gene detection sensitivity and abundance; evenness of transcript coverage; and technical reproducibility. our results revealed the strengths and weaknesses of each method, and provided guidelines for choosing the method that is best adapted for metatranscriptomic studies.

RESULTS
experimental design
to overcome the extreme complexity of environmental samples, we set up a simplified benchmark comprising total rna from four microbial species: two gram negative organisms, escherichia coli mg <dig> and acinetobacter baylyi adp1; and two gram positive organisms, lactococcus lactis mg <dig> and bacillus subtilis  <dig>  the four species, for which reference genomes are available, have different gc contents, heterogeneous genome sizes and gene contents . they were cultivated in different conditions reflecting their different gene expression dynamics.

we prepared libraries using total rna  and depleted rna individually from the four microorganisms and from a pool of four rnas  in duplicate, starting from the same individual rnas and mix sample. using illumina paired-end sequencing, we generated, on average,  <dig>  m reads and  <dig>  m reads for the control and depleted rna libraries, respectively . reads were cleaned as described in the methods and subsequent analyses were performed on the remaining data . here we discuss the data analyses of the l. lactis and mix datasets. the results obtained for the other bacterial species are mostly presented in the additional files.table  <dig> 
sequences and mapping statistics



ts_l.l

enc_l.l

ov_l.l

smart_l.l

ts_l.l control

ov_l.l control

smart_l.l control

ts_mix

enc_mix

ov_mix

smart_mix

ts_mix control

ov_mix control

smart_mix control
_l.l: library prepared from l. lactis depleted rna.

_l.l control: library prepared from l. lactis total rna.

_mix: library prepared from the mix depleted rna.

_mix control: library prepared from the mix total rna.


aproportion of rrna reads detected in the raw reads.


bnumber of sequences remaining after the data quality control pipeline treatment applied on raw reads.


cproportion of cleaned reads uniquely mapped on cds sequences.


dduplication rate estimated on  <dig>  <dig> cleaned reads.



rrna removal efficiency
rrna depletion using the ribo-zero kit was efficient: the proportion of rrna reads was less than 1% for the ts and ov libraries, and less than 3% for the smart library . by contrast, this proportion increased to 38% in the enc libraries, suggesting that the selective priming in the enc method is not efficient. this led to a decreased number of useful reads, which could negatively affect metatranscriptomic studies where deep sequencing is needed to obtain sufficient coverage.

library complexity
we assessed the complexity of each library by calculating the number of duplicated paired reads. we preferred to evaluate the duplication on paired reads rather than on single reads, as they take into account the pcr duplicates. the results  showed satisfactory values for all experiments, except for the smart control libraries. the very high duplication rate in these libraries could reflect an insufficient amount of input rna , which resulted in a low final library yield. consequently, the number of useful reads in these libraries was lower. the duplication rates in the ov and enc libraries were not comparable to the others, because in these preparations, cdnas are randomly sheared after their synthesis. indeed, this fragmentation step introduces additional diversity into the starting position of the sequence.

transcript coverage and orientation
reads from the l. lactis libraries were aligned against the l. lactis cds sequences to estimate the specificity of each method. ts produced the best mapping percentages to the cds sequences , followed by ov and smart  . mapping rates were variable for the enc samples , indicating that this protocol was less reproducible.

based on l. lactis gene prediction, we assessed the orientation of the reads in smart, enc and ts libraries, which were expected to preserve the coding strand information. around 99% of smart and enc reads mapped to the sense strand, whereas around 99% of ts reads mapped to the antisense strand, as expected according to the manufacturer’s specifications. these strand-specific methods are advantageous for de novo transcriptome assembly, gene annotation and detection of potential antisense transcription.

the enc protocol had the highest rate of intergenic covered bases  and ov had the lowest  . as a rigorous dnase treatment was applied, we could infer that the presence of reads mapping to intergenic regions reflected the capture of rnas at different steps of their maturation or synthesis. indeed, the same rna extractions were used for each experiment, suggesting that these differences in the percentages of intergenic regions could be attributed to the different rna reverse transcription protocols.

we evaluated the evenness of cds coverage for each method, based on the l. lactis cds coverage extracted from the mix experiments. ts, ov and smart covered the cds globally over their entire lengths, with a drop at the 5′ and 3′ extremities. enc had a higher coverage rate at the 5′ extremities. plots of cds-accumulated coverage versus their gc content showed that high gc content cds were detected less frequently in ov libraries, whereas the other methods presented the same global profile for all the cds, irrespective of gc content .figure  <dig> 
cds coverage and gc content. , , : box plots distribution of the cds read counts normalized by the total read count for three categories of gc content  and for each mix library. : distribution of the cumulated coverage along the length of the annotated cds for mix libraries .



metatranscriptome bias evaluation
the mix samples were especially useful for assessing if the cdna and library preparation methods had introduced bias into the pattern of gene expression from each bacterial species in a multispecies context. after alignment of mix library reads against cdss, we observed that the distribution of reads attributed to each organism was similar for the ts, smart and enc samples . however, the distribution of the ov reads was quite different: in particular, 38% of the reads were attributed to l. lactis, compared with 20–25% for the other methods. again, the ov method seemed to introduce a bias in relation to the gc content of the genomes .

we then normalized the rna-seq fragment counts by calculating the fragments per kilobase of cds per million fragments mapped  and performed a linear correlation between the l. lactis and mix samples. l. lactis mrna abundances correlated well in the mix and the single species samples for all the methods, except for smart . for this method, however, almost all the cdss in the l. lactis sample were present in the mix. indeed, we observed that absent genes in the mix had the lowest fpkm values in the l. lactis sample. the l. lactis rna quantity used in the mix sample preparations was four-fold less than that in the l. lactis libraries. we inferred that this led to a loss of information, essentially for the lowest-expressed genes.table  <dig> 
pearson correlation coefficients


l. lactisvs mixa

l. lactis

mix
pearson correlation coefficients between:


athe l. lactis library and the mix library for each method.


bthe two replicates for each experiment.


cenc, ov or smart l. lactis libraries and ts l. lactis libraries.


dthe depleted rna library and the total rna library for each method.



experimental reproducibility
to test the robustness of each method, the pearson correlation coefficients between the two replicates of the l. lactis samples were calculated . the ov and smart methods performed best , whereas the enc method was the least reproducible  . the variability in the cds detection between two replicates was around 8%, except for enc . for the mix samples, replicates for each of the four methods all correlated well .

gene expression level
we compared the gene expression patterns to examine how they were affected by the different cdna synthesis methods. we considered the ts experiments as a reference and calculated the pearson correlation and the percentage of differentially expressed genes  for each method in the l. lactis samples . this choice was based on the fact that truseq experiments are not made with limited amounts of rna and should better reflect the complexity of the transcriptome. indeed, in this study, experiments performed with ts produced the best results in terms of library complexity, gene detection and coverage, and reproducibility.table  <dig> 
proportions of genes detected as differentially expressed


l. lactisvsl. lactistsa
l. lactisdepleted rna vs l. lactistotal rnac
proportions of genes detected as differentially expressed between:


aenc, ov or smart l. lactis library and ts l. lactis library.


benc, ov or smart mix library and ts mix library.


cts,ov or smart l. lactis depleted rna library and ts,ov or smart l. lactis total rna library.


dts,ov or smart mix depleted rna library and ts,ov or smart mix total rna library.



surprisingly, broad differences in gene expression patterns were observed. enc was the least correlated method , with 31% of l. lactis genes detected as differentially expressed . the ov experiments performed slightly better  with 28% of degs. smart was the best correlated method  and the number of genes detected as differentially expressed in comparison to the ts experiment was not significant. the same comparison made within the mix samples showed similar results. the smart mix sample was the best correlated, even if the percentage of degs was slightly higher  than in the l. lactis libraries .

we showed previously that the gc content could influence the results. therefore, we verified if highly differentially expressed genes were correlated with their gc content. this analysis was limited to enc and ov mix libraries as the number of genes to be considered in the smart libraries was not statistically significant. the results showed that the enc profiles of overexpressed and underexpressed genes were similar . no correlation was evident between the gc content of the genes and their differential expression. in contrast, differences in ov gene expression patterns were clearly correlated with the gc content. specifically, expression of low gc content genes was overestimated and gc-rich genes were penalized, confirming our previous observations that the ov method introduces a bias in favor of low gc genes.figure  <dig> 
gene expression profile of ts versus ov, smart and enc methods in mix samples. gene expression profile from ts_mix versus  enc_mix  smart_mix  ov_mix samples. this figure shows the log scatter plots and the coefficients of determination  obtained by comparing fpkm values for  <dig> annotated cds in the mix of bacteria.
evaluation of the gc bias in the differential expression analysis. genes detected as the most differentially expressed were extracted  for enc and ov mix libraries. the proportions of cds for different gc content intervals were plotted to evaluate the bias introduced by the cdna synthesis method.



to validate the results of the sequencing experiments, we performed qrt-pcr analysis on certain selected l. lactis genes and compared qrt-pcr quantifications with the read counts of the same genes in the sequenced transcriptomes. a strong positive correlation was observed for the ts and smart experiments . enc showed a slightly lower correlation , whereas gene expression levels in ov were significantly different  . this experiment confirms that, among the “low-input” methods, smart most reliably represents the mrna abundance.

depletion effect
ribo-zero treatment protocol was adapted for smart and ov experiments to fit with total rna inputs of 50 ng. hence, we investigated if this technical modification had an impact on the mrna expression profiles. linear correlation of gene expression patterns between libraries prepared from total rna  or depleted ones showed similar percentages of mapped reads , as well as a strong correlation  for ts  and ov . no bias in the expression profiles was observed .

curiously, we noticed that in the ov control libraries, the percentage of rrna reads was significantly lower than expected . this observation suggested that the ov rna priming strategy has a decreased affinity for rrna. at least two hypotheses could explain this observation: first, the presence of oligo primers could influence priming of rna by an unknown mechanism. second, in this system, random and oligo primers are coupled to an rna stretch that is necessary to create the anchoring site for the primer used in subsequent linear amplification. the sequence and length of this rna stretch, and of the primer, are not available; therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility that they recognize some specific rna regions, introducing a bias. the same arguments could explain the strong preference of this method towards amplification of low gc content genes.

the comparison between control and depleted libraries prepared using the smart method revealed a greater bias, especially for the l. lactis sample . this probably resulted from the low complexity of the control libraries rather than a bias induced by rrna depletion. in fact, as the duplication rate was very high in the control libraries , the number of unique mappable reads and of cdss detected also strongly decreased . however, pearson correlation between total and depleted samples was satisfactory , and the percentage of degs was not significant, showing that the expression patterns of the detected genes were not affected.

to verify if the complexity of the library was altered because of an insufficient initial quantity of input rna, we prepared a library starting from 5 ng of total rna. as expected, the duplication rate decreased to  <dig> % and read results were comparable to the depleted l. lactis library . the same experiment from 5 ng total rna was performed for the mix and similar results were obtained. thus, the minimal input for the smart method should be higher than 1 ng to obtain the best performance.

other bacterial species
the same analyses described above were also performed for the other species to confirm the previous conclusions. our results  confirmed the observations made for the l. lactis and mix samples. globally, ts and smart performed best for all the species, whereas ov performances were highly variable. on a. baylyi, ov performed relatively well, based on cds alignments and pearson correlation coefficients, whereas in b. subtilis, the results were poor for all measures. moreover, as in the case of l. lactis, the ov control libraries had lower rrna read percentages than the smart and ts libraries. this value varied significantly among species, with  <dig> % of rrna reads for the e. coli control library and only  <dig> % for b. subtilis control library. once again, it seems that the ov random priming disfavors rrna retrotranscription, but at different levels according to the species. finally, previous observations of enc performances were confirmed in the experiments using the other bacterial species: enc-depleted libraries showed a high percentage of rrna reads. similar to l. lactis, the enc method correlated least well with ts. smart had the highest correlation coefficient for all the species.

discussion
ribosomal rna depletion does not introduce significant bias, even at very low inputs
we observed that ribosomal rna removal treatment by ribo-zero is very efficient on every type of sample, as previously shown by giannoukos et al.  <cit> . in contrast to this previous study, our protocol was adapted for inputs lower than those defined by the manufacturer to successfully remove rrna from only 50 ng total rna. not only did rrna reads account for less than 3%, irrespective of the downstream library preparation method, but also the depletion did not seem to introduce biases in mrna relative abundance, as indicated by the high correlations between total rna and rrna-depleted libraries .

however, the selective priming strategy adopted by the enc method seems much less efficient. as selective primers are designed to counter-select rrna sequences of the most common bacterial species, including our benchmark species, we predict even lower performances when the method is applied to complex environmental samples, which often comprise unknown or poorly characterized organisms.

technical reproducibility is high
technical reproducibility, evaluated by pearson correlations between replicates, was good for ts, ov and smart . enc performed less well for the l. lactis replicates, but not in the mix, so we are cautious to make conclusions about its robustness. the negligible technical variation within replicates indicated that biases related to each method are also reproducible and are not influenced by the setting up of technical replicates.

truseq performs well but is not adapted to “low-input” studies
the impact of the four library preparation methods on data quality was evaluated by comparing library complexity, specificity in mrna detection, evenness of cds coverage in individual and mixed populations, and gene expression patterns. for most of these values, ts performed best, showing the best transcriptional coverage and parameters on cds alignments  and gene expression profiles. this is not surprising, as initial experiments were conducted from 4 μg total rna. lowering the input to 400 ng did not seem to skew the library composition . conversely, we tried to construct libraries with only 100 ng total rna, but the library preparation failed or the yield was very weak . thus, the ts method seems to be limited by input rna requirements and does not appear appropriate for most microbial metatranscriptomic studies.

encore complete method has a higher cost per sample because of inefficient removal of rrna
the enc library expression profiles were comparable to those obtained with ov and smart, and they were similar in terms of cds coverage in both the l. lactis and mix experiments. however, because of a high % of rrna reads, enc libraries have to be sequenced deeper to obtain sufficient transcriptome coverage. hence, this method would introduce additional costs to metatranscriptomic studies that require an important sequencing effort to explore the complexity of these samples in depth.

ovation rna-seq system is the best solution at very low inputs but the quantitative information is biased
the ov library preparation was the simplest and most reliable in terms of library preparation workflow and final yield. it produced several micrograms of double-stranded cdna starting from less than  <dig>  ng rna . cdna synthesis was successful even at concentrations of only a few pg . a cdna aliquot could then be used, after shearing, in a standard illumina library preparation. all the preparation steps are easily amenable to automation.

reads mapping from ov libraries clearly showed that the cdss detected were the same found by the other methods and technical reproducibility was satisfactory. by contrast, in the mix experiments, species distribution was significantly biased. moreover, we detected evidence of a strong bias in gene expression profiles , particularly in favor of low gc content genes. another surprising result was the relatively low percentage of rrna reads in the total rna control libraries. this led us to hypothesize that the random priming is not truly “random”, or that the concurrent presence of oligo or addition of rna primer stretches could bias the rna retrotranscription or cdna amplification. this should be further explored by including more complex samples with gc and at-rich species. finally, this strategy does not provide information about strand orientation, which could be very useful for de novo transcriptome assembly and gene annotation. for all these reasons, we would be very cautious in applying this method for metatranscriptomic studies and, more generally, in quantitative studies.

smarter is the best compromise for intermediate rna inputs
the smarter method is a recent release from clontech that aims to provide a random and stranded version of the first smarter low input library kit  priming), which has been used successfully for eukaryotic single cell transcriptomic studies  <cit> . indeed, the low input oligo version is robust at very low inputs  and we experienced this during a marine plankton metatranscriptomic study with satisfactory results . the minimal rna input indicated by the manufacturer for the new random stranded protocol is 1 ng rna  and, to test it at the minimal input requirements, we prepared control libraries from 1 ng total rna. surprisingly, the final library yields were very low and the results obtained from sequencing of these libraries were not satisfactory: high duplication rates coupled to low alignment percentages suggested an insufficient library complexity. the poor efficiency was somewhat surprising but, in opposition to the oligo low-input method, this protocol does not include an exponential amplification of cdna before illumina library preparation. indeed, single-stranded cdna is directly amplified with oligonucleotides provided with the kit, which contain illumina adaptor sequences to obtain a ready-to-sequence library. this could explain why the yields obtained with this method are different to those of the smarter low-input version.

the same control experiment performed starting from 5 ng of total rna produced much better results, leading us to conclude that the minimal rna input indicated by the manufacturer is not sufficient to preserve sample diversity, even in samples with only one bacterial species. this should be taken into account when choosing the initial rna quantity to be depleted. fifty ng seems to be the lower threshold to obtain sufficient library yield and satisfactory transcriptional coverage. in fact, with these inputs, the mix libraries showed good library complexity, species representation, and gene detection and abundance. however, we could not estimate the exact depleted rna quantity used for cdna synthesis after rna depletion. the rrna quantity present in a given sample is variable, and depends on growth conditions and the state of the cell at the moment of extraction. it has been demonstrated that non-cultivated environmental bacterial cells contain less mrna molecules than laboratory strains. for example, only ~ <dig> transcripts are present simultaneously in a marine bacterial cell versus ~ <dig> mrna molecules in exponentially growing e. coli
 <cit> . mrna yield after depletion could vary and easily be closer to 1 ng. finally, the smarter method appears the most satisfying solution for metatranscriptomic studies. however, we propose that more than 50 ng of total rna should be used to produce robust results.

gene expression patterns are dependent on the library construction method
one of the most relevant results of this study is the difference in gene expression patterns among the methods. we clearly demonstrated that comparison of enc or ov data with ts or smart would lead to false degs detection. by contrast, ts and smart libraries appear to produce more accurate results, which were corroborated by qrt-pcr experiments. this emphasizes that comparison of rna-seq studies performed using different library protocols could be hazardous, and should be carefully evaluated. knowledge of biases of each method, as provided in the present study, is essential to help interpret the results.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we evaluated the impact of cdna synthesis and library preparation methods on a simplified metatranscriptome. we used four well-characterized bacterial species, individually or pooled together, to mimic a controlled metatranscriptome. first, we showed that the ribosomal depletion treatment by ribo-zero efficiently reduces the rrna reads and does not introduce significant bias, even at an input as low as 50 ng of total rna. we therefore strongly suggest applying this treatment before library preparation to reduce sequencing costs, particularly in metatranscriptomics studies where deep coverage is needed.

second, the best library preparation method was closely associated with the initial total rna quantity used for cdna synthesis. the truseq stranded protocol produces accurate and reproducible transcriptomic patterns when rna quantity is not limiting. however, it is not realistic to apply this method for metatranscriptomic samples, usually characterized by very low rna quantities. among the methods adapted to lower-input rna, smarter stranded performed adequately both in terms of library yield and data quality. it has the advantage of retaining the coding strand orientation information and it would be suitable for quantitative analysis as shown by the consistency of gene expression patterns. importantly, we show that ts and smart results are comparable and can be used together in degs analyses. finally, with very low amounts, the ovation rna-seq system v <dig> is the only one to guarantee the success of library preparation and sequencing. nevertheless, this method introduces a significant bias in species abundance and gene expression patterns, probably at priming steps in reverse transcription or linear amplification. therefore, it may not be helpful for quantitative analysis. however, it allows the production of gene catalogs with extremely low-input samples, which could not be explored otherwise. thus, the present study provides guidelines that allow the choice of the best-fitted library preparation method for microbial metatranscriptomic studies.

