BACKGROUND
improving the synthesis rate of desired metabolites in metabolic systems is one of the main tasks in metabolic engineering. two recent advancements in this area are promising to increase the performance of metabolic systems. the first factor is a significantly better understanding of the structure of metabolic networks and the kinetics and thermodynamics of biochemical reactions that take place in living cells. in many cases, this understanding is not merely qualitative but quantitative, and can be expressed in terms of kinetics equations. the second factor is the current advance in molecular biological techniques and the development of numerous useful vectors. this has enabled microbiologists to change the protein content in a given organism and alter its enzymatic profile, enhancing the synthesis of specific end-products or intermediates. the combination of these two factors permits the modification of the metabolic structure and the improvement of the synthesis rate of some desired metabolites in an organism.

in the last decade, many researchers have used model-based optimization strategies to analyze and manipulate metabolic networks  <cit> . the mathematical models used in these model-based optimization problems can be classified as stoichiometric and kinetic models. stoichiometric models can be obtained through the reaction topology of a metabolic network. though stoichiometric models do not require kinetic data and are easy to construct, there is a shortage of handling regulatory dynamics of metabolic networks in them. on the other hand, kinetic models, e.g., generalized mass action  and michaelis-menten formulations, require more information to describe system characteristics. however, kinetic models are in general expressed as nonlinear models that are more complex than linear models and require more computational time for analysis and optimization. logarithmic transformation can convert a non-linear model represented by the s-system formalism used widely in biochemical systems theory  to a linear model if we consider systems at steady state only  <cit> . indirect optimization methods  convert a nonlinear kinetic model into an s-system model, and then solve the optimization problem at steady state using a linear programming method  <cit> . on the contrary, stochastic optimization methods and deterministic branch-and-reduce methods are directly applied to nonlinear models to obtain a global optimum  <cit> . optimization problems for metabolic network systems can be categorized as single-objective and multi-objective formulations, depending on the design purpose. most studies on microbial metabolic engineering focus on only a single objective to maximize the synthesis rate of the desired metabolite  <cit> . in contrast, a multi-objective optimization approach attempts to find the solutions that are optimal for many objectives simultaneously. the multi-objective indirect optimization method  has been applied to maximize ethanol productivity and to minimize intermediate concentrations simultaneously  <cit> .

selecting a proper genetic manipulation strategy for metabolic network optimization problem is a tedious task. the regulatory structure of metabolic networks can be determined by model-based optimization strategies  <cit> . researchers have used mixed-integer linear programming to determine an optimal regulatory structure and the synthesis rate of metabolic systems described by linear models  <cit> . however, the minimum set of enzymes  in a metabolic system that should be manipulated to obtain a viable strain under the situation of producing the maximum possible flux or yield of a desired final product remains unclear. this study introduces a multi-objective optimization formulation to find an optimal regulatory structure to cope with these problems. experimental results show that a strain may reflect resilience phenomenon after stressful environmental changes and genetic perturbations  <cit> . this resilience phenomenon means that the mutant strain may respond with rapid and dramatic alterations to global genetic perturbations. however, after genetic perturbations, the mutant tries to evolve to a new steady state that may be only slightly different from its previous steady state. this new steady state indicates that the mutant strain tries to recover from its "wild-type" characteristics and maintain relative stability on metabolism. accurately predicting the steady state of a microbial strain after gene manipulations is not a trivial job, since the adaption of metabolic systems against gene alterations is complex. segrèt et al. introduced the minimization of metabolic adjustment  method to calculate the minimum distance solution relative to the original "wild-type" solution for the mutant strain  <cit> . shlomi et al. applied regulatory on/off minimization  to determine minimum number of changes between the mutant strain and the original strain  <cit> . however, both of these models are based on the stoichiometric model derived from the flux balance analysis . almost no studies discuss the resilience phenomena for metabolic systems described by kinetic models.

this study introduces a generalized fuzzy multi-objective optimization problem  to determine the optimal enzymatic manipulations for metabolic network systems considering resilience effects. this study first formulates a multi-objective optimization problem that simultaneously considers the resilience effects and minimum set of manipulated enzymes by combining the concepts of moma and room into an optimization framework. since nonlinear kinetic models offer a more detailed description of metabolic networks than stoichiometric models and the gene manipulations, including gene repressions and over-expressions, in metabolic networks can directly correspond to the changes of maximum flux parameters and reaction rates in the kinetic models, this study uses a nonlinear kinetic model in the optimization formulation. integer variables are also introduced to model gene over-expression and repression. thus, the optimization formulation must be solved using mixed-integer nonlinear programming  methods. the metabolic networks for ethanol production by saccharomyces cerevisiae and amino acid synthesis rates in escherichia coli were employed to evaluate the applicability of the gfmoop. suitable membership functions are used to quantify the resilience effects and cell viability constraints. results show that the maximum synthesis rates of target products by genetic interventions are always over-estimated in metabolic networks that do not consider the resilience effects.

RESULTS
each following example solves two optimization problems and compares their results. the first problem is a primal optimization problem for determining the optimal enzyme manipulations, corresponding gene over-expression or repression, in metabolic networks without considering cell viability and metabolic adjustment. the second problem is the fuzzy optimization problem, which is similar to the primal optimization problem, but considers cell viability and metabolic adjustment.

maximization of the ethanol production by s. cerevisiae
s. cerevisiae is still the most important microorganism for ethanol production to date. researchers have developed many strategies to enhance ethanol productivity using yeast, and its metabolic network is well studied. figure  <dig> shows a scheme of the simple metabolic network of s. cerevisiae for anaerobic ethanol production. curto et al. developed a gma model for analyzing the anaerobic ethanol fermentation of s. cerevisiae at steady state  <cit> . this model consists of five nonlinear ordinal differential equations and eight nonlinear rate equations. detailed information about this model can be found in the additional file  <dig> 

this study uses the mixed-integer hybrid differential evolution  method  <cit>  and the commercial software gams  <dig>  with seven solvers to solve the ethanol fermentation optimization problem for finding the optimal enzyme manipulations in s. cerevisiae. the feasible region for each metabolite and enzyme can be estimated through biological understanding or global optimization techniques  <cit> . this study sets the feasible region for each metabolite and enzyme to expand/shrink 5-fold based on its basal value. the primal optimization problem for maximizing the ethanol productivity in s. cerevisiae was first solved by mihde to obtain the pareto front, shown as the red curve in figure  <dig>  the larger the allowable number of the manipulated enzymes in the metabolic network, the higher the improved ethanol flux ratio, vpyk∕vpykbasal. the highest improvement  was achieved when the allowable number of the manipulated enzymes was greater than six. figure  <dig> shows all feasible solutions  for the primal optimization problem. many improvements in the ethanol flux ratio are close to the highest value; for example, if at most two enzymes can be modulated, seven out of  <dig> feasible solutions with the improved ethanol flux ratio greater than  <dig>  are obtained. the highest improved ratio is  <dig>  and the corresponding modulated enzymes are hxt and pfk in this case.

this study also uses seven minlp solvers in gams to solve the primal optimization problem with various allowable numbers of manipulated enzymes. table  <dig> lists the maximum ethanol flux ratio and modulated enzymes using different allowable numbers of manipulated enzymes. these pareto optimal solutions are identical to those obtained from the mihde method . however, some solvers may converge to a premature result, as shown in the parentheses of table  <dig>  the optimal solution obtained from the gams solvers can be improved by using the convergent solution obtained by mihde as the initial point for the gams solvers. however, it is time-consuming for mihde to obtain a feasible solution. the computational time increases significantly when we apply mihde to solve the primal optimization problem for a complex system. this is because it is difficult to maintain a feasible solution in the stochastic evolution procedure. the following computations apply combined procedures based on the seven gams solvers to determine an optimal solution. two solvers were randomly selected from the seven solvers for each combined procedure. the convergent solution of the first solver served as the initial point for the second solver in each combined procedure. seven different combined procedures were performed to determine the optimal solution for the primal optimization problem by comparing their optimal objective values. the results obtained by these combined procedures suggest that the enzymes to be modulated for the primal optimization problem are {hxt, pfk, pyk, tdh, glk, atpase, gol, tps} in decreasing order of priority .

the optimal enzymatic modulations for maximizing ethanol productivity by s. cerevisiae obtained by solving the primal multi-objective optimization problem using various gams solvers . γxilb and γeilb are set to  <dig> . γxiub and γeiub are set to  <dig> . the superscript * means optimal solution, † denotes that the solution is a premature result, and ε is the number of allowed manipulated genes.

the optimal enzymatic modulation for maximizing ethanol productivity by s. cerevisiae considering cell viability and metabolic adjustment for =. γxilb and γeilb are set to  <dig> . γxiub and γeiub are set to  <dig> . the superscript * means optimal solution, † indicates that the optimal result is obtained by solving fuzzy optimization problem using the fixed enzymatic modulations, and ε is the number of allowed manipulated genes.

  vpykvpykbasal=basal <dig> ×basal <dig> ×basal- <dig> . 

the exponents in equation  indicate that the ethanol synthesis flux, vpyk, increases when the concentrations of metabolites  or  increase and the concentration of metabolite  decreases. figure  <dig> shows the optimal flux ratios for the modulated enzymes hxt and tdh  and modulated enzymes hxt and pfk , respectively. figure  <dig> also shows the changed concentration ratios of the metabolites for the corresponding modulated enzymes. for the allowable modulated enzyme set {hxt, tdh}, the optimal concentration ratios of  and  are smaller than those obtained by modulating enzymes hxt and pfk. this indicates that lower  and higher  increase the ethanol flux rate vpyk. this result makes sense from a biological viewpoint, since a lower  level slows down cell growth and allows yeast to carry out the anaerobic fermentation required to produce ethanol. although the exponent of  is positive, the small value causes an insignificant effect on the improved ethanol flux ratio. as a result, the maximum value of vpyk obtained by modulating enzymes hxt and tdh exceeds that by modulating enzymes hxt and pfk. following the similar procedures, the best selected enzymes to be modulated for the resilience problem when at most three enzymes can be modulated are hxt, tdh, and atpase. these results differ from those obtained from the primal optimization problem, as tables  <dig> and  <dig> indicate. the atpase enzyme does not appear in the suggested modulated enzyme set obtained from the resilience problem when four and five manipulated enzymes are allowed. as a result, we cannot prioritize the selection of enzymatic modulations in the optimization problems when at most three enzymes can be modulated. however, both primal optimization and resilience problems have the identical selected enzymes when the allowable number of manipulated enzymes is greater than three.

each rate equation contains some metabolite concentration information so that the kinetic model is able to account for important regulatory features. such regulations depend on the model validity because model parameter values are estimated from a normal condition. as a result, the kinetic model can cope with dynamics of metabolic networks under a small perturbation on enzyme level. however, an optimal enzyme manipulation problem may yield an over-estimation productivity if a large-scale change for each enzyme level is allowed. for instance, this study sets the perturbation region for each enzyme to expand/shrink 5-fold based on its basal value. such a large-scale perturbation may reach beyond the regulation capability of kinetic models. the resilience phenomena can be applied to compensate such a gap. we also solve the primal and resilience optimization problems using two another smaller perturbation regions for each enzyme, i.e., the lower and upper factors  are set to  and , to illustrate the effect of resilience phenomena on optimal productivity under different perturbation regions. figure  <dig> shows the percentage of over-estimation productivity for different number of allowable modulated enzymes and different perturbation region. for each number of allowable modulated enzymes, larger perturbation region results in higher over-estimation productivity. this result indicates that the resilience phenomena can be applied to compensate the regulation capability of kinetic models. it is worthy to verify this result experimentally by microbiologists.

multi-objective maximization of amino acid synthesis rates in escherichia coli
this example considers the determination of the optimal enzyme manipulation in the central carbon metabolic network of e. coli. the kinetic model for the network is complex and highly nonlinear. chassagnole et al. developed a nonlinear dynamic model for part of central carbon metabolism of e. coli  <cit> . their model has the ability to describe the experimentally observed dynamic behavior of metabolites in metabolic networks and is also capable of describing the intracellular metabolite oscillations observed in experiments  <cit> . this model links the kinetics of sugar transporter pts  with glycolysis and pentose-phosphate pathways, and is used to support the exploration of the central carbon metabolism of e. coli. figure  <dig> presents a schematic diagram of central carbon metabolism of e. coli. it depicts  <dig> enzymatic reactions,  <dig> metabolites or precursors, and seven co-metabolites . these co-metabolite concentrations are assumed to be constant in the mathematical model. the reaction rates can be accessed from the model database of jws online cellular systems modeling . the detail information of the kinetic model for the central carbon metabolism in e. coli can be found in the additional file  <dig> 

many researchers have applied optimization methods to enhance synthesis capabilities of microbial strains  <cit> . most of the works on optimization of microbial strains focused on single-objective optimization. for example, vital-lopez et al. used a kinetic model of the central carbon metabolism of e. coli to identify optimal intervention strategies under the maximization of serine synthesis  <cit> . lee et al. applied bi-objective optimization methods to investigate the influences of gene interventions on the amino acid synthesis using e. coli  <cit> . lee et al. were interested in maximizing dahps, pepc, and sers enzymatic flux ratios that correspond to the enhancement of synthesis of aromatic amino acids, serine, and oxaloacetate, respectively. their study solves two bi-objective optimization problems for maximizing dahps and pepc flux ratios and maximizing dahps and sers flux ratios, respectively, to determine the optimal gene manipulation strategies. however, this current study determines the optimal enzyme manipulation strategies to maximize the flux ratios of dahps, pepc, and sers simultaneously through genetic manipulations.

the procedures described in the previous example were again used to obtain the optimal pareto solutions for the primal optimization problem with various allowable numbers of the manipulated enzymes . the resilience problem was then solved using the lower and upper restriction factors of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, for both fuzzy cell viability constraints. table  <dig> shows the optimal enzymatic manipulations with various allowable numbers of the manipulated enzymes for the resilience problem. the optimal modulated enzymes for both optimization problems are the same as those in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  however, each maximum flux ratio for the resilience problem is smaller than that obtained from the corresponding primal optimization problem.

the optimal enzymatic modulation to maximize aromatic amino acid, serine, and oxaloacetate synthesis rates simultaneously by e. coli without considering cell viability constraints. γxilb and γeilb are set to  <dig> . γxiub and γeiub are set to  <dig> . the superscript * means optimal solution, † denotes that the solution is not a pareto solution, and ε is the number of allowed manipulated genes.

the optimal enzymatic modulation to maximize aromatic amino acid, serine, and oxaloacetate synthesis rates simultaneously by e. coli considering fuzzy cell viability constraints and fuzzy metabolic adjustment for .  and  are set to  <dig> .  and  are set to  <dig> . the superscript * means optimal solution, † denotes that the solution is not a pareto solution, and ε is the number of allowed manipulated genes.

the optimal enzyme pk is selected from the 30-enzyme network if only one enzyme can be manipulated. the improved flux ratios of pepc, sers, and dahps for the primal optimal problem are nearly identical to those obtained from the resilience problem. this indicates that the resilience phenomenon has little effect on the cell response when only one enzyme alteration is allowed. in contrast, the optimal selected enzymes are g6pdh and sers if two enzyme manipulations are allowed. both flux ratios of sers and dahps are enhanced even though the pepc flux ratio is smaller than that obtained by modulating pk only. as a result, the pair of the selected enzymes  is a pareto optimal solution. to confirm this result, solve the primal optimization problem and resilience problem using the fixed modulation pairs of  and . the three maximum flux ratios obtained by modulating pk and sers are less than those obtained by manipulating g6pdh and sers. this indicates that the modulation pair of  is dominated by . the maximum flux ratios of pepc and dahps increase and the maximum flux ratio of sers decreases in comparison with those obtained by using the modulation pair . thus, the result for the modulation pair  is also a pareto solution. however, the optimal objective value for  exceeds that of manipulating g6pdh and sers, so we obtain a single pareto solution. the pareto solution for manipulating g6pdh is similar to those show in tables  <dig> and  <dig> 

similar procedures were also used to obtain the optimal modulations for the primal optimization problem using different allowable numbers of manipulated enzymes ranging from three to five, respectively. tables  <dig> and  <dig> show the convergent solutions obtained by seven solvers in gams. for the case of the allowable numbers of three and four, we obtained two convergent solutions, but a pareto optimal solution only. tables  <dig> and  <dig> also show that the optimal solution for n allowable modulated enzymes includes the suggested enzyme set for n -  <dig> allowable modulated enzymes. this trend is same as that obtained by voit and signore resulting from the effect of experimental imprecision  <cit> . finally, we could qualitatively speculate that the suggested enzymes to be modulated for both primal and resilience optimization problems are {g6pdh, pk, sers, rppk, dahps, syn1} in decreasing order of priority.

in this metabolic system, we assume that concentrations of the seven co-metabolites are constant in the mathematical model. these adenine nucleotides stoichiometrically join in all of the metabolic networks of a living cell. in practical, they actively participate in the dynamics of the network and cannot be ignored. the value of the adenylate energy charges in e. coli cells and the ratios of / and / in the redox metabolic network are equal to the ratios of their basal levels and can be considered as constants  <cit> . their relationships are expressed as

  + <dig> ++=basal+ <dig> basalbasal+basal+basal=c <dig>  

  +=basalbasal+basal=c <dig>  

  +=basalbasal+basal=c <dig>  

where ci are constants. this study also evaluated the effects of the assumption of constant co-metabolite concentrations by applying equations - to the optimization problems. similar procedures were also used to obtain the optimal modulations for the primal and resilience optimization problems. the computational results can be found in tables s <dig> and s <dig> of additional file  <dig>  we could conclude that the improved flux ratios are a little different from those obtained from the optimization problems with constant co-metabolite concentrations. the order of priority of the suggested modulated enzymes is nearly identical to that obtained based on the assumption of constant co-metabolite concentrations except when the number of allowable modulated enzymes is five.

CONCLUSIONS
the optimization of biological systems, which is a branch of metabolic engineering, has generated a lot of industrial and academic interest for a long time. the ultimate goal of this optimization is to find the optimal mutation strategy for improving productivity. model-based optimization strategies have been applied to analyze and design metabolic networks during the last decade. the accuracy of optimization results depends heavily on the development of essential kinetic models of metabolic networks. kinetic models can quantitatively capture the experimentally observed regulation data of metabolic systems and are often used to find the optimal manipulation of external inputs. to address the issues of optimizing the regulatory structure of metabolic networks, it is necessary to consider qualitative effects, e.g., the resilience phenomena and cell viability constraints. combining the qualitative and quantitative descriptions for metabolic networks makes it possible to design a viable strain and accurately predict the maximum possible flux rates of desired products.

this study introduces a generalized fuzzy multi-objective optimization approach to determine the optimal enzymatic manipulations for metabolic network systems to obtain the maximal flux ratios of desired metabolites of interest. the goal of this optimization problem is to find the maximal synthesis rates of desired metabolites and the minimum set of manipulated enzymes simultaneously based on kinetic models. the kinetic model was directly used for the optimization problem and minlp solvers were applied to determine which enzymes to manipulate and how their corresponding activities changed. this study applies fuzzy equal and fuzzy inequality operations to the optimization problem to deal with the resilience phenomena and cell viability constraints. this study tests the practical utility of the proposed approach by applying it to two metabolic networks of s. cerevisiae and e. coli. the resulting optimal enzymatic manipulations for metabolic networks and the maximum flux ratios for desired metabolites are more justifiable based on biological knowledge. we could qualitatively speculate the priority of modulated enzymes obtained by iteratively solving the optimization problems using various allowable numbers of manipulated enzymes. these results can help microbiologists make a proper decision when genetically modifying a microorganism.

