BACKGROUND
understanding the rate at which new mutations arise and their effects on fitness has been central in the development of many important theories in evolutionary genetics such as those that attempt to explain the evolution of sex and recombination  <cit> , patterns of dna sequence variation and molecular evolution in chromosomal regions with different recombination rates  <cit> , the evolution of diploidy  <cit>  and polyploidy  <cit> , and the risk of small populations to become extinct  <cit> . mutation accumulation  is a classical experiment to estimate the rate at which deleterious mutations arise in populations and their effects on fitness . this approach is characterized by the propagation of replicates of highly inbreed and clonal populations over a long period of time in an environment where mutations over the whole genome are allowed to randomly accumulate without the purging effect of selection. because different replicate lines will accumulate distinct mutations, the variance in fitness among lines is expected to increase over time. fitness assays carried out with contemporaneous and ancestral populations may thus explain the phenotypic effects of the new accumulated mutations and can be used to provide estimates of the haploid genomic mutation rate per generation , the mean mutational effect )  <cit> , and the distribution of effects of new mutations )  <cit> . several model organisms, including some microbes, have been subject to such ma experiments and have permitted estimates of the rates and effects of mutations. ma experiments are expected to increase the genetic load and potentially lead to extinction due to fitness decline  <cit> , as it has been observed, for example, in strains of e. coli  <cit>  or in yeast  <cit> .

mutation accumulation studies have already been done with a wide variety of organisms, including viruses  <cit> , bacteria  <cit> , fungi  <cit> , plants  <cit> , and animals . to our knowledge, however, experiments to estimate the rate and effects of mutations have never been performed with any of the diverse lineages of protists. although lynch and gabriel  <cit>  had previously estimated the mutation load of paramecium caudatum this estimate was performed on data collected to determine the species maximum lifespan and therefore replicate lines were obtained from a diverse population and initial phenotypic variability was not set to zero as it is typical of ma studies.

ciliates have a unique form of genomic information. as typical ciliate, tetrahymena thermophila presents a marked nuclear dimorphism characterized by a diploid micronucleus  with five chromosomes that functions primarily as the germ line, and a somatic polyploid macronucleus  thought to be responsible for all gene expression during vegetative growth  <cit> . the mac originates from the mic and goes through several developmentally programmed dna rearrangements such as site-specific fragmentation of the five chromosomes leading to  <dig> autonomous replicating pieces  that comprises a total of  <dig> mb in length and more than  <dig> predicted protein-coding genes  <cit> . each of these arp undergoes several rounds of replication until each locus is present at an average level of  <dig> copies per mac genome  <cit> .

during vegetative growth the mic divides following a regular mitosis while the mac constricts and divides amitotically due to the absence of mitotic spindles and functional centromeres  <cit> . the major consequence of amitosis is the unequal partition of the genetic material between the two daughter cells, which causes a random segregation of alleles and an asymmetric division of the chromosomes . this unequal division of the genetic material after each cell division is expected to result in the tendency towards increased variance in macronuclear dna content in the absence of a specific regulatory mechanism of copy number control  <cit> . it was suggested that this trend could be constrained by the elimination of the two extremes through suppression  <cit>  or repetition  <cit>  of complete rounds of macronuclear dna synthesis between each cell division  <cit> . although this cell cycle regulating mechanism has been observed it has not been formally demonstrated to be the mechanism that allows the cell to maintain its chromosomal copy number at the optimal level.

another important consequence of the random segregation of the homologous chromosome copies at each cell division is the production of homozygous phenotypes from sexually-produced heterozygotes by the process of phenotypic assortment  <cit> . the general explanation for phenotypic assortment simply requires a randomly distribution of alleles between the two daughter cells  <cit> . the rate of assortment is dependent on the initial input ratio and on the number of assorting units and proceeds to homozygosity independently of the dominance relationships between alleles. the allele assortment rate has been estimated in t. thermophila for several loci and leads to a value of about  <dig> assorting units typical of the mac of this species  <cit> .

in this study we carry out a mutation accumulation experiment with the ciliate protozoan tetrahymena thermophila with the aim to determine its somatic macronuclear  genomic mutation rate and the effect of new deleterious mutations on the mean population fitness. even though experiments similar to this ma have been performed in the past  <cit> , mainly to determine the possible immortality of ciliates  <cit> , this is the first attempt to estimate the genomic mutation rate and effects of deleterious mutations in a protist. due to the particular mode that characterizes the genetic segregation in the macronucleous of tetrahymena that defies the rules of diploid mendelian inheritance, we developed a simple simulation model to estimate both u - the rate at which copy number variation in the mac occurs- and s - the mean effect on fitness caused by deviations of the optimum copy number. the ma experiment carried out in this study with t. thermophila was replicated with cell lines of tetrahymena pyriformis with the aim to compare their rates of clonal extinction. the macronucleous of t. pyriformis is also fragmented into many arp, each one highly amplified, and cell divisions are characterized by the amitotic segregation of alleles between the two daughter cells  <cit> . in contrast to t. thermophila, t. pyriformis organisms are amicronucleated, i.e. they lack the germinal micronucleus and are therefore unable to reproduce sexually with both germinal and somatic functions being carried out by the macronucleus alone. most importantly, these organisms lack the ability to purge deleterious mutation through meiosis and conjugation, and therefore they provide an important contrast to the somatic ma occurring the in mac of t. thermophila. although during the course of the experiment t. thermophila accumulates mutations in both mic and mac nuclei, our phenotypic measures of fitness only detect the mutations accumulated in the macronucleus. hence the results are comparable between species and they show that the mutation load in t. thermophila macronucleus is much greater than in t. pyriformis. tetrahymena offers the opportunity to investigate  the establishment of the somatic vs. germ line during evolution process,  the advantage of having either sexual or asexual life cycles, and  the dynamics of and diploidy vs. polyploidy coexisting in the same cell/organism. finally, t. thermophila is an important model organism in biomedical research and understanding the magnitude of its genomic mutation rate is critical to any evolutionary interpretation of its phenotypes.

RESULTS
mutation accumulation experiment and fitness assays
the mutation accumulation  experiment was carried out with  <dig> lines of tetrahymena thermophila, all derived from the same clonal population that was derived from a single cell in the previous  <dig> hours, hence with no measureable phenotypic variation. sampling of a single individual was performed every  <dig> hours, and was continued for  <dig> bottlenecks, after which all lines were extinct. during the course of the experiment these extinctions occurred at a rather constant rate of approximately  <dig>  clonal extinctions per bottleneck  and the mean time to extinction of the  <dig> replicate lines was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  bottlenecks. the same experiment carried out with t. pyriformis gave strikingly different results. while the  <dig> ma lines of t. thermophila went extinct within a short period of  <dig> bottlenecks, t. pyriformis, on the other hand, showed a much higher robustness to extinction with only two clonal deaths during the same time period.

measures of competitive fitness determined for each population along the bottlenecks, provide more complete information of the mutation accumulation process. fitness measurements for the  <dig> ma lines show an overall tendency for mean population fitness to decrease during the experiment, as is typical of ma experiments . variance in fitness during the development of ma lines increases initially due to the likely accumulation of different mutations in each line. after bottleneck six, it stabilizes and then later decreases due to the increased number of extinct lines classified as having fitness of zero. at the end of the experiment , no variation in fitness between populations is obtained since all lines become extinct. mean and variance of population fitness estimated excluding extinct lines are presented in a supplementary fig. s <dig> . most importantly, although the general tendency is for average fitness values to decrease within populations, occasional recoveries were detected in some lines. this is precisely what is expected to occur if a mechanism related to the variation in chromosomal copy number  is occurring. in fact similar dynamics can be observed in the simulation model that we developed. the model assumes that copy number variation is the key mechanism leading to the eventual extinction of all lines. more generally, throughout the experiment there was a decrease in fission rate, with an increased probability of the appearance of abnormally dividing cells with an altered plan of cell division or asymmetric divisions . these are common phenotypic observation in experiments of this type and have been documented in the literature as evidence of macronuclear deterioration  <cit> . we also noticed that fitness measures taken prior to extinction were not predictive of the probability of extinction in the following bottleneck. we interpret this as further evidence for the effect of random drift in accelerating the process of macronuclear deterioration, a conclusion that contradicts what would be expected if viability were under the effect of selection. the efficacy of natural selection in preventing fitness decline depends on the population size. estes et al  <cit>  showed a strong effect of population size in the population mean fitness estimated from ma lines c. elegans. lines that are kept at a slightly larger size had higher levels of mean fitness than lines kept at size one. by increasing the bottleneck size, the efficiency of selection against mutations of large effect will be improved. to evaluate the effect of bottleneck size in the rate of clonal extinction, we performed an additional experiment where  <dig> lines of t. thermophila, all derived from the same founding clonal population, were grown in the same conditions as the initial ma lines, except instead of transferring  <dig> single cell every  <dig> hours we performed daily transferences of  <dig> cells. during the course of this experiment none of the replicate lines become extinct , and we did not detect any decay in the absolute fitness . this strongly suggests that such an increase in the effective population size is enough for natural selection to act on the macronucleus rescuing populations of t. thermophila from extinction.

simulations
postulating that copy number variation is the key to explain the fast extinction observed, we developed a model to estimate the rate and mean effects of copy number variation in the population mean fitness. the model simulates as close as possible the experimental conditions of the ma experiment and assumes that the evolutionary consequences of a mechanism of variation in chromosomal copy number is enough to explain our experimental results. first the model and its parameters should be consistent with the rate of clonal death observed in t. thermophila  and second those estimated values of u and s should provide a pattern of mean fitness decline and fitness variance across bottlenecks similar to that observed in the experiment . we performed an exhaustive search of the parameter space defined by u and s in order to characterize the set of parameters that generate data consistent with the empirical observations for clonal death:  <dig> extinctions in  <dig> populations and  <dig> bottlenecks, and a mean and variance in time to extinction of  <dig>  and  <dig>  bottlenecks, respectively . figure  <dig> describes the parameter space that corresponds to values of u and s for which the probability of obtaining data similar to the experiment  is higher than  <dig> . our results show that both large values of u associated with small values of s, or smaller values of u associated with large values of s, can provide reasonable fits to the main features of the data. this shows that u covaries strongly with s which makes it difficult to estimate these parameters independently. in fact, assuming a slightly different model, lynch obtained that the decline in viability over time depends on the product us. we further explore this space for a set of parameters whose fitness dynamics was close to the one observed, and the parameter values of s =  <dig> , u =  <dig>  showed a good fit with the observed fitness dynamics, where both the rates of mean fitness decrease are not significantly different . we should note that these estimates of u and s should be taken as ball park estimates. the mutation rate of u =  <dig>  corresponds to our best estimate of the somatic mutation rate for the whole macronucleus of t. thermophila and can be interpreted as the probability of somatic chromosomal lost/gain per mac genome per generation. considering that this species has on average  <dig> copies of each chromosomal replicating unit this estimate becomes  <dig>  per haploid mac genome per generation. the same set of parameters in a model that simulates the experimental conditions of transferring a larger number of cells leads to the expected result of no clonal extinction similar to the empirical results .

q-pcr assays
our model also suggests that a difference in the level of mac polyploidization could be sufficient to explain the rather distinct results obtained for both t. thermophila and t. pyriformis, where the later is expected to have a larger macronuclear copy number. to investigate the differences in copy number per cell between these two species we carried out q-pcr for three single-copy genes per haploid genome . in this analysis we assume similar amplification efficiencies between species and independent inferences of the ploidy level by each gene. the results indicate that t. pyriformis has on average  <dig>  more copies per ng of dna than t. thermophila . because the ratio of the number of cells of t. pyriformis to t. thermophila per ng of dna after dna extraction was  <dig>   we estimated that t. pyriformis has on average more  <dig>  copies per cell than t. thermophila. this result is larger but on the same order of magnitude with other rough estimates of macronuclear dna content for several tetrahymena species that suggest a mean ratio of the ploidy level between t. pyriformis and t. thermophila to be approximately  <dig>   <cit> .

1elongation factor  <dig> alpha

discussion
the rate at which t. thermophila clones become extinct through continuous reduction in population size imposed by the strong bottlenecks is characteristic of a mutational meltdown  <cit> . during the course of the experiment, a synergistic interaction is created between population size and the random effect of genetic drift, and this promotes the build up of the population mutation load which, in its extreme, causes a mutation meltdown and drives populations to extinction  <cit> . in fact, although some extinctions have been previously observed in mutator strains of bacteria  <cit>  and yeasts  <cit> , no such high rate of extinction was observed in ma experiments with other organisms. in our experiments t. thermophila showed a decline rate of  <dig>  clonal extinctions per bottleneck, a value that is at least two and three orders of magnitude faster than the rates of  <dig>  and  <dig>  obtained in the yeast and bacteria experiments. it is unlikely that the fast rate observed in t. thermophila is due solely to the accumulation of random deleterious mutations, such as nucleotide changes, transpositions and/or small insertions-deletions as observed in other organisms. more plausible is that this rate of extinction reflects the process of gain and loss of chromosomes that is characteristic of the amitotic division of the macronucleous of t. thermophila. theory predicts that the accumulation of deleterious mutations in ma lines is accompanied by a steady decrease in the mean population fitness  <cit> . however, in our study we observed occasional recoveries of the mean population fitness , which can only be obtained when the rate of back mutations is sufficiently high for offspring to be fitter than the parental generation  <cit> . in our simulations we mimic these recoveries when we assume no bias for the probability of gain and loss of chromosomal copies in the amitotic division, a condition that still lacks empirical confirmation.

lynch and gabriel  <cit>  analyzed the data from takagi and yoshida  <cit>  and, by regressing the fraction of extinct or non-dividing cells on the number of cell divisions estimated the macronuclear mutation load  of  <dig>  for a clone of p. caudatum - a ciliate that shares with tetrahymena many of the genetic features associated with the presence of two nuclei and the amitotic division of the macronucleus. there are several differences both in the experimental design used by takagi and yoshida and the model used by lynch and gabriel to reanalyzed the data from that experiment. takagi and yoshida followed the evolution of  <dig> clones, replicated  <dig> times each, derived from a large population of p caudatum. each of these lines were propagated with daily transfers of one cell, and occasionally replaced by members of sister sublines, a procedure we have not done and is not typical in ma experiments. lynch and gabriel applied a model to the data obtained by measuring the fraction of clonal populations with dividing cells during the experiment. lynch and gabriel model assumes that mutations occur following a poisson process, just as we do in our model, and that each mutation causes a negative effect on fitness, s, that is irreversible. this was not assumed in our model. in our model each mutation causes a deviation from optimal copy number  = exp, see simulation model in methods section), which causes a negative fitness effect that can be reverted. under lynch and gabriel model, no selection occurs in the experiment and a linear decline in log mean fitness is expected over time, which translates into an estimate of us, the mutational load. lynch and gabriel point out that since several simplifying assumptions are done in the model, including lack of back-mutation and lack of selection, this estimated is likely downwardly biased. importantly not only takagi and yoshida did not perform a classical ma experiment but also they did not measure competitive fitness. lynch and gabriel performed a regression of the fraction of clones with dividing cells on the number of cell divisions to get a rough estimate of the mutational load in p. caudatum of  <dig> . if we applied the same model used by lynch and gabriel on our data of the extinction pattern  we obtain an equivalent value for the macronuclear mutation load in t. thermophila of  <dig> . this value is four times larger than the one estimated for p. caudatum, which may reflect differences in macronuclear gene content between these two species and differences in experimental design. this load measures the proportional reduction in fitness due to deleterious mutations and lies within the range of μs  estimated for eukaryotes  <cit> . interestingly, a  <dig>  rate of clonal death was independently estimated by merriam and bruns  <cit>  for t. thermophila. these authors demonstrated that this rate is consistent with the rate of phenotypic assortment of a single gene, and suggested that the lower the copy number in the macronucleus, the higher the probability of expressing a deleterious allele in the homozygous form, and thus kill the cell. our proposed mechanism also assumes that an increase in copy number in the macronuclear genome would provide higher robustness to clonal extinction. in fact, the selection coefficient  against a change in copy number away from an optimum value  may depend upon the absolute number of copies. it is easy to imagine that a cell carrying  <dig> copies of a gene whose optimum number of copies is  <dig> will have a lower fitness relative to a cell carrying  <dig> copies whose optimum value is  <dig>  if this is the case then we can easily understand the difference in results of the ma of t. thermophila and t. pyriformis. for the same rate u a smaller s will lead to a much lower level of extinctions in the same time period . lynch and gabriel  also speculate that the high longevities attributed to the amicronucleated tetrahymena could be associated with an increase in mean extinction time when the effects of mutations are highly variable relative to their expectations - exactly what is expected when the gain and loss of chromosomal copies is achieved through a mechanism that is random relatively to the dna composition of what is transferred.

the ecology associated with natural populations of tetrahymena imply that they periodically suffer drastic fluctuations in population size  <cit>  and hence suggests that t. thermophila species must recurrently undergo sexual reproduction in order to avoid the deleterious effects seen in our laboratory experiments due to extreme and periodic size reductions. the robustness of t. pyriformis to the accumulation of deleterious mutations in the ma lines, on the other hand, requires that species that lack the resetting mechanism of sex must take advantage of another mechanism that would confer protection from the deleterious effects of randomly accumulated mutations. the dependence of the rate of phenotypic assortment on the level of copy number suggests that longevity would benefit from  high copy number that allows for longer assortment times  <cit> , and  shorter chromosomes sizes so that the linkage between deleterious and beneficial mutations can be broken down thus promoting more efficient selection. our computer simulations show that the observed rate of clonal death can be obtained simply as a consequence of the evolutionary dynamics of an unfaithful mechanism of copy number segregation that, in the face of strong genetic drift, is unable to maintain the cell line at an optimum number of copies.

one important result from our study is the suggestion that the mechanism that regulates copy number in the macronucleus is natural selection acting on the diversity generated by a stochastic process of gain and loss of chromosomes. it has always been a puzzle how the continuous amitotic mechanism of macronuclear division does not lead to massive chromosomal imbalances and death from aneuploidy for this reason, a regulatory mechanism of copy number control through replication was favored  <cit> . it was observed that a cell-cycle mechanism such as the one proposed by preer and preer  <cit>  can rescue the cells from extreme chromosomal imbalances. but the fact that once started replication would duplicate all dna content present in the macronucleus  <cit>  strongly suggests this mechanism would be a last resort solution.

this is the not the first time that a stochastic model is advocated to explain the chromosomal segregation in ciliate macronucleus  <cit> . however, unlike previous models we postulate that changes in chromosome copy number, even the smaller changes compatible to what is expected from each cell fission  <cit> , carry fitness costs that are seen by selection. we can therefore hypothesize that under large effective population sizes the probability of population extinction through genetic imbalances should be small. in fact, once we allow for selection to be effective  no such rate of extinction is observed, suggesting that the rate of extinction was due to ineffective selection in the face of intense genetic drift. our model does not explain assortment of rdna given these genes are present in such high copy numbers unless these copies occur in synteny. interestingly, merrian and burns  <cit>  estimated a rate of assortment for rdna <dig>  that is similar to the assortment rate of other genes maintained at  <dig> copies. it was suggested an epigenetic regulation independent of the assortment of other genes could explain the regulation of these highly amplified gene copies  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the aim of this study was to estimate the somatic mutation rate of t. thermophila by performing a classic experiment of mutation accumulation. we observed a rate of clonal death and a fitness dynamics that are consistent with a mechanism of gain/loss of chromosomes, as is characteristic of the amitotic division of tetrahymena macronucleus. the high similarity of estimates available for the mutation load in t. thermophila also strengthens the hypothesis that the mechanism responsible for the accumulation of deleterious effects is dependent on a species-specific feature such as chromosomal copy number. we suggest that copy number and the rate of chromosomal gain/loss at each amitotic division are crucial to understand macronuclear degeneration, cell line longevity, and senescence in ciliates. it also renders the hypothesis of longevity controlled by programmed cell death unlikely.

