BACKGROUND
the importance of developing protective humoral immunity following vaccination is widely recognized, as those who fail to respond are at increased risk of contracting the disease if exposed. rubella is well controlled via vaccination programs in industrialized countries, but epidemics of the disease occasionally occur in developing countries and both rubella virus infection and congenital rubella syndrome remain a major health concern around the world  <cit> . understanding how host genetic influences modify response to rubella immunization may shed light into the biology of immunity to rubella infection, as well as into the potential development of even more highly effective vaccines. while the heritability of antibody responses to rubella vaccination has been estimated to be as high as 46%  <cit> , knowledge of the genetic control of rubella vaccine-induced immunity remains incomplete.

our group and others have shown that polymorphisms in the human leukocyte antigen  region, as well as snps in cytokine and cytokine receptor genes, are associated with differences in a variety of immune responses to rubella vaccine, but do not explain all of the variance in immune responses seen within the population  <cit> . studies with other viral vaccines, such as measles and mumps, have demonstrated associations between cytokine and cytokine receptor gene polymorphisms and immune responses  <cit> . because of the central role of cytokines as intercellular protein messengers and the role of their receptors in the immune response cascade, cytokine and cytokine receptor gene polymorphisms may significantly influence the outcome of rubella vaccine immune response. for example, polymorphisms in both coding and noncoding regions of these genes can affect multiple aspects of cytokine biology, such as transcriptional activity protein production, receptor binding and functional activity  <cit> . thus, a wide variety of genes is likely to be important in regulating immune response to live viral vaccines.

while the role of cytokines in antiviral immune responses has been established, little is known about how other gene families control immune responses to rubella virus. studies in a variety of other models  have also recently demonstrated the importance of innate and vitamin receptor genes in regulating immune responses  <cit> . in this regard, innate antiviral factor trim, toll-like receptors  and their associated intracellular signaling molecules activation is critical to stimulating innate and adaptive immunity  <cit> . importantly, innate pathways detect infection and serve two purposes: mediate initial anti-viral response and prime more powerful and specific adaptive responses. finally, vitamins and their receptors are known to have hormone-like attributes and were also found to affect innate and adaptive immunity  <cit> . to further characterize the impact of immune gene polymorphisms on variability in vaccine-induced humoral immunity, it is crucial to broadly examine variants in key genes important to the immune response to viral vaccines such as rubella. the genetic diversity of innate, adaptive, antiviral effector and other immune response genes has not been comprehensively studied within the context of rubella vaccine-induced humoral immune responses.

the discovery of genetic variations caused by single nucleotide polymorphisms  has led to population-based immunogenetic studies intended to elucidate the potential relationship between host genomic variation and immune response  <cit> . a high level of regulatory complexity is required in the human immune system to insure a high probability of functional redundancy in both cell-mediated and humoral immune responses to vaccination  <cit> . for instance, one gene may be able to compensate for potential loss of function due to genetic variation in another. this would lead to reduced power to detect real associations because variation in immune response may only be apparent within subjects with genetic variants in both of the genes. because such associations could be missed with single snp analyses, when associations between genetic variants and measures of immune response are studied it is important to examine more than just their relationships with individual snps. that is, not only should genetic associations be studied for the main effects of single genetic variants on immune response, but multigenic associations, whether epistatic or otherwise, should be examined as well  <cit> . a growing collection of approaches is becoming available for the study of multigenic associations in association with disease states. these include relatively standard statistical approaches to study interactions, but also newer approaches that have been designed to search for the presence of multigenic effects in high dimensional genetic data consisting of many snps  <cit> .

in this study, we searched for evidence of multigenic associations among a broad collection of snps identified from non-hla genes that are candidates for being immunologically relevant to the development of a humoral response to rubella vaccination after two doses of measles-mumps-rubella vaccine. due to the large number of genes in immune response gene families, we selected a group of key genes for each family, which, based on biologic plausibility and the published literature, are highly likely to be involved in regulating rubella immunity. we were particularly interested in assessing the degree to which the inclusion of multilocus associations would identify important genetic variation that contributes to rubella-specific antibody levels. to date, no such data have been published to address this issue.

RESULTS
we attempted to genotype a total of  <dig> snps in a cohort of  <dig> children who had received two doses of rubella vaccine. after snps with call rates below 90%, hwe p-values less than  <dig>  or minor allele frequencies less than 5% were excluded from analysis, a total of  <dig> remained, for an overall genotyping success rate of  <dig> %. subject exclusions were made on the basis of poor dna quality , complete genotyping failure  and call rates below 95% . these exclusions removed  <dig> subjects, leaving  <dig> subjects for analysis. data from these individuals are summarized in table  <dig>  included with these summaries are the associations between the various descriptive variables and rubella antibody levels. of note, differences in antibody levels were observed between males and females , and among categories defined by the age at which the second rubella vaccination was received .

notes:

a q <dig> and q <dig> represent the first  and third  quartiles, respectively.

b p-value represents a test of the null hypothesis that there are no differences in the level of rubella antibody igg levels among the categories represented.

our omnibus test of association between the number of positively associated alleles carried across all of these candidate snps and the observed antibody levels suggested that, even with the high number of null snps apparent from the univariate analyses, there was a significant association between this collection of snps and rubella antibody after performing a randomization test to account for multiple comparisons . in order to narrow the list of snps that contributed to this omnibus association, we performed a stepwise selection procedure. this procedure identified a list of  <dig> snps that all contributed to the genetic association with rubella antibody levels when considered simultaneously in the same regression model, with a global p-value obtained via a randomization test of  <dig> . these snps are illustrated in table  <dig>  the snp with the smallest p-value in the univariate analyses, rs <dig>  also had the smallest p-value after adjusting for the other snps in the multi-allelic model. interestingly, several snps without a clear ordinal trend in univariate analyses were significantly associated with the outcome on a per-allele basis after controlling for other snps in candidate multi-allelic model. one example of this is rs <dig>  which displayed a u-shaped trend across the three genotypes when examined individually , and displayed a negative dose-response after controlling for other snps in the multi-allelic model .

identified snps are all significant when adjusting for all other snps shown in the table, and for the descriptive variables outlined in table  <dig>  univariate results are shown for comparison.

notes:

a q <dig> and q <dig> represent the first and third quartiles, the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively.

b estimate represents the difference in log associated with carrying one copy of the minor allele. the anti-log of this quantity provides an estimate of the fold-change in antibody levels associated with carrying one copy of the minor allele.

c s.e. represents the standard error of the estimate. the ratio of the estimate to the s.e. provides a measure of the relative strength of the effect among the snps

the plot in figure  <dig> represents the results from the analysis of the associations between the  <dig>  possible pair-wise combinations of snps and rubella antibody levels. the observed p-values deviate somewhat from the line of unity, but not in a way that is indicative of the presence of a small number of pairs of snps that are strongly associated with rubella antibody levels. in fact, the smallest p-value of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> for the combination of rs <dig>  an intronic snp in il12rb <dig>  and rs <dig>  a 3' flanking snp in il18r <dig>  was actually less extreme than what would be expected if there were no pair-wise epistatic associations present.

as with the assessment of all possible pair-wise interactions, the use of recursive partitioning algorithms did not yield strong evidence in favor of major epistatic interactions. after forming the recursive partitioning tree, an assessment of the degree of pruning required to avoid over-fitting indicated that the best-fitting tree was one with a single node, with the split being on rs <dig>  because of this finding, further analyses seeking additional multi-allelic epistatic effects were not pursued.

discussion
because of the regulatory complexity of immune responses to complex antigens, there is almost certainly a diversity of genes that together influence the immune response to vaccination. while there are many genes that are strong candidates, the bulk of those that have an effect on the levels of rubella-specific antibody raised in response to immunization have yet to be identified. in this study, we examined a broad collection of snps that tag  <dig> genes that have been identified as potentially playing a role in the immune process. we have performed an array of analyses in an attempt to identify potential multigenic associations between these candidate snps and the observed levels of rubella-specific antibody levels following mmr-ii vaccination.

as we have reported previously, a number of snps and hla alleles have already been identified as being univariately associated with variation in responses to rubella immunization  <cit> . in the analyses presented here, we were able to examine all univariate snp associations with rubella antibodies simultaneously. this assessment suggested that the top four snps were among those that were significantly associated with the humoral immune response. when broader analyses were performed that explicitly searched for multiple snps that independently contributed to variation in rubella antibody levels while statistically correcting for multiple testing using a randomization approach, we found that there was a significant association between the number of positively associated alleles carried by an individual across all candidate snps and differences in rubella antibody level . in order to identify the subset of snps that captured this signal, we subsequently performed a snp selection procedure and identified a total of  <dig> snps that simultaneously provided information on the levels of rubella-specific antibodies . in both of these analyses, we employed resampling procedures to account for the process of model building and selection as the tests for significance were performed  <cit> .

we performed two separate analyses in our search for epistatic effects among the  <dig> snps. we first assessed the significance of all possible two-way combinations of snps . while there were more snp pairs with p-values between  <dig>  and  <dig>  than would have been expected under the null hypothesis, we found that the smallest p-value was actually larger than what would be expected under the hypothesis that no snp pairs were significantly associated with rubella antibody levels. likewise, as we performed a recursive partitioning analysis, we found that the best-fitting classification tree had only one node. this provided further evidence against the presence of major epistatic associations being in effect among the snps from the candidate genes under study.

while the evidence for epistasis among the candidate snps is not strong, our analysis supports the concept that considering the broader collection of a large number of snps does provide additional insight into the genetic control of rubella antibody levels. by assessing all snps in a single model we were able to identify a broader collection of candidates than was possible when each snp was considered individually. while the univariate tests implicated snps in the lta, il <dig> and il4r genes, the analysis of all snps identified not only these genes but also a broader collection of genes that appear to contribute to variation in rubella antibody levels. the  <dig> snps that were jointly associated with humoral immunity are shown in table  <dig>  these snps that were jointly associated with differences in rubella antibody levels resided in a total of  <dig> genes.

while there is evidence in favor of there being a major genetic component to the observed levels of rubella-specific antibodies following vaccination  <cit> , the current knowledge of the genetic control of immune responses to rubella immunization has been obtained from studies that focused on a small number of genetic loci that were analyzed one at a time  <cit> . given the genetic diversity required by the immune system to mount an adequate response to a wide number of pathogens, it is likely that these one-at-a-time approaches are inadequate for the comprehensive study of the genetic correlates of immune response. indeed, the efforts reported here implicated a broader number of candidate genes as potentially being involved in modulating rubella-specific antibody levels using multigenic analyses that examined more than one locus at a time.

the genes that have been implicated as being associated with rubella antibody levels were selected for study because of their general relevance to viral immunity. the humoral immune response to rubella vaccine reflected in assayed antibody levels is the cumulative result of the actions and interactions of multiple genes and pathways. those snps that were identified as being important for humoral immunity to rubella are included in table  <dig>  among these genes are cytokine  and cytokine receptor, lymphotoxin alpha , leukocyte specific transcript- <dig> , antiviral effector , ifn-type i-induced , adenosine deaminase , vitamin a receptor family , the innate antiviral factor , mucin-like protocadherin  and other genes. these identified variants reside in genes spanning a broad collection of different classes of immune-related genes. since genetic polymorphisms may function jointly to determine the outcome of vaccine-induced antibody response, it is reasonable to suggest that the observed antibody level effects in our study may be an outcome of combinations of snp-defined alleles and immune response pathways, with the cumulative sum of variants across these genes influencing levels of rubella-specific antibodies. better understanding the immunogenetic impact of multiple gene family pathways critical to development of humoral immune responses following rubella vaccination may provide insight into the factors that influence rubella immunity.

strengths and limitations
this manuscript outlines the first analysis of its kind, an assessment of the associations between a large collection of snps from immunologically relevant genes and rubella antibody levels. this analysis made it possible to examine all snps we genotyped on a well-characterized cohort of study participants and assess the likelihood that the univariate snp results were significant on their own. this examination also made it possible to study a variety of types of associations between candidate snps and rubella antibody levels, both epistatic and otherwise. when complicated analytical approaches were employed, we used resampling methodologies to obtain statistical significance levels that were not over-trained to the data  <cit> . this study does have two important limitations, however. first, as with all genetic association studies there is a need for replication, and a replication cohort is currently unavailable to us. second, there was limited power to detect significant epistatic associations; for two snps with mafs of  <dig>  there was 80% power to detect interactions if the effect of carrying one copy of each of the minor alleles was associated with a  <dig> -fold departure from additivity, while the detectable effect for a main effect for these snps was for a  <dig> -fold difference. an additional limitation of this study is that our analyses were restricted to a collection of  <dig> tagsnps identified from  <dig> candidate genes. there are likely to be other genetic variants that contribute to differences in rubella antibody levels that we have not assessed.

CONCLUSIONS
the implications of this work are two-fold. first, it presents a novel methodological approach that can provide additional insights into candidate genetic associations when analyzing similar data in other studies. when searching for associations between genes that are part of a complex system and outcomes that are potentially influenced by genetic variation in this system, it is important to consider more than just simple single-snp assessments. second, it is clear that the "dominant allele" model of genetic regulation of complex system processes such as immune response is both uncommon and too limiting. at least for those viral vaccines we have studied , variation in immune responses are clearly the result of small contributions from many genes and sets of genes acting in concert. these data provide motivation to move beyond simple univariate associations to the types of analyses illustrated in this report in order to identify significant multigenic associations otherwise unobservable by simple univariate models. the value of approaches such as this include the ability to more clearly identify and model the genetic determinants of immune response to viral vaccines. the findings from these models can then be used to inform the development of next-generation vaccines.

