BACKGROUND
bacteria possess the ability to adhere to surfaces and grow within an extracellular matrix of their own synthesis. although these bacterial aggregates, or biofilms, were first identified in natural aquatic environments  <cit> , their importance in infectious disease is attracting much attention  <cit> . for pathogens, life in a biofilm offers protection from mucociliary clearance, phagocytosis, and from antibiotic attack  <cit> , thereby playing a participatory role in persistent infections  <cit> .

bacteria are thought to organize into communities that produce and populate the biofilm, controlling its morphology by varying growth and gene expression, and by interacting with neighboring cells. random environmental pressures also participate in shaping these specialized structures  <cit> . chemotaxis and bacterially induced small-scale water currents  <cit>  have been used to explain large  periodic bacterial patterns on mucus veils suspended over sulfidic marine sediments  <cit> . surface-bound biofilms have been observed to develop into microscopic structures, such as the pillars and mushroom-shaped cell clusters produced by pseudomonas aeruginosa  <cit> . pseudomonas fluorescens sbw <dig> produced biofilms that were comprised of extensive, extracellular non-periodic webs of fine  cellulose fibers  <cit> . freeze-dried colonies of erwinia amylovora were found to contain cross-linked stalactites of extracellular polymeric substances  with an approximate spacing of  <dig> μm  <cit> , and biofilms of listeria monocytogenes strains consisted of complex, regular structures with an approximate spacing of  <dig> μm  <cit> .

the organism studied in the present report is a pseudomonas fluorescens soil isolate from an environment heavily contaminated by tar seeps. p. fluorescens is a ubiquitous, gram-negative, motile, biofilm-forming bacterium commonly-encountered in soil and water habitats. the organism plays an important role in food spoilage, drinking water quality, plant disease, and nosocomial infections. p. fluorescens also is known to form biofilms and consequently the surface adhesion of a number of isolates has been investigated. cossard et al. determined that the adherence properties of four p. fluorescens isolates were independent of their ecological habitat  <cit> . p. fluorescens wcs <dig> was found to produce a cell surface protein  that promoted the colonization of glass, plastic, and quartz sand via adhesion  <cit> . biofilm formation by p. fluorescens sbw <dig> at the air-liquid interface required an acetylated form of cellulose  <cit>  and the genetic systems that underpin cellulose production and colonization in numerous strains have been determined  <cit> . the physiology and behavior of p. fluorescens biofilms under diverse hydrodynamic stresses have been the subject of numerous flow-chamber studies  <cit> . biofilms formed under a turbulent flow regime were more active and contained more viable biomass than their laminar counterparts. given p. fluorescens' resistance to a number of bacterial agents, biofilm control methods involving bacteriophages have been investigated recently with encouraging preliminary results  <cit> . studies on biofilms produced by p. fluorescens have relied heavily on optical microscopy, notably on selective staining with fluorescent dyes followed by examination with confocal laser scanning microscopy. plasmid expression of specially-constructed autofluorescent proteins also has been used to image p. fluorescens strains in the rhizosphere  <cit>  and on leaf surfaces  <cit> .

recent studies on biofilms formed by a pathogenic strain of staphylococcus epidermidis have revealed highly ordered, three-dimensional organization of extracellular matrix that was vacated as the biofilm matured  <cit> . if the remarkable ability to form complex extracellular structures were restricted to one strain of pathogenic bacteria, it would constitute an interesting observation with limited applicability. here we demonstrate that a strain of bacteria isolated from a natural environment can produce biofilms consisting of complex, organized structures.

RESULTS
the bacterial isolate is an axenic pseudomonad
the environmental isolate used in this study, evs4-b <dig>  consisted of gram-negative, rod-shaped  cells that produced fluorescent colonies on gould's s <dig> agar. to ensure that axenic cultures were examined, the bacterial populations were propagated and pcr was performed using a universal primer that amplifies a consensus 16s rrna gene, and a primer that identifies a pseudomonas-specific amplicon within the 16s rrna gene. the 16s rrna gene sequence of evs4-b <dig> was found to be 99% identical  to the corresponding region of p. sp. tm7_ <dig>  metabolic tests and fatty acid analysis identified evs4-b <dig> as belonging to the p. fluorescens species . the culture was free from contaminating species based on the purity of the above sequence.

bacteria growing in vitro form biofilms with reproducible macroscopic features
initially, axenic cultures of the bacterial isolate propagated exponentially, but the optical density of the growth medium started to decline significantly  <dig> h following inoculation . the drop in planktonic bacterial numbers, estimated by optical density, coincided with the formation of macroscopic opaque structures in the bottom of the culture tube. these structures had a diaphanous, gossamer appearance  and consisted of a dense, fibrillary core, with interdispersed white flocs that usually were anchored firmly to the bottom of the tube when grown as standing cultures; in shaking cultures, the material was commonly detached from the bottom of the tube. it was concluded that the structures in the bottom of the tubes were biofilms.

examination of the mature  hydrated biofilms in a dissecting microscope revealed macroscopic features that were reproducible from culture to culture. an aggregation of delicate flocs of opaque material made up the bulk of the biofilm volume . tethered to this construct via a thin cord was a parachute-like appendage approximately  <dig> mm in diameter  that consisted of material resembling fibrous sheets . while each culture only contained one of these highly unusual parachute-like structures, they were consistent macroscopic biofilm features when p. fluorescens evs4-b <dig> was grown in minimal media. glutaraldehyde fixation of the biofilms led to rapid dissolution of the flocculent material and slowly dissolved the fibrous, string-like core. the parachute-like appendage was the only biofilm component that remained after aldehyde fixation and subsequent staining and dehydration.

biofilms formed by the bacterial isolate have a complex ultrastructural morphology
p. fluorescens evs4-b <dig> biofilms were prepared for sem analysis using cryomethods. conventional aqueous cross-linking and contrasting agents, such as glutaraldehyde and osmium tetroxide, were not used because of the structural disruption we observed under the dissection microscope as described above. low magnification sem examination of the prepared biofilms revealed unique structural features . running through the biofilm were cords of twisted material . larger structures consisting of wrapped sheets also were present inside the biofilm . when specimen preparation led to breaks in this structure, the biofilm core was exposed  and consisted of small numbers of bacteria embedded in a matrix of fibers and particulate matter aggregating on the fibers . in other parts of the biofilm, the fibers were more apparent and formed irregular, net-like structures . at higher magnification it was possible to see that the fibers were organized into ordered networks of periodic nets. these nets contained few bacteria  and were covered by thin sheets of material similar to that observed around the bacteria embedded in the particulate matter .

the ultrastructures observed by sem are not artifacts resulting from sample preparation
the transmission electron microscopy  images of the embedded biofilms  are consistent with the corresponding sem data  and therefore validate the ultrastructural organization observed in the sem suggesting that they did not result from sample preparation. the honeycomb-like structures, as well as the morphology of the partitions, are clearly visible using both techniques. the structures appeared to have two types of walls. either it was thin with a smooth surface, or it was thicker and made up of globular structures . the thicker walls, although smooth on the surface, were of variable thickness giving them a bumpy appearance . the section staining revealed separations between the components of the thicker walls and globular masses separated by thin sheets . no obvious freezing damage due to ice crystal formation was observed suggesting that the em data presented here are of real ultrastructural features in the biofilms and are not the result of eutectic crystallization.

biofilms are chemically heterogeneous
hydrated biofilms from multiple cultures were combined taking care to minimize the inclusion of spent media without disturbing the fragile structures. no further handling of the biofilms was carried out prior to freeze-drying in order to preserve the chemical integrity of the structures. physical or chemical treatments of the samples such as centrifugation, filtration, extraction, and ion exchange chromatography have the potential to significantly alter the biofilm composition, thus biasing the results of the chemical analysis. the method described here is simple, convenient, minimally invasive, and is designed to provide representative samples for compositional analysis. hydrated biofilms  afforded  <dig>  mg of dry material  consisting of biofilm and spent media, where-as spent media free of biofilm  afforded  <dig>  mg of dry material . assuming that the dry material makes up a negligible proportion  of the mass of the hydrated sample, the media contribution to the mixed sample was estimated as  <dig>  mg , or 33% . background contributions from spent media to the chemical sample make-up were subtracted from the mixed biofilm-media samples according to eq.  <dig>  this simple relationship was employed throughout to estimate biofilm composition. results of the biofilm chemical analyses are summarized in table  <dig> 

adry material.

bmeasured as bsa.

cmeasured as dextrose monohydrate.

the principal ir absorption bands of the mixed biofilm/media sample are presented elsewhere . the most striking difference between the biofilm/media and media spectra is the presence of the peak at  <dig> cm- <dig> in the biofilm-containing sample, which is virtually absent in the media sample. this peak likely corresponds to an amide ii stretch in proteins  <cit> . the biofilm-containing sample lacks peaks at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> , and  <dig> cm- <dig>  which all are present in the media sample. the relative β-d-mannuronate  and α-l-guluronate  content of alginate copolymers can be estimated as the m/g ratio using the absorption bands at  <dig> and  <dig> cm- <dig>  <cit> . the corresponding bands observed here were at  <dig> and  <dig> cm- <dig> and were weak, suggesting a low alginate content. strong absorptions in the 1064– <dig> cm- <dig> range assigned to vibrations in polysaccharide ring structures  <cit>  also were missing. although a very weak shoulder at  <dig> cm- <dig> was observed, neither the biofilm nor the media ir spectra exhibited significant peaks around 1728– <dig> cm- <dig>  which correspond to the c = o stretch in o-acetyl esters  <cit> , specifically acylated sugars.

biofilms contain viable bacteria and glycoproteins
the primary goal of the confocal laser scanning microscopy  studies was to determine if viable bacteria were present in the mature biofilm structures. clsm in combination with multiple, chemo-specific, fluorescent labels are increasingly being used to achieve in situ characterization of bacterial biofilms with up to single cell resolution  <cit> . biofilms from p. fluorescens evs4-b <dig> cultures were labeled with baclight and were examined by clsm. this technique optimizes the possibility of detecting intact, viable bacteria that may be un-culturable on agar plates or as planktonic forms in liquid medium. the labeling demonstrated that the bacterial biofilms contained significant populations of living bacteria in clusters surrounded by dead bacteria . these results indicate that the mature biofilms are still physiologically active and are not merely aggregates of cellular debris.

concanavalin a  is one of the most widely used and best characterized lectins in biomedical research. it has a broad applicability because it binds to alpha-linked mannose residues, a common component of the core oligosaccharide of many glycoproteins. the presence of con a binding is usually an indication that glycoproteins are present. con a binding was observed in many regions of the biofilm that also contained bacteria, as determined by syto  <dig> staining . the cords of twisted material running through the biofilm were easily recognizable features of the biofilm that labeled with con a . these cords appeared to be embedded in aggregates of bacteria that did not label with con a. the structures that labeled with con a in other regions of the biofilm appeared diffuse and were not easily identified .

discussion
a bacterial species from an extreme environment rich in toxic compounds was isolated into axenic culture and grown in the laboratory. during the course of these studies, it was observed that the isolate produced atypical growth curves and formed a macroscopic structure tethered to the bottom of the culture tubes. these biofilms were unusual as they did not consist of the typical mucoidal material, but were made up of well-defined solid structures. confocal laser scanning microscopy confirmed that these mature structures contained significant zones of physiological activity. physical and chemical characterization of the mature biofilms was carried out and is discussed below.

when examined by light microscopy, bacterial cultures reproducibly contained similar structural motifs that were composed of viable bacteria as well as dead cells and extracellular material. at the macroscopic level, delicate flocculent material of what appeared to be bacterial aggregates was enveloped by a network of fibers. smaller fibers branched from this central core in a microscopic analogue to tree branches emanating from a trunk and surrounded by foliage . each culture tube also contained one complex three-dimensional structure that resembled a parachute.

at higher magnification using the confocal microscope, the thick fibers in the flocculent material appeared tightly coiled. the tightly coiled structures contained bacteria and had an affinity for fluorescently-labeled concanavalin a . these results suggest that there are specialized zones within the biofilm consisting of bacteria associated with extracellular proteins. the presence of bacterial aggregates in the biofilm that did not label with con a suggests that at least part of the extracellular material contains glycoproteins.

rapid freezing of biofilms followed by freeze substitution and epoxy resin embedding of the specimens enabled examination of thin sections through biofilms that had been minimally disturbed  <cit> . cryofixation followed by freeze-substitution has been shown to be a highly effective method for preserving biofilm organization for em examination  <cit> . it is well known, however, that freezing can lead to structural artifacts  <cit>  and that highly hydrated structures such as biofilms will collapse to some extent during sample preparation that involves dehydration. these distinct features must be recognized to avoid misinterpretation of the images. the fact that complex three-dimensional structures were observed in fully hydrated living specimens using a dissecting microscope, a compound microscope, and with a confocal microscope is strongly suggestive that the biofilm structures observed here are real, and not the result of either sample preparation or specimen handling. the same structures also were present in rapidly frozen, freeze-substituted material that has been embedded in resin.

the results presented in this preliminary account are derived from monospecies biofilms, grown in the laboratory under artificial conditions. biofilms produced in situ, either in the environment or in medical specimens, usually consist of more than one species or subspecies, sometimes making up highly complex microbial communities. the extracellular ultrastructures of such multispecies biofilms could differ from that of the monospecies model biofilms studied here by forming a more heterogeneous matrix, or by providing substrates for catabolic processes in other species. therefore, it is possible that the observed high degree of matrix organization could be the result of growing pure cultures under constant conditions and may not be as pronounced in the environment. more research on multispecies biofilms observed in vitro as well as those taken directly from natural environments is required to thoroughly address this important issue.

the biofilms were characterized in terms of their overall chemical composition  and were found to consist primarily  of proteins, reflecting the typical dry weight composition of e. coli cells under balanced growth conditions  <cit> . polysaccharides were found to make up a smaller fraction of the biofilm mass , and were of the magnitude expected in a vegetative bacterial cell. these results are atypical for eps produced by pseudomonads, which generally have a higher sugar-protein ratio. pseudomonas aeruginosa is considered a model organism for biofilm research and consequently has been studied intensively within this context  <cit> . the eps of p. aeruginosa sg <dig> consists primarily of uronic acids  and proteins, in roughly a 2: <dig> ratio   <cit> . marcotte et al. reported sugar-protein weight ratios of  <dig>  for p. aeruginosa, where-as the intracellular sugar-protein weight ratios for two p. aeruginosa strains were in the  <dig> – <dig>  range  <cit> . it should be noted that the biofilms in these studies were processed by different methods to those described here. the comparison of sugar-protein ratios, however, still is relevant and underscores the difference in chemical composition of the biofilms produced by these related pseudomonads. alginates in biofilm eps have been implicated in the development and maintenance of the mechanical stability of biofilms formed by p. aeruginosa both on living and abiotic surfaces  <cit> . the lack of observed o- or n-acetylation in the biofilm samples analyzed here also is noteworthy, as these groups are common components of biofilm eps produced by pseudomonas spp.  <cit> .

total nucleic acid levels in the biofilm  were one order of magnitude higher than corresponding dna measurements . this was not unexpected as total nucleic acid levels will include contributions from rna; e. coli cells typically contain six times more rna than dna  <cit> . the nucleic acid mass fraction of the studied biofilms, however, was ca.  <dig> times lower than the nucleic acid dry weight content of e. coli.

the calcium content  of p. fluorescens evs4-b <dig> biofilm equaled the total dry weight of all inorganic ions typically found in e. coli  <cit>  and was three times higher than the calcium content of the spent media. korstens et al. studied the mechanical properties of p. aeruginosa biofilms as a function of calcium ion concentration and found that the apparent young's modulus, representing a measure of biofilm stiffness, increased strongly at a critical calcium concentration and subsequently remained constant at higher calcium levels  <cit> . this behavior was explained in terms of calcium ions crosslinking eps components. based on these results it is conceivable that the observed calcium accumulation in the biofilms studied here plays a significant role in crosslinking/bridging eps components and herewith determining the geometry and maintaining the integrity of the observed structures. unlike calcium, magnesium was not found to accumulate significantly in the biofilms relative to the spent media.

note that the chemical composition of the biofilm presented in table  <dig> is a semi-quantitative approximation rather than a rigorous, absolute quantitation, which is virtually impossible as the chemical heterogeneity of bacterial biofilms  <cit>  precludes representative standards to be used in a number of the above assays.

cell and colony morphology have been used by microbiologists in the identification of bacteria since van leeuwenhoek developed the optical microscope nearly three hundred and fifty years ago. the morphology of bacterial biofilms also may contain elements that can assist identification, but the features can only be observed under the electron microscope. the difficulty in preparing biofilm samples for examination by this technique without introducing artifacts has limited its usefulness. the emergence of cryomethods such as those described here has enabled the reliable application of electron microscopy to biofilm research. recent results suggest that bacterial biofilms contain architectural motifs that may be useful in identifying these structures in medical, dental, and environmental samples. this approach has been used by costerton and colleagues in studying intraamniotic infections  <cit>  and affected bone in patients with osteonecrosis of the jaws secondary to bisphosphonate therapy  <cit> . biofilms produced by p. fluorescens evs4-b <dig>  p. putida  <cit> , and p. fulva  isolates from the same environment share a common morphology suggesting that these microscopic features may be useful for in vivo identification.

CONCLUSIONS
the present work provides evidence that a pseudomonas strain isolated from a natural soil environment can self-organize into elaborate biofilm constructs made up of an extracellular matrix of repeating motifs. mature biofilms contained living bacteria and were structurally, chemically, and physiologically heterogeneous. these remarkable structures are formed in the laboratory without unusual culturing conditions  and the organism does not appear to lose the ability to form biofilm, even after a six or more subcultures. the principal architectural elements observed by electron microscopy may be useful morphological identifiers for classifying bacterial biofilms in vivo.

the complexity and reproducibility of the structural motifs in the observed biofilms suggest that they are the result of organized assembly and not a result of ad hoc associations. these results suggest possible ecological advantages of the p. fluorescens evs4-b <dig> strain. cooperation among microbes currently is generating much interest within both the evolutionary and microbial communities  <cit> . the matrix of cross-linked polymers observed in the studied biofilms is being produced in copious amounts with high associated costs to the bacteria, while causing large separations between cells. these are relevant and impressive observations, especially within the context of recent theoretical studies  <cit> , which have demonstrated that polymer production in biofilms can be a competitive trait allowing eps-producing bacteria to occupy more favorable locations in the biofilm while "suffocating" strains of non-polymer producers. conversely, biofilm eps may provide a protective microenvironment fostering mutualism, such as encountered among endophytic bacteria that colonize intercellular spaces in various interior plant tissues and in the rhizosphere without causing damage. it has been suggested that biofilms produced by facultative endophytes may be involved in protecting plants from vascular pathogens and may have applications in pesticide phytoremediation  <cit> . begun et al. showed that eps from staphylococcal biofilms protected the enclosed bacterial communities against the immune defenses of the model nematode caenorhabditis elegans  <cit> .

