BACKGROUND
circadian rhythms are generated by cell-autonomous molecular oscillators widely distributed across the mammalian body. in order to perform their function of providing temporal order to physiological processes, these independent oscillators need to be synchronised among themselves and with diurnal rhythms in the environment associated with the earth’s axial rotation. among the signalling molecules known to influence the clock are several that engage g-protein-coupled receptors . accordingly, gpcrs and their downstream signalling cascades are known to regulate the expression of elements of the molecular oscillator and the phase and/or period of the clock .

gpcrs engage numerous cellular signalling pathways and second messenger systems. the best characterised of these are those downstream of the heterotrimeric g-proteins that are activated by gpcrs and in turn alter the activity of numerous effector enzymes. more recently, however, a quite separate signalling activity involving β-arrestins has been described. β-arrestins bind phosphorylated residues in the c-terminal intracellular tail of activated gpcrs. their long established role is to terminate g-protein binding and thus quench signalling. binding of arrestin also facilitates internalisation and recycling of activated receptors. the signalling activity of β-arrestins is related to their ability to act as scaffolds, facilitating the phosphorylation of numerous proteins and changing the activity of intracellular kinase cascades . in this way, they are able to influence varied aspects of cell physiology, ranging from modifications of the cytoskeleton, to changes in gene expression at the level of both transcription and translation  <cit> .

here, we set out to address the question of the extent to which gpcr inputs to the circadian clockwork can employ both g-protein-dependent and -independent signalling pathways. involvement of the former is implied by the observation that pharmacological manipulation of second messenger systems downstream of g-protein activation successfully changes clock gene expression and shifts the clock. to date, there is no evidence that arrestin pathways are also employed.

a challenge in studying influences on the circadian clock is that the clock’s response to incoming signals typically depends upon the clock phase at which they arrive. thus, the same signal can either have no impact or can delay or advance clock phase depending upon when it appears. this phenomenon is described by a ‘phase response curve’ and is necessary if the clock is to be synchronised to periodic inputs. in the laboratory, this means that experimental manipulations probing mechanisms of entrainment should be carefully timed with respect to clock phase. optogenetics represents an attractive method of achieving this. the mammalian clock  is not directly photosensitive, allowing light to be used to control optogenetic actuators with high temporal fidelity. accordingly, photopigments driving light dependent changes in membrane potential and intracellular calcium have been used to explore the ability of time-delimited manipulations in these aspects of cell physiology to shift the clock  <cit> . here, we adopted this approach by employing an opsin photopigment  that is naturally coupled to a gαs signalling cascade driving increases in camp  <cit> . gαs-coupled gpcrs are targets for signalling molecules known to shift the clock  <cit> , and pharmacological increases in camp represent a strong phase resetting stimulus  <cit> . it is less clear whether any arrestin-dependent signalling of jellyop could influence the clock. to address this possibility, we introduce a point mutation  that inhibits jellyop’s ability to activate g-protein but retains its light-dependent arrestin interaction. we show that both native jellyop and jellyop f112a support light-dependent shifts in the fibroblast circadian clock, but do so at different circadian phases and via different molecular mechanisms. these experiments thus reveal separable g-protein-dependent and -independent pathways through which gpcrs can entrain circadian clocks.

RESULTS
optogenetic activation of gαs signalling
we set out initially to determine an optimal optogenetic approach to achieve time-delimited activation of gαs signalling. two photopigments have been applied to gαs signaling in the literature, both based upon metazoan opsins that are naturally light activated gpcrs. the first is a chimeric receptor termed opto-β2ar, in which the photosensitive core of bovine rod opsin was fused with intracellular domains from the hamster β <dig> adrenergic receptor  <cit> . rod opsin is naturally gαt coupled, but opto-β2ar attains the gαs signalling ability of the β <dig> adrenergic receptor. the other approach is to employ jellyop, a photopigment from the box jellyfish carybdea rastonii that is naturally gαs coupled  <cit> . we have previously reported that the jellyop pigment better supports responses to repeated light exposure in cell culture and especially in the absence of cis isoforms of retinaldehyde  <cit> . to further determine which of these provides the highest level of control we undertook side-by-side comparison of other features of the optogenetic response  provided by a humanised version of the opto-β2ar  and jellyop in hek <dig> cells expressing a luminescent reporter for intracellular camp .

live cell recording revealed that transient expression of opto-hβ2ar, but not jellyop, significantly elevated baseline camp luminescence in the dark . a 5 second pulse of blue light  induced an increase in luminescence in cells expressing either pigment, but response amplitude was an order of magnitude greater in cells expressing jellyop than opto-hβ2ar . this difference in amplitude was retained across a range of light pulse intensities . responses were next normalised to the maximum for that pigment in each run of the assay, to account for the difference in absolute response amplitude between the two pigments and for inter-assay variability. data processed in this way revealed a significant reduction in photosensitivity between the two pigments . one potential explanation for the reduced camp response of the opto-hβ2ar is that it retains significant gαi/o activity, as is the case for the β <dig> adrenergic receptor itself  <cit> . in hek <dig> cells, gαs/gαi/o pathways have antagonistic effects on camp  <cit> . in accordance with this hypothesis, application of the gαi inhibitor pertussis toxin  led to a significant increase in the amplitude of the opto-hβ2ar light response . this indicates that the opto-hβ2ar has significant gαi/o signaling activity. there was no effect of ptx on the light response of jellyop expressing cells  indicating that this pigment has good selectivity for the gαs over gαi/o pathway. even after ptx treatment, the opto-hβ2ar light response was qualitatively deficient compared to that produced by jellyop , revealing that, while part of jellyop’s improved performance in this assay can be attributable to higher selectivity for gαs it must also have other, more generic, advantages.fig.  <dig> comparison of jellyop and opto-hβ2ar for optogenetic control over gαs signalling. a baseline  luminescence of cells expressing jellyop, opto-hβ2ar or the glosensor reporter alone. opto-hβ2ar causes a significant increase in baseline luminescence compared to the glosensor alone condition . b time course showing changes in camp reporter luminescence in cells expressing either jellyop or opto-hβ2ar held in the dark and given a 5 second light flash  at 2 min, as indicated by a grey arrow . c irradiance response curves for the peak increase in camp reporter luminescence  produced by the two photopigments . data fitted with standard sigmoidal dose response curves; mean ± sem, n =  <dig>  d irradiance response profiles from  expressed as a percentage of maximum luminescence response for each photopigment, fitted with sigmoidal dose response curves . e comparison of peak increase in camp reporter luminescence  following a saturating light pulse ) with and without pertussis toxin . the increase in response amplitude in opto-hβ2ar expressing cells following ptx administration implies that significant gαi/o activation by this receptor had suppressed the response in the absence of ptx . this effect is absent in jellyop expressing cells . all data mean ± sem unless stated




jellyop causes light-dependent camp induction and circadian phase shifts in fibroblasts
based upon the results of the side-by-side comparison of jellyop and opto-hβ2ar, we chose the former for the remaining experiments in this study. as hek <dig> cells do not exhibit circadian oscillations, we switched to a fibroblast cell line  that does. we employed a version of this line that carries a luciferase coding sequence under control of a minimal period <dig>  promoter . per <dig> is a component of the molecular circadian clock whose expression shows strong circadian regulation. as a result, the phase of circadian clocks in the rat <dig> fibroblast reporter line can be tracked in real time by measuring luminescence. we first confirmed that jellyop can induce camp in the rat <dig> fibroblasts by creating a cell line stably expressing jellyop and transiently transfecting it with the glosensor camp reporter . fibroblasts transfect less readily than hek <dig> cells  <cit>   and rat <dig> fibroblasts ) and, as a result, the amount of glosensor luminescence activity was low when compared with hek <dig> cells. nevertheless, jellyop expressing cells responded to flashes of light with transient and repeatable increases in luminescence and to sustained illumination with a maintained response . as an additional confirmation of this effect we assayed camp directly using an elisa. two minutes of light exposure induced a 29-fold increase in intracellular camp concentration on average in rat <dig> cells expressing jellyop but not in dark control cells .fig.  <dig> jellyop allows time-dependent manipulation of the circadian clock. a jellyop-expressing per2::luc rat <dig> fibroblasts  show a robust increase in luminescent camp reporter activity following exposure to light, which is absent in cells expressing only the glosensor reporter . the data present representative traces of baseline normalised luminescence units  from triplicate samples in a single assay. cells were pulsed with single light flashes at  <dig> and 12 min, followed by  <dig> light flashes  starting at 22 min, indicated by grey arrows. b the circadian luciferase rhythm of per2::luc  and jellyop-expressing per2::luc  rat <dig> fibroblasts exposed to 4 h of intermittent white light  at various phases of the per <dig> rhythm . for phase analysis, baseline corrected bioluminescence rhythms prior to light treatment were modelled by a sine wave . time of first trough in per2::luc rhythm aligned for all traces to facilitate comparisons. c phase response profile for jellyop-expressing per2::luc rat <dig> fibroblasts illustrates the relationship between the timing of light onset and magnitude of phase shifts in per <dig> rhythm. data represent the extent of phase shifts captured from individual light pulsed cultures and plotted on a y-axis where positive and negative values denote phase advances and delays, respectively 


fig.  <dig> characterisation of signalling properties of gαs-coupled jellyop and its structural arrestin-biased mutant jellyop f112a. a hek <dig> cells expressing jellyop f112a mutant  show a much reduced increase in luminescent camp reporter activity following exposure to a flash of light at 2 min  compared to cells expressing jellyop . the response of cells expressing an inactivation mutant  are shown for comparison . b a significant increase in aequorin calcium reporter luminescence is seen in response to carbachol  treatment of hek <dig> cells . no calcium reporter increase above background is seen in cells expressing jellyop f112a  and exposed to light . c fluorescence immunohistochemical labelling of the 1d <dig> epitope in hek <dig> cells transiently expressing jellyop  and f112a mutant . scale bar: 20 μm. d a schematic presentation of an arrestin-based luminescent probe. two fragments of a luciferase were fused to an opsin  and β-arrestin , respectively. when opsins are activated, β-arrestin is recruited to the receptors and the fragments recover their luminescence property. e β-arrestin luminescent assay reveals that light stimulation significantly enhances luminescence for β-arrestin  <dig> and  <dig> in hek <dig> cells expressing positive control opsins known to have light-induced arrestin interaction . f β-arrestin luminescent assay reveals light triggered luminescence induction in jellyop and f112a mutant only in the presence of 9-cis retinal. . g–h kinetics of jellyop  and f112a mutant  interaction with β-arrestin  <dig>  and β-arrestin  <dig>  after a light flash  indicated by a yellow arrow 


fig.  <dig> phase shifts of the fibroblast clock by the arrestin-biased jellyop f112a mutant. a immunocytochemistry photomicrographs showing detection of jellyop variants stably expressed in rat <dig> fibroblasts and labelled with a 1d <dig> antibody . cells are also stained with dapi . scale bar = 20 μm. b the circadian per <dig> rhythm of jellyop f112a-expressing per2::luc rat <dig> fibroblasts exposed to 4 h intermittent white light  at various phases of the per <dig> rhythm . for phase analysis, baseline corrected bioluminescence rhythms prior to light treatment were modelled by a sine wave . time of first trough in per2:luc rhythm aligned for all traces to facilitate comparisons. c double-plotted phase response profile for jellyop  and jellyop f112a  expressing per2::luc rat <dig> fibroblasts, illustrates the relationship between the timing of light onset and magnitude of phase shifts in per <dig> rhythm. data represent extent of phase shifts captured from individual light pulsed cultures and plotted on a y-axis where positive and negative values denote phase advances and delays, respectively. linear regression fits with r <dig> of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for jellyop and jellyop f112a, respectively . d acute light-dependent changes in transcription of core clock genes of jellyop  and jellyop f112a . mrna was extracted from fibroblasts exposed to 30 min or 2 h intermittent white light , at the circadian time when the biggest phase shift was produced for each optogenetic tool, namely at ct <dig> and ct <dig> for jellyop  and jellyop f112a , respectively. per <dig> and cry <dig> are upregulated in jellyop wt and both have camp responsive element  in their promoters that regulates their expression. all results were normalised to actin expression. all data are presented as the relative gene expression mean ± sem 




to assess the impact of time-delimited activation of jellyop on the clock, we tracked circadian rhythms in luminescence from the per2::luc reporter in rat <dig> fibroblasts expressing this photopigment. in accordance with the low dark activity of this pigment, the inclusion of jellyop did not alter the period or amplitude of rhythms in luminescence . when jellyop was activated by light exposure  large shifts in circadian phase could be observed in jellyop expressing cells. cells not expressing the opsin, by contrast, showed no response to light . the magnitude and sign of the shift in jellyop expressing cells was strongly dependent upon the circadian phase at which it was applied . to describe this feature in more detail, we applied light pulses across the circadian cycle in order to describe a phase response curve . this revealed strong phase advances between circadian time  0– <dig> , and phase delays between ct <dig> and ct <dig>  in between these times, light had little impact on the clock.

an arrestin-biased variant of jellyop
the strong phase shifts induced by jellyop activation confirm the ability of gpcr signalling to reset the circadian clock. given the established phase resetting ability of drugs targeting camp, the most parsimonious explanation for those data is that they reflect the gαs activating properties of jellyop. however, they do not exclude a role for the additional arrestin-dependent signalling capacity of gpcrs. it is possible to substantially inhibit g-protein activation without abolishing arrestin binding by changing key residues near the conserved dry motif  and second intracellular loop ) of gpcrs, thus creating a functionally biased receptor . we aimed to design a mutant of jellyop that would still be capable of arrestin-dependent signalling but with reduced g-protein activation in order to dissect possible contributions of these pathways in resetting the circadian clock. in addition, we aimed to design a mutant with as few amino acid substitutions as possible to limit changes in structural stability. we therefore assessed the ability of a single point mutation f112a to inhibit jellyop’s ability to increase camp in hek <dig> cells . we found that the light-induced increase in glosensor luminescence was substantially reduced in cells expressing this mutant compared to the intact jellyop. luminescence values were much more similar to those measured from cells expressing a variant of jellyop lacking a retinal binding lysine residue that is essential for opsin function  <cit>  .

we first confirmed that the f112a mutation had genuinely reduced g-protein activation and not simply switched selectivity to another g-protein class. we assayed gαq/ <dig> activity using an aequorin luminescent reporter for intracellular calcium  <cit> . hek <dig> cells expressing jellyop f112a failed to produce a significant increase in the activity of this reporter , indicating a lack of gαq/ <dig> activity. we also assessed gαi/o signalling by including ptx in the glosensor assay. inhibition of gαi/o with this toxin did not significantly enhance response magnitude to a flash of light  as would be expected if jellyop f112a had measurable interaction with this g-protein class. given the overall reduced g-protein activity of the mutant, we additionally confirmed that both jellyop and jellyop f112a are expressed well in these cells .

we then turned our attention to arrestin binding. we employed a split luciferase method to track jellyop arrestin interactions. in brief, we tagged the c-terminus of an opsin with the c-terminal fragment of a click beetle luciferase coding sequence and appended the other portion of the luciferase to the n-terminus of either β-arrestin  <dig> or  <dig>   <cit> . in this arrangement, binding of β-arrestin to an opsin is predicted to bring the two halves of the luciferase together, allowing them to form a functional catalytic unit. thus, luminescence can provide a real-time read-out of opsin:β-arrestin interactions. we first checked whether melanopsin and rhodopsin, as positive controls, show measurable opsin:arrestin interactions with this method. indeed, both melanopsin and rhodopsin showed increased interaction with β-arrestin  <dig> and  <dig> in the light . when applied to hek <dig> cells with stable expression of either native jellyop or f112a mutant, this split luciferase reporter revealed light-dependent binding of both β-arrestin  <dig> and  <dig> . to confirm that this was a specific event, we repeated the experiment without adding the chromophore and, as expected, the light-dependent arrestin interaction disappeared . as differences in reporter activity in stable cell lines can reflect differences in opsin expression associated with integration site of the transgene, we next explored the ability of jellyop and the f112a mutant to interact with β-arrestin  <dig> and  <dig> under transient transfection. light-dependent interactions with both arrestins were apparent for both opsins and there was no suggestion of a difference in either response amplitude or kinetics between the pigments . the results confirmed that both jellyop and jellyop f112a interact with β-arrestin upon light stimulation.

arrestin-biased jellyop f112a phase shifts the circadian clock
we next set out to determine whether the jellyop f112a mutant could phase shift the fibroblast circadian clock. jellyop f112a expressed well in rat <dig> per2::luc fibroblasts . we first confirmed that the f112a mutant had a similar impact on jellyop f112a’s signalling in these cells as it had in hek <dig> cells. we assessed light dependent gαs activation in this cell line by measuring camp using an elisa. no significant increase in intracellular camp concentration was seen following 2 min of light exposure in jellyop f112a-expressing cells . we then confirmed that jellyop f112a retained the light-dependent arrestin interaction. the poor transfection efficiency of rat <dig> cells was a practical barrier to employing the split luciferase approach in this cell line. therefore, we instead turned to a proximity ligation assay, in which a polymerase reaction incorporates red fluorescent nucleotides when there is a close physical proximity between antibodies targeting jellyop  and arrestin . changes in the frequency of red pixels within the cell cytoplasm following 2 min of light exposure were normalised to changes in cells with no opsin. in three replicates, the increase in red pixels in cells expressing jellyop compared to no opsin ranged between  <dig> and 34 pixels per cell and in jellyop f112a-expressing cells between  <dig> to 58 pixels per cell. this confirmed a light-dependent increase in opsin:arrestin interactions in rat <dig> fibroblasts expressing jellyop f112a.

turning to the circadian oscillator, we found that light induced large shifts in rhythms of the per2::luc reporter in rat <dig> fibroblasts expressing jellyop f112a . the magnitude of these shifts could be as large as those induced by the native pigment . however, the phase response curve for this mutant was advanced by approximately  <dig>  h compared to that of jellyop , with the result that jellyop f112a activation induced large phase advances at times when jellyop induced phase delays, and vice versa .

the difference in the light phase response curve between jellyop- and jellyop f112a-expressing cells is consistent with the view that the intracellular events linking receptor activation to the molecular clock are quite distinct in these two systems. the increase in camp induced by jellyop is predicted to induce expression of per <dig> and cry <dig>  whose promoters contain camp response elements. this, in turn, is an accepted mechanism for shifting circadian phase. we therefore looked for light-dependent induction of clock gene expression in rat <dig> cells expressing jellyop and jellyop f112a using quantitative rt-pcr . we found a significant increase in expression of cry <dig> in jellyop-expressing cells at  <dig> and 120 min, and per <dig> at 120 min after a light pulse . by contrast, there was no significant change in expression of either of these clock genes in jellyop f112a cells .

discussion
we show here that both native jellyop and a structural variant , with impaired g-protein signalling but retaining light-dependent arrestin binding, can phase shift the circadian clock. the conclusion that they do so by separable mechanisms is supported not only by our characterisation of their relative signalling capabilities, but also by differences in the circadian phase at which they have their biggest impact and by our demonstration that, while jellyop induces expression of the clock genes per <dig> and cry <dig> , jellyop f112a does not.

our characterisation of jellyop f112a indicates that the replacement of phenylalanine with a non-polar single amino acid at this site is sufficient to abolish g-protein signalling, without interfering with light activation or subsequent β-arrestin binding in this opsin. sequence alignments predict that the f <dig> residue will lie around the transition from tm <dig> and the second intracellular loop . our data are thus consistent with the view that this domain plays a key role in g-protein interaction  <cit> . the appearance of phenylalanine in this position is highly conserved across gpcrs, and its replacement by alanine has previously been shown to inhibit g-protein interaction  <cit> .

jellyop and jellyop f112a represent attractive tools for optogenetic control over gαs and β-arrestin signalling. jellyop is the only opsin known to be naturally gαs coupled; however, optogenetic control over this signalling pathway has also been attained using an ‘opto-β2ar’ chimera between rod opsin and the β2-adrenergic receptor  <cit> . here, we extend our previous side-by-side comparison of these two approaches  <cit>  and confirm that jellyop has several advantages. in the dark, jellyop expressing cells do not show elevated levels of camp compared to untransfected controls, whereas cells expressing opto-hβ2ar appear to have significant constitutive activity. the subsequent magnitude of the light response is significantly larger for jellyop and can be achieved using less powerful light. in addition, we find that the opto-hβ2ar has measurable gαi activity making it less selective for gαs than jellyop. an equivalent comparison between jellyop f112a and a recently published arrestin-biased version of the opto-hβ2ar carrying mutations at three residues on the intracellular surface  <cit>  is currently lacking. however, peterson et al.  <cit>  found that, while arrestin bias could be achieved in the dopamine d <dig> receptor by replacing either the single residue at the equivalent site to jellyop f <dig> plus one other, or the three tyy residues applied to the opto-hβ2ar, the latter led to protein instability and less robust separation of g-protein and β-arrestin interactions.

the split luciferase reporter for β-arrestin interactions affords a new approach to interrogating opsin:β-arrestin interactions that is uniquely suitable for photopigments. this assay lacks the spatial and temporal resolution of fret-based reporters, but has the advantage of reporting activity more quantitatively. firstly, a fluorescent protein pair, cfp and yfp, is used for fret experiments to detect the dynamic changes of gpcr activity  <cit> . however, this becomes a problem when assessing opsin activity, as the blue light used to excite cfp should also activate and bleach the opsins, complicating the accurate quantification of their activity  <cit> . in contrast, bioluminescence-based reporters, including the split luciferase probe, do not require any excitation light and emit many fewer photons than fluorescent reporters do. therefore, the assays with bioluminescence probes should perturb the activity of opsins during the measurement much less, providing more accurate results. secondly, this assay provides a high signal-to-noise ratio due to almost negligible background luminescence, which is also advantageous for quantitative detection  <cit> . finally, considering that the bioluminescence response of the split luciferase probe occurs on the order of 1 min  <cit> , the probe can have enough temporal resolution to monitor the dynamic patterns of opsin-β-arrestin interaction, which holds on the order of 10 min  <cit> . therefore, the split luciferase reporter is a suitable tool to quantitatively detect the dynamics of protein interactions in living cells without interfering with the photoreactive proteins.

while the importance of g-protein coupled receptors in entraining circadian clocks is well established, to our knowledge, this study is the first to implicate β-arrestin signalling in this process. activation of the β-arrestin-biased opioid receptor cxcr <dig> has been shown to enhance the amplitude of circadian rhythms in adrenal glucocorticoid production in mice, but not via effects on the clock mechanism itself  <cit> . application of a mutated version of jellyop lacking arrestin binding is a conceptually attractive approach to confirming the β-arrestin link to the circadian clock. in practice, however, it would be hard to interpret the outcome of such an experiment as any interruption to β-arrestin binding would also interfere with termination of g-protein signaling, which could itself alter the clock response. nevertheless, several aspects of our data provide confidence that jellyop and jellyop f112a interact with the clock via fundamentally different mechanisms. thus, phase shifts produced by these two pigments occur at different circadian phases, and have differing effects on clock gene expression. this indicates that the phase resetting ability of jellyop f112a does not reflect residual g-protein signalling activity, leaving its demonstrated arrestin-interaction activity as the most parsimonious origin of the phase shift.

future work will be required to establish the signalling steps linking jellyop f112a to the circadian machinery. β-arrestin activation has been linked to influential signalling cascades via interactions with map kinases, pi3k/akt and rhoa  <cit> . several of these processes have been linked to the molecular clock . one important aspect of our data is that jellyop f112a produced very high amplitude shifts without detectable changes in per <dig> or cry <dig> expression. this implies that it interacts with the clock machinery via a post-transcriptional mechanism. the translation, cellular localisation and longevity of clock proteins are all under dynamic control and provide opportunities to influence the period or phase of the oscillator  <cit> .

the existence of separable g-protein-dependent and -independent pathways linking gpcrs to the circadian machinery allows additional flexibility for the circadian system. the degree to which gpcrs activate g-protein and/or arrestin pathways can differ between receptors for the same ligand. it also can vary for the same receptor depending upon the ligand bound and the rhodopsin kinase it recruits upon activation  <cit> . in this way, having separable g-protein and arrestin pathways provides a mechanism for the same signalling molecule to activate different pathways, and for different molecules to activate different pathways via the same receptor. in the context of the multi-oscillator circadian system, these effects could provide a mechanism for the different tissue oscillators to respond appropriately to environmental signals. under stable entrainment, the phase of the molecular clockwork differs between tissues and this effect can be exacerbated by timed feeding  or scheduled exercise  <cit> . if, as this implies, flexibility in the relative phasing of tissue clocks helps organisms tailor physiological rhythms to environmental conditions, then having separable g-protein and arrestin signalling routes could allow cells to adopt quite different phases to the same signalling molecule depending upon their tissue location and/or physiological state. another possibility is that the dual signalling function of gpcrs allows additional scope for the central clock to influence the response of peripheral clocks to environmental signals. thus, some of the kinase cascades targeted by β-arrestin are also thought to provide a route for nutrient levels to entrain the clock . activation of an arrestin-biased gpcr could thus either augment or inhibit the phase shifting effect of a nutrient signal.

CONCLUSIONS
we show here that both native jellyop and jellyop f112a support light-dependent shifts in the fibroblast circadian clock, but do so at different circadian phases and via different molecular mechanisms. these experiments thus reveal separable g-protein and arrestin pathways through which gpcrs can entrain circadian clocks. the pair of optogenetic tools developed herein are suitable for manipulating gαs- and β-arrestin-biased signalling in live cells.

