BACKGROUND
coronary artery disease  is a leading cause of mortality worldwide. the etiology of cad is influenced by lifestyle, genetics, and gut microbiome
 <cit>  although the balance of these contributors remains unclear. while numerous gwas projects have explored the genetics of cad susceptibility
 <cit> , comparatively less is known about gene expression changes in this disease
 <cit> . this is partly because cad is a complex phenotype involving multiple physiological systems. consequently, no single tissue may fully reflect the network of gene expression changes underlying the disease
 <cit> .

in addition, current knowledge of the cad transcriptome is based on gene expression microarrays, a technology that is useful but has several limitations. recently, rna-seq, a powerful new technique for transcriptome analysis has revolutionized gene expression analyses by providing the ability to simultaneously interrogate all transcripts in an rna sample 
 <cit> . in addition, the high resolution of rna-seq can facilitate discoveries of transcript dysregulation that have been missed by previous technologies. here, we present results from a pilot application of rna-seq on human cases and controls chosen to reflect extremes for coronary artery calcification , a clinical marker for advanced cad that is highly correlated with future adverse cardiovascular events
 <cit> . as a patient surrogate for gene expression, we used epstein-barr virus transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines , which have been shown in multiple studies to reliably reflect gene expression signatures
 <cit> , particularly those associated with nearby cis-acting genomic polymorphisms 
 <cit> .

here, we used rna-seq to compare lcls from matched cac cases and controls in the clinseq® project
 <cit> , and report a set of candidate genes for cad that show differential expression and splicing variation between the groups, as well as novel transcripts that may have relevance for disease. rna-seq results were experimentally and technically replicated by repeating the cell culture part of our experiments and then measuring gene expression independently using expression microarrays. at the network level, we demonstrate that these differentially expressed genes are enriched for prior cad association as well as for biological pathways with direct relevance to atherosclerosis.

methods
an expanded methods section is provided in additional file
 <dig> 

coronary calcification scoring
cac scoring was performed using multi-slice computed tomography  with the use of prospective electrocardiographic gating. calcification was quantified using the agatston scoring method
 <cit>  on a dedicated workstation . the study was approved by the nhgri institutional review board and all subjects gave written informed consent.

cell culture, rna-seq library preparation, and sequencing
lcls were established by epstein-barr virus  inoculation of b-lymphocytes using standard procedures, grown to a density of 2– <dig> ×  <dig> cells/ml, harvested when the culture reached  <dig> cells in total  and stored at -80°c. total rna from  <dig> ×  <dig> cells was extracted using the rneasy mini kit . rna integrity was assessed using an agilent bioanalyzer . rna-seq libraries were constructed using a custom protocol . sequencing was done on illumina gaiix sequencers , collecting two lanes of 51 bp reads for each library.

rna-seq data processing
reads were aligned to the human genome  using tophat
 <cit> . the tophat output sam file was converted to bed format using the bamtobed script from the bedtools package
 <cit> . the coveragebed script from bedtools was used to count reads mapping to individual exons in the refseq database . a total count for each transcript in this database was obtained by adding the counts for its constituent exons. these counts, after filtering and normalization , were used for statistical analysis of differential expression. we confirmed the subject identity in all rna-seq libraries by genotyping a subset of expressed snps from the corresponding genomic dna. this indicated some contamination in the data for subject 133871; hence, this subject was excluded from further rna-seq analyses. the transcript-level rna-seq counts were first analyzed using a two level, one-way anova to compare the expression in the case and control groups. concurrently, the count data were analyzed using the edger bioconductor package with default settings using the moderated tagwise dispersion option and the prior. n parameter set to  <dig> 

affymetrix exon array experiment
for each sample, two micrograms of total rna were used in conjunction with the whole-transcript expression analysis protocol for affymetrix human exon  <dig>  st arrays. arrays were scanned using an affymetrix gene chip scanner  <dig> and intensities were calculated using affymetrix agcc software. rma  signal intensities were calculated using affymetrix expression console, converted to arithmetic scale, and transformed using an adaptive variance-stabilizing, quantile-normalizing transformation that was scaled to match the transformation used on the rna-seq data. a two level, one-way anova was run on the microarray expression results.

western blot analysis of igll5
a small piece of human carotid atherosclerotic plaque was frozen in liquid nitrogen and crushed to fine powder using an alloy tool steel mortar and pestle set that was pre-cooled in liquid nitrogen. the tissue powder was transferred to an ice-cold microcentrifuge tube and ice-cold cell lysis buffer  containing protease inhibitor cocktail  was added; the tissue weight to buffer volume ratio was  <dig>  g/ <dig>  ml. the samples were vortexed for 20 seconds at 10-minute intervals for  <dig> mins . samples were then centrifuged at 14000 g for 15 minutes at 4°c; the supernatant was collected in new microcentrifuge tubes. protein concentrations in the supernatant were quantified by using micro bca protein assay kit  according to manufacturer’s instructions. 50ug of protein from each sample was separated on a  <dig> – 20% polyacrylamide gel  with tris-glycine – sds buffer . the proteins were transferred onto immuno-blot pvdf membranes . the membrane was blocked with 5% non-fat dry milk in tris-buffered saline tween  <dig>  for 1 hour at room temperature, then incubated with primary antibody  at a concentration of 1: <dig> overnight at 4°c. the membranes were washed with tris-buffered saline tween  <dig>  three times, incubated with a secondary peroxidase – linked antibody  for two hours at room temperature and then washed three times with tris-buffered saline tween  <dig> . the reactive bands were visualized by a chemiluminescence kit  on kodak biomax light film. the intensity of each igll <dig> band was analyzed by using the chemidoc xrs system with western blot analysis software . the final intensity was adjusted by individual loading control intensity readings .

detection of novel transcripts
the ensembl, aceview, ccds, knowngenes, refgene, trna and rnagene annotation tables were downloaded in gtf format from the ucsc genome browser  and combined into one master annotation file using the cuffmerge tool in cufflinks
 <cit> . transcripts were assembled using rna-seq data from a separate lcl library with extremely high depth of sequencing  using cufflinks with the -m option to mask transcripts in the combined annotation file. these putative novel transcripts were then used as a reference annotation to run cuffdiff, with the same bam files from the case and control subjects that were used for quantifying gene expression. loci detected as significant after benjamini-hochberg multiple testing correction were visually inspected by viewing the raw sequencing data  on the ucsc genome browser with all gene and gene prediction tracks  turned on.

detection of alternatively spliced transcripts
for alternative splicing, the exon-level counts were fit to a linear mixed-effect three-factor anova model containing the following terms:

 yijk=μ+ai+βji+c+acik+ϵijk 

where y was the normalized read count for an exon, ai was the fixed treatment effect for  <dig> through i treatments , βj  was the random sample effect for sample j within treatment, ck was the fixed exon effect for  <dig> through k exons within a transcript, acik was the fixed interaction “treatment x exon” effect and ϵ was the error factor. the anova p-value for p-ac  was then used to select for exons showing significantly different usage between cases and controls. independently, the cuffdiff algorithm
 <cit>  was also used to detect alternatively spliced transcripts.

RESULTS
assessment of cad burden and rna-seq experimental design
to quantify cad status, study subjects were assessed at enrolment for cac, using multi-slice computed tomography followed by agatston scoring . cac scoring is a robust marker of cad
 <cit>  and has been demonstrated to be useful for both calibration and discrimination of the disease burden. in addition, this measurement of cad also has superior positive predictive value for future adverse cardiovascular events
 <cit> . we selected eight age-, sex-, and ethnicity-matched case:control pairs from the extremes of the coronary calcium score distribution for combined rna-seq and microarray analysis and another eight matched case:control pairs for microarray-only analysis . the median cac scores for cases in the first and second groups were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. for comparison, even the presence of a cac score  is clinically considered indicative of cad, while a score of  <dig> is often considered an advanced disease state
 <cit> . when the median age for the cases in the first and second groups  and the ethnicity of these subjects  was considered, these scores corresponded to the 99th and 93rd centiles, respectively, as measured using the cac score distribution from  <dig> participants in the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis 
 <cit> . this demonstrated the severity of cad in our discovery cases. as part of the clinseq® protocol, all subjects were also analyzed using a set of  <dig> clinical chemistry tests and six phenotypic measurements . results from these tests did not show significant association with calcification scores.

all subjects were males of caucasian ethnicity.

analyses of gene expression with rna-seq data
to convert the rna-seq read data into a quantitative measure of gene expression, we calculated the number of rna-seq reads mapping to transcripts in the refseq database . such transcript-level read counts are better suited for statistical testing of gene expression differences compared to other rna-seq expression metrics
 <cit> . several statistical techniques have been developed for quantifying differential expression from rna-seq count data. to reduce artifacts arising from an arbitrary choice of any single technique, we used a dual analysis approach. first, we analyzed the count data with the bioconductor package edger <cit> , which uses the negative binomial distribution to model the count data. using the common dispersion setting in edger, we found  <dig> transcripts to be differentially expressed transcripts , of which  <dig> were significant after applying a 5% benjamini-hochberg correction for multiple testing . however, edger and other rna-seq analysis tools using the negative binomial distribution have high rates of false discovery
 <cit> . to reduce artifacts arising from an arbitrary choice of any single technique, we applied a second, more conservative test   in addition to edger, which returned  <dig> transcripts at p <  <dig>  without correction for multiple testing. overall, results from both techniques showed good agreement, although edger was more liberal than the anova test in assigning low significance values. to define a gene list, we selected transcripts that were significant at p <  <dig>  in both the edger and anova results, retaining  <dig> transcripts from  <dig> genes . we noted here that neither edger nor anova tests were designed for isoform-level quantification; hence, for genes with multiple transcripts in this list of  <dig>  we could not identify which isoform was differentially expressed.

an interesting feature of the rna-seq results was that many transcripts expressed at very low levels showed significant differences between cases and controls. as genes expressed at near-background levels have historically been problematic for microarray technology
 <cit> , this aspect of the cad transcriptome may benefit greatly from the increased dynamic range of rna-seq. to quantify absolute expression of these rare transcripts, we conducted a separate rna-seq experiment, starting with the same amount of total rna used for other experiments in this study, with the difference being that the number of cells used for rna extraction was precisely quantified. to the input rna, we added seven polyadenylated non-mammalian rna spikes, quantified such that their abundance  spanned five orders of magnitude . next, after sequencing this library to the same depth as the others , we converted rna-seq reads counts of these spikes to rpkm  values
 <cit> . finally, by comparing rpkm values of differentially expressed transcripts in our study with the spike-in control experiment, we determined that the cellular abundance of the rarer transcripts in our data approaches ~ <dig> copies per cell . as many of the candidate genes with the highest statistical significance belong to this low-expression category , some observations are relevant to note here. firstly, before statistical testing, we screened out transcripts which had minimal or no coverage . hence, these results are unlikely to represent statistical artifacts arising from low rna-seq coverage. regarding quantity of input material, ten micrograms of total rna were used for all rna-seq experiments, which is far above the minimum requirement for the illumina rna-seq protocol. consequently, paucity of input rna should not cause transcripts to appear “rare” if they are otherwise expressed abundantly. finally, each sample was sequenced using two full lanes of an illumina flow cell for a relatively high depth of  <dig> million reads, which suggests that lack of sequencing coverage would not bias our results. overall, these findings suggest that low-expression transcripts  constitute an unexplored area of the cad transcriptome that may contain clinically relevant information.

validation of rna-seq results using affymetrix arrays
to address the effects of variation introduced by experimental procedures, we repeated the cell culture and rna extraction steps for all  <dig> cell lines used for the rna-seq, starting from previously frozen stocks. we then measured gene expression in these newer cultures using affymetrix human exon  <dig>  st microarrays. previous studies have demonstrated that these two methods of expression measurement  show strong agreement when applied to the same rna sample
 <cit> . here, despite the fact that two additional passages of the cell lines took place in between the separate experiments, comparisons of the sixteen pairs of rna-seq and microarray results from the same subjects still showed high correlation  . hence, we conclude that in vitro procedures did not appear to cause significant variability in the gene expression profiles of the cell lines.

to identify gene expression differences in cases and controls that were robust to both experimental  replication as well as measurement technique, , we next selected genes that showed consistent up- or downregulation in both experiments. from the list of  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts found by rna-seq,  <dig> were included in the microarray probe design. of these,  <dig> were regulated in the same direction  in both the microarray and rna-seq data . given that these two gene expression measurements were conducted independently and on different rna extraction batches, the observed agreement in fold change for 110/ <dig> genes is highly significant . next, we selected a validation cohort of eight additional matched case:control pairs from the extremes of the cac score distribution  and analyzed these samples using affymetrix human exon  <dig>  st microarrays. despite the fact that cases in this cohort had a lower median calcification score compared to the first cohort , we again found a significant number of transcripts  with consistent up- or downregulation in both cohorts . we conclude that these transcripts may be potential cac biomarkers, as their expression differences persist even though the extent of calcification differed substantially when comparing our first and second cohorts.

finally, we reasoned that direct evidence of a causal relationship with cad would be obtained if any transcripts from lcl-based analyses exhibited differential expression patterns within actual atherosclerotic lesions. to identify such genes, we downloaded publicly available microarray data  from a gene expression study of human carotid artery autopsy samples
 <cit> . from these samples , rna was collected from  <dig> arteries in early cad states  and from  <dig> advanced cad lesions . the two groups of samples, which were clearly separated by principal components analysis, showed an abundance of genes with highly significant differential expression . however, our aim here was not to study these samples themselves but to identify genes showing similar patterns in lcls and atherosclerotic arteries. to identify such genes, we calculated fold changes of  <dig> genes that were measured in both studies . next, we selected genes that had a fold change ≥  <dig>  in the same direction in all three data sets . two genes  met this criterion, of which, mmp <dig> is especially notable due to its functional role in atherosclerotic plaque rupture and vascular smooth muscle cell apoptosis
 <cit> . in addition, at the protein level, plasma concentrations of mmp <dig> were increased in patients with coronary artery disease
 <cit> . regarding igll <dig>  this gene is interesting, as apart from being upregulated with disease in two unrelated tissues, it also had the largest fold change in the list of  <dig> significant transcripts. to investigate if igll <dig> is successfully translated in the arterial wall and if the mrna difference persists at the protein level, we conducted preliminary immunoblotting experiments on lysates from human carotid plaques. using an anti-human polyclonal antibody , we compared three samples each from areas exhibiting early and advanced cad . corresponding to the mrna upregulation, we found a trend of increased protein levels in lysates from advanced disease . igll <dig> was also detected at abundant levels in the supernatants of the above lysates, suggesting that it is a secreted protein . although the trend of protein upregulation was not statistically significant in this small set of samples , given the complexity of cad etiology, follow-up studies of this gene using a larger sample size may be worthwhile.
1: figure s <dig> for sirna knockdown experiments of to establish specificity of this antibody for igll <dig> 

analyses of transcription at unannotated genomic regions
recent evidence from rna-seq studies has demonstrated that the human genome is pervasively transcribed
 <cit> . thus, it is possible that cad-relevant expression differences may exist in unannotated parts of the genome. such differences would be even more interesting, as previous gene expression studies of cad using microarrays would have entirely missed these regions due to their absence in the probe design. to explore this aspect of the transcriptome, we used the cufflinks suite of rna-seq analysis tools 
 <cit> . first, we assembled novel transcripts, which we defined as those not included in a combination of several previous annotations including predicted genes. next, we used the cuffdiff tool to measure differential expression in these novel transcripts. finally, we manually inspected the results to confirm that they showed evidence for being putative transcripts. using this approach, we found eight novel loci that show differential expression with high statistical significance  . in terms of transcript structure, five of these eight loci contain multiple regions of increased read coverage joined by spliced rna-seq reads that mapped following the gt-ag rule . this strongly suggested the presence of a canonical exon-intron structure. mapping these loci to the encode integrated regulation track on the ucsc genome browser showed histone modifications indicating active transcription. although functional analyses will be required to confirm if these transcripts have genuine relevance to cad, these results are interesting as they form the first description of unannotated regions of the transcriptome associated with this disease. as the ability to discover such novel transcripts is a significant advantage of rna-seq over existing techniques, we speculate that future analyses in different tissues and with larger sample sizes will continue to demonstrate that hidden components of cad biology may exist outside known genes.

column  <dig> denotes presence of spliced reads following gt-ag rule. column  <dig> denotes presence of layered h3k4me <dig> or h3k4me <dig> histone modification marks at the locus. column  <dig> denotes the presence of spliced or unspliced human ests in the ucsc genome browser database. *cuff. <dig>  cuff. <dig> and cuff. <dig> were annotated by the cufflinks pipeline as separate transcripts but their close location suggests that they may be components of the same transcript.

detection of candidate genes for alternative splicing
the role of alternative splicing in cad overall  has not been explored comprehensively, mainly due to the difficulties of microarray platforms in efficiently detecting changes in splicing patterns. in contrast, rna-seq is extremely powerful for studying splicing variation. as statistical algorithms for such analyses are in an early stage of development, we chose to proceed with a conservative approach for detecting case:control splicing changes. specifically, we analyzed exon-level rna-seq read counts using a linear anova model fit to exon-level rna-seq read counts . this model was designed to detect genes containing exons with increased case:control differential expression relative to other exons within the same transcript , which would thus be potential candidates for exon skipping, the most common form of alternative splicing. using this approach, we detected  <dig> transcripts that show statistically significant differential usage in at least one exon  . these transcripts were then validated independently using the cuffdiff computational algorithm
 <cit> . eleven transcripts were validated by both methods and hence show promise for follow-up studies . interestingly, this list included the human leukocyte antigen gene hla-h, variation in which has been associated with cad susceptibility
 <cit> .

differentially expressed genes are enriched for cad association and disease-relevant functions
we next determined if differentially expressed genes showed an overall relationship with cardiovascular disease. to investigate this, we first combined previously compiled lists of cad-associated genes
 <cit> . from the combined list, we identified  <dig> genes which showed expression in our rna-seq data. from this list,  <dig> genes are present in the list of  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts in our results. statistically, this represented a highly significant enrichment of cad-associated genes , suggesting that gene expression differences we detected by comparing cell lines from cac cases and controls showed an overall relationship with cad.

at the network level, differentially expressed genes may identify biological pathways that are perturbed in cad. to investigate this hypothesis, we used ingenuity pathways analysis™  software, which performs systems biology analysis using a large repository of previously documented gene-gene interactions and functional annotations . the highest-scoring network  in the list of  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts included the term “cardiovascular system development and function”, further highlighting the relationship of differential expression in this study with cad. interestingly, the second highest-scoring network  contained the function “lipid metabolism”, suggesting another possible mechanism through which gene expression differences may be related to cad etiology. finally, gene ontology  term analysis of the  <dig> transcripts , detected a number of networks related to cyclic amp metabolism .

discussion
we present here results from a pilot project for the use of rna-seq and cell lines in studying cac gene expression. we used gene expression microarrays and cell culture replication for technical and experimental validation, respectively, of our initial results from this new technology. this project should be viewed in context of its scope and limitations; analyses of much larger numbers of lcls will be required before any definitive statements can be made about the functional role in cac of genes that we detected. however, our primary objective in this study was not functional analysis of such genes, but rather to identify candidate dysregulated genes in cac using two relatively unexplored tools that may be useful overall in cad research. by choosing lcls from subjects who represent extreme outliers for the calcification score distribution, we hypothesized that between-group differences that are relevant for cad may be detected. evidence for this is reflected in the significant enrichment of cad-associated genes in our results and further underscored in our ipa results, which show that differentially expressed genes we detected are concentrated in functional networks directly connected to cad. however, we do not suggest that lcls mirror in any way the transcriptional landscape of the atherosclerotic lesion itself. rather, we hypothesize that our results represent eqtl-associated gene expression variants, which are stably propagated in these cell lines, underlying the observed differences between the case and control groups. we show that the combination of rna-seq and microarrays can be used to obtain useful results with a comparatively small sample size. in the near future, we anticipate that rapidly falling sequencing costs and development of user-friendly data analysis tools will soon make rna-seq the preferred alternative for transcriptome studies.

as the scope of this pilot project did not include functional validation assays, we refrain from speculating on the specific mechanisms by which individual genes may be involved in atherosclerosis development. however, as to the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first whole-transcriptome analysis specifically focusing on coronary artery calcification, and differentially genes that we found include many previous cad candidates , some observations may be relevant to state here. interestingly, we detected differential expression of zhx <dig>  a regulator of plasma lipid metabolism that is the closest gene to the top snp locus from a recent atherosclerosis gwas meta-analysis
 <cit> . at the gene family level, the gimap family is enriched, with four genes . perhaps not by coincidence, multiple gimap family members have also been reported in a set of  <dig> genes  that is associated with atherosclerosis development. overall, the gimap family has a crucial role in the development and function of t lymphocytes, which have an important role in the etiology of atherosclerosis
 <cit> . finally, it is intriguing that we detected differential expression of four genes involved in camp metabolism , as existing studies focusing on individual genes involved in arterial calcification collectively suggest that perturbation of atp metabolism plays a role in this process
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, in this project we piloted the study of coronary artery calcification using cell lines as a patient surrogate for gene expression. we demonstrate that with careful experimental design and secondary validation of results, statistically significant results can be obtained with rna-seq even from a small sample size. in addition to canonical gene expression, we focused on alternative splicing and novel transcript discovery, two areas of the cad transcriptome that may benefit the most from further rna-seq analyses. studies using larger numbers of lcls along with follow-up experiments will be needed to validate differentially expressed genes from this pilot study as true cac biomarkers; this will become possible in the near future as we deploy rna-seq to the entire clinseq® cohort.

abbreviations
lcl: lymphoblastoid cell line; ebv: epstein-barr virus; cad: coronary artery disease; cac: coronary artery calcification; gwas: genome-wide association study; fdr: false discovery rate.

competing interests
leslie g. biesecker is an uncompensated consultant to the illumina corporation.

authors’ contributions
sks, lgb, jcm, edg and pjm designed the experiments. myc and aea carried out all ct scanning and calcification scoring procedures. sl performed all cell culture experiments. sks, dsa and nisc constructed and sequenced rna-seq libraries. age performed all microarray experiments. fdk, xz and qc conducted all immunoblotting experiments. sks, jjb, pfc, lns, jcm and pjm participated in bioinformatics and statistical analysis of the rna-seq and microarray data. sks and jjb drafted the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
additional methods and figures description: expanded rna-seq protocol, statistical and bioinformatics methods. additional file
1: figures s1–s <dig> 

click here for file

 additional file 2
additional data. description: clinical data, expanded lists of differentially expressed and alternatively spliced transcripts and results from western blotting.

click here for file

 additional file 3
ingenuity pathways analysis results description: complete output from ingenuity pathways analysis.

click here for file

 acknowledgments
the authors thank peter chines, nancy hansen, jamie teer, and aaron quinlan for computational analyses, robert blakesley, alice young, michael erdos, marjorie lindhurst, jacquelyn idol, and jennifer johnston for help with experimental procedures, julia fekecs for help with preparing high-resolution graphics, soma chowdhury for proofreading, and flavia facio, david ng, clesson turner, and the clinseq® clinical support and nursing staff for their help with the clinical aspects of this study. we thank eric olivares and the seqanswers community  for providing valuable advice. above all, we are grateful to the many participants of the clinseq® study. this study is supported by funds from the intramural research program of the national institutes of health.
