BACKGROUND
prion diseases, or transmissible spongiform encephalopathies , are rare fatal neurodegenerative disorders that affect a number of species including sheep and goats , cattle , deer, elk and moose , mink , and humans . a hallmark of tses is the accumulation of a relatively protease-resistant isoform  of the host-encoded normal cellular prion protein  in the central nervous system  <cit> . in classical scrapie, prpsc accumulation in the lymphoreticular system precedes prpsc accumulation in the central nervous system  <cit>  such that preclinical infection can be detected ante-mortem by immunohistochemical analysis  of lymphoid follicles associated with the nictitating membrane  <cit> , tonsil  <cit>  and rectoanal mucosa  <cit> . detection of prpsc in lymphoid tissues very early in the course of disease suggests that prions may disseminate within the body via the blood and lymphatic vascular systems before entering the central nervous system  <cit> . indeed, the presence of prions in the peripheral blood of sheep with classical scrapie or with experimental bse has been confirmed through blood transfusion in lambs  <cit>  and in lymphoid tissues of goats and sheep with classical scrapie through bioassay in mice  <cit> . furthermore, presence of prions or prpsc in peripheral blood mononuclear cells was also demonstrated by two in vitro assays such as polyanionic ligand-base enzyme linked immunosorbent   <cit>  and protein misfolding cyclic amplification assays  <cit> .

hemal nodes are small independent organs found mostly along larger blood vessels in the head, and thoracic and abdominal viscera in various animal species including sheep  <cit> . like the spleen, hemal nodes lack both afferent and efferent lymphatic vessels and therefore receive leukocytes only from the blood, and vascular sinuses are filled with blood rather than lymph  <cit> . the major functions of hemal nodes are blood filtration and erythrophagocytosis  <cit> . despite the lack of lymphatic vessels in the spleen, prions can be readily detected in the spleen as early as three months of age in lambs born to scrapie-infected dams  <cit> . since prions are present within the different blood components and hemal nodes structurally and functionally resemble spleen, it seems likely that the cellular components of hemal nodes are exposed to prions and thus might accumulate prpsc and participate as a site of prion replication.

a previous study in cattle and sheep demonstrated that b- and t-lymphocyte distribution within the primary and secondary follicles of hemal nodes was similar to lymph nodes  <cit> . although the lymphocyte and macrophage distribution within hemal node follicles is similar to those of lymph node follicles, it is not clear what type of leukocytes within hemal nodes process prpsc. it was also not clear whether macrophages, follicular dendritic cells  and lymphocytes in hemal nodes or lymph nodes process prpsc derived from sheep with natural scrapie differently than those derived after experimental blood transfusion. therefore, the objectives of this study were to compare prpsc distribution and antibody reactivity patterns within hemal nodes and lymph nodes  collected from naturally or experimentally  exposed scrapie-infected sheep and studied by routine scrapie ihc in conjunction with in situ immune cell phenotyping, prpsc epitope mapping and western blot studies.

RESULTS
prpsc accumulates within the hemal nodes of scrapie-infected sheep
lambs became scrapie infected either through natural exposure or by intravenous transfusion of whole blood or blood cell fractions isolated from scrapie-infected sheep  <cit> . transmission of scrapie was confirmed by rectal biopsy  <cit> . postmortem tissues were collected at both preclinical and clinical time points and routinely processed for scrapie ihc  <cit> . prpsc accumulation in lymphoid tissues was initially assessed using mab f99/ <dig> . <dig> . in this study, once the rectal biopsy was positive, both the retropharyngeal lymph nodes and at least one mesenteric lymph node were positive regardless of genotype, type of disease exposure, and clinical status . making a comparison between abdominal hemal nodes and mesenteric lymph nodes, prpsc accumulation in hemal nodes was detected in 82% of the animals. prpsc accumulation in the hemal nodes was similarly detected in all three major scrapie susceptible prnp genotypes in both scrapie-infected groups . rectal biopsy from blood transfusion recipients are routinely collected at four months post-transfusion. when the majority of animals became positive for prpsc accumulation, animals were then euthanized within four to ten months post-transfusion  <cit> . therefore, the lack of prpsc detection in the hemal nodes of some preclinical experimental animals is most likely due to the early euthanasia .

abbreviations, mab = monoclonal antibody; prpc residues = normal cellular prion amino acid residues.

1prpsc detected by ihc in both the retropharyngeal and a mesenteric lymph node of all sheep.

2the preclinical time-point for the experimental exposure of vrq/vrq group was at 4- <dig> months after transfusion of weaned lambs.

hemal nodes and lymph nodes show similar anti-prion mabs reactivity patterns
in order to determine whether hemal nodes shows similar prpsc distribution and antibody reactivity patterns to lymph nodes, an epitope mapping study of prpsc was conducted using a series of mabs  with epitopes representing three major regions of the ovine prion protein: n-terminal , globular domain  and c-terminal . due to the lack of sufficient amount of mesenteric lymph node blocks from scrapie-infected animals and the routine use of retropharyngeal lymph nodes diagnostic works, paired retropharyngeal lymph nodes and abdominal hemal nodes from naturally and experimentally scrapie-infected sheep, representing all three scrapie susceptible prnp genotypes  were used for the epitope mapping study. prpsc accumulation within retropharyngeal lymph nodes and abdominal hemal nodes appeared similar . prpsc labeling was detected within the germinal centers of secondary follicles of hemal nodes and retropharyngeal lymph nodes . unlike lymph nodes, dark zone and light zone demarcation within the germinal centers of secondary follicles of the hemal nodes was not very clear. the abundant intracellular pattern of prpsc labeling aggregates observed within the germinal centers and mantle zones of hemal nodes are likely to be tangible body macrophages. hemal nodes collected from several animals in both scrapie-infected groups also showed a wide spread follicular dendritic cell -type of prpsc labeling pattern which was interspersed between lymphocytes in germinal centers with all seven mabs. however, the intensity of fdc-type prpsc labeling was variable across secondary follicles with different mabs  and also between different hemal nodes. as it has been previously described  <cit> , aggregates of prpsc labeling visible in the light zones and dark zones of the germinal centers of secondary follicles and also within the mantle zones and occasionally in paracortical zones of retropharyngeal lymph nodes were macrophages . unlike in hemal nodes, light zone and dark zone architecture was clearly visible in germinal centers of the secondary follicles in retropharyngeal lymph nodes where well-defined fdc-type prpsc labeling was clearly interspersed between lymphocytes in the light zones . in some animals, fdc-type prpsc labeling was not very strong with mabs 1e <dig> and l <dig> . the intensities of fdc-type prpsc labeling patterns varied between follicles, tissue blocks and animals. however, the majority of naturally and experimentally scrapie-infected animals with different prnp genotypes showed both macrophages and fdc-type prpsc labeling. prpsc labeling was not detected from three hemal node sections from three naturally scrapie-infected sheep with 1e <dig> and 8g <dig> mabs and three hemal node sections from two experimentally scrapie-infected animals with 1e <dig> and 12b <dig> mabs . labeling of the sections from the same tissue blocks from these sheep with these mabs failed to identify prpsc positive follicles due to sectioning through the prpsc positive areas within these nodes. prpsc immunolabeling was not observed when hemal nodes and retropharyngeal lymph nodes from scrapie-negative sheep were incubated with anti-prion mabs or when hemal nodes and retropharyngeal lymph nodes from scrapie-infected animals were incubated with isotype-matched immunoglobulins .

abbreviations: prnp = prion genotypes; na = not available; exp = experimental; prp = platelet-rich plasma; bc = buffy coat; wb = whole blood; pbmc = peripheral blood mononuclear cells; * = cd21+ subset of b cells; blank = prpsc labeling was detected; n = prpsc labeling was not detected.

macrophages and fdcs within the hemal nodes and retropharyngeal lymph nodes are the major cell types to harbor prpsc
we used leukocyte subset-specific mabs  to phenotype prpsc accumulating cells in situ and mab f99/ <dig> . <dig> to label prpsc. t lymphocytes were observed predominantly within the paracortex or interfollicular regions of retropharyngeal lymph nodes but some were also found scattered in the light zone in the germinal centers of secondary follicles . in hemal nodes, t lymphocytes were found around the follicles, few in the germinal centers  and also in the interfollicular regions when two follicles were next to each other. b lymphocytes were abundant in the germinal centers and mantle zones of hemal node and retropharyngeal lymph node secondary follicles . it has been previously reported that there is occasional accumulation of prpsc granules on the outer surface of b and t lymphocytes plasma membranes  <cit> . using our method, we also observed similar prpsc labeling near the outer surface of b and t lymphocytes in both tissues . prpsc labeling was predominantly found within macrophages  and fdcs  within the germinal centers of both types of nodes. although fdc-type prpsc labeling in the light zones was very prominent in single labeling , such labeling was significantly reduced under double labeling conditions. also, it is noteworthy to mention that despite using the same immunolabeling conditions, fdc labeling was very strong with retropharyngeal lymph node follicles compared to hemal node follicles .

abbreviations, mab = monoclonal antibody; poly = polyclonal antibody; fdcs = follicular dendritic cells; mac = macrophages.

prpsc banding patterns in hemal nodes and retropharyngeal lymph nodes are similar
epitope mapping using seven different mabs confirmed that accumulated prpsc in hemal nodes and retropharyngeal lymph nodes appears to be similar. however, such ihc studies alone are unable to provide any information regarding prp glycosylation or molecular mass differences. thus, prpsc-specific wb assays were performed with f99/ <dig> . <dig> mab. phosphotungstic acid  precipitation was used to concentrate prpsc from the samples. retropharyngeal lymph node homogenates from experimentally scrapie-infected sheep and naturally scrapie-infected sheep had the characteristic three banding pattern of proteinase k resistant prpsc . one animal in the naturally scrapie-infected group had weak prpsc signals . except for one animal from the experimental group, , hemal nodes from experimentally and naturally scrapie-infected sheep also showed the characteristic proteinase k resistant three banding pattern of prpsc . interestingly, prpsc immunolabeling in the hemal nodes of this animal  was clearly detected by ihc with the same f99/ <dig> . <dig> mab . hemal nodes from one animal in the naturally scrapie-infected group had weak prpsc signals . as expected, the scrapie-uninfected control sheep did not show any proteinase k-resistant prp bands . the distribution of prpsc bands in both types of nodes were similar and they were in the order of diglycosylated > monoglycosylated > unglycosylated. molecular masses of di- , mono-  and un-glycosylated  prpsc bands in hemal nodes and corresponding retropharyngeal lymph nodes from naturally and experimentally scrapie-infected sheep were similar.

discussion
the goal of this study was to compare the distribution and accumulation of prpsc in hemal nodes and a representative peripheral lymph node such as the retropharyngeal or mesenteric lymph node. in addition, we were interested to know if these characteristics were dependent on prnp genotype or type of exposure. our findings revealed that prpsc labeling was detected in hemal nodes of 82% sheep with prpsc positive in both mesenteric and retropharyngeal lymph nodes. the lack of prpsc detection in hemal nodes of  <dig> scrapie-infected sheep included both naturally and experimentally infected, and preclinical as well as clinical sheep . since we only collected and evaluated few hemal nodes from thoracic and abdominal regions, the lack of prpsc detection in these sheep does not necessarily mean their hemal nodes are negative for prions. perhaps other hemal nodes in head region or abdominal viscera could have accumulated prpsc. we did not observe any differences in prpsc epitope mapping between hemal nodes and retropharyngeal lymph nodes of scrapie-infected sheep  or any difference in lymphocytes, macrophages or fdcs arrangement within the follicles of hemal and lymph nodes . therefore, these observations suggest that irrespective of mode of infection  or vascular anatomical differences , once prions enter into follicles, both hemal and lymph nodes process prpsc similarly.

after ingestion of scrapie contaminated materials, prpsc accumulation has been first detected within the follicles of peyer’s patches and draining gut-associated  lymph node  in the ileum  <cit> . dissemination of prions from draining galns to most of the non-gut associated secondary lymph nodes is not clear. a recent study in mice by blocking the sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor which sequesters lymphocytes within secondary lymph nodes revealed that b lymphocytes disseminate prions from gut associated lymph nodes to other secondary lymph nodes  <cit> . previous studies of cryopreserved hemal and lymph nodes showed that b lymphocytes within the germinal centers of secondary follicles of sheep are positive for cd <dig>  <cit> . since cd21-positive b lymphocytes are known to be recirculating b lymphocytes  <cit> , it is possible that hemal nodes receive prions mainly through cd21- positive b lymphocytes. under our ihc labeling conditions, prpsc labeling was observed near the outside surface of b lymphocytes . however, based on the high resolution electron microscopic observations of submandibular lymph nodes by mcgovern and jeffrey  <cit> , the observed prpsc labeling near the outside surface of b and t lymphocytes are most likely to be prpsc in the fdc dendrites. blood transfusion experiments conducted in lambs  <cit>  and ic inoculation in transgenic tg <dig> mice  <cit>  revealed that infectious prions are associated with platelets and all major pbmc subsets of scrapie-infected sheep. our inability to transmit scrapie using only platelet-poor plasma  <cit>  prompted us to speculate prpsc was not in a cell-free form in ovine plasma. however, a recent study by bannach et al.,  <dig>  <cit>  with fluorescent antibody probe revealed the presence of prpsc in plasma samples collected from scrapie-infected sheep whose plasma samples were previously identified as prpsc negative by idexx elisa  <cit> . since hemal nodes receive blood rather than lymph, it is possible that hemal nodes can also receive a cell-free form of prpsc from the blood circulation as well.

hemal nodes and retropharyngeal lymph nodes were evaluated by wb assays to detect characteristic prpsc banding patterns after proteinase k treatment. it has been previously reported that sodium phosphotungstic acid  can enrich prpsc in the samples  <cit> . therefore, prpsc in homogenates from both types of nodes were concentrated with pta before wb assays. hemal node and retropharyngeal lymph node homogenates from naturally and experimentally scrapie-infected sheep showed typical banding patterns of three prpsc isoforms . although prpsc banding pattern was not observed in one animal’s hemal node preparations in wb assay, positive prpsc immunolabeling was clearly detected in several other hemal nodes separately collected from the abdominal cavity for ihc. however, such prpsc labeling was not detected from thoracic hemal nodes. the lack of prpsc accumulation in the hemal nodes collected for wb assay from the abdominal cavity and positive ihc labeling in hemal nodes from abdominal cavity but not from the thoracic cavity in this particular animal further confirmed that prpsc accumulation is not uniform among hemal nodes. therefore, this finding highlights that the lack of prpsc accumulation detected in the hemal nodes in some animals  compared to those of mesenteric lymph nodes, is most likely due to the limited number of hemal nodes collected and assessed by ihc. although no attempt was made to perform glycoform analysis due to insufficient tissue, there were no obvious differences in glycosylation patterns between both types of tissues or between naturally and experimentally scrapie-infected sheep. furthermore, molecular masses of prpsc bands of hemal nodes were similar to corresponding lymph nodes. therefore, these findings further confirmed our ihc observations that prpsc in both types of tissues are fundamentally similar to each other and thus both tissues process prpsc similarly.

the ihc analyses of hemal nodes collected from scrapie-infected sheep demonstrated the presence of both primary and secondary follicles. unlike in retropharyngeal lymph nodes, dark and light zone architecture within the germinal centers of secondary follicles in hemal nodes was not very clear. however, observed fdc-type prpsc labeling interspersed between lymphocytes in the germinal centers in some secondary follicles strongly suggest the presence of light zones and dark zones in the hemal nodes as well . since the prion protein is a self-antigen, it is unlikely that germinal center formation within the secondary follicles of hemal and lymph nodes were induced by prpsc. whatever the cause for such germinal center formation, these observations suggest that hemal nodes of sheep are not simply passive organs that accumulate plasma or blood-derived prpsc but rather immunologically active organs which replicate and process prpsc similarly to lymph nodes.

CONCLUSIONS
a prpsc epitope mapping study using seven different mabs by ihc revealed that prpsc labeling patterns of scrapie-infected ovine hemal nodes are similar to those of lymph nodes; and macrophages and fdcs are the major cell types to harbor prpsc in both types of nodes. western blot analysis confirmed that glycosylation patterns and molecular masses of prpsc in hemal and lymph nodes are similar. therefore, we concluded that hemal nodes process prions similar to lymphoid tissues.

