BACKGROUND
the bone marrow microenvironment provides protection to acute lymphoblastic leukemia  cells against drug treatment and is a frequent site of leukemia relapse. ex vivo, primary pro-b all cells do not proliferate long-term without the presence of stromal support
 <cit> . we therefore developed an ex vivo co-culture model consisting of mouse leukemic pro-b lymphoblasts
 <cit>  grown with mitotically inactivated mouse embryonic fibroblasts . this system provides a generic type of protection to the all cells as is evidenced by the emergence of drug resistant all cells within 2-4 weeks of treatment with a moderate dose of a therapeutic drug
 <cit> .

some of the factors produced by stromal cells that provide protection to the all cells have been identified, and include stromally produced sdf1α
 <cit> . however, it is unclear if the presence of drug-treated all cells affects the stromal fibroblasts. the current study was initiated to examine this using expression profiling on the irradiated mefs. these experiments led to the identification of an evolutionarily conserved family of multi-copy sequences, of which transcription is increased in both the all cells and the irradiated stromal cells when all cells are subjected to drug treatment.

RESULTS
mitotically inactivated stromal cells upregulate expression of a cluster of loci on chromosome  <dig> when exposed to drug-treated all cells
to provide stromal support to all cells without problems associated with the presence of two types of proliferating cells, we standardly mitotically inactivate the stromal mefs by irradiation. although these cells no longer divide, they are able to provide support to the all cells under steady-state growth conditions and also when the all cells are challenged by therapeutic drug treatment.

the murine all cells used here express the bcr/abl oncogene and are sensitive to the abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor nilotinib. previous experiments using different concentrations of nilotinib showed that  <dig> nm of this drug eradicates large numbers of  <dig> all cells, but allows cells to grow out that have become tolerant to this concentration of drug
 <cit> .

when these all cells are co-cultured with protective stromal cells, they adhere loosely to the top of this layer and migrate underneath it. to be able to isolate a pure population of protective mefs, we therefore separated the all cells from the irradiated mefs using transwell membranes. microarray analysis was performed on rna isolated from mefs exposed to dmso, to nilotinib, and to nilotinib plus all cells at the end of the treatment on day  <dig> when the all cells had recovered . as expected, there were minimal differences in the transcriptomes between mefs treated with dmso and nilotinib since this drug is a specific inhibitor of the deregulated bcr/abl tyrosine kinase oncogene in the lymphoblasts. compared to dmso-treated mefs, only  <dig> probesets reported larger than 2-fold increased expression in mefs exposed to nilotinib-treated all cells. of these, only  <dig> reported values that exceeded a 3-fold upregulation.

among those sets with highly increased expression, an interesting profile was reported by  <dig> probesets representing three genes located on chromosome  <dig> band a <dig> and one on chromosome  <dig> in band e <dig> . expression was increased 3-10-fold in mefs that were in contact with nilotinib-treated all cells . these probe sets are not present on previous murine affymetrix gene expression arrays.

chromosome  <dig> cluster contains members of an evolutionarily conserved family of sequences
the annotation provided for one of the probesets, gm <dig> , indicates that its deduced amino acid sequence is similar to that of the hypothetical plasmodium protein xp_ <dig>  this region on mouse chromosome  <dig> contained  <dig> other loci with significant homology to the original  <dig> located on chromosome  <dig>  alignment of the deduced amino acid sequences from computer-generated transcripts of these loci revealed a family of highly related sequences .

further database analysis showed the existence of numerous physical homologous cdnas , which are distinct from the cluster of sequences on the chromosome  <dig> locus. we conclude that the mouse genome must contain a large family of homologous but distinct genes of which at least nine are transcribed into rna.

homologous sequences were present on every mouse chromosome with  <dig> mouse blast hits on 7_04_ <dig> in refseq_genomic, many in the wgs and in the est database . moreover, these sequences are highly conserved in evolution. the malaria parasite plasmodium also contains numerous sequences, in addition to the one represented by xp_ <dig>  with a high degree of similarity to this family. in the non-human, non-mouse ests database, sequences from danio rerio, pythium ultimum and amphioxus branchiostoma were found. also, culex quinquefasciatus contains a conserved hypothetical protein with high homology . human ests include for example ax <dig>  aw <dig>  aw <dig>  aw <dig>  bi <dig> and bg <dig>  similar sequences were also detected in other species, such as the lancelet amphioxus branchiostoma, a primitive “living fossil” vertebrate, in the est_others database.

cassini expression is high in hematopoietic cell types and is upregulated by bacterial endotoxin in vitro and in vivo
because we could not verify the existence of cdnas that matched the exact sequence of any members of the chromosome  <dig> cluster, we obtained a cdna, ak <dig>  of which the deduced amino acid sequence was most homologous to the plasmodium xp_ <dig> product  to further investigate this family of genes. we named this specific gene product cassini. the cdna was generated from rna isolated from a murine activated spleen cdna library. primers for rt/pcr  amplified a single product of the expected size . we next subcloned the cdna insert into an egfp-expression vector, transfected this into mefs and confirmed that the primer pair detected cassini rna using real-time rt/pcr. as shown in figure 
2b, we detected high levels of the transcript in mefs transfected with the cdna compared to non-transfected cells or control cells transfected with egfp. dissociation curves of the product generated with this primer pair in real-time rt/pcr also support the amplification of a single product .

since ak <dig> was isolated from hematopoietic tissue that had been activated, we first investigated cassini expression in mice exposed to bacterial endotoxin. as shown in figure 
3a, the highest levels of cassini rna were present in the spleen and in the thymus of control mice. e. coli endotoxin treatment of the mice further induced the transcription of this locus 10-fold both in the thymus and spleen . transcription was also increased in isolated splenocytes stimulated ex vivo with lps .

acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells increase cassini transcript levels when exposed to therapeutic drugs
we next examined expression of cassini rna in the mef samples used for the gene expression profiling. these samples contain only mef rna since the fibroblasts were physically separated from the all cells by a membrane . we found that nilotinib treatment of mefs had little effect on cassini expression, whereas the presence of all cells treated with nilotinib induced a 2-fold increase . to confirm that the presence of nilotinib-treated all cells specifically induced cassini in the mefs, we isolated mef samples on d <dig>  d <dig> and d <dig> of nilotinib treatment. as shown in figure 
1d, there was a significant increase in expression of cassini in mefs exposed to drug-treated leukemia cells compared to mefs kept in the presence of dmso-treated all cells.

to examine if all cells express cassini and whether or not drug treatment affects this, we isolated rna from all cells treated with  <dig> nm nilotinib over the course of 10 days. after an initial drop in viability, this typically results in increased viability of the culture and emergence of all cells that are able to proliferate at that concentration of drug . figure 
4c shows that levels of cassini were comparable to the 0 hr control at time points when viability of the all cells was still high. however, decreased viability correlated with induction of cassini, of which expression increased 5- <dig> fold. the peak of expression on day  <dig> correlated with the period of low viability before the culture started to recover. this suggests that cassini expression is related to a stress response of the all cells.

the combined treatment of the all cells with nilotinib and aspirin delays the emergence of drug-resistance . to investigate the effect of this treatment on cassini expression, we treated mouse all cells co-cultured with irradiated mefs with acetylsalicylic acid , with nilotinib, and a combination of the two. as shown in figure 
4d, aspirin alone induced a modest upregulation of cassini. interestingly, the dual treatment with nilotinib and aspirin caused a very high increase in cassini transcripts.

we additionally investigated if the mouse cassini primer pair would amplify a product in human rna. real-time rt/pcr on rna isolated from control and vincristine-treated human all cells  showed that human cassini rna was present in these cells and that its expression was further increased by cytotoxic drug treatment. we also detected cassini rna in txl2r cells that had been made tolerant to  <dig> nm nilotinib . culture of these cells without drug for 14 days, followed by de novo treatment with nilotinib also induced a low increase in expression . these results further confirm that cassini is evolutionarily conserved.

induction of cassini by specific stress
to further investigate if cassini upregulation in all cells correlates with cellular stress, we subjected  <dig> pro-b leukemia cells to different types of treatments including temperature change, hypertonic and hypotonic stress, superoxide  treatment and γ-irradiation. hypertonic shock did not affect levels of cassini, and hypotonic treatment similarly had little effect . short-term radiation induced a non-significant increase , and exposure to up to  <dig>  mm of h2o <dig> did not significantly alter its expression . however, exposure of cells to elevated temperature did induce a significant increase .

discussion
mouse Î³-satellite is not homologous to human Î³-satellite, but human-mouse homologous sequences exist
overall, absolute levels of cassini in cells and tissues that expressed it varied significantly, but were very high as compared to that of the reference gene gapdh or 18 s rrna, and in some samples exceeded those of the housekeeping transcripts. therefore, it was remarkable that this family had not been characterized. further database searches revealed that cassini and sequences related to it belong to a class of dna that has been collectively named γ-satellite dna in the murine genome. satellite dna was named as such due to its buoyant density on cscl gradients, differentiating it from that of the bulk of eukaryotic dna. this is a consequence of its different overall base pair composition. when we evaluated the first dna sequence reported for a mouse major satellite dna from  <dig>  we found it to be a cassini-like sequence
 <cit> . vissel and choo
 <cit>  coined the term γ-satellite dna for these sequences to distinguish this mouse satellite dna from other satellite families, such as the mouse “minor” satellite, the human centromeric n satellite and a new p-satellite family. however, the term γ-satellite, as proposed by vissel and choo, remains confusing in that it suggests relatedness between such sequences from different species. mouse γ-satellites were regarded as non-conserved in evolution, and indeed we found that the sequences described as human γ-satellite dna repeats bear no sequence homology to the mouse γ-satellite dna . in addition, mouse γ-satellite dna is reported to be pericentromeric, but we were unable to detect any homology between the cassini-type sequences and the different human pericentromeric repeats reported in eymery et al.
 <cit> . we did find numerous human cassini-like est sequences and two non-assigned human genomic clones from chromosome  <dig> and  <dig>  however, in contrast to mouse, none of these sequences have been assigned to a chromosomal sublocation and therefore it is unknown whether the human cassini loci are pericentromeric.

similar to some classes of human pericentromeric repetitive dna, cassini mouse γ-satellite is transcriptionally regulated
interestingly, as reviewed in ugarkovic
 <cit> , some of the other satellite dnas are also highly conserved. to the extent that the conservation of a sequence in evolution, such as that of an exon versus an intron, signifies an evolutionary constraint on divergence because of loss of function, this would imply that sequences such as cassini have a function. vourc’h and biamonti
 <cit>  reviewed possible functions of satellite dna, in particular human pericentromeric satellite dna, which has been more extensively studied. although the human pericentromeric satellites show no homology to the mouse γ-satellite dna, those located in the human 9q <dig> region show increased expression in hela cells that are heat shocked or stressed. our results show that cassini expression is regulated by heat shock suggesting that the human pericentromeric satellites and cassini share inducibility.

mouse Î³-satellite could be part of one large transcriptional unit
vissel and choo
 <cit>  described the basic repeating unit of the mouse γ-satellite dna to be 234 bp, and the majority of monomers were reported to be organized into largely uninterrupted arrays that vary from a minimum of 240 kb to greater than 2000 kb in length. however, an inspection of the only segment of the mouse genome wherein the organization of the γ-satellite is precisely reported shows that the 234 bp sequences are in fact organized as exons within typical genes. the chromosome  <dig> cluster contains  <dig> blocks of these sequences , organized in a tandem head-to-tail configuration in the same transcriptional orientation. the  <dig> blocks each have a possible intron-exon structure, with the γ-satellite sequences interspersed by non-γ-satellite dna sequences. in fact, the automated dna analysis software has annotated this region as containing genes.

it is currently unclear whether this area would be transcribed as  <dig> units or whether some of the units could be spliced together to form a larger transcript. murine cdnas corresponding in size to the predicted transcripts of these units are listed in the databases. the only indication that a very large spliced transcript could exist is the fact that the plasmodium genome also contains homologous sequences, organized in a typical exon-intron structure; the largest virtual cdna that was generated by automated annotation would be composed of  <dig> exons containing multiple “γ-satellite” units.

cassini shows some of the features of a typical gene
whereas in earlier years repetitive dna, including γ-satellite dna, was regarded as functionless, in the course of twenty years, views on mouse γ-satellite dna appear to have evolved
 <cit> . one paper reported detecting a transcript in senescent cardiac muscle
 <cit> , and a different study linked mouse γ-satellite transcription to the cell cycle
 <cit>  suggesting that some of these sequences may be transcribed.

our current study, using real time rt/pcr, is the first to extensively analyze and quantify transcription of one such sequence, which we have named after the celestial satellite cassini. the primer pair that we selected detects a single product in the databases, and the melting curves obtained from both mouse and human samples indicate the primers amplify a single product. however, we cannot definitively exclude the possibility that we are detecting transcripts from more than one locus because we presume that not all of these sequences are reported in the databases. nonetheless, individual γ-satellite sequences that are reported as physical cdnas have distinct nucleotide sequences. thus, they represent distinct loci, and the cassini primers detect transcription from only a subset of these loci.

furthermore, the detection of large differences in basal and induced transcription of cassini in different mouse tissues supports the specificity of its expression. if the cassini transcript is the product from a single gene, then specific stimuli, including endotoxin exposure and drug treatment of pro-b all cells, induce extremely high levels of this specific rna. our experiments standardized cassini levels to those of the abundant gapdh and, in some experiments, levels were measured that vastly exceeded those of gapdh. because the highest basal levels of cassini were detected in thymus and spleen, its expression may be regulated in hematopoietic cell types, and we speculate that this could be promoted through transcription factors that were reported to bind mouse γ-satellite dna including ikaros, a b-lineage specific transcription factor that regulates the early development of hematopoiesis
 <cit> , glfi1b, which is an important regulator of hematopoiesis
 <cit>  or yinyang <dig>  which is needed for differentiation of prob to preb cells
 <cit> .

cassini protein?
it is currently unclear if cassini or other mouse γ-satellite rna is translated into a protein  as we were unable to demonstrate the existence of a protein that corresponds in expression pattern to that of the cassini rna. although our data clearly show that a cassini protein can be made, the product, if it exists, is likely to have unusual characteristics as is demonstrated by the migration abnormalities and aggregation of egfp-cassini after heat treatment in sds-sb lysates .

effect of cassini expression
our experiments showed that induction of cassini rna in cells correlates with specific stress stimuli, but our data do not provide information on whether the increased levels are detrimental to the cells or contribute a survival advantage. because of the abundance of this rna upon stress of cells, and the possibility that other transcribed loci exist in the genome with identical sequence, ablation of the rna using sirna does not appear technically feasible. we therefore used transient transfection in  <dig> cells to attempt to achieve expression levels that would significantly add to that already induced endogenously by stress, and also subjected the cells to a short-term treatment with chemotherapeutic drugs. the results of these experiments rule out the possibility that cassini induction correlates with or contributes to cell death, and suggest that high levels of this rna provide some form of protection against the cytostatic activity of such drugs .

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that γ-satellite repeat sequences are widely conserved and, as shown here, their transcription can be specifically regulated. our analysis of cassini demonstrates that among this large family of loci, some are likely to participate in the response of acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells to cytotoxic drug treatment in cancer therapy in the presence of stromal support, and that this may provide some protection against these drugs.

