BACKGROUND
insects are useful models for the study of cellular and molecular mechanisms of learning  <cit> . there is evidence suggesting that aminergic neurons convey reinforcing signals in classical conditioning in insects  <cit> , as in mammals  <cit> , and it has been suggested that octopaminergic  and dopaminergic  neurons convey reward and punishment signals, respectively . in honey bees, for example, hammer  <cit>  suggested that a putative oa-ergic neuron, vummx <dig> neuron , mediates reinforcing properties of sucrose unconditioned stimulus  in appetitive olfactory conditioning. in the cricket gryllus bimaculatus, we have shown that pharmacological blockade of octopamine  receptors impairs conditioning of olfactory, visual pattern or color stimuli with water reward, whereas blockade of dopamine  receptors specifically impairs conditioning of these stimuli with sodium chloride punishment  <cit> .

the roles of oa and da for memory recall in insects, however, have remained controversial. in fruit-flies, disruption of da-ergic synaptic transmission had no effects on memory recall after aversive olfactory conditioning  <cit> . in honey bees, in contrast, farooqui et al.  <cit>  reported that disruption of oa-ergic transmission in the antennal lobe, the primary olfactory center and one of the termination areas of the vummx <dig> neuron, by an oa receptor antagonist  or by rna interference of the oa receptor gene impaired appetitive olfactory memory recall. considering the observation by hammer  <cit>  that the vummx <dig> neuron was activated in response to olfactory conditioned stimulus  after conditioning with sucrose us, farooqui et al.  <cit>  argued that activation of the vummx <dig> neuron by olfactory cs is required for recall of appetitive olfactory memory. the results of the study by farooqui et al.  <cit> , however, are not conclusive because the possibility that these treatments impaired memory consolidation or maintenance has not been excluded.

here we show that oa and da receptor antagonists impair appetitive and aversive memory recall, respectively, in olfactory and visual pattern conditioning in crickets. in order to account for this finding, we propose a new model of insect classical conditioning that assumes the involvement of two memory traces, one characterized as 'stimulus-stimulus connection'  and the other characterized as 'stimulus-response connection'  following the terminology of theorists studying classical conditioning in higher vertebrates  <cit> , in contrast to previous models of insect classical conditioning  <cit>  that are characterized as s-r connection models. we examined the validity of our model by pharmacological experiments using a cross-modal second-order conditioning procedure, and the results obtained fully supported the model. we suggest, for the first time, that the formation of s-s connection by conditioning and its activation for memory recall, which have often been referred to as cognitive processes in reports on classical conditioning in higher vertebrates  <cit> , underlie classical conditioning in insects.

RESULTS
oa and da receptor antagonists impair the recall of appetitive and aversive olfactory memory, respectively
first, the effects of epinastine and mianserin, antagonists of insect oa receptors, on the recall of appetitive olfactory memory were studied. the specificity of these drugs for insect neural oa receptors has been demonstrated in biochemical studies  <cit> . three groups of animals were subjected to appetitive conditioning trials to associate an odor with water reward, using the procedure described previously  <cit> . one day after conditioning, the groups were each injected with physiological saline or saline containing epinastine or mianserin into the head hemolymph. the doses of drugs were based on results of our previous studies  <cit>  and are stated in the figure legends. the odor preference of animals was tested before conditioning and at  <dig> min after injection. the saline-injected control group exhibited a significant level of memory recall, that is, a significantly increased preference for the rewarded odor compared with that before conditioning , the level of which was as high as that in groups of intact animals we reported previously  <cit> . in contrast, the epinastine-injected and mianserin-injected groups exhibited no significantly increased preference for the rewarded odor . this impairment may be due to impairment of  consolidation of memory,  maintenance of consolidated memory or  memory retrieval . the first possibility is less likely because we have shown that protein-synthesis dependent long-term memory is fully established  <dig> hours after conditioning  <cit>  and thus consolidation is likely to be completed by this time. to examine the second possibility, animals in one control group were subjected to appetitive conditioning trials and were injected with epinastine one day later and then tested one day after injection, at which time epinastine had been fully metabolized. they exhibited a significantly increased preference for the rewarded odor . the finding that animals exhibit impaired learning performance only under the influence of oa receptor antagonists ruled out the second possibility. thus we conclude that oa receptor antagonists impair recall of appetitive olfactory memory.

next, the effects of oa receptor antagonists on the recall of aversive olfactory memory were studied. three groups of animals were subjected to aversive conditioning trials to associate an odor with 20% sodium chloride solution. one day later, the groups were each injected with saline or saline containing epinastine or mianserin and were subjected to retention tests at  <dig> min after injection. the groups injected with epinastine and mianserin exhibited significantly increased preferences for the control odor , the levels of preferences being as high as that of the saline-injected control group . thus, oa receptor antagonists do not impair aversive memory recall. this finding also suggests that oa receptor antagonists do not impair sensory or motor functions or the motivation necessary for normal learning performance.

we also found that fluphenazine, chlorpromazine and spiperone, antagonists of insect da receptors, impair aversive olfactory memory recall. the specificity of these drugs for insect neural oa receptors has been examined in biochemical studies  <cit> . four groups of animals were subjected to aversive conditioning trials. one day later, they were each injected with saline or saline containing fluphenazine, chlorpromazine, or spiperone and were subjected to retention tests at  <dig> min after injection. the groups injected with fluphenazine, chlorpromazine and spiperone exhibited complete impairment of memory recall: they exhibited no significantly decreased preference for the punished odor . in contrast, the saline-injected control group exhibited significantly decreased preference for the punished odor . the impairment in the experimental group was not due to impairment of memory maintenance, since animals in the group that received aversive conditioning trials and were injected with fluphenazine one day later and tested one day after injection exhibited no impairment of memory recall .

da receptor antagonists had no effects on appetitive olfactory memory recall. four groups of animals were subjected to appetitive conditioning trials. one day later, they were each injected with saline or saline containing fluphenazine, chlorpromazine or spiperone and tested at  <dig> min after injection. the groups injected with fluphenazine, chlorpromazine and spiperone exhibited no impairment of appetitive memory recall . this finding also suggests that da receptor antagonists do not impair sensory or motor functions or the motivation necessary for normal learning performance.

because the effects of da and oa receptor antagonists on memory recall were studied after two-trial appetitive conditioning and six-trial aversive conditioning, it could be argued that different effects of oa and da receptor antagonists are ascribed to the difference in the number of trials. however, this is unlikely because we have observed that memory recall after six-trial appetitive conditioning is fully impaired by epinastine .

the impairment of appetitive memory recall and aversive memory recall by injection of oa and da receptor antagonists, respectively, indicates that intact synaptic transmission from oa- and da-ergic neurons is necessary for appetitive memory recall and aversive memory recall, respectively. impairment of the recall of appetitive memory and aversive memory by blockade of oa and da receptors, respectively, was not specific to 1-day  memory but was also found for 1-h  memory .

oa and da receptor antagonists impair the recall of appetitive and aversive visual memory, respectively
we next investigated whether the finding that oa and da receptor antagonists specifically impair the recall of appetitive memory and aversive memory, respectively, is applicable to the recall of visual memory. first, the effects of an oa receptor antagonist on the recall of appetitive visual memory were studied. three groups of animals were subjected to appetitive conditioning of a visual pattern, using the procedure described previously  <cit> . one day later, they were each injected with saline or saline containing epinastine or mianserin and subjected to retention tests at  <dig> min after injection. the groups injected with epinastine and mianserin exhibited no significant level of memory recall , whereas the saline-injected control group exhibited a significant level of memory recall . the impairment was again not due to impairment of memory maintenance, because animals in another control group that received appetitive conditioning trials and were injected with epinastine  <dig> day after conditioning and tested  <dig> day after injection exhibited no impairment of memory recall .

next, the effects of an oa receptor antagonist on the recall of aversive visual memory were studied. another three groups of animals were subjected to aversive conditioning trials. one day later, the groups were each injected with saline or saline containing epinastine or mianserin and tested at  <dig> min after injection. the groups injected with epinastine and mianserin exhibited significant levels of memory recall, indicating that an oa receptor antagonist does not impair aversive memory recall . thus, blockade of oa receptors impairs appetitive visual memory recall without affecting aversive visual memory recall.

similarly, injection of da receptor antagonists impaired aversive visual memory recall . four groups of animals were subjected to aversive visual conditioning trials. one day later, the groups were each injected with saline or saline containing fluphenazine, chlorpromazine or spiperone and subjected to retention tests at  <dig> min after injection. the groups injected with fluphenazine, chlorpromazine and spiperone exhibited complete impairment of memory recall, although the saline-injected group exhibited a significant level of memory recall . the impairment was not due to impairment of memory maintenance, because animals in the control group that received aversive conditioning trials and were injected with epinastine  <dig> day after conditioning and tested  <dig> day after injection exhibited no impairment of memory recall .

injection of da receptor antagonists had no effect on appetitive visual memory recall. four groups of animals were subjected to appetitive visual conditioning. one day later, the groups were each injected with saline or saline containing fluphenazine, chlorpromazine or spiperone and tested at  <dig> min after injection. the groups injected with fluphenazine, chlorpromazine and spiperone exhibited significant levels of memory recall, the levels of which were as high as the level in the saline-injected group . thus, we conclude that intact synaptic transmission from da-ergic neurons is needed for aversive visual memory recall but not for appetitive visual memory recall.

re-examination of the effect of an oa receptor antagonist on visual conditioning
we previously concluded that oa/da receptor antagonists impaired olfactory and visual pattern conditioning on the basis of observations that groups of crickets injected with these drugs  <dig> min before conditioning exhibited no conditioning effects, that is, no significantly changed preferences for the conditioned stimuli, in retention tests performed  <dig> day  or  <dig> min  after completing the conditioning  <cit> . the present finding that these drugs impair olfactory and visual pattern memory recall, however, prompted us to re-examine the validity of this conclusion, because if the effect of drugs remained during the retention test, the impairment may not be due to an impairment of conditioning.

it is obvious that our conclusion that an oa antagonist and a da antagonist impair appetitive and aversive olfactory conditioning is valid, because the effects of epinastine  and fluphenazine  do not last for  <dig> day   <cit>  and thus it is unlikely that effects of these drugs remained during the retention test, which was performed  <dig> day after conditioning.

in the case of visual pattern conditioning, however, our conclusion can be justified only for aversive conditioning. we observed that fluphenazine impaired aversive olfactory conditioning when it was injected  <dig> min before conditioning but not when it was injected  <dig> min before conditioning  <cit> . the retention test after aversive visual pattern conditioning started  <dig> min after fluphenazine injection  <cit>  and thus it is unlikely that the effect of fluphenazine remained during the retention test. we observed, however, that epinastine was effective when it was injected  <dig> min before olfactory conditioning  <cit> , and the retention test after appetitive visual conditioning was performed  <dig> min after epinastine injection. thus, it is most likely that the effects of epinastine remained during testing.

we performed, therefore, new experiments to re-examine the effect of epinastine on appetitive visual pattern conditioning. a group of animals was injected with epinastine  <dig> min before appetitive visual pattern conditioning and subjected to retention tests at  <dig> day after conditioning. the group exhibited no significantly increased preference for the rewarded pattern , thus indicating complete impairment of conditioning. we conclude that intact synaptic transmission from oa-ergic neurons is needed for appetitive visual pattern conditioning.

proposal of a novel model of insect classical conditioning
notably, our finding that intact synaptic transmission from oa- and da-ergic neurons is needed for the recall of appetitive memory and aversive memory, respectively, is not consistent with conventional neural models of insect classical conditioning. figure 4a depicts perhaps the best model proposed to account for the roles of extrinsic and intrinsic neurons of the mushroom body, a higher-order association center of the insect brain, in olfactory conditioning in the fruit-fly drosophila  <cit> . in this model, it is postulated that  'cs' neurons  that convey signals about a cs make synaptic connections with dendrites of 'cr' neurons , activation of which leads to a conditioned response  that mimics unconditioned response , but these synaptic connections are silent or very weak before conditioning;  oa- or da-ergic efferent neurons projecting to the lobes , which convey signals for appetitive or aversive us, respectively, make synaptic connections with axon terminals of 'cs' neurons, and  the efficacy of the synaptic connection from 'cs' neurons to 'cr' neurons that induce a cr  is strengthened by coincident activation of 'cs' neurons and 'oa/da' neurons during conditioning . this model assumes that presentation of a cs after conditioning activates the cs-cr or s-r connection to induce a cr. this model is characterized as an s-r model, following terminology in studies on classical conditioning in higher vertebrates  <cit> . this model is in accordance with our previous findings that intact synaptic output from oa- or da-ergic neurons is needed to achieve appetitive or aversive conditioning, respectively  but does not account for the present finding that it is also needed to achieve appetitive or aversive memory recall, respectively.

we propose a new model  with minimal modifications of the model by schwaerzel et al.  <cit> , by considering the present findings in crickets and previous findings in honey bees by hammer  <cit>  and farooqui et al.  <cit>  described in the introductory section. we assume, at first, that activation of 'oa/da' neurons and resulting release of oa or da are needed to 'gate' the sensori-motor pathway from the 'cs' neurons to 'cr' neurons  after conditioning. secondly, in order to account for the activation of oa/da neurons during memory recall, we assume that synaptic connection from 'cs' neurons to 'oa/da' neurons representing unconditioned stimulus , which is termed cs-us or s-s connection  <cit> , is strengthened by coincident activation of 'cs' neurons and 'oa/da' neurons during conditioning. in short, our model assumes the formation of two kinds of memory traces by conditioning and activation of both kinds for memory recall. this model is characterized as a hybrid of the s-s and s-r models.

an alternative possibility to explain our finding is that different sets of 'oa/da' neurons govern reinforcement and memory retrieval processes, respectively. this is achieved by modifying the model shown in figure 4a by assuming other 'oa/da' neurons in neural pathways downstream of the 'cr' neurons. it is difficult, however, for this model to account for our results with second-order conditioning described below.

the core of our model is that a 'cs-oa/da' pathway  is formed during conditioning. we evaluated this assumption by using a second-order conditioning procedure. second-order conditioning is a technique for testing whether a stimulus can acquire the reinforcing property of a us by conditioning with the us and the stimulus can support new conditioning thereafter. in actual experiment, a stimulus  is paired with a us and then a new stimulus  is paired with the cs <dig> . in our model, second-order conditioning is accounted for by the formation a 'cs-oa/da' pathway in the initial cs1-us pairing stage, which allows the cs <dig> to activate oa- or da-ergic neurons and thus to substitute for the us in the second cs2-cs <dig> pairing stage . a notable prediction from our model is that blockade of oa or da receptors during the initial cs1-us pairing stage does not impair the enhancement of synapses from 'cs' neurons to 'oa/da' neurons. this is because blockade of oa or da receptors  should not affect normal activities of 'cs' neurons and 'oa/da' neurons. in other words, impairment of normal functioning of oa/da receptors should impair establishing one kind of memory traces  but not establishing the other . hence, a stimulus that has been conditioned with a us under the blockade of oa or da receptors does not induce a cr  <cit> , but the stimulus should still be able to support new conditioning. therefore, our model predicts that blockade of oa or da receptors during the first cs1-us pairing stage does not impair second-order conditioning. in contrast, the same treatment during the second cs2-cs <dig> pairing stage or during the final retention test should impair second-order conditioning or memory recall, respectively.

second-order conditioning in crickets
second-order conditioning has been reported in honey bees  <cit>  and fruit-flies  <cit>  but not in crickets. therefore, we first studied the capability of crickets to achieve second-order conditioning. we used an olfactory stimulus as cs <dig> and a visual pattern as cs <dig> : such cross-modal second-order conditioning has not been reported in any species of insects. the second-order conditioning procedure and control procedure are depicted in figure 5c and 5d. a group of animals that was subjected to appetitive second-order conditioning trials exhibited significantly increased preference for the cs <dig> . in contrast, control groups that were each subjected to unpaired presentations of stimuli at the first or second conditioning stage exhibited no significantly increased preference for the cs <dig> , thus indicating that the increased preference for the cs <dig> in the experimental group is truly the result of second-order conditioning. another group of animals that was subjected to aversive second-order conditioning trials also exhibited significantly increased preference for the control pattern  . control groups that were each subjected to unpaired presentations of stimuli at the first or second conditioning stage exhibited no significantly increased preference for the control pattern , thus indicating that the decreased preference for the cs <dig> observed in the experimental group is truly the result of aversive second-order conditioning. the aversive second-order conditioning, however, was less effective than the appetitive second-order conditioning .

evaluation of our model by using the second-order conditioning procedure
we then proceeded to the evaluation of our model by using the second-order conditioning procedure. first, we studied the effects of injection of an oa receptor antagonist before the initial stage of appetitive second-order conditioning. one group of animals was injected with saline containing epinastine, and  <dig> min later the group was subjected to the first appetitive conditioning stage in which cs <dig> was paired with an appetitive us . the second cs1-cs <dig> pairing stage was performed  <dig> day after completion of the first conditioning stage, assuring that epinastine had been fully metabolized at this stage. the final test was performed  <dig> h after completion of the second conditioning stage. the group injected with epinastine before the first conditioning stage exhibited a significantly increased preference for the cs <dig>  thus indicating that appetitive second-order conditioning is achieved .

in contrast, epinastine impaired appetitive second-order conditioning when it was injected before the second conditioning stage. two groups of animals were subjected to the first conditioning stage and each group was injected with saline or saline containing epinastine  <dig> min later. they were subjected to the second conditioning stage  <dig> min after the injection. the test was performed  <dig> day after completion of the second conditioning stage, assuring that epinastine had been fully metabolized at that time. here, the time schedule was slightly changed from that shown in figures 5e and 6a in order to make the schedule as short as possible so as to assure that the animals remain healthy. therefore, we confirmed in another group of animals that second-order conditioning is achieved with this changed time schedule . the group injected with saline before the second conditioning stage exhibited a significantly increased preference for the cs <dig>  the level being as high as that in a group of intact animals . in contrast, the group injected with epinastine before the second conditioning stage exhibited no significantly increased preference for the cs <dig> , thus indicating complete impairment of second-order conditioning.

epinastine also impaired the recall of memory formed by appetitive second-order conditioning. two groups of animals were subjected to appetitive second-order conditioning and each group was injected with saline or saline containing epinastine  <dig> min later. the final test was performed  <dig> min after the injection. the control group injected with saline before the test exhibited a significantly increased preference for the cs <dig>  in contrast, the group injected with epinastine before the final test exhibited no significantly increased preference for the cs <dig> . the impairment was not due to impairment of memory maintenance, because animals in the group that received appetitive second-order conditioning trials and were injected with epinastine at  <dig> min after completion of the second conditioning stage and tested  <dig> day after injection exhibited a significant level of memory recall .

next, we studied the effects of injection of a da receptor antagonist before the initial stage of aversive second-order conditioning. a group of animals was injected with fluphenazine, and  <dig> min later the group was subjected to the first aversive conditioning stage to associate cs <dig> with aversive us. one day later, the group was subjected to the second cs2-cs <dig> pairing stage, and the final test was performed  <dig> h after the second conditioning stage. the group injected with fluphenazine before the first conditioning stage exhibited a significantly increased preference for the control pattern  , thus indicating that aversive second-order conditioning is achieved.

in contrast, fluphenazine impaired aversive second-order conditioning when it was injected before the second conditioning stage. two groups were subjected to the first conditioning stage and each group was injected with saline or saline containing fluphenazine  <dig> min later. at  <dig> min after injection, they were subjected to the second conditioning stage. the final test was performed  <dig> day after completion of the second conditioning stage. we showed in another group of animals that aversive second-order conditioning could be achieved with this time schedule . the saline-injected group exhibited a significantly increased preference for the control pattern, the level of the preference being as high as that of intact animals . in contrast, the group injected with fluphenazine before the second conditioning stage exhibited no significantly increased preference for the control pattern, thus indicating complete impairment of second-order conditioning.

fluphenazine also impaired the recall of memory formed by aversive second-order conditioning. two groups were subjected to aversive second-order conditioning trials. the groups were injected with saline or saline containing fluphenazine at  <dig> min after completion of the conditioning trials and tested at  <dig> min after injection. the control group injected with saline before the test exhibited a significantly increased preference for the control pattern . in contrast, the group injected with fluphenazine before the final test exhibited no significantly increased preference for the control pattern . this impairment was not due to impairment of memory maintenance, because animals in the group that received aversive second-order conditioning trials and were injected with fluphenazine at  <dig> min after completion of the conditioning trials and tested  <dig> day after injection exhibited a significantly increased preference for the control pattern . we thus conclude that fluphenazine impairs memory recall. we observed, however, that the significance of the difference between the saline-injected group and the fluphenazine-injected group was marginal , probably because aversive second-order conditioning trials yielded only a relatively low level of conditioning effect. on account of the imperfectness of data, the results are in good accordance with our model. it should be noted that alternative models in which different sets of oa/da neurons participate in reinforcement and memory recall do not account for our finding, since these models predict an impairment of second-order conditioning when oa/da receptors are blocked at any stage of conditioning.

discussion
major findings
we found, at first, that epinastine and mianserin, oa receptor antagonists, impair appetitive memory recall without affecting aversive memory recall, whereas fluphenazine, chlorpromazine, and spiperone, da receptor antagonists, impair aversive memory recall without affecting appetitive memory recall, in olfactory and visual pattern learning in crickets. although the specificity of some of antagonists used in this study is not perfect, as we have discussed previously  <cit> , we observed in our previous studies  <cit>  and in this study that different kinds of antagonists had the same effects, that is, all presumed oa or da receptor antagonists impaired only appetitive or aversive conditioning and memory recall, respectively, suggesting that the observed effect is due to the blockade of oa or da receptors. the results of this study suggest that intact synaptic transmission from oa- and da-ergic neurons is needed for the recall of appetitive memory and aversive memory, respectively.

in order to account for this finding, we proposed a model with the assumptions that  two synaptic connections, that is, synaptic connection from neurons representing cs to oa/da neurons representing us  and that from neurons representing cs to neurons that induce cr , are strengthened by conditioning and  activation of both connections is needed to induce cr . in short, our model assumes that two kinds of memory traces are formed by conditioning and that both kinds need to be activated for memory recall. our model predicts that, although injection of oa/da receptor antagonists before first-order conditioning fully impaired conditioning , injection of these drugs before the initial cs1-us pairing stage of the second-order conditioning does not impair second-order conditioning, because blockade of oa/da receptors should not impair the growth of the cs1-us connection, which allows the cs <dig> to activate the oa/da neurons and thus provides reinforcing properties to the cs <dig> at the second cs2-cs <dig> pairing stage. the results of our experiments with second-order conditioning fully supported this prediction.

comparisons with reports on other species of insects
our finding that oa-ergic signaling and da-ergic signaling are needed for appetitive and aversive memory recall, respectively, is in accordance with some previous findings but not with others. in honey bees, hammer  <cit>  reported that a putative oa-ergic neuron, called vummx <dig> neuron, mediates reinforcing properties of sucrose us and that this neuron exhibited increased responses to olfactory cs after conditioning with sucrose us. moreover, based on the results of a study using an oa receptor antagonist, mianserin, and rna interference of expression of the oa receptor gene, farooqui et al.  <cit>  suggested that normal oa-ergic synaptic transmission in the antennal lobe, one of the termination areas of the vummx <dig> neuron, is needed for memory recall in appetitive olfactory conditioning with sucrose us. farooqui et al.  <cit>  argued that activation of the vummx <dig> neuron by olfactory cs is needed for appetitive memory recall, in full accordance with our model. in fruit-flies, it has also been reported that da-ergic neurons innervating the mushroom body exhibited enhanced responses to olfactory cs after pairing olfactory cs with electric shock us  <cit> , but it is not known whether the activation is needed for memory recall.

results of other studies, however, are inconsistent with our findings. a study using transgenic fruit-flies has suggested that intact da-ergic synaptic transmission is not needed for memory recall after pairing olfactory cs with electric shock us  <cit> . in honey bees, it has been reported that injection of oa in the antennal lobe or the calyx of the mushroom body can substitute, at least in part, presentation of sucrose us for achieving olfactory conditioning  <cit> . this finding is not consistent with our model, because it is obvious that memory recall after this substitutive conditioning does not accompany an activation of the vummx <dig> neuron, since injection of oa does not activate the vummx <dig> neuron and thus it is unlikely that synaptic connection for the olfactory cs to activate the vummx <dig> neuron is enhanced by pairing of cs with oa injection, if enhancement of the synaptic transmission requires coincident activation of the pre- and post-synaptic neurons. thus, these findings are consistent with the view that activation of oa- or da-ergic neurons by the cs is not needed for memory recall, thereby supporting conventional s-r models.

based on our findings in crickets and those reported in other species of insects, we propose that activations of oa/da neurons are needed for memory recall in some forms of classical conditioning in insects but not in other forms of classical conditioning. such diversity is noted in classical conditioning in higher vertebrates as is discussed below. the critical factors for the requirement of oa/da-ergic signaling in appetitive/aversive memory recall in insect classical conditioning should be determined.

second-order conditioning has been reported in honey bees  <cit>  and fruit-flies  <cit> , but this study is the first to demonstrate cross-modal second-order conditioning, in which olfactory stimulus was used as cs <dig> and visual stimulus was used as cs <dig>  successful demonstration of cross-modal second-order conditioning indicates that oa/da-ergic neurons that convey reward/punishment signals in olfactory learning can also convey reward/punishment signals in visual learning. this finding supports our proposal  <cit>  that oa/da-ergic neurons serve as general reward/punishment systems, conveying reinforcement signals in the learning of a variety of sensory signals.

an important future subject is to determine the sites of convergence of cs and us for olfactory and visual pattern learning in crickets. in fruit-flies  <cit>  and honey bees  <cit> , the antennal lobe and the mushroom bodies have been considered as sites of convergence of olfactory cs and us in olfactory conditioning. in the cricket acheta domesticus, the mushroom body has been suggested to participate in olfactory learning  <cit> . in fruit-flies, a recent study has suggested that the central complex participates in visual pattern learning  <cit> . thus, the focus of our study should be the antennal lobe, the mushroom bodies, and the central complex. unfortunately, distributions of neurons immunoreactive to oa and da in these brain areas have not been fully characterized in crickets  <cit>  and studies are therefore needed on this subject. a more important subject is to determine the precise locations of two kinds of memory traces.

comparisons with classical conditioning in mammals
in higher vertebrates, two theories to account for classical conditioning have been proposed. in one theory, classical conditioning is viewed as the formation of a new reflex pathway for the cs to evoke a cr, as a result of pairing of the cs with a us . according to this view, an initially insignificant event, cs, is incorporated into the reflex system under the control of a more biologically significant stimulus, us, whenever those two events occur in close temporal contiguity. this view accounts for some forms of classical conditioning in higher vertebrates  <cit> . many other forms of classical conditioning in higher vertebrates, however, have been suggested to involve the formation of connection between neurons representing cs and those representing us . according to this view , associations are formed between internal representation of the cs and that of the us, and the growth of this association permits the cs to activate a representation of the us in the absence of the us itself. this anticipatory activation of the us representation produces the cr. this view is also referred to as the cognitive account of classical conditioning  <cit> , since it assumes the formation of internal representation of the relationship between external sensory events  by conditioning and that its activation leads to memory recall. our model involves both the s-r and s-s connections and is the first to propose that the s-s or cognitive account is applicable to classical conditioning in insects.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that activation of oa- and da-ergic neurons is necessary for appetitive and aversive memory recall, respectively, in crickets. we also suggest that the s-s or cognitive account of classical conditioning proposed for higher vertebrates is applicable to insects. because the brain of insects, which we refers to as 'microbrain'  <cit> , consists of relatively small numbers of neurons and is accessible to various kinds of experimental manipulation  <cit> , insects should emerge as pertinent models for studying neural mechanisms of sophisticated information processing underlying classical conditioning.

