BACKGROUND
the sequencing of the human genome in  <dig> marked the beginning of the genomic era  <cit>  and since then sequencing technology has undergone major improvements and cost reductions  <cit> . the “next generation of sequencers” enables the sequencing of an ever increasing range of genomes quickly, cheaply and with a high degree of accuracy. bold sequencing projects, such as the  <dig>  bacteria genomes, and the  <dig>  vertebrate genomes are revolutionizing life science research and medicine. in medicine, the community is preparing for personal, whole human genomes to become a part of routine care, while a trend to sequence gene panels in human increase until this happens. even the effects of the human microbial community on human health have been described by dna sequencing  <cit> . in the environmental sciences, microbes have been identified that are associated with different ecological processes, and the functional profile of microbial communities can be compared across environments  <cit> . in the pharmaceutical industry, sequencing is used in all aspects research and development. graduates competent in next generation sequencing technologies are needed to support each of these research endeavors, as highlighted in the national research council discussion of metagenomics, clinical pathologists call to action, and nature’s discussion on the requisites in genome-jobs  <cit> .

while the potential application for genomics is extensive, accelerating our scientific discoveries and simultaneously revolutionizing human lives, the training of the next generation of researchers is lagging  <cit> . genomic courses at undergraduate level have been taught at a small number of institutions, however the opportunity for students to gain hands on experience of preparing samples and operating the sequencers is rare. a key aspect in a young scientists’ development is to learn good experimental design practices, which is best achieved by providing experiences across the entire project work flow. in many courses, dna sequences are obtained from projects available on the web  <cit>  or third party resources, and the students annotate new genes, but do not do any of the sequencing process. other courses enable the students to extract the dna, which is sent to a genome center for technicians to sequence  <cit> , and the students annotate the new genomes. while annotation has been shown to engage students in analytical thinking, and can allow significant numbers of students to participate in the scientific process  <cit>  there could be pedagogical and practical value in providing students with opportunities to participate in the whole process, including the sequencing per se. here we test a new way to engage students, having them work directly with next-generation instrumentation to conduct the dna sequencing process from the beginning, then annotating the novel genome they sequenced. we invite the scientific community to consider what might be accomplished by the distributed community of undergraduate scientists using this approach.

the most effective way to teach science is to participate in the scientific process  <cit> . molecular biology has proven adaptable to educational settings. cloning projects have allowed students to become technically proficient and learn other important skills of science, such as critical thinking, troubleshooting and adapting protocols to become independent researchers  <cit> . the development of the “phage hunter” course, where student isolate new phages, obtain sequence data, explore the genomic data, and get to name their phage has been highly successful in training students in scientific discovery and providing new data to science  <cit> . we have built on this excitement of discovery and developed a course that allows undergraduate students to extract, sequence, and analyze novel genomes to become part of sequencing and annotating the tree of life.

the first series of courses in ecological genomics was taught in  <dig> at san diego state university. in the ecological metagenomics course,  <dig> students sequenced novel dna from microbes, metagenomes and marine mammals. the students were provided with interdisciplinary training in genomics, experience in research, and generated data that is being used by an international consortium to investigate the genomic signature of cancers in the california sea lions. as a template for others to generate next generation dna sequencing courses, here we describe the ecological metagenomics course, results of student affective surveys, learning outcomes, data quality, and initial findings of the first marine mammal genome sequenced and annotated by undergraduate students.

RESULTS
ecological metagenomics courses
a practical course in dna sequencing and annotating novel genomes from start to finish with a next-generation sequencer was offered to upper division undergraduates and graduate students as a lecture and laboratory course and was open to students across biology and computer sciences. the syllabus is provided in additional file 1: table s <dig>  the goals of the course were to: 1) introduce and use a next generation sequencer and analyse the data, 2) engage the students in research projects sequencing novel genomes, and 3) understand the importance of genomics to areas of biology and ecology. the students were novices in the genomics field as measured by an introductory quiz of the students’ knowledge . none of the students knew when the human genome was sequenced, how much it cost, or how long it took to complete. the students had not been introduced to genomics in earlier classes and had not considered genomics as a research or career area.

the course was taught using a  <dig> flx titanium sequencer, and covered the entire dna sequencing process. each process has multiple steps and requires students to follow complex protocols and carefully conduct the steps in a time sensitive manner. conducted by one person the process takes about 3 days. to fit all of the components into the course, in which the students were only in the lab for 3 hours one day a week and ensure that the students had practice in all steps; the process was redesigned to seven modules that were taught on a rotational basis. similar adaptations could be made for all sequencing platforms. therefore, every student played a part in every sequence run, the sequencer was run most weeks, and sequences were ready for analysis early in the semester .

the course focused on sequencing the california sea lion  and the microbial communities from the kelp forest where the sea lion hunts. the different organisms piqued each student’s interest, and the range of genome sizes provided different characteristics that were useful in practical conduct of the course. for example, the large genomes provided a control sample that could be sequenced multiple times at the same titration level throughout the course, facilitating the students’ introduction to the sequencer, and providing the instructor a tool to evaluate each student’s progress. the microbial samples allowed the students to culture organisms and extract dna for sequencing. because each microbial genome library was different, the students were required to calculate the titration level for each library. by calculating the titration levels , the students understood the effect of varying dna quantity on the sequencing quality.

several metrics were used to determine the success of the ecological metagenomics course, including quality of sequences data, course evaluation, student self-confidence, and student learning. the quality of the data produced by the students was assessed using the quality control targets set by the manufacture, sequencing number and average length, and contamination levels. course evaluation was administered at the end to assess whether the students had perceived that the course had met its education goals. self-confidence and learning surveys were administered at the beginning and end of the course. student learning was measured by changes in responses to  <dig> open-ended questions . changes in students’ self-confidence in their ability to sequence dna and to conduct scientific research were measured using scales adapted for this particular course  <cit> . both scales were found to be reliable  and changes were measured using a matched-pairs t-test.

the california sea lion genome case study
the california sea lion, zalophus californianus, is a coastal sea lion that ranges from the west coast of southern alaska to the baja peninsula in mexico  <cit> . the california sea lion population is growing and while iconic for the california students, they are often in conflict with humans because they exploit prized fisheries such as swordfish and salmon  <cit> . the california sea lion is most closely related to the galapagos sea lion and the extinct japanese sea lion  <cit> . sequencing mammal genomes provides information on evolution and identifies genes that are responsible for specific traits, in this case the return of a land mammal to a semi-aquatic habitat. many mammalian diseases have a genetic component and identifying linages specific genomic changes may shed light on defects in related organisms. understanding structural and functional features that influence genome size and evolution may be important in ecological and population studies designed to address issues relating to coastal conservation. the california sea lion is the first marine mammal genome, the first from the suborder pinnipedia, and the fourth carnivore to be sequenced. the assembled dna totals  <dig> , <dig>  bp with  <dig> ,265 bp in contigs > 10 kb, and  <dig>  bp in contigs > 15 kb. the n <dig> sizes are  <dig>  bp for all contigs,  <dig>  for the 10 kb contigs, and  <dig>  for the 15 kb contigs, suggesting high quality sequencing. the sea lion data is available from http://www.sealiongenome.org upon request and will be released after publication from ncbi.

the sea lion genome is  <dig> % repeats , which is consistent with carnivores, including the dog   <cit>  and the panda   <cit> . the level of repeats is ~ 10% less than the human genome  <cit> . the repeat regions were dominated by the line <dig> category, similar to other carnivores. in contrast alu repeat sequences, which are abundant in the primate linage  <cit> , were not present in the student sea lion genome, showing minimal human dna contamination of the sequences. the mitochondria dna was completely sequenced and showed a 100% sequence identity to california sea lion mitochondria from ncbi accession number am <dig> . the phylogenetic comparison of the mitochondria placed it within a group containing other sea lions and fur seals .

course outcomes
to assess the outcomes of the course, we examined the quality of student data, course evaluations, changes in students’ self-confidence, and student learning. at the end of the course , the students had sequenced  <dig> bacterial genomes,  <dig> metagenomes and approximately 5x coverage of the sea lion genome. the students met the manufacturers recommended key quality targets for the sequencing process. targets include correctly sized libraries , bead recovery  and enrichment levels . each run of the sequencer should provide approximately  <dig>  to a million sequences. the number of sequences will depend on the dna quality and the operation of the sequencer. there are various filters built into the sequencing software, these include removal of short sequences and those of poor quality. therefore, a successful run should have about  <dig> million beads loaded onto the plate  and a good quality run will retain ~ 50% of these sequences, which was shown in the three randomly chosen students’ runs . to analyse the quality of the data, the length of the sequence can be assessed. the sequences on a single run will range in length with a tight peak of sequences around the average length for the individual sequencer. the length of sequences obtained from a plate sequenced by the students was compared to one from a professional lab and it shows the students had a peak of sequences around the 500 bp long, with few short sequences .

human contamination is a potential problem with novice users. human contamination is difficult to discern in eukaryotic dna, because there is an over whelming bias of human dna sequences in the databases. therefore, the amount of contamination in the metagenomics samples was calculated using blast. a metagenome is a random sample taken from a microbial community and contains short sequences that are generated from different microbial taxa and different genes  <cit> . the metagenomes are microbial and therefore should contain very few sequences similar to human dna . as shown in additional file 1: table s <dig>  almost no human dna matches were found suggesting the students were not sequencing themselves. another test of the quality of the sequences generated by the students would be to see whether the proportion of sequences in the metagenomes that show similarity to microbes or functional genes were similar to those described in the metagenomes from the literature. the microbial communities sequenced by the students had between 37–76% of the sequences that showed similarity to various bacteria and archaea and  <dig> – 53% of sequences similar to known functional genes, similar to that of an externally sequenced metagenome . the proportions sequences similar to known organisms in the student sequenced metagenomes is similar to those describes for other marine samples in the literature  <cit> , further suggesting that the student were generating usable sequence data.

the students’ final project was a formal report where they described the characteristic of the genomes, specific metabolic pathways or suggested how the features of genome contribute to the activity of the organism. the students investigated viral, bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic genomes using  <dig> billion bp of sequence data and some of their project titles, amount of sequence examined and brief findings of the students is shown in additional file 1: table s <dig>  several of the ecological student reports are in the final stages of manuscript preparation for submission to peer reviewed journals and sequences generated by the class have contributed to two publications  <cit>  and two new genome descriptions  <cit> .

the students  evaluated the ecological metagenomics course relative to its goals of; 1) to introduce and use a next generation sequencer and analyse the data, 2) to engage the students in research projects sequencing novel genomes, and 3) to understand the importance of genomics to areas of biology and ecology) as  <dig>   out of  <dig>  a mean rating of  <dig>    was given to the students’ perceived confidence in conducting the  <dig> modules described in figure  <dig>  lower scores were given to the analysis section . a major objective of the ecological genomics series is to increase student ability to conduct research. on two different measures assessed, there was a significant increase in scientific competency. students’ self-confidence in their ability to conduct dna sequencing  increased from  <dig>   to  <dig>   . students’ perceived confidence to conduct scientific research  increased  <dig>   to  <dig>   test . the students showed an increased confidence in conducting projects where 1) no one knows the outcome, 2) they have input into the process, 3) they need to work as a whole class and 4) they have responsibility for part of the process . the students increased in their ability to interpret primary literature, present data and keep a lab book. skills required in becoming a successful scientist. the students did not vary in the ability to listen to lectures, take notes, read a textbook or work on set problems, all skills they learned in traditional courses, but these activities were not a focus of this capstone course. the change in the student perceptions match the types of activities that were conducted in class and therefore the class was highly successful. all students would recommend the course to other students and had extremely positive comments about the course and some are listed in table  <dig>  students increased their knowledge about genomics by discussing journal articles, analysing the large amounts of data, and writing a formal report about their data. the students’ scores  on the pre and post quiz almost doubled from  <dig>   at the beginning of the class to  <dig>   at the end of the class . for example, students were unable to answer question  <dig>  “describe how pyrosequencing works” at the beginning of the class but provided at least a ½ page answer at the end of the course. in addition to the sequencing concepts, at the beginning of the course the students did not know about the activity of microbes and viruses in the environment and afterwards they were able to provide detailed descriptions of metagenomics and the information that was obtained by sequencing environmental microbes and viruses.

discussion
in a time when education and research are suffering budgetary constraints, introducing a sequencing based course into undergraduate training was high risk, but has returned high rewards. publishable quality data has been generated and the students were provided with state of the art training. new technology engages students  <cit> , and the genomics course merges the new technologies of metagenomics and next generation sequencing. while the sequencing technology is changing rapidly, by conducting the process on one instrument the students will be able to understand the new developments and the gains that the students made in terms of thinking like a scientists will last them a lifetime. the course inspired students to follow a genomic career path and several are employed in related industries or continued their education in the genomic arena. career pathways that are not only highly relevant in today’s society, but ones they had not considered prior to taking the course. the students have gained knowledge and skills that are not offered in traditional lecture- and laboratory-based course which follow a cook book approach. instead, these students are engaged in real research, and generating data that is useful to researchers across the world. data will be released through seed, mg_rast and ncbi upon publication.

the course is cross-disciplinary, bringing together biologists and computer science students. in genomics, bioinformatics and analysis of the resultant data has now become the bottleneck of most sequencing projects. part of the problem arises from a lack of training in both biology and computer science. this course has the two groups of students working side by side, the computer scientists learned biology and the biologists learn some of the computational constraints and both groups of students learned research techniques. enabling collaboration of these students at an early stage will help the progress of bioinformatics in the future.

the lab is costly, time and instructor intensive, but the reward are large as it provides students with research experience in a technology of the future and acts as a recruitment tool for the life sciences. there are several problems inherent in teaching students dna sequencing, 1) the potential of human contamination, 2) contamination of the environmental dna with linkers or other cross-contamination of samples, 3) damage to the equipment with inexperienced researchers, and 4) establishing metrics to enable the assessment of good laboratory practices. using basic laboratory sterile techniques successfully limited contamination issues. setting the course up on a rotational basis by having students working in different rooms and leaving after each step stopped cross-contamination with linkers. the students were closely guided when operating the sequencer and recognized the opportunity, thus respected the equipment and no damage to the sequencer occurred during the course. by dividing the protocols up into lab timed blocks, the whole sequencing process takes longer than would be recommended by the manufacturer, but the time lag did not lead to noticeable reduction in yield. the time lag made it difficult to respond to any sequencing issues, such as over or under enrichment. keeping track of each part of the process being conducted by each group of student was initially difficult and therefore a new online database that could be accessed by students and instructors was developed and would be available to other researchers on request. as with any course, pedagogical goals were reinforced by repeatedly covering material and using assessments to reinforce learning outcomes.

CONCLUSIONS
dna sequencing is one of the fastest growing fields in the life sciences; however students have problems relating to the concepts because of the complexities, amounts of data, cross-disciplinary and microscopic nature of the process  <cit> . by providing students with the opportunity to use a sequencer and sequence novel organisms, some of the mystery of sequencing was removed and the students were motivated to explore the complex data. students attended capstone courses, became part of many research projects, including an international consortium, and were provided training to enter the genomic era. many students have continued their scientific careers in either the academic or industry side of the business, suggesting the power of dna sequencing to recruit much needed talent to the life sciences and extend the capacity and use of dna sequencing. the best summary of the course comes from the students “this course is a ‘must have’ in the resume of any molecular biologists, graduate or undergraduate. the technology we were able to use and the research projects we have been part of constitute an unbelievable asset that without any doubt will be very useful in our professional futures”.

