BACKGROUND
resistance to xenobiotics  is a problem limiting our ability to control organisms of a medical or economic importance. multiple resistance, where organisms harbour separate mutations conferring resistance against more than one type of xenobiotic, poses an even greater problem. furthermore, the number of cases documenting multiple resistance are increasing in frequency and involve a broad range of target organisms, including; viruses  <cit> , bacteria  <cit> , fungi  <cit> , plants  <cit> , and insects  <cit> .

while little can prevent the emergence of resistance, short of stopping xenobiotic use, it should be possible to manage resistance in target populations by regulating how, when, and which xenobiotics are used. to do so, it is important to understand the evolutionary dynamics of resistance in both the presence and absence of xenobiotic selection pressure. this is because the extent to which a target population experiences these two types of environment will have a strong influence on the frequency of resistance and the rate at which it changes. for example, migration of susceptible and resistant individuals between treated and untreated areas influences spatial and temporal variations in the frequency of insecticide resistance alleles in populations of the peach-potato aphid myzus persicae,  <cit>  and culex pipiens mosquitoes  <cit> . in each case, resistance alleles provide a fitness benefit to their bearers in the presence of a particular insecticide and can rapidly increase in frequency within populations. however in the absence of insecticide pressure, these resistance alleles are often associated with fitness costs that lead to them decreasing in frequency as resistant individuals are out-competed by susceptible rivals. for example, resistant individuals have been found to have lower mating success  <cit> , be more susceptible to natural enemies  <cit> , or more prone to mortality during over-wintering  <cit> . however, there are some counter-examples where resistant individuals show a gain in their fitness relative to susceptible rivals in untreated areas. the traits involved include greater mating success  <cit> , and being less susceptible to the costs of natural enemies  <cit> . thus it is important to identify traits that might be affected by resistance alleles and contexts in which they may influence fitness.

far less information is available to estimate the dynamics of multiple resistance where resistance to more than one type of xenobiotic is conferred by the presence of resistance alleles at more than one locus. this situation is potentially more complex as resistance alleles could interact with one another to affect the fitness of their bearers, and these interactions could depend on the environmental context determined by the presence/absence of one or more xenobiotic. indeed, there is evidence from natural populations of mosquitoes that the frequency of doubly-resistant individuals in untreated areas depart from hardy-weinberg expectations, indicating that alleles at different loci in these populations do interact with one another to affect the fitness of their bearers  <cit> , and available data suggests a similar pattern may be occurring in aphids  <cit> . in addition, it is known that the efficacy of a xenobiotic can depend on the presence of other xenobiotics in the environment, such that the combined activity of two xenobiotics is greater  or less  than expected based on the sum of activity for each compound separately  <cit> . furthermore, whether two xenobiotics act synergistically or antagonistically can depend on the presence or absence of a particular resistance allele in the target individual, as has been found for carbamate and pyrethroid activity against culex quinquefasciatus mosquitoes with or without the ace-1r allele at the ace- <dig> locus  <cit> . hence, the evolutionary dynamics of multiple resistance are open to modification by interactions among alleles at different loci within the organism, interactions involving alleles and toxins in the environment, and interactions among toxins in the environment. identifying these interactions and how they influence the fitness of multiply resistant organisms could provide useful information for operational strategies of resistance management and throw light on the physiological processes underlying them.

in the following article, we investigated the fitness effects of two insecticide resistance alleles, ace-1r and kdrr, in four strains of c. quinquefasciatus that differed in harbouring only one resistance allele , both alleles, or neither allele . these mutations confer resistance to carbamate and pyrethroid insecticides, respectively. as an important vector of west nile virus in north america  <cit> , and a major vector of bancroftian filariasis in africa  <cit> , c. quinquefasciatus is frequently subject to control by insecticides, including the two mentioned above. the two resistance alleles involved in this study are present in natural mosquito populations, and some populations harbour both mutations  <cit> . thus, multiple resistance is a potential problem in these populations.

a insecticide resistance alleles are in bold. all strains are homozygous at both loci

fitness estimates for resistance alleles, including any potential interactions among them, can vary according to the genetic background in which they are expressed  <cit> , and on the environmental conditions in which they are measured  <cit> . to control for the first factor, the two resistance alleles involved in this study were separately backcrossed into a common and susceptible genetic background provided by the slab strain of c. quinquefasciatus  <cit> . the doubly-resistant strain was derived by backcrossing the two singly-resistant strains . hence, differences between strains could be directly attributed to the expression of resistance alleles in a standard genetic environment. measurements of fitness were performed in standardised laboratory conditions that differed only in the presence/absence of one or both insecticides, thereby minimising other potentially confounding sources of genotype-by-environment interactions.

RESULTS
fitness costs associated with resistance alleles
there were costs associated with insecticide resistance in an insecticide-free environment . strains differed in the average probability of female emergence , with a tukey-kramer hsd test finding emergence from the susceptible slab strain to be significantly greater than for the three resistant strains. the same test also found the emergence of strains bc and bcsr to not be different, and that both were significantly greater than for strain sr. in other words, doubly-resistant females from strain bcsr, harbouring both ace-1r and kdrr alleles, were significantly more likely to reach adulthood than singly-resistant females of strain sr with only the ace-1r allele.

insecticide interactions
the dose-effect curves for permethrin, carbosulfan and their mixtures on the mortality of adult female mosquitoes of each strain  are shown in figure  <dig>  for each strain, the dose-mortality relationships were sigmoidal. mortality in control batches never exceeded 10%. median lethal doses for these relationships are listed in table  <dig> 

a estimates within a column that differ in super-script letter are significantly different 

the susceptible strain slab showed, a limited degree of synergy in activity, especially when the treatment doses applied induced <80% mortality. that is, the mixture of insecticides was more potent or effective than would be expected if each had acted in an independent and additive manner. however, at higher doses inducing >80% mortality, the two compounds acted in an additive fashion . in contrast, the two insecticides acted antagonistically when applied to the carbamate-resistant strain sr, especially once >25% of the mosquitoes were killed during assays . hence, the combination of insecticides was less efficient than would be expected had each acted separately in an additive fashion. a simple additive effect was found for the pyrethroid-resistant bc strain in the low to medium range of insecticide activity, while at high doses antagonistic behaviour was observed . finally, the doubly resistant strain bcsr, showed striking synergism between the pyrethroid and carbamate activity  indicating the mix of insecticides was more efficient at killing mosquitoes than if each had acted additively.

discussion
evolutionary theory predicts that mutations of large phenotypic effect, such as resistance mutations, are likely to be costly to their bearers in environments where they were not selected  <cit> . we found costs associated with both resistance mutations in an insecticide-free environment . significantly fewer females emerged as adults from resistant strains sr and bc in comparison to the susceptible control strain slab. these costs could be associated with how the resistance mutations influence the nervous system. in strain sr, the ace-1r mutation causes hyper-activity of nervous systems due to a modified acetylcholinesterase  that is less efficient at catalysing the breakdown of acetylcholine  bound to nicotinic receptors at the post-synaptic membrane  <cit> . in the field, fewer homozygotes of ace-1r were found than would be expected from the hardy-weinberg ratio, indicating reduced viability of these homozygotes  <cit> . recent findings from studies on drosophila melanogaster suggest these costs could directly arise from a reduced stability of the enzyme due to changes in its deacetylation  <cit> . in contrast, lee et al. observed changes in the pharmacological and biophysical properties of sodium channels in heliothis virescens moths with pyrethroid resistance due to a kdr mutation  <cit> . these changes were found to cause sluggish neural activity in the absence of pyrethroids and were characterized by decreased cellular and behavioural excitability of sodium channels  <cit> . the kdr mutation enhances closed-state inactivation of nerves, meaning that more stimulation is required before nerves fire and release ach into the synaptic cleft in comparison with susceptible individuals  <cit> .

the fitness of the bcsr strain harbouring both ace-1r and kdrr was of particular interest. reduced female emergence, relative to the susceptible slab strain, showed there were costs of resistance for this strain. however, the costs of harbouring both resistance alleles were significantly less than for strain sr only harbouring the ace-1r mutation . we speculate that the relatively greater costs associated with a reduced efficiency of ach degradation at the post-synaptic terminal  could be partially compensated for by a more sluggish release of ach at the pre-synaptic terminal . this hypothesis of how the two alleles interact at the functional level could be tested by electrophysiological examination of the synaptic activity of insects harbouring only one resistance allele , both alleles, or neither allele.

the reduced costs experienced by strain bcsr relative to strain sr in an insecticide-free environment are noteworthy as they illustrate that one resistance allele can act as a compensatory mutation for another resistance allele, and both can be mutations of large effect. our results would predict the addition of kdrr, by mutation or recombination, to a genotype with ace-1r already present would reduce the strength of selection against ace-1r in an insecticide-free environment. thus not only would the strength of selection against ace-1r be reduced in untreated populations, but this allele would remain for longer in untreated populations in mosquitoes with both resistance alleles and that were resistant to both carbamate and pyrethroid insecticides, rather than in mosquitoes only resistant to carbamates. although this prediction can only strictly be applied to c. quinquefasciatus mosquitoes of the slab strain, the role of compensatory activity among resistance alleles on the evolution and control of multiple resistance warrants general investigation, as this experiment provides evidence that it can occur.

we also found evidence that resistance alleles interacted with one another in the presence of both insecticides. when mosquitoes were tested against mixtures of permethrin and carbosulfan, strain slab showed evidence for additive activity of the two insecticides at high doses , while bc showed additive activity at low to medium doses . in contrast, there was a synergy of activity at low doses when both insecticides were tested against slab , but this effect was more striking for the doubly-resistant bcsr strain . this latter result confirms previous studies involving the slab strain  <cit> , where these studies showed both insecticides complemented each other as both cause ach to accumulate in synaptic clefts. furthermore, at sufficiently high concentrations, ach simulates the activity of muscarinic receptors m <dig> at the pre-synaptic terminal  <cit> . simulation of these receptors inhibits further release of ach into the synaptic cleft. this enhanced negative feedback inhibition of ach release effectively shuts down neural activity and leads to the insect's death.

there was synergism in insecticide activity when applied to bcsr, but antagonism for strain sr . we cannot currently explain this result. although the mode of action for pyrethroids and carbamates against susceptible insects have described in detail  <cit> , it is less clear as to how they induce mortality when organisms harbour multiple resistance alleles. from a physiological point of view, point mutations in sodium channels and acetylcholinesterase are responsible for reduced insecticide sensitivity in several insect species  <cit> . consequently, when the primary targets of insecticides become insensitive , higher doses are required to achieve equivalent mortality and secondary target sites may be involved. in doing so, they add to the number of events influencing neuronal activity and the pathways by which insecticides can act and interact with one another, e.g., gaba receptor – ionophore complex or chloride channel and muscarinic receptors have been shown to be secondary target sites for pyrethroids and carbamates, respectively  <cit> . to our knowledge, the only publication investigating the functional costs of harbouring multiple resistance alleles was published by bourguet et al. in  <dig>  <cit> . in this article the authors showed ache activity in the sr strain of c. quinquefasciatus was unaffected by the treatment of propoxur , even at doses of insecticides inducing 100% mortality. this lead to the suspicion that mortality of sr larvae was not due to ache inhibition, but to the insecticide interacting with another target site, known as choline acetyltransferase, or chat, which is involved in ach synthesis  <cit> . this hypothesis was supported by the behavioural abnormality of moribund larvae due to a lack of ach in the synapse and the fact that in vitro inhibition of chat activity was caused by doses of propoxur inducing mortality of the sr strain  <cit> .

a greater understanding of the mechanisms involved in what determines positive or negative interactions of insecticide activity will require further toxicological and electrophysiological studies involving single- and multiple-resistance alleles in appropriate environments where their effects can be directly compared and contrasted.

CONCLUSIONS
our results show the resistance alleles ace-1r and kdrr interact with one another to influence the fitness of c. quinquefasciatus mosquitoes in a laboratory environment, and that they did so in both the presence and absence of insecticides. a particularly interesting, and potentially worrying, observation was that kdrr could compensate for the costs of ace-1r in an insecticide-free environment. this would predict selection against ace-1r in untreated environments would be slower in mosquitoes resistant to both pyrethroid and carbamate insecticides, rather than just resistant to carbamates. more needs to be done to verify if this is an isolated interaction or if it more widely reflects how resistance alleles may interact. we also found a female mosquito's resistance status influenced whether mixtures of carbamate and pyrethroid insecticides had additive, synergistic or antagonistic activity. overall these results suggest the evolutionary dynamics of resistance will be difficult to predict in populations where multiple resistance mutations are present or that are subject to treatment by different xenobiotics.

