BACKGROUND
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  is a neurodegenerative disorder affecting motoneurons in the spinal cord, brainstem and motor cortex and leading to denervation, muscular atrophy, paralysis and premature death  <cit> . the disease is sporadic in approximately 90% of cases  <cit>  and the correlation between the pathology and an identified gene mutation is known only in a small percentage of cases   <cit> .

glutamate-induced excitotoxicity may be one of the main factors in als pathogenesis  <cit> . both glial and neuronal glutamate transporters play a pivotal role in avoiding excitotoxicity by removing the excess of glutamate released into the synaptic cleft from presynaptic neurons and consequently preventing the overstimulation of post-synaptic glutamate receptors. evidence of abnormal glutamate metabolism and impaired expression of the glial glutamate transporter  <dig>  in als patients suggests that glutamate-induced excitotoxicity plays a key role in generating this disease  <cit> . glutamate overstimulation can act through both the n-methyl-d-aspartate  receptors and the alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate/kainate ionotropic  receptors, generating an excessive influx of ca++ and na+ in neurons and the subsequent activation of damaging pathways, leading to motoneuron death  <cit> . another source of motoneuron vulnerability involves a change of ca++ conductance in ampa receptors. the relative ca++ permeability of native ampa receptors in neurons is inversely correlated with the rate of edited glur <dig> and the differences in this ca++ permeability between various neuronal cell types could be an important constituent of selective vulnerability  <cit> . it has been widely demonstrated that different neuronal cell types can differ in glur <dig> expression, in the rate of glur <dig> editing and in the desensitisation properties of their ampa receptors  <cit>  and such differences may be related to the selective vulnerability of motoneurons in als. glur <dig> mrna levels in motoneurons are the lowest among the human neuronal populations considered  <cit> . in addition, in a subset of als patients, the editing of glur <dig> is defective, causing increased ca++ permeability to the ampa receptor  <cit> , that enhances ca++-dependent pathways and leads to motoneurons death  <cit> .

although these results suggest glutamate-induced excitotoxicity is involved in als, it is almost impossible to verify this in humans because of the impossibility of studying cerebral tissues during the clinical course of the disease. therefore animal models of motoneuron degeneration can provide a reliable tool for investigating alterations of parameters potentially involved in the human disease, mainly during the early phases.

the wobbler mouse, originally characterized and described by falconer  <cit> , carries a mutation in a gene coding for a protein involved in the retrograde transport from endosomes to the trans golgi network   <cit> . at the end of the symptomatic phase  the number of motoneurons in the cervical region is reduced by about 65%. wobbler mice show progressive atrophy of foreleg muscles, with marked loss of muscle strength and motor ability.

although several pharmacological treatments have been tested in wobbler mice and a full ultrastructural characterization of degenerating motoneurons has already been carried out  <cit> , the possible role of glutamate-induced excitotoxicity in motoneuron death in these mice is far from clear. no changes in the glt- <dig> and glast glutamate transporters were reported in cervical spinal cord at different stages of disease  <cit>  and results on glutamate receptor binding autoradiography in wobbler spinal cord tend to vary  <cit> .

to better elucidate the role of glutamate receptors in this model of motoneuron disease, we focused on the expression and localisation of ampa and nmda receptor subunits. we performed western blot experiments to evaluate the protein levels of the different ampa  and nmda  receptor subunits both in whole homogenates and in triton-insoluble post-synaptic fraction   <cit>  from cervical and lumbar spinal cord. since motoneurons represent only a small percentage of the heterogeneous tissue of spinal cord, we also investigated ampa and nmda receptor subunits by immunohistochemical experiments, to obtain information both on the levels of protein expression and on the cellular localization in motoneurons of cervical and lumbar spinal cord in healthy and diseased mice at two different phases of the disease.

RESULTS
immunohistochemistry for ampa and nmda receptors
cervical region
glur1
the patterns of staining for glur <dig> in the whole cervical spinal cord of four-week-old wobbler mice and healthy littermates e shown in figure  <dig>  panels a, i. in both sections there was marked immunoreactivity in the dorsal horns and weak but homogenous staining in whole gray matter; the white matter was almost unstained for glur <dig>  no real differences were seen between wobbler and healthy mice sections.

glur2
glur <dig> immunoreactivity in the cervical spinal cord of four-week-old wobbler mice and healthy littermates is shown in figure  <dig>  panels b, j. glur <dig> showed an intense staining in the whole gray matter, mainly in the dorsal horns and in neurons of ventral horns. in the anterior horn, large neurons in the lamina ix showed intense immunoreactivity. no marked differences were seen between healthy mice  and wobbler mice .

the distribution and localization of glur <dig> immunostaining in anterior horn neurons of the cervical spinal cord in four-week-old wobbler mice and healthy littermates is shown in figure  <dig>  panels f, n. motoneurons were intensely stained in wobbler mice  and healthy littermates . the same pattern of staining for glur <dig> was seen in surviving motoneurons in 12-week-old wobbler mice .

glur3
cervical spinal cord sections showed strong immunostaining for glur <dig> in the dorsal horns, both in wobbler and healthy littermates . the anterior horn showed spotty staining, mainly in the central and lateral columns of lamina ix motoneurons. observation of the anterior horn at higher magnification clearly confirmed that this strong immunoreactivity for glur <dig> was related to large neurons.

as shown in figure  <dig>  panels g and o, glur <dig> was markedly expressed in the whole surface of the cell body in motoneurons of the cervical spinal cord and also in the proximal region of its prolongations, likely axons. there was no marked difference in localization, distribution and density of staining for glur <dig> in motoneurons between wobbler mice  and healthy littermates  in either the presymptomatic or late symptomatic stage .

glur4
staining for glur <dig> was mainly localized in the dorsal horns. in the cervical region of four-week-old wobbler mice modest but detectable immunostaining was also observed in the anterior horns, but in fibers more than in cell bodies . observation of anterior horn neurons at higher magnification clearly revealed a marked immunoreactivity around the nuclear area and a weaker signal in the periphery in unaffected , in early  and late symptomatic mice .

nr <dig> and nr2a
different to nr <dig> immunostaining the immunoreactivity of nr2a was nearly absent in dorsal and central areas and was mainly concentrated in ventral neurons . in motoneurons the immunoreactivity for nr2a was detectable in the surface corresponding to the cell body and in its arborizations ; this pattern of staining was similar in healthy mice and in motoneurons of late symptomatic wobbler mice which are not yet degenerated.

lumbar region
immunohistochemistry experiments for ampa and mnda receptor subunits in the lumbar tract of 4- and 12-week-old wobbler and control mice showed the same patterns of staining as in the cervical . no difference between unaffected and diseased mice were found in this region.

colocalisation experiments
gfap immunostaining in the cervical region of 12-week-old healthy mice  and in age-matched wobbler mice  confirms that reactive gliosis was exclusively present in affected mice. gfap positive cells were mainly localized in the anterior horn, close to the injured area. this difference was already detectable in early symptomatic wobbler mice .

the merge between nissl staining , gfap immunoreactivity  and glur <dig> expression  is shown in figure 3j. glur <dig> was almost exclusively expressed in nissl-positive cells, either in large or in small neurons, while colocalisation between gfap and this subunit was very weak and spare.

glur <dig> immunoreactivity, figure 3q, was very low and confined to large nissl-positive neurons , whereas gfap-positive cells  showed no colocalisation with this subunit . interestingly, colocalisation experiments in the white matter of anterior horn in the same section, figure  <dig>  panels w-z, showed a clear pattern of colocalisation  between gfap-positive radial glia  and glur <dig> .

to clarify the subcellular distribution of ampa receptor subunits, double staining experiments were done in the cervical region of four-week-old wobbler mice and healthy littermates.

western blotting analysis
ampa and nmda receptor subunit protein levels were examined by western blot analysis in whole homogenate and tif prepared from cervical and lumbar spinal cord of 4- and 12-week-old wobbler mice and healthy littermates. protein yields were similar in tif from all groups and the same amount of whole homogenate and tif proteins was applied to sds-gel and electroblotted. at both stages of the disease no differences between wobbler mice and healthy littermates were found in the levels of expression of any proteins in the homogenate fractions, in either lumbar or cervical spinal cord region . alterations in the protein levels in the tif were observed in late symptomatic wobbler mice aged  <dig> weeks , but not in early symptomatic mice.

the quantification of the optical densities of proteins in whole homogenate fraction and tif, performed in two different experiments from the cervical region of 12-week-old wobbler mice, is shown in figure  <dig>  mean values from wobbler mice were expressed as percentage of the mean values obtained from healthy littermates.

although statistical comparison cannot be performed, the quantification showed that there was a strong reduction for nr2a and glur <dig> in the tif, but not in whole homogenate. in tif of 12-week-old wobbler mice glur <dig> and glur <dig> were reduced to a lower extent.

in the lumbar spinal cord there was no change of glutamate receptor subunits for the tif compartment even though a surprising increase in nr2a was detected in lumbar region of four-week-old of wobbler mice.

gfap levels in whole homogenates of cervical spinal cord in either 4- and 12-week-old wobbler mice are markedly increased  <cit> , however no gfap expression in tif samples was found from cervical and lumbar spinal cord of wobbler mice and healthy littermates at four and  <dig> weeks of age .

discussion
nr2a and glur <dig> receptor subunits in tif samples from the cervical spinal of cord wobbler mice decreased only in the late stage of the disease, when the two thirds of motoneurons were lost, but not in the early stage. this is an important point of discussion because between the fourth and fifth weeks of life the rate of motoneuron death peaks in the cervical region of wobbler mice , but no simultaneous alteration in the expression of ampa and nmda receptors in post-synaptic densities are present. the lack of lowering of ampa and nmda receptor subunits levels in tif from early symtpomatic wobbler mice, when at least 25% of motoneurons are lost, might be to due to the fact that post-synaptic densities are not only related to motoneurons, and our immunohistochemical experiments clearly showed that ampa and nmda receptor subunits are expressed in almost all neuronal populations, particularly the dorsal horn neurons.

in addition, immunohistochemical studies indicated that the localisation and the distribution of ampa and nmda receptor subunits in the whole cervical region of both early and late symptomatic wobbler mice was no different from that of healthy littermates. it is of interest that the decrease of ampa and nmda receptor in tif was not found in the lumbar spinal cord region, in either early or late stages of the disease, where motoneurons were not lost. these observations suggest that the decrease in glur <dig> and nr2a receptor subunits in tif from the cervical spinal cord of late symptomatic wobbler mice might be a consequence of motoneuron loss. differently from the tif, the whole homogenate fraction from cervical region of 12-week-old wobbler mice and healthy littermates contained the same amounts of ampa and nmda receptor subunits. however, tif includes glutamate receptors expressed in the post-synaptic densities of spinal neurons, and the glial component was nearly absent in this preparation  <cit> . our study using triple-immunofluorescence experiments showed that glur <dig> and nr2a were highly expressed in activated astrocytes, and marked reactive gliosis selectively occurs in the cervical spinal cord of wobbler mice during the progression of the disease  <cit> . thus, in the whole homogenate from affected region, the expression of glur <dig> and nr2a receptors in activated astrocytes may partially mask the difference of these subunits found in tif.

although in the cervical region of wobbler mouse there is no evidence of increased glutamate release from the corticospinal tract, a defective mechanism regulating glutamate/glutamine synthesis and/or influx or efflux in purified cultures of astrocytes from symptomatic wobbler mice has been reported  <cit> . our study evidenced that astrocytes in the cervical region of wobbler mice lack the ca++ impermeable ampa receptor subunits  and suggests an interesting scenario about neurons-glia crosstalk in wobbler motoneuron disease. further investigation of the susceptibility to excitotoxic agents in motoneurons from the cervical spinal cord of wobbler mice would help to characterize the involvement of glutamate-induced excitotoxicity in this model.

a less direct but nevertheless reliable approach to study the different sensitivity of ampa receptors in wobbler mice is chronic treatment with ampa antagonists.

their protective role has been reported in different models of motoneuron degeneration. the non-competitive ampa antagonist zk <dig> significantly reduced the symptoms of neuromuscular deficit and improved the motor behavioural impairment in both sod1g93a and mnd mice, and extended the survival of sod1g93a transgenic mice  <cit> . in these latter, the competitive ampa antagonist rpr <dig> significantly improved muscle strength and prolonged survival  <cit> . we did not find beneficial effects after chronic treatment of wobbler mice with rpr <dig> on the progression of the disease, the rate of motoneuron loss and biceps atrophy  <cit> .

regarding the role of nmda receptor-mediated injury in wobbler mice, it has been reported that treatment with the non-competitive nmda receptor antagonist +-5-methyl- <dig> -dihydro-5h-dibenzocyclopheten- <dig> -imine maleate , did not delay the progression of the disease  <cit> . our characterization seems to be in accordance with this result, suggesting that altered expression of nmda receptor subunits is not involved in the early symptomatic phase of the disease.

although further experiments with other ampa and nmda receptor antagonists are required to confirm our results, this pharmacological evidence adds relevance to the results reported in the present study and makes even more convincing that no alteration in glutamate receptors is involved in the wobbler mouse motoneuron disease.

CONCLUSIONS
the main evidence from this study is that the decrease in the amount of glur <dig> and nr2a receptor subunits in tif in late symptomatic wobbler mice is not related to an early reduction in the expression of these subunits in degenerating motoneurons, but more likely is related to the reduction in motoneuron number at the late stage of the disease.

