BACKGROUND
crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis are chronic inflammatory disorders of the gut that cause major life-long disability. afflicting mostly young people at an age when they are most active both in their private and professional life, inflammatory bowel disease  represents an important public health problem affecting the patients education, working abilities, social life and quality of life. the cause of ibd is multiple and so far not completely understood. however, genetic factors, environmental factors and the gut bacteria play a role in disease development.

conventional therapy of active ibd pre-dominantly target anti-inflammatory immune responses, largely due to cytokine release within the intestine. thus, therapeutic treatment mainly includes anti-inflammatory drugs, immunosuppressants, biologic agents, and antibiotics  <cit> . however, these agents may cause severe adverse effects and are therefore not suitable for long-term treatment of ibd. moreover, conventional drugs block manifestation or consequences of inflammation in acute disease. thus, there is a necessity for therapeutic strategies that target improvement of impaired barrier function in remission. suitable candidates are dietary supplements and food components such as colostrum. although natural therapies are commonly associated with lower toxicity and fewer side effects than conventional drugs, the scientific proof of their effectiveness and safety is demanded  <cit> .

colostrum, the secretion produced by the mammary glands during the first three days post-partum, contains many functional nutrients. these include immunoglobulins, growth factors, and antimicrobial peptides. the potential of colostrum to affect gastrointestinal infections and to reduce the incidence of immune-mediated diseases is well established  <cit> . in accordance with this, we recently demonstrated the protective effect of orally applied colostrum in a murine colitis model  <cit> . beneficial effects were characterized by improvement of clinical colorectal inflammation symptoms and by the induction of immunoregulatory mechanisms, predominantly of the innate immune system arm. thus, identification of factors responsible for preventing experimental colitis might provide the basis for developing a long-term treatment regimen.

in ibd patients, local production of polymeric iga  is altered and this affects both immunological homeostasis and humoral immune responses  <cit> . iga does not activate the classical complement pathway and inhibits the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to lipopolysaccharide , thereby maintaining mucosal integrity  <cit> . siga preparations from colostrum are active against various microbial antigens and inhibit adhesion and invasion by enteropathogenic escherichia coli in vitro <cit> . colostral siga influences the development of the gastrointestinal immune system in milk-fed infants; however, little is known about the effectiveness of oral siga in maintaining gut barrier functions in adults.

another colostral peptide with a broad range of immunomodulatory properties is lactoferrin , a member of the iron-binding glycoprotein family. lf is predominately found in mucosal secretions and neutrophilic granules  <cit> . lf concentration and iron saturation differ among species; bovine  and human  lfs show strong sequence homology  <cit> . blf has been reported to stimulate mucosal and systemic immune responses when given orally  <cit> . moreover, there is experimental evidence that lf reduces the severity of colitis in rodents  <cit> .

in the present study, we explored the potential of orally applied colostral blf and siga for modulating immune responses and recovery from dextran sodium sulfate -induced murine colitis. whole bovine colostrum  improved the clinical severity of colitis, whereas blf had no effect. siga influenced dss-mediated immune cell redistribution and specifically altered colonic cell infiltration. therefore, it might be an interesting candidate for promoting regeneration from acute colitis.

RESULTS
therapeutic application of colostrum and siga improved clinical recovery from colitis
after a single seven-day treatment of 5% dss in drinking water, the mice showed signs of acute colitis including weight loss, bloody stools, and diarrhea. during the induction phase of colitis, neither the treatment  nor the control  groups differed significantly with respect to body weight . however, disease activity in the acute phase of inflammation  declined only after bc-feeding owing to reduced occult blood  and enhanced stool consistency .

during the recovery phase, mice receiving therapeutic siga gained more weight than controls receiving nacl  or bsa . bc and blf showed only marginal differences from the control groups . since bsa-fed mice showed the most dramatic weight loss, up to 20% at day  <dig>  the bc- and siga-induced recovery was not simply attributable to a feeding effect .

therapeutic application of colostrum or colostral components had no effect on histopathological severity of colitis
in contrast to the clinical benefit, bc and siga did not reduce colon shortening at day  <dig> after dss challenge. in all experimental groups, colon lengths were significantly lower than those in controls not treated with dss . histological examination of the colon at day  <dig> revealed no significant differences in total histological score or in grade and extent of inflammation .

therapeutic application of siga affected immune cell redistribution
the induction of colitis is characterized by a reduced number of mature cd11c+cd83+ dendritic cells  in the periphery and spleen and by a raised level in the mesenteric lymph nodes. therapeutic application of igs normalized the distribution of cd11c+cd83+ cells compared to nacl controls by increasing their numbers in the spleens of siga-fed and in the peripheral blood of igg-fed mice. inflammation-induced elevation of dcs in mesenteric lymph nodes was exclusively found in nacl controls; their numbers were not altered in the therapeutic groups . in addition to dcs, γδ tcr+ t cells are significantly influenced by dss-induced colitis  <cit> , and the levels of this cell population were higher in the mesenteric lymph nodes and spleens of dss-exposed mice than in untreated controls. however, except in the case of igg, therapeutic application of bc or lf did not significantly alter the dss-mediated cell redistribution . taking these findings together, the observed clinical benefit of siga treatment could partly be explained by systemic immunological alterations.

effect of prophylactically applied secretory iga on clinical severity of colitis
next, we analyzed the potential of siga in a prophylactic setting. igg served as control and bc as positive control. during the feeding period, siga and igg were well tolerated by all mice and no side effects such as lethargy, abdominal pain or diarrhea were observed. initial weight loss from day  <dig> to day  <dig> remained unchanged in all experimental groups . in the recovery phase, weight gain was enhanced within the bc group until the end of the experiments , and bc ameliorated clinical dai  owing to improved stool consistency  . clinical recovery did not differ significantly between siga- and igg-fed mice .

prophylactic application of secretory iga failed to improve histopathological changes of colitis but affected colonic cell infiltration
colon length  and total median histological score did not differ significantly among any of the dss-exposed experimental and untreated control groups . therefore, a detailed immunohistochemical analysis from colonic sections was performed to unravel the observed clinical benefit . the numbers of cd4+ and γδ tcr+ t cells and of cd11c+ and cd83+ mature dendritic cells were markedly higher in the bc and siga groups than in igg-fed mice . these data argued for a specific local immune modulation by bc and colostral siga.

prophylactically applied secretory iga normalized dss-mediated redistribution of immune cells
we next examined whether immunological effector cells were influenced by siga in other lymphatic organs. prophylactic application of siga normalized t cell numbers in spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes. levels of cd3+cd4+ cells were similar to those in the untreated control mice. interestingly, neither igg nor bc affected t cell numbers, indicating a specific siga-mediated response .

comparable though less pronounced effects were observed for splenic γδ tcr+ cells . in mesenteric lymph nodes, a similar modulation of immune cell distribution was found. here again, levels of mature cd11c+cd83+ dendritic cells were specifically normalized by siga prophylaxis . taken together, these data clearly pointed to immunological alterations by siga prophylaxis that influenced colonic inflammation.

prophylactically applied secretory iga increased levels of dss-induced myeloid-derived suppressor cells
myeloid-derived suppressor cells  represent another cell population that is altered during the course of colitis  <cit> . the mdsc population is heterogeneous and is characterized by cd11b+ and gr1+ co-expression. these cells are induced by dss exposure and accelerate recovery from colitis following transplantation  <cit> . accordingly, the total levels of splenic cd11b+gr1+ cells were higher in dss-exposed mice than in healthy untreated controls on day  <dig> . while bc prophylaxis nearly normalized splenic cd11b+gr1+ cell numbers, siga did not. in siga-fed mice, the numbers of mdscs were massively increased . it is notable that these effects were evident in all three subpopulations ; mdsc levels were more than three-fold higher than in igg and bc-exposed mice .

discussion
as shown in a previous study, oral bc prophylaxis accelerates recovery from dss-induced colitis  <cit> . however, most treatment regimens for ibd patients are not available before the onset of disease. therefore, the present study was undertaken to evaluate the potential of whole bc and selected colostral compounds such as siga and blf in a therapeutic setting. both compounds display immunomodulatory potential  <cit> , are resistant against proteolytic degradation, and accumulate in blood and intestinal tissue of mice  <cit> .

the major finding of the study was that whole bc and in part colostral siga improved clinical recovery from colitis when applied therapeutically. this conclusion was confirmed by the enhanced weight gain of siga-fed mice and the lower disease activity  in the bc-fed treatment group. although bc and siga prevented neither the initial weight loss after induction of colitis nor the histological outcome of colitis, siga- and bc-fed mice recovered more quickly than control animals. in striking contrast, blf failed to improve the clinical and histological course of colitis after both therapeutic and prophylactic applications . this was surprising since blf showed anti-inflammatory potential in dss-induced colitis and stimulated mucosal and systemic immune responses when given orally  <cit> . in addition, reduced lps-induced epithelial damage and barrier destruction have been reported  <cit> , as well as decreased rectal bleeding and an improved histological score  <cit> . these findings, seemingly contradictory to our study, could be attributed to the fact that in these studies, human lf with 7% iron saturation level was applied perorally twice a day. in contrast, we used lf derived from bovine colostrum, and the level of iron saturation of bovine lf was in range of  <dig> to 30%. therefore, the discrepancy might be due to the therapeutic regimen rather than to the iron saturation level. thus, increasing the number of lf injections per day might have beneficial effects on the course of colitis. however, this was beyond the scope of the present study.

another remarkable finding of our study was the effect of immunoglobulins on those immunological effector cells that most probably promote disease recovery. mature dcs  and immunoregulatory γδ tcr+ t cells were almost normalized in lymph nodes and spleens in the siga and igg groups. similar data were obtained in the prophylactic setting. siga almost normalized the dss-mediated cell redistribution  in lymph nodes and spleen.

although γδ t cells are important in intestinal inflammation, the functional role of this cell population remains unknown. under physiological conditions, they represent a minor subset within lymph nodes and spleens; however, they are induced in mice and men by inflammatory responses  <cit> . peripheral human γδ t cells exert regulatory functions and suppress t helper cell proliferation  <cit> . thus, the specific effects of siga on immune cell distribution can be regarded as favorable immune modulation of dss-induced inflammation. in addition, colostral siga but not igg influenced colonic cell infiltration. just as whole bc is effective in preventing dss-induced colitis, so siga treatment was characterized by massive increases in colonic cd11c+ and cd83+ dcs as well as γδ tcr+ t cells. thus, the increase of local regulatory cells after bc prophylaxis was most likely to have been due to colostral siga rather than igg. activated γδ t cells have been shown to promote epithelial cell growth via the production of keratinocyte growth factor  <cit>  and to regulate intestinal homeostasis  <cit> , while depletion of γδ t cells worsened inflammation in mouse models of colitis  <cit> . therefore, in accordance with these studies, the enhanced recovery from colitis was most probably mediated by immune cell modulation through colostrum and in particular colostral siga.

in our previous study, we hypothesized that mdscs contributed to the clinical benefit of prophylactically applied colostrum  <cit> . here again, siga prophylaxis specifically increased the number of splenic cd11b+gr-1+ mdscs. although the function of cd11b+gr-1+ mdsc in intestinal inflammation remains unclear, mdscs accumulated in the bone marrow and spleen of dss-exposed mice, and intravenous transplantation of dss-induced splenic cd11b+gr-1+ cells in c57bl/ <dig> mice resulted in advanced mucosal healing  <cit> . we therefore conclude that the strong induction of cd11b+gr-1+ cells by siga contributed to the enhanced recovery from weight loss at later time points.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we tested the immunomodulatory potential of siga and blf for improving the severity of dss-induced murine colitis. siga but not blf was identified as a colostral component that altered immune responses and promoted weight gain in colitic mice. further studies are required to explore how this natural colostral compound modulates the colitis-induced immune cell redistribution.

