BACKGROUND
the ability of populations to adapt to a particular habitat is a key topic in evolutionary biology because the exploitation of new niches is a key component of the speciation process  <cit> . in order to survive in heterogeneous habitats, organisms can adopt three main evolutionary strategies  <cit> . one is to fix a generalist genotype more or less suitable over a broad range of environmental conditions. a second possibility is to adapt to a particular environmental condition by heritable variation in a particular trait . finally, a third option is to  control the sensitivity of the genotype to changes in the environment . the first and third strategies are expected to be typical of organisms with relatively high dispersal abilities, while the second strategy is preferentially expected for species with restricted dispersal ability, although different exceptions are known  <cit> . in addition, in the case of sedentary organisms the level of environmental fluctuation might also affect which strategy is used  <cit> .

phenotypic plasticity is defined as occurring when the phenotype expressed by a given genotype is altered by changes in environmental conditions  <cit> . therefore, it is possible to quantify the relative importance of direct genetic determination versus phenotypic plasticity for causing adaptative variation in a particular trait, even though the plastic ability of the trait can show heritable variation within and between populations and species  <cit> . a body of evidence suggests that plasticity may promote adaptative divergence in various systems, often followed by genetic changes in the direction of the plastic response  <cit> . furthermore, phenotypic plasticity enhances the survival and reproductive success of individuals by contributing to their ability to cope with environmental changes. in this way, it enables of potential adaptation to new niches  <cit> , and therefore can promote important biological processes such as adaptation, divergence and reproductive isolation. however, we cannot, a priori, assume that phenotypic plasticity is always an adaptative response under natural selection  <cit> . when studying the mechanism  of adaptation, it may help to identify a clear model system in which phenotypic variation has been shown to be clearly adaptative. here, we use two well-known ecological forms  of a marine snail as a biological model system in order to study the role of phenotypic plasticity in potentially adaptative traits.

littorina saxatilis  is a marine intertidal gastropod that presents separate sexes, ovoviviparity  and high polymorphism. along of the galician coast , two intertidal ecotypes of the snail l. saxatilis are adapted to different shore levels and habitats  <cit> . the large-sized ridged and banded ecotype , lives among barnacles at the upper shore, has a larger, thicker and more robust shell, and a smaller aperture for reducing the loss of water due to the high desiccation from exposure to sunshine  <cit> . at the lower shore, the small-sized, smooth and unbanded ecotype  lives on mussels, and has a smaller and thinner shell with a relatively wider aperture necessary to accommodate a larger muscular foot that prevents dislodgement resulting from heavy wave action  <cit> . both habitats and ecotypes are typically separated by 5- <dig> meters, although the snails have the potential ability to move from one habitat to the other during their lifetimes, and hence can be considered as effectively sympatric  <cit> . at the mid-shore, both ecotypes meet and occasionally mate in true sympatry, showing a partial pre-zygotic isolation barrier . due to the effectively sympatric ecotype distribution and its incomplete reproductive isolation, the gene flow among ecotypes is only slightly restricted  <cit> . therefore, the polymorphism observed is due to a strong, divergent natural selection acting across the environmental gradient  <cit> , making a perfect system to study the genes involved in the origin of adaptation and speciation processes.

these ecologically distinct ecotypes have shown differences in about 3% of their genome that can not be explained by stochastic forces, reported as the first preliminary estimate of the percentage of the genome variation affected  by natural selection in this species  <cit> . in addition, a few studies in the same species showed that shell shape variation is an adaptive trait along the vertical rocky shore gradient, although its phenotype is relatively independent of the experienced environment  <cit> . in fact, the majority of the adaptative morphological variation was attributed to direct genetic determination . recently the proteome profiles of these two ecotypes have been compared using two-dimensional electrophoresis  <cit> . in such study, the two sympatric ecotypes collected in the field differed in 12% of their proteome,  <dig> % after correcting for multiple testing . in the former study, however, the observed differences between ecotypes could be explained by both genetic and environmental determination, since protein expression profiles are known to be significantly affected by environmental changes  <cit> . here, a new proteome comparison between field-collected and laboratory-reared snails of both rb and su ecotypes was carried out to study the possible role of phenotypic plasticity in determining the protein expression in this model system.

RESULTS
analyses of two-dimensional protein profiles
protein expression profiles of pooled snails from different ecotypes  and habitats  were studied. after 2-de , only well-resolved protein spots were taken into account for the analyses, finding  <dig> spots on average per gel. in the qualitative analysis,  <dig> spots altogether were observed in at least one of the  <dig> gels, finding  <dig> significant spots  between ecotypes after multitest adjustment, while none remained significant between environments . in the quantitative analysis, only  <dig> spots were present in all gels, obtaining  <dig> spots  with significantly different expression between ecotypes after multitest correction, and none between environments . this estimate was nearly identical to the estimate obtained by martínez-fernández et al.   <cit>  comparing the same ecotypes from the same locality, pointing to the robustness of the proteomic approach . this similarity between the different estimates is notable as the two studies used specimens of different ages , years and seasons. only two  out of the  <dig> spots studied did not show homocedasticity, but they remained significant after being transformed, which supports the assertion that the former pattern is statistically robust.

 <dig> data re-analysed from martínez-fernández et al.   <cit> 

n spots is the number of spots studied, % from ecotype or environment is the percentage of spots, respectively, being statistically different between treatments within factor. the numbers in parenthesis are the percentages with significant differences in expression before multitest correction. the mean value ± standard error  from the percentage of differences due to ecotype is represented as well.

quantifying the importance of phenotypic plasticity
a detailed two-way anova was carried out in those protein spots that showed significant differentiation for any factor separately. this analysis included ecotype, environment and interaction factors, and allowed us to estimate the relative importance of each one using eta squared  coefficients . the results confirmed that the ecotype is the main factor, explaining on average 73%  of the overall variance in expression, whereas the environment explained an average of 18% , and the interaction an average of 8% . in fact, these mean percentages across factors differed significantly . the low level of genotype-environment interaction has been interpreted in similar studies as a preference for additive effects controlling gene expression  <cit> , although epistatic  effects were observed at least in one study using microarrays  <cit> . furthermore, if plasticity is contributing to adaptation, the differences in expression between ecotypes will be higher in the field than in the laboratory environment. in this study, only  <dig> of  <dig>  of the proteins with differences in expression between ecotypes showed also significant differences between environments in the two-way anova. moreover, only in one of these cases  plasticity could contribute to maintain this polymorphism, since the different expression between ecotypes is still higher in the field than in the laboratory . but, even in that case, the percentage of variation attributed to the environment  was smaller compared to the percentage attributed to the ecotype differences .

*p ≤  <dig> ; **p ≤  <dig> ; ***p ≤  <dig> 

mean levels of expression in ppm  for significant spots in the one-way anova. the ratio quantifies the expression differences between ecotypes  with the sign showing the ecotype with larger intensity . ecotype, environment and interaction represent the percentage of variance explained after the two-way anova . p is the significance of the randomization anova comparing percentages of variation across factors .

there is a few possible sources of biases that could potentially affect to our experimental design. for example, we can not exclude that some juveniles were fertilized in the wild, since the females were maintained in the lab during 2- <dig> months and the time that zygotes need to develop into juveniles inside the mother is still unknown. however, females have a sperm reserve that can store for months  and we already proved that after three months in laboratory females nearly finish releasing new born juveniles  <cit> . thus, we expect that most born juveniles were developed in the lab, if not also fertilized, thanks to this sperm reserve. additionally, since we did not maintain our snails for two generations in laboratory conditions, we can not neglect completely a contribution of maternal effects to our genetic factor. nevertheless, maternal effects seem to be typically genetic in origin  <cit> , and therefore, we did not expect that the main picture outlined here would change considerably. such conclusion is particularly robust when thinking in a trait like protein expression, which considerably varies spatially and temporally  <cit> .

in summary, all these results support a relatively minor contribution of the phenotypic plasticity to the ecotype differences observed in the proteome expression, suggesting an important genetic basis for the variability in gene expression in this species. future studies should focus on the estimation of the heritability in protein expression profiles.

a comparison of the same causal factors was carried out in the same species and population for shell shape variation  <cit> , indicating that most shell shape variation was also accounted by the ecotype of the parents, irrespectively of the experienced environment. the similar relative importance of genetic effects in morphology  and protein expression  points to the generality of the phenomenon, since the mechanisms that enable the plastic responses at the different biological levels are fundamentally the same  <cit> . therefore, this species seems to show low levels of phenotypic plasticity affecting variation in morphology  <cit>  and proteomic expression .

a few studies have observed proteome adaptation in plants  <cit> , where two populations of picea abies showed different expression profiles at two different ecological habitats. in addition, proteome expression variability associated with particular taxa  <cit> , or with populations living in different environments  <cit>  or affected by distinct pollutants  <cit>  has been observed in several marine bivalve molluscs. however, in spite of the general importance of phenotypic plasticity in adaptation, to our knowledge there has not been any study focusing on the quantitative relevance of phenotypic plasticity on protein expression, making evident the importance and novelty of this work. in fact, most of the studies focused on the role of phenotypic plasticity have been traditionally carried out on the basis of the morphological differences  <cit> , although some used dna markers  <cit>  or new large-scale gene expression technologies . even when these studies have found a possible role of plasticity in different biological processes, neither of them quantified the relative role of genotype versus environment effects.

cluster analysis
a cluster of the  <dig> protein spots showing quantitative differences in expression was applied in order to detect groups of spots or specimens with similar expression levels. the individuals were correctly clustered by their ecotype. in addition, the protein spots were clearly grouped in two well-differentiated classes . such clustering has been traditionally interpreted as protein co-regulation, which may indicate that they are participating in similar metabolic pathways  <cit> . therefore, future efforts will need to focus on the identification of these spots in order to confirm or reject this hypothesis. moreover, it could be interesting to study them at different developmental stages in order to characterise the biochemical and physiological strategies of adaptation, especially after knowing that they showed genetically controlled expression differences between ecotypes.

CONCLUSIONS
to conclude, understanding how biological diversity is generated and maintained is a central issue in evolutionary biology. we have detected that a portion of the proteome studied  differs in expression level between ecotypes, possibly related with their adaptation to the distinct habitats and shore levels. in addition, phenotypic plasticity does not have an important role in determining those proteomic differences, supporting the assertion that most of the proteomic variation may have a genetic origin, at least in those with differences between ecotypes. however, this information is still insufficient to reveal the genetic architecture of the adaptative phenotypic change, since to do this purpose it would be necessary to identify quantitative trait loci of gene expression profiles, as well as their genetic architecture , an extremely difficult but interesting future task for this evolutionary model system.

