BACKGROUND
genome analyses of a range of organisms have lead to the identification of an increasing number of putative rna-binding proteins  whose function is still unknown. rbps have been found to act as integral part of ribonucleoparticles  controlling gene expression at different levels  <cit> . rnps are involved in controlling rna export, rna stability, rna subcellular localization and mrna translation  <cit> . it has been proposed that in this context rbps could act as central coordinators in regulating the expression and fate of specific subsets of rnas. this model is reminiscent of bacterial operons, where the expression of genes that act in the same pathway is regulated as one unit  <cit> .

recently, research has mainly been focused on identifying protein-protein interactions using two-hybrid interactions  <cit> , immunopurification  <cit>  or affinity purification  <cit> . so far, only few examples have been reported that were aimed at the identification of mrna-protein interactions. in yeast, immunopurification has, for example, been used to enrich rnp complexes leading to the identification of  <dig> mrnas localized to the bud tip  <cit> , to the identification of lhp1p associated mrnas  <cit>  and to the identification of mrna export factor associated transcripts  <cit> . there are many examples for affinity purification methods in yeast, but perhaps the one that has been used most extensively is the tandem affinity purification . tap consists of two serial affinity purification steps of a protein tagged with a double epitope tag, without affecting the expression level of the protein. it was first described for identifying new protein components of the yeast u <dig> snrnp  <cit>  and later used to identify protein-protein interactions in yeast  <cit> , bacteria  <cit> , trypanosoma brucei  <cit> , drosophila  <cit>  and mammals  <cit> . it has also been used to describe the set of mrnas associated with the puf family of rna-binding proteins in yeast  <cit> .

besides the purification method, the way to lyse cells is also crucial. in yeast, different lysis methods are in use. glass bead milling has been applied to identify rnas from immunoprecipitated rnps  <cit> . both french press and glass bead milling have been successfully used to characterize protein-protein  <cit>  and protein-rnas interactions  <cit> . however, the integrity of the mrna has not been determined under the conditions used. here, we show that existing lysis methods lead to extensive mrna degradation even in the presence of rnase inhibitors. we also present evidence that a third method, grinding deep-frozen cells at ultra-low temperature, can be used to obtain intact mrnas.

RESULTS
glass bead mill lysis leads to degraded rnas
breaking yeast with a glass bead mill is a common method to produce cell lysates. the principle is based on the physical rupture of the yeast's cell wall and cell due to the friction produced by glass beads rapidly moving through the cell suspension. one of the advantages of this method is the high lysis efficiency.

we lysed two different yeast strains using a "bead-beater" bead mill in the presence of rnase inhibitors  as described in methods. we used a strain where nrp1p, a putative rna-binding protein that contains one rrm   <cit> , has been tagged and a wild type strain. as shown in figure 1a we could enrich the bait protein, nrp1p, in the tev eluate as compared to a purification from a control wild type strain performed in parallel. we then analyzed the rna extracted from the input material at the igg immunopurification step from both strains by agarose gel electrophoresis. the absence of 25s and 18s rrnas in the extracts as compared to total rna extracted by phenol  <cit>  indicates that rna was degraded .

the chosen purification method involves several steps: lysis, extract preparation and igg immunopurification. to rule out in which step rna degradation takes place, we analysed mrna integrity in samples taken at different purification steps . therefore, we used a strain where pbp2p, a putative rna-binding protein that contains two kh-type  <dig> domains   <cit> , has been tagged and a wild type strain. we found that extensive degradation already occurs during cell lysis  as shown by northern blot against a specific abundant mrna  or by direct staining of ribosomal rnas after blotting with methylene blue .

lysis by french press leads to degraded rnas
a second major lysis method for yeast cells is the french press. lysis occurs when the cell suspension is pressed through a small capillary. the pressure difference between the chamber and the capillary ruptures the cell.

we lysed cells as described  <cit>  in the presence of rnase inhibitors , and spun the crude lysate at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> × g as indicated in methods. we then analyzed the rna extracted from the different fractions by northern blot. as shown in figure  <dig>  when analyzing rna quality by methylen blue staining, rna degradation is not as obvious as with bead mill lysis . however, all different strains tested  show a high degree of pda <dig> mrna degradation during cell lysis , although subsequent centrifugation steps do not further enhance degradation of this mrna . we also tested, if the rna becomes degraded during the first step of the tap protocol. we took samples before and after the igg immunopurification step and checked rna integrity by northern blot. as shown in figure  <dig>  no further degradation of the rnas during this step can be detected. taken together these results lead to the conclusion that most of the rna degradation observed during french press or glass bead mill lysis happens during cell rupture despite the presence of rnase inhibitors in the lysis buffer.

intact rnas after lysis by mortar grinding
we also tested a third described method for cell lysis, which is grinding deep-frozen cells with a mortar  <cit> . this method breaks cells mechanically while keeping proteins and nucleic acids intact due to the lack of enzymatic activity at ultra-low breaking temperatures. after grinding, the extract is thawed in lysis buffer in the presence of rnase inhibitors , immediately inactivating deleterious enzymatic activities.

first, we checked the integrity of the rna after cells were lysed by manual grinding in liquid nitrogen. as shown in figure 4a, rna in crude lysate from the three strains tested  shows little difference from rna isolated by direct phenol:chloroform extraction as indicated by the 25s/18s ribosomal rna ratio and hybridization against pda <dig> mrna. we also tested rna integrity during subsequent centrifugation steps after cell lysis with a motor-driven mortar. as shown in figure 4b, the rna from the different samples analyzed show only little degradation as judged by the pda <dig> mrna hybridization signal.

both rnase inhibitors are needed to keep mrna intact
to optimize the lysis protocol, we also tested if both rnase inhibitors are needed to keep the rna intact. for this purpose we first used a strain where she2p, an rna-binding protein required for ash <dig> mrna localization, has been tagged  <cit> . she2p is known to bind to specific regions of ash <dig> mrna, which could help to protect the target mrna. we lysed cells by mortar grinding and thawed them in lysis buffer with a final concentration of  <dig> u/ml of superasein as only rnase inhibitor. we took samples from crude lysate, different steps from the differential centrifugation and from the igg immunopurification steps  and extracted the rna. as shown in figure 5a degradation of both pda <dig> and ash <dig> mrnas is already detected in the crude lysate. whereas no further degradation of pda <dig> mrna is detected during subsequent centrifugation, ash <dig> mrna is heavily degraded, indicating that there might not be a protective effect of rna-binding proteins like she2p. in addition, when the extract was incubated with the igg-coupled beads for  <dig> hours degradation becomes evident also for pda <dig> mrna .

we then checked the effect of a reduced concentration of both rnase inhibitors, superasein and rvc, on rna integrity. for this purpose we used a strain where sub2p, an rna-binding protein required for splicing and mrna export, is tagged  <cit> . sub2p is more abundant than she2p and believed to bind to mrnas competent for export  <cit> . like she2p, it could also have a protective function against mrna degradation that could be more prominent due to its higher abundance. we lysed cells by mortar grinding and thawed them in lysis buffer containing either  <dig> mm rvc and  <dig> u/ml superasein, or  <dig> mm rvc, or  <dig> u/ml superasein. we took samples from crude lysate, supernatant of a  <dig> × g spin, as well as input and flow through from the igg immunopurification. as shown in figure 5b, no degradation can be observed when rna is stained with methylen blue and the signals from the 25s and 18s ribosomal rnas are compared. in contrast, degradation of pda <dig> mrna is visible in crude lysates from samples that have been thawed in lysis buffers supplemented only with superasein as inhibitor , in concordance with previous results . when rvc is present as sole rnase inhibitor , degradation is reduced. only when both inhibitors are present in the lysis buffer  intact rnas are detected.

discussion
since most rna-binding proteins fulfil their function in the context of rna-protein complexes, knowledge of rnas associated with specific rbps is essential to elucidate their functions. in order to identify these transcripts, new methods must be developed or existing successful protocols for the identification of protein-protein interactions must be adapted. although several recent publications have identified rna partners from rnp-complexes  <cit> , there are so far no reports on the quality of the rnas purified from these complexes. here we demonstrate that the method used for cell lysis of yeast cells is of great importance for isolation of intact complexes. whereas standard lysis methods like disruption by french press or glass bead mill lead to massive rna degradation , grinding yeast cells at ultra-low temperatures leaves cellular rna intact .

the major difference between the lysis methods compared in this study is the timing between addition of the rnase inhibitor and target inactivation. in french press and glass bead milling, a lag between addition and target inactivation occurs because inhibitors require cells to be broken in order to inactivate rnases as the yeast's cell wall acts as a barrier for large molecules. since rnases are highly active enzymes, this could result in rna degradation prior to their inactivation by the inhibitor. this lag could explain the degradation observed in samples from crude lysates produced by these lysis methods even in the presence of rnase inhibitors . this idea is supported by the lack of further degradation during subsequent steps . although we have only analyzed the first step of the tap protocol, the igg immunopurification, the conclusion from this experiment can be extrapolated to immunoprecipitated rnps as the molecular interactions in both methods are equivalent.

in contrast to bead milling or disruption by french press, the temperature during grinding is kept close to -80°c and enzymatic activities are essentially absent. the results from figure  <dig> show only little rna degradation after thawing ground extracts in buffer supplemented with rnase inhibitors, which supports cell grinding as an rna integrity conserving method. our data demonstrating enhanced stability of mrnas using the grinding method are supported by previous successful purifications of snrnps with intact snrnas using grinding as lysis method  <cit> .

rna degradation can severely bias identification of rna from purified rnps because only rna fragments that are protected from degradation would remain in the purified extract. under these circumstances, the choice of the primer for retrotranscribing the pool of purified rnas is critical since it is likely that only primers annealing close to or inside the protected sites would result in a cdna product.

furthermore, when such protected rna fragments are used to probe micro-arrays, the type of the dna-array also becomes crucial. since many rbps bind to the utrs of mrnas and many dna-microarrays contain only dna corresponding to the orf of the genes, detection of bound rnas by such microarrays could be biased against rbps binding outside the orf. this problem would be enhanced using arrays composed of long oligonucleotides since only rnas whose protected regions overlap with the oligo sequence would be identified.

another point to consider is the low abundance of several rnps. as many rna-binding proteins are expressed at low levels, purification of complexes using rnps as bait might result in low yield of bait protein plus associated rnas. under these circumstances, it is mandatory to keep rna intact at early stages , since the following purification steps might become an additional source of rna degradation. this idea is also supported by our results  where, even under optimised lysis conditions, mrnas become sensitive to degradation during longer incubation times.

CONCLUSIONS
our data suggest that mechanical breakage of frozen yeast cells at ultra-low temperatures is the lysis method of choice for purification of intact mrnp complexes. since in recent approaches  <cit>  different lysis conditions have been used, a substantial number of protein-associated mrnas might have been missed.

