BACKGROUND
salmonella enterica is a major food-borne pathogen able to cause diarrhoea or thyphoid/paratyphoid fever  <cit> . the systemic infection is often preceded by an asymptomatic chronic colonization or by a local infection process. one of the major problems associated with persistent colonization or infection is the steady rise of antibiotic resistance among strains, which can lead to treatment failures  <cit> . the association between the overuse of antibiotics and/or biocides in farms, hospitals, industry and homes and the emergence of both co-resistance and cross-resistance to different compounds in salmonella populations is of concern .

unlike antibiotics, most biocides do not act on specific cell targets. in fact, only a few mechanisms by which microorganisms became tolerant to these antimicrobials have been fully characterized. over-expression of multidrug efflux pumps such as acrab or acref which are controlled by global transcriptional regulators such as marab, rama and soxrs can lead to diverse levels of resistance to biocides and/or antibiotics . often, tolerance to triclosan is due to over-expression and/or mutations in fabi, the enoyl-acyl-reductase protein required for fatty acid synthesis  <cit> . moreover, exposure and further adaptation to biocides may also impair cellular homeostasis, and/or changes the level of expression of genes regulating synthesis and modification of cell envelope, virulence, motility, or stress response . whether or not such physiological changes are needed for adaptation to the presence of biocides, or they just reflect secondary changes associated with restoring fitness after adaptation remains to be established. previous studies in salmonella enterica prototype strain sl <dig> have described the modification of antibiotic susceptibility, growth and regulation of different genes after exposure to biocides  <cit> . however, few studies provided comprehensive information about the genomic and transcriptomic changes of mutants selected after exposure to different biocides and antibiotics, which can be used either coincidentally or sequentially in the clinical practice and in the food industry .

the aim of this study was to determine the effect of exposure to some biocides , or antibiotics , widely used in farms, hospitals, industry and homes on the selection of antibiotic/biocide-resistant salmonella mutants and to characterize the associated genomic and transcriptomic profiles, as well as the extended phenotypes . to address whether these adaptive changes found in laboratory-selected mutants also occurred in natural populations of salmonella, the transcriptomes of a set of field isolates exhibiting reduced susceptibility to biocides were comparatively studied.

methods
bacterial strains
the prototype s. enterica serovar typhimurium sl <dig>  <cit>  strain was exposed to biocides , and antibiotics . the quantitative phenotype of this strain against diverse antimicrobials is summarized in table  <dig> table  <dig> susceptibility profiles of salmonella mutants respect to sl <dig> parental strain

 <dig> 
16
16
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
32
 <dig> 
3
3
ne/tri1
ne/chx2
chx/bkc3
tri/bkc3
ne/bkc3
chx/amp
ne: non-exposed, - not done

in the designation of mutants, numbers 1- <dig> refer to the concentration of compounds in plates as follows: 1- 32 mg/l, 2- 64 mg/l and 3-128 mg/l

mutants cip/tri <dig> and cip/chx <dig> classified as more fit than sl <dig> exhibited -17 % and -21 %, respectively

wgs was performed in the underlined mutants



sixteen salmonella spp. isolates from food-borne animals with reduced susceptibility to tri , bkc , chx  used in a previous work  <cit> , were investigated for their transcriptomic profiles. such isolates, collected in a veterinary surveillance project in europe, showed  <dig> different pfge-types and belonged to salmonella enterica subspecies enterica  and subspecies typhimurium .

most of these strains were susceptible to antibiotics. a few number of isolates harbored plasmids that contained acquired genes coding for resistance to β-lactams , aminoglycosides , tetracycline  and quinolone . plasmids from  <dig> isolates also carried genes encoding resistance to metals .

selection of mutants
a colony of s. enterica serovar typhimurium sl <dig> grown overnight in luria bertani  plates was inoculated into lb-broth and lb supplemented with sub-inhibitory concentrations  of biocides  or antibiotics  and further incubated overnight at 37 °c with shaking at 150 rpm. subsequently, aliquots of 100 μl were plated onto lb plates containing a single biocide or a single antibiotic compound at concentrations ranging  <dig> -33 × mic and incubated at 30 °c. these primary selective plates were examined for growth during 7 days. a variable number of viable mutants  were tested for growth on secondary selective plates containing other biocides or antibiotics. the stability of mutants was evaluated after serial passages in non-selective lb broth . mutants were named by the acronym name of the antimicrobial compound added to the broth cultures before plating, followed by the name and concentration of the compound added to the selective agar plates from where the mutant was retrieved. the mutants obtained from broth cultures not supplemented with any antimicrobial were designated as non-exposed . phenotypes of decreased and increased susceptibility to biocides and antibiotics appear represented by the super indexes “r” or “hs”, respectively. the colonial morphology in lb and blood agar plates was compared between mutants and the parental strain. the variability of xbai-digested genomic dna profiles of mutants and parental strain was assessed by pulsed field gel electrophoresis  using standard protocols for dna preparation, digestion and pfge running conditions for enterobacteriaceae  <cit> .

antimicrobial susceptibility testing
the minimal inhibitory concentrations  of biocides  and antibiotics   were determined by both broth micro-dilution using e- test strips following clsi guidelines. escherichia coli atcc <dig> and staphylococcus aureus atcc <dig> were used as control strains . minimum bactericidal concentrations  were determined by subculturing 10 μl from each well without visible bacterial growth when mic was determined on mueller-hinton broth . the minimal concentration yielding no-growth after overnight incubation at 37 °c was scored as the mbc. the susceptibility of wild type strains to amp, streptomycin, sulphonamides, trimethoprim, nalidixic acid, cip, clo, tet, gen and kanamycin was determined by disk diffusion.

further, the susceptibility of mutants and the parental strain to  <dig> cell growth-inhibiting chemical compounds was screened using the phenotype microarray pm11-pm <dig> in two independent experiments  as previously described  <cit> . the strains were grown overnight at 30 ° c on bug agar  and then, colonies were picked up with a sterile cotton swab and suspended in 15 ml of 1x inoculation fluid . cell density was adjusted to 85 % transmittance  on a biolog turbidimeter. inoculation fluid for pm11- <dig> was prepared mixing 100 ml of if-10a gn base  ,  <dig>  ml of biolog redox dye a  ,  <dig>  ml of cell suspension at 85 % t, bringing to a final volume of 120 ml with sterile water. the mixture was inoculated in the pm plates  and monitored automatically for color development every 15 min for 72 h at 30 °c in an omnilog reader . to identify phenotypes, the kinetic curves of both parental strain and mutants were compared using omnilog-pm software . such comparison was based on the half maximal inhibitory concentration  values for  <dig> concentrations of each antimicrobial, which is defined as the well at which a particular per-well parameter is the half of its maximal value over the concentration series; the reference parameter being the area under the curve. raw data were filtered using differences of average area of mutant compared to control taking a difference of 1: <dig>  as significant.

growth kinetics
the growth kinetics of both the parental strain sl <dig> and biocide-tolerant mutants exhibiting various phenotypes was determined by measuring the optical density at 600 nm every 5–10 min for 24 h at 37 °c in bioscreen c , adapting the method described by foucault et al.  <cit> . inocula in a concentration of  <dig> to 105 cfu/ml were obtained from a 1/ <dig> dilution of an overnight culture in fresh lb broth and aliquots of 400 μl were seeded in triplicate in a microtitre plate. growth rates were determined in the interval estimated to be exponential using the growthrates  <dig>  program  <cit> . the fitness cost  reflects the relative growth rates, which were based on the individual growth rates of mutants relative to the parental strain. for each strain, data from growth rates were averaged and standard deviations calculated.

whole genome sequencing 
six mutants with different phenotypes were selected for whole genome sequencing. genomic dna was extracted from 1 ml of overnight cultures in plain lb broth using a promega wizard genomic dna purification kit according manufacturer instructions. genome sequencing was performed on illumina miseq platform to obtain 100–200 bp paired-end reads. reads were revised and corrected using lighter software and further mapped against the genome of the sl <dig> strain  using breseq v <dig> . <dig> pipeline . single nucleotide polymorphisms  detected in all mutants were not deemed confident and were excluded, because we cannot dismiss differences between the laboratory sl <dig> strain used as wild-type in this work, and that corresponding to the canonical sequence in the genbank database. reads not found in all mutants were treated as deletions.

transcriptome analysis
array design and production
an array was designed to cover the complete genome of salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar typhimurium, as well as plasmids isolated from various gram-negative microorganisms. probe design was performed by the customarray design service  and included  <dig>  capture probes ,  <dig> quality control probes and  <dig> non-specific probes derived from plants, phages and unrelated bacterial sequences, and also  <dig> empty spots with no oligonucleotides. arrays were synthesized on a customarray synthesizer  and quality tested using the standard protocols provided by the manufacturer.

rna extraction
strains were grown overnight in 10 ml lb broth at 37 °c, 150 rpm. the cultures were diluted 1: <dig> in pre-warmed lb and grown to logarithmic phase . 2 ml of the culture /ml) were harvested in 4 ml of rna protect reagent® , incubated for 5 min at room temperature and centrifuged for 10 min at  <dig> x g. bacterial pellets were suspended in 200 μl of te buffer  containing 1 mg/ml lysozyme  and incubated for 5 min at room temperature, 600 rpm. total rna was then extracted using rneasy mini kit , according to the manufacturer’s instructions. contaminating dna was removed using dna-free™ kit . the rna isolation procedure was validated for rna quality by testing rna samples on an agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer . rna concentration and purity were determined by nanodrop® nd- <dig> spectrophotometer . for each strain, at least  <dig> rna samples were prepared from independent cultures.

rna labelling and fragmentation
isolated, unamplified rna was labelled with cy <dig>  using uls™ labeling kit for combimatrix arrays , according to the manufacturer’s instructions. rna was fragmented with the rna fragmentation reagents .

array hybridization
12 k custom arrays were hybridized with 2 μg of labelled, fragmented rna, according to information provided by the manufacturer . in brief, after pre-hybridization of the arrays, hybridization was performed at 45 °c for 16 hours in a hybridization buffer containing 25 % formamide. after washing steps, microarrays were scanned using packard scanarray <dig> array scanner and software  with incremental laser power from  <dig> to 100 %. data were extracted with microarray imager software  and spot intensity expressed as median intensity. after scanning, microarrays were striped using 12 k customarray™ stripping kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. quality of the stripping was verified by scanning the microarray at maximal laser intensity and repeated when necessary. microarrays were used up to four times.

data analysis
to adjust for difference in the amount and labelling efficiency of hybridized rnas, the median fluorescence intensity values of all spots was determined for all laser intensities used during scanning. scanning data with similar median fluorescence intensity were chosen for further analysis. fluorescence values of spots with maximal intensity  at a given laser intensity were extrapolated by linear regression, using values gathered with lower laser intensity. for each set of arrays for a given strain, non-specific binding was determined from fluorescence values of the non-specific probes. the cut-off for specific binding was set as the upper 95 % confidence interval of the mean signal intensity of the non-specific probes. probes were excluded when the mean values for the strains compared were under the cut-off value.

the fluorescence values were log <dig> transformed and stage-wise quantitative normalization was performed for each set of comparison, using a script written in the statistical computing environment of r . to identify genes differentially regulated, we analyzed the transformed and normalized intensities determined by two methods, the significance analysis of microarrays method  and “r”, comprising base package statistics and the attached limma package . the presence of genes identified by both methods in the mutants analyzed was searched in the wild type strains included in the study and transcriptomic profiles were compared. the expression profiles of these genes were visualized in a heatmap built with the ‘pheatmap’ package in “r”.

statistical analysis
in the sam method, the delta value was set to obtain an average. false discovery rate  of 5 % and the fold change cut-off value was established as  <dig> . in limma analysis, genes with a fold change > <dig>  and p <  <dig>  were considered as differentially expressed. only the genes identified as differentially expressed by both sam and limma were considered.

availability of supporting data
the data sets supporting the results of this article are available in the arrayexpress repository,  under accession numbers a-mexp- <dig>  and e-mtab- <dig> .

RESULTS
exposure to biocides or antibiotics yield mutants with different susceptibility to biocides and antimicrobials
table  <dig> shows the diversity of mutants exhibiting phenotypes obtained . some mutants with increased mics to biocides were obtained without previous exposure to any antimicrobial but using selective plates supplemented with tri, bkc or chx. others were retrieved after exposure to antibiotics such as cip and amp. previous exposure to shc did not yield resistant mutants. a number of biocide tolerant mutants mentioned above showed lower mic values for amp, caz, cip, ery, gen, clo and tet than those for the corresponding parental strain .

preexposure to sub-inhibitory concentrations of bkc resulted in mutants with either decreased susceptibility to bkc, tri and/or chx  or increased susceptibility to tri . two of these four mutants selected in plates supplemented with bkc also showed a slight increase in miccaz . the trir/bkcr/chxr and the trihs phenotypes were also selected after pre-exposure to chx, cip or without pre-exposure to any antimicrobial. a hyper-susceptible trihs mutant  showed a 2-fold increased micery.

preexposure to sub-inhibitory concentrations of tri resulted in mutants that only showed the phenotypes bkcr and bkcr/chxr, which could even exhibit increased susceptibility to tri. such bkcr mutants showed a minor increase in mic values to caz. two different mutants were selected on plates supplemented with tri, one obtained without previous exposure to antimicrobials showed an increased mictri  and small increases in miccip, micery and micgen. the other, obtained after pre-conditioning with cip did not show an increase in mictri. pre-exposure to cip resulted on mutants showing bkcr or trihs phenotypes, which were closely related with the above ones.

a more comprehensive analysis of the effects that the exposure to biocides and antimicrobials had on salmonella strain sl <dig> strain was performed by characterizing the genome and transcriptome of six mutants representing the phenotypes trir/bkcr/chxr , bkcr/chxr/trihs , bkcr , and trihs  .table  <dig> techniques carried out for a representative subset of mutants

yes and no denotes whether the technique was performed or not



antimicrobial susceptibility
we identified mutants with a given biocide phenotype and variable antibiotic susceptibility patterns but also mutants exhibiting different biocide susceptibility phenotypes and similar antimicrobial susceptibility profiles . the activity of different compounds against seven mutants and the parental strain was evaluated considering their ic <dig> values. high ic <dig> values were observed for antibiotics that inhibit protein synthesis , specific metabolic routes as the reduction of dihydrofolic acid to tetrahydrofolic acid, which is an essential precursor in the thymidine synthesis pathway , or membrane acting compounds  chloride). conversely, compounds that act on the bacterial cell envelopes , toxic anions , quaternary salts  and protease inhibitors showed low ic <dig> values.table  <dig> antimicrobial susceptibility determined by biolog for salmonella enterica mutants in comparison to the parental strain

blank cells indicate that no variation in the susceptibility were found in comparison to the parental strain



within this common antimicrobial susceptibility profile, differences were observed for some mutants. the two trir/bkcr/chxr  and the bkcr/chxr/trihs  exhibited an increased susceptibility to the oxidizing agent 1-chloro- <dig> -dinitrobenzene, and the trna synthetase inhibitor d,l-methionine hydroxamate. the two mutants exhibiting decreased susceptibility to cip by standard mic testing, trir/bkcr/chxr  and bkcr/chxr/trihs  also showed resistance to other quinolones such as nalidixic acid and/or enoxacin. those with increased susceptibility to tri  were more tolerant to benzethonium chloride than the parental strain. this compound is a synthetic qac widely used in different settings, including the food industry as a hard-surface disinfectant, antiseptic, and in foaming hand sanitizers  <cit> . it is noteworthy that resistance to tri in salmonella was frequently associated with tolerance to several antibiotics of different families, with the exception of aminoglycosides.

changes in the genome of sl <dig> strain after exposure to biocides
the six sl <dig> mutants fully sequenced showed snps and deletions in genes involved in cell division/stress, membrane transport, cell motility, metabolism and virulence .table  <dig> mutations identified in sequenced mutants

asna
a
aarf
b
fabi
c
tola
d
ftsk
e
mipa
f

motb
g
biga
h

purh
j
/-

tdca/gara
k
yean
l
description of gene products: a asparagine synthetase a, b ubiquinone biosynthesis protein; c enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase ; d membrane transporter tola protein; e cell division protein ftsk; f hypothetical outer membrane protein; g motility protein b; h hypothetical surface-exposed virulence protein; i intergenic region between glutamyl-t-rna synthetase / xanthosin operon transcriptional regulator; j intergenic region between phosphoribosylaminoimidezolecarboxamide fosmyltransferase and imp cyclohydrolase/- ; k
tdc operon transcriptional activator/hypothetical surface-exposed virulence protein; l hypothetical membrane protein of major facilitator superfamily 



the three trir/bkcr/chxr mutants  differed in the number and nucleotide changes. the ne/tri <dig> mutant presenting the highest mictri value  had a snp in the fabi gene that resulted in the gly93ser change in the binding site of fabi. it also presented a snp in the ftsk gene, which is involved in cell division and likely in the last steps of peptidoglycan biosynthesis. the chx/bkc <dig> mutant harboured two mutations in the ftsk gene and a snp in the yean gene, which encodes a still uncharacterized transporter of the major facilitator superfamily . finally, the ne/chx <dig> mutant showed a snp in the intergenic region in the boundary of purh and the 16s rrna genes, the former related to purine metabolism and previously associated with virulence in different bacterial species.

the bkcr/chxr/trihs  mutant showed unique snps in mipa, asna, aarf genes, but the same snp described above for ne/chx <dig>  mipa is an outer membrane protein possibly involved in a novel antibiotic resistance mechanism against kanamycin in e. coli  <cit> . the other genes are related to the metabolism of amino acids and ubiquinones.

the trihs mutant  showed an amino acid change in tola, the membrane protein specialized in colicin uptake which has been previously involved in detergent tolerance  <cit> , along with a mutation in the intergenic region between the glutamyl-t-rna synthetase / and the regulator of the xanthosin operon transcriptional regulator.

the genome of the bkcr mutant  showed three changes located at the nucleotide sequence of motb gene, the intergenic region next the tdc/gara operon and a deletion in the biga gene. the motb  gene encodes flagellar motor proteins that generate the stator and proton channel anchored to the peptidoglycan layer. the tdc operon is a single transcriptional unit involved in threonine and serine metabolism during anaerobic growth. finally, deletions in the biga gene encoding a hypothetical surface/exposed protein were associated with virulence in some intracellular pathogens  <cit> . deletions in biga gene were also found in other two mutants showing trihs  and trir/bkcr/chxr  phenotypes.

changes in the transcriptome of s. enterica sl <dig> biocide resistant mutants
figure  <dig> shows the volcano plots of genes altered after exposure to biocides in the six mutants analyzed and fig.  <dig>  the heatmap clustering mutants according to the expression profiles of genes identified as differently regulated using both methods . down regulation of genes was more remarkable than overexpression of genes .fig.  <dig> volcano plots of genes showing altered expression after exposure to biocides in the six mutants analyzed. log <dig> fold changes and their corresponding p-values of all genes in the microarray were considered to build the volcano plot. genes up-regulated  are depicted in red box. genes down regulated  appear in blue boxes. genes that did not show a significantly modified pattern are represented in grey dots and the yellow dots depict the genes found in both sam and limma outputs for each mutant

fig.  <dig> heat map of the genes with altered expression in different mutants



differential expression was identified for genes involved in cellular metabolism , energy production, ion transport/metabolism, protein synthesis and signal chemotaxis pathways . the expression of genes classically involved in tolerance to biocides as efflux-pumps  was slightly increased in some mutants.

two trirchxrbkcr mutants  and one bkcr  showed similar gene expression profiles. upregulation of genes involved in protein synthesis occurred in these three mutants, and some other changes were common, either in three or two of them, involving genes related to transcription such as rpoz and rpob which encodes subunits of the rna polymerase. conversely, transcriptional regulators were repressed in ne/tri  and chx/bkc <dig> and tri/bkc <dig> . the maltose monomeric activator malt is a luxr/uhpa member, a family of large size proteins believed to have another functions . the others are members of the arac family and negative regulators of hila, the key regulator of the salmonella pathogenicity island  <dig>   <cit> .

both tri/bkc <dig> and chx/bkc <dig> mutants shared a pattern of down-regulation of genes related to transport and metabolism with a potential role in virulence such as some within type iii secretion system complex, e.g. prgi, pgrh and sope or possibly ompc, encoding surface proteins involved in chemotaxis signal transduction system i.e. part of flagella and invasion proteins . the resultant proteins regulate the events that lead to changes in the swimming behaviour of the cell  <cit> . moreover, the two mutants ne/tri <dig> and chx/bkc <dig> distinguished from the rest by the down-expression of genes linked to threonine metabolism .

overexpression of genes coding for metabolic enzymes related to energy production such as glucose catabolism , some pts systems and other carbohydrate metabolic components were shown for tri/bkc <dig> 

genes with a function related to some of those with mutations such as ftsl <dig> and ftsh, yead, yeac and yeaf, tdcb, tdcc and tdce were found to have altered expression in several mutants.

similar transcriptomic profiles were exhibited by field salmonella strains showing variable reduced susceptibility to biocides and the laboratory-selected mutants
the genes with altered expression in mutants were investigated for their expression in field isolates with decreased susceptibility to biocides . over and down expression of particular genes was noticed for both natural isolates and mutants .fig.  <dig> volcano plots of genes showing altered expression in both natural isolates and mutants. log <dig> fold changes and their corresponding p-values of all genes in the microarray were considered to build the volcano plot. genes up-regulated  are depicted in red box. genes down regulated  appear in blue boxes. genes that did not show a significantly modified pattern are represented in grey dots.

fig.  <dig> heat map of the common genes with altered expression of natural isolates and mutants



similarly to what was observed for mutants, transcriptomic changes did not fully correlate with the phenotypes of susceptibility to biocides. however, enhanced expression of some of the same ribosomal proteins was identified for field strains. a higher number of metabolism-related genes were over-expressed in the wild-type isolates. furthermore, the over-expression of genes encoding pathogenicity-related proteins  occurred in different strains.

other changes were only detected among wild-type strains. for example, the strain with the highest mbc for tri  showed a high level expression of the abc transporter ydey, a pump for which a role on biocide resistance has not been described so far. up-regulation of genes involved in the modification of the lipid a implicated in polymyxin resistance was found for some trir and bkcr strains. on the other hand, slight down-regulation of the acre efflux pump was observed in three pfge-unrelated strains exhibiting a susceptible biocide phenotype  while one of them had the suge gene over-expressed. a number of antibiotic resistance genes were up- or down-regulated in natural isolates.

resistance to biocides reduces the fitness of salmonella sl1344
variable values of fitness cost  were observed for some mutants with disparate biocide phenotype . both ne/chx <dig> , which did not show any considerable susceptibility change, and tri/bkc <dig> , showed the highest fc values . they had deleted biga gene. mutants trir/bkcr/chxr , and trihs  showed similar fc values  . mutants fitter than parental strain showed increased miccaz.

besides changes in growth rates, altered colony morphology was also observed. although several mutants had smoother and smaller colonies than the parental strain, we did not observe notable differences in the rdar  morphotype, an aggregative and resistant physiological state which has been linked to survival in nutrient-limited environments  <cit> , or in the genomic xbai-genomic digested dna profiles .

discussion
this paper documents a versatile adaptive response of the salmonella enterica strain sl <dig> after exposure to inhibitory concentrations of biocides or antibiotics which resulted on a diversity of phenotypes and genomic and proteomic changes. the emergence of mutants with phenotypes of antimicrobial resistance  which had not been previously exposed to antimicrobial agents but were recovered on selection plates, suggests that a variety of mutants with altered susceptibility to biocides easily arises. biocides, acting on multiple cellular targets, would drive random selection of mutants, eventually causing pleiotropic changes; and therefore a high diversity of phenotypes were associated with biocide-tolerance. the fact that shc did not select for mutants might provide a chance for efficient and safe sanitization.

most mutants showed slight variations in their mic values to the antimicrobials tested. although cross-resistance between biocides and antibiotics is frequently described for biocide resistant mutants, we also observed increased susceptibility for some antimicrobials, a phenomenum that can be attributed to frequent collateral effects in the emergence of resistance as previously documented for antibiotic resistant bacteria  <cit> . indeed, antimicrobial resistant mutants of salmonella presented increased susceptibility to envelope active inhibitory compounds. importantly, this sort of compounds turns the cytoplasmic membrane more permeable, which often results on reduced viability. therefore the ability to become resistant to these antimicrobials is lower. a part from the membrane vulnerability, most mutants potentially had alterations in the oxidative metabolism and protein synthesis. our data showed that tri resistance was often accompanied by higher tolerance to compounds of different antibiotic families, with the exception of aminoglycosides. this finding is in line with other studies in salmonella enterica strains that reported increases in the susceptibility to aminoglycosides and chx accompanying trir  <cit> . while most studies on the field focused on the analysis of cross-resistance of biocides and antibiotics, negative epistasis phenomena inferred from the simultaneous emergence of susceptibility to aminoglycosides or biocides and resistance to other antimicrobial agents are not uncommon  <cit> . this antagonistic pleiotropy epistatic effect known as “collateral sensitivity” must be taken into consideration when evaluating the risks for the acquisition of resistance or to envisage methods for reducing or even eliminating resistant microorganisms in the field  <cit> .

comparative genomic analysis revealed changes in a variety of genes, some of them previously linked to tolerance to antibiotics or metals   <cit>  and others newly identified here. different amino acid changes at position  <dig> of the fabi protein resulted in trir phenotypes . however, differences in the polarity of amino acids at position  <dig> might be associated with distinct structural conformations of fabi protein that would affect mictri values; higher values  occurring when an uncharged amino acid  is substituted by a polar amino acid .

non-functional ftsk gene mutants have previously shown increased susceptibility to β-lactams and cip and tolerance to chromate in pseudomonas aeruginosa  <cit> . in this study mutants with snps in ftsk  showed either increased susceptibility to several β-lactams or to most cip-related antibiotics, respectively. the tola gene showed a mutation and differential expression in different mutants. other snps may also modulate virulence in the mutants as for instance, mutants in motb  genes may paralyse the flagellar phenotype influencing adhesion and invasion of cells  <cit> . flagellar assembly and/or mobility may antagonize the t3ss that delivers effectors into the host cell of some pathogens, revealing the potential impact of cross talk between some virulence factors depending on the bacterial colonization phase and infection type  <cit> .

while particular changes at genetic level in the mutants were detected, a remarkable alteration of the expression profiles was noted in both mutants and field isolates, with overexpression of ribosomal protein synthesis as well the down-regulation of genes involved in global stress and regulatory mechanisms, metabolism of amino acids , secondary metabolism, transport, virulence, chemotaxis, invasion pathways and of unknown function. this might indicate a higher cellular activity with lower virulence. efflux pumps previously involved in biocide tolerance were up-regulated in some mutants and field isolates. they included suge, classically implicated in qacs resistance and frequently found in salmonella isolates of clinical and animal origin  <cit>  or acrab  <cit> , whose over-expression is known to contribute to antimicrobial resistance yet at low-level.

this is the first study characterizing both the genomic and expression profiles after antimicrobials challenge, although the stress response after exposure to a high diversity of environmental stressors including biocides or antibiotics has been tackled before. cold-shock response, allowing the survival of listeria monocutogenes in the presence of biocides was previously reported  <cit> . similarly to the mutants selected in bkc in this study, antibiotic-resistant mutants obtained under different metabolic conditions were related to attenuated virulence due to low expression of the t3ss , or mutation in transcriptional regulators. the rna polymerase regulates the transcription of genes encoding transport proteins and enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of the metabolic intermediates of exopolysaccharides, lipids, lipopolysaccharides, lipoproteins, flagella and peptidoglycan. this protein is stress-induced and plays a central role in the control of processes that involve physical interaction of an organism with the environment, as colonization of host surfaces  or biofilm formation  <cit> . polymorphisms in genes coding for rna polymerase subunit α   <cit> , and also σ factors   <cit> ) were previously reported. despite other genes coding for rna polymerase activity  were shown here to be up-regulated, it corroborates the importance of this protein as a target implicated in intrinsic resistance to biocides  <cit> . conversely, down-regulation of transcriptional and ribosomal genes were previously detected after exposure to chx  <cit> . in addition, we report less transcripts of members of the luxr/uhpa and arac family, the last one being negative regulator of hila, the key regulator of the spi <dig>  <cit> . down-regulation of genes encoding virulence-related proteins for several mutants might suggest a lower pathogenicity.

the finding of similar transcriptomic changes found in both biocide resistant mutants and field isolates with reduced susceptibility to biocides, suggests the involvement of common general responses that include diverse alterations in metabolic and chemotaxis pathways, protein synthesis, cell envelope or regulation of pathogenicity-islands, which has been reported in other studies analysing biocide-induced mutants of salmonella and other species  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this study shows that growth of salmonella in the presence of selective concentrations of biocides or antibiotics leads to the selection of mutants with variable susceptibility to antimicrobials  which is consistent with the “multiples target sites” hypothesis of most biocidal agents  <cit> . the results highlight the wide range of pathways employed by salmonella to counteract biocides and achieve stasis/stress survival. unlike to what has been commonly reported, overexpression of acrab-like pumps did not seem to be the main mechanism involved in biocide tolerance. detection of snps was not associated with altered expression of related genes, making data from genomic and transcriptomic analysis necessary for a comprehensive analysis of biocide-challenged strains. finally, most selected biocide-resistant mutants presented fitness costs, an issue that might reduce their chances to spread under non-selective conditions.

additional files
additional file 1: figure s <dig>  mic distributions to triclosan, chlorhexidine and benzalkonium chloride for  <dig> natural salmonella isolates. the number of salmonella isolates with reduced susceptibility to biocides analysed for gene expression are indicated above the arrows and mic susceptibility values. colors are according biocide distributions.  an isolate showed simultaneously reduced susceptibility to chx and bkc. other  <dig> isolates more susceptible for biocides were analysed for control .


figure s <dig> 
xbai digested-chromosomal dna pfge of several salmonella mutants and its parental strain .


figure s <dig>  growth curves of salmonella mutants and the parental strain in plain lb at 37 °c with shaking. 

additional file 2: table s <dig>  differential gene expression of common genes from limma and sam methods for mutants. 

additional file 3: table s <dig>  differential gene expression of common genes from limma and sam methods for natural isolates. 



