BACKGROUND
proteins are quite tolerant of mutations, allowing evolution to produce highly diverged sequences that fold to similar structures and perform conserved biochemical functions  <cit> . however, proteins with nearly identical structures and functions can differ in their robustness to mutation  <cit> , as well as in their capacity to acquire new functions  <cit> . the fact that mutational robustness and evolvability can vary among the functionally equivalent proteins produced by natural sequence divergence makes these properties important hidden dimensions in evolution – direct selection for protein function is blind to them, yet they can play a crucial role in enabling future evolution. whether the evolutionary process somehow promotes the acquisition of mutational robustness and evolvability therefore remains a major question  <cit> .

previous experiments have identified several specific evolutionary conditions that can affect mutational robustness. for example, genetic complementation decreases the mutational robustness of viruses  <cit> , while high mutation rates favor mutational robustness in simulated digital organisms  <cit> . however, theory  <cit>  makes the much broader – and previously experimentally untested – prediction that extra mutational robustness will arise quite generally in sufficiently large populations. this prediction cannot be understood in the standard framework of kimura's neutral theory  <cit> , because one of the usual assumptions of the neutral theory is that mutational robustness is constant.  however, changes in mutational robustness can be described by envisioning evolution as occurring on neutral networks, or sets of functionally equivalent proteins that are connected by single mutational steps  <cit> . in a seminal theoretical analysis of evolution on neutral networks, van nimwegen and coworkers  <cit>  predicted that the extent of mutational robustness should depend on the degree of population polymorphism. here, we briefly summarize their reasoning, as it motivates our experimental work. we also refer the reader to chapter  <dig> of wagner  <cit> , which contains an excellent explanation of the densely mathematical work of van nimwegen and coworkers  <cit> .

if an evolving population is mostly monomorphic, then each mutation is either lost or goes to fixation before another mutation occurs. the population is therefore usually clustered at a single genotype and rarely experiences mutations, meaning that selection does not distinguish between genotypes of different mutational robustness. the evolving population can be envisioned as a single walker on the neutral network, and although the population is less likely to move to poorly-connected nodes of the neutral network, when it does reach such nodes it will tend to remain "stuck" at them for long periods of time . as a result, a mostly monomorphic population occupies all neutral network nodes with equal probability  <cit> . by contrast, a highly polymorphic population is always spread across many nodes of the neutral network. when mutations occur, the members of the population at highly connected nodes have a better chance of surviving, causing them to be favored by evolution and increasing the average mutational robustness  <cit> . specifically, a highly polymorphic population occupies each node with a probability proportional to its eigenvector centrality  <cit> , a measure of how connected it is to other connected nodes . figure 1a illustrates how mostly monomorphic and highly polymorphic populations are predicted to occupy a neutral network. the preference of highly polymorphic populations for more connected neutral network nodes leads to an increase in the average mutational robustness, as a node's connectivity is proportional to its robustness to single mutations.

for proteins, this preference for excess mutational robustness in highly polymorphic populations can also be seen in the stabilities of the evolved proteins  <cit> . the basic idea is that selection for protein function imposes a roughly threshold requirement on protein stability, with proteins able to perform their biochemical functions if, and only if, they are more stable than some minimal threshold. extra stability beyond the threshold confers no direct benefit on a protein's function, but it does increase the protein's mutational robustness by allowing it to tolerate a wider range of destabilizing mutations . the preference for protein mutational robustness in highly polymorphic populations is therefore predicted to be manifested by higher average stability of proteins evolving in such populations  <cit> . figure 1b illustrates how proteins from highly polymorphic populations are predicted to be more stable than their counterparts from mostly monomorphic populations. note that the extent of polymorphism depends on the product of the mutation rate and population size, meaning that proteins from populations of different sizes are predicted to evolve to different levels of mutational robustness and stability even if they experience the same mutation rate.

RESULTS
design of neutral evolution experiment
to test whether high population polymorphism drives an increase in mutational robustness and protein stability, we performed laboratory evolution experiments on cytochrome p <dig> proteins. the basic idea was to neutrally evolve p450s under a constant selection pressure in populations that were either monomorphic or highly polymorphic, and observe whether the proteins evolved to different levels of mutational robustness and stability. the evolution experiments started with a p <dig> bm <dig> heme domain that had been engineered to hydroxylate 12-p-nitrophenoxydodecanoic acid   <cit> . we imposed the selection criterion that escherichia coli cells expressing the p <dig> had to yield lysate with enough active enzyme to hydroxylate a specified amount of 12-pnca in  <dig> min. this criterion roughly corresponds to the case in which an enzyme must catalyze a biochemically relevant reaction at some minimal level in order for its host to survive. note that other properties such as stability and expression level can vary freely, provided that the criterion for total activity is met.

the properties of a neutrally evolving protein eventually "equilibrate," much as the properties of an isolated physical system under some macroscopic constraint tend towards the values that maximize the system's internal entropy. for proteins, this usually means that stability, expression, and activity drift towards their lowest tolerable values, as the vast majority of random sequences do not encode stable, well expressed enzymes   <cit> . the initial p <dig> had been engineered for maximal activity  <cit> , meaning that it was not equilibrated to the more mild selection criterion of the experiments. we therefore neutrally evolved this initial p <dig> for  <dig> generations, introducing random mutations with error-prone pcr and retaining all mutants that met the selection criterion for total activity on 12-pnca. the procedure used for this equilibration evolution was similar to that used for the polymorphic neutral evolution described below. as expected, expression, stability, and activity all dropped during the equilibration evolution. at the end of the equilibration evolution, we chose a single sequence as the parent for the neutral evolution experiments. the gene encoding this parent sequence contained  <dig> nucleotide mutations and  <dig> amino acid mutations relative to the initial p <dig> .

we used this parent gene to begin three parallel sets of neutral evolution experiments, which we named "monomorphic," "polymorphic," and "unselected" . the monomorphic experiments capture the case where the population moves as a single entity, the polymorphic experiment captures the case where the population spreads across many sequences, and the unselected experiments show how the gene evolves in the absence of selection for protein function. in all experiments, at each generation we used error-prone pcr to introduce an average of  <dig>  nucleotide mutations per p <dig> gene . the mutant genes were ligated into a plasmid and transformed into e. coli  <cit> , and transformants were selected using the plasmid's antibiotic resistance marker. for the unselected case, we randomly picked one of the mutants, recovered the mutant gene with a plasmid mini-prep, and used this mutant as the template for the next generation of error-prone pcr. we performed four independent replicates of unselected evolution, evolving each for  <dig> generations.

for the monomorphic and polymorphic populations, we imposed the selection criterion that the p450s hydroxylate 12-pnca with at least 75% of the total activity of the original parent gene. we expressed the p450s in e. coli, and then assayed the cell lysates for activity in a high-throughput 96-well plate format. the total amount of product produced by  <dig> μl of clarified lysate in  <dig> min was compared to the median of four control wells containing the original parent p <dig> to determine if the mutant met the selection criterion. the only difference between the monomorphic and polymorphic experiments was the size of the evolving populations. in the monomorphic limit, each mutation is either lost or goes to fixation before the next occurs. we enforced this evolutionary dynamic by holding the population size to a single protein sequence. at each generation, we assayed a single mutant. if this mutant met the selection criterion, then it was carried over to the next generation, corresponding to a neutral mutation going to fixation. if the mutant failed the selection criterion, then the population stayed at the previous sequence for the next generation, corresponding to a mutation lost to selection. the fact that we retained the previous sequence when a nonfunctional mutant was screened is critical, as it made the protocol correspond to the case of a mostly monomorphic population where the genotype is unchanged if a nonfunctional mutant is produced . if all of the mutants assayed had zero or one mutations, then this protocol would correspond exactly to the "blind ant" walk of  <cit>  or the nμ <<  <dig> equations of  <cit> . however, in order to achieve appreciable sequence evolution on a laboratory time scale, we used a mutation rate that sometimes produced multiple mutations in a generation. we mathematically describe this situation in the appendix; here we simply note that it is possible to think of each generation as introducing a single mutational event rather than a single mutation. we performed  <dig> independent replicates of monomorphic evolution, evolving each for  <dig> generations.

in the polymorphic limit, the population spreads across many sequences. to implement this experimentally, we assayed  <dig> mutants at each generation. the selection criterion was used to classify each mutant as functional or nonfunctional. in neutral evolution, all functional mutants reproduce with equal probability. we therefore pooled equal volumes of stationary-phase cultures of each functional mutant and recovered the pooled genes with a mini-prep. the polymorphic evolution experiment therefore approaches the equations of  <cit> , again with the exception that a sequence might undergo multiple mutations at a single generation. we give the equations describing this situation in the appendix. the mutational robustness of a sufficiently large population is expected to evolve deterministically  <cit> , so we only performed a single polymorphic replicate . because mutations accumulate more rapidly in the polymorphic experiments than the monomorphic ones, we evolved the polymorphic population for  <dig> generations rather than  <dig> 

mutations and mutational robustness
to test directly whether the polymorphic population evolves higher average mutational robustness, we measured the fraction of  <dig> random mutants that met the selection criterion. figure  <dig> shows that the polymorphic population neutrally evolved to a markedly higher mutational robustness than the monomorphic populations, with  <dig> ± 2% of the final polymorphic population mutants continuing to function versus  <dig> ± 2% for the final monomorphic populations . the only difference between the two types of populations was their size, so evolution has clearly favored mutational robustness in the larger and thus more polymorphic population. this finding represents the first experimental support for the prediction that highly polymorphic populations evolve excess mutational robustness  <cit> .

theory predicts that the excess mutational robustness of a highly polymorphic protein population comes from increased protein stability  <cit> . because the p <dig> variants unfold irreversibly, an equilibrium thermodynamic stability Δgf cannot be measured. we therefore determined stability to irreversible thermal and chemical denaturation, two highly correlated measures of p <dig> stability that have previously been shown to contribute to mutational robustness  <cit>  . figure  <dig> shows that proteins from the polymorphic population were in fact more stable than their counterparts from the monomorphic population . we also observed that proteins in the polymorphic population tended to accumulate to higher levels in e. coli . elevated expression could be a byproduct of increased stability, or it could independently increase mutational robustness by allowing the proteins to better tolerate mutations that decrease codon adaptation or reduce folding efficiency. changes in p <dig> catalytic efficiency did not appear to be a major mechanism for the observed differences in mutational robustness, as we did not see any evidence of systematic differences between the polymorphic and monomorphic populations in the number of 12-pnca turnovers per enzyme . however, it is certainly possible that additional unrecognized biophysical factors contributed to the excess mutational robustness of the polymorphic population, although no such factors were immediately obvious.

interpretation in terms of the p <dig> neutral network
the higher mutational robustness of the polymorphic population is due to the fact that it occupies the p <dig> gene neutral network differently than the monomorphic populations. measurements from the evolution experiments can therefore be used to infer basic properties of the underlying neutral network of p <dig> genes, as originally noted by van nimwegen and coworkers  <cit> . in the appendix, we derive approximations for the normalized principal eigenvalue ⟨ν⟩∞ and the normalized average connectivity ⟨ν⟩o of the neutral network, where in both cases the normalization is obtained by dividing by the network coordination number. we obtain ⟨ν⟩∞ =  <dig>  and ⟨ν⟩o =  <dig>  for the p <dig> gene neutral network. our ability to consistently estimate these two parameters from four different experimental measurements supports the idea that the theory that we elaborate in the appendix appropriately describes the experiments. the difference between ⟨ν⟩∞ and ⟨ν⟩o is a measure of the extent to which some p <dig> neutral network nodes have more connections than others. we note that ⟨ν⟩∞ is approximately equal to the exponential decline parameter for the asymptotic decline in the fraction of functional mutants with increasing numbers of random nucleotide mutations  <cit>  . previous studies looking at this exponential decline have reported ⟨ν⟩∞ =  <dig>  for subtilisin  <cit> , ⟨ν⟩∞ =  <dig>  for 3-methyladenine dna glycosylase  <cit> , and ⟨ν⟩∞ =  <dig> – <dig>  for tem <dig> β-lactamase  <cit> . these comparisons suggest that p <dig> has a sparser neutral network  than these other proteins. we suspect, however, that these earlier studies  overestimate ⟨ν⟩∞ due to insufficient equilibration of the starting sequence. we believe that the approach of the current work is a more accurate method for determining ⟨ν⟩∞ because the measurements are made after many mutations have equilibrated the initial sequence. this approach could be used in future experiments to compare the neutral network connectivities of proteins from different families.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated that neutral evolution favors more mutationally robust proteins when the evolving population is highly polymorphic. strikingly, the excess mutational robustness is due only to population polymorphism, and so will arise in any population of sufficiently large size. our work is the first experimental demonstration of this phenomenon, which is predicted to occur quite generally in neutrally evolving proteins and nucleic acids  <cit> . furthermore, we were able to identify one of the biophysical factors underlying the increase in mutational robustness by showing that proteins from the highly polymorphic population are more stable. we recognize, however, that evolution in a biological context will be more complex. in our experiments, fitness was considered to be the p450's ability to be expressed in active form by bacteria grown to saturation in an environment with plentiful nutrients. biological fitness, however, depends on numerous additional and subtle effects such as the metabolic costs of protein synthesis or the burdens imposed by misfolded molecules. some mutations that are neutral in the experiments might therefore have deleterious effects in a biological setting  <cit> . the experiments nonetheless capture the overriding constraint that proteins retain their biochemical functions. our success in quantitatively explaining the results supports the notion that important aspects of protein evolution can be described simply in terms of mutational effects on stability  <cit> .

an obvious question is whether evolution in nature favors mutational robustness by the process we have demonstrated. whether natural populations will evolve excess mutational robustness in their proteins depends on whether they are sufficiently polymorphic, which will be the case if the product of their effective population size n and per protein per generation mutation rate μ is much greater than one  <cit> . accurately estimating nμ, which is closely related to the widely used parameter θ in population genetics, for natural populations is difficult  <cit>  . for humans and other multicellular organisms, nμ is probably too small  <cit>  for their proteins to neutrally evolve mutational robustness. but estimates  <cit>  place nμ≈  <dig> to  <dig> for typical-length proteins in bacteria, and it is probably much higher for many viruses  <cit> . it therefore is likely that many viral and some bacterial proteins have evolved extra mutational robustness. it is important to note that this type of mutational robustness is due to changes in the internal properties  of the proteins, and is limited by the "entropic force" caused by the constant rain of destabilizing mutations  <cit>  rather than by any direct organismal fitness cost of maintaining the mutational robustness. by contrast, some other mechanisms of mutational robustness  impose direct organismal fitness costs, and so will not necessarily be favored in large populations  <cit> .

the fact that evolution favors protein mutational robustness in sufficiently large populations might also contribute to adaptive evolution. experiments have shown that extra stability increases a protein's evolvability by allowing it to tolerate a wider range of functionally beneficial but destabilizing mutations  <cit> . a similar phenomenon seems to occur in natural evolution, where functionally neutral but stabilizing mutations can play a key role in adaptive evolution by counterbalancing the destabilizing effects of other functionally beneficial mutations  <cit> . viruses and perhaps bacteria might thus benefit from large population sizes and high mutation rates that drive an increase in the mutational robustness and stability of their proteins, which in turn enhances the capacity of these proteins to rapidly change their sequences and evolve new functions.

