BACKGROUND
compared to other senses, olfactory perception is considered to be variable, subjective, and unreliable. both variability between individuals and within individuals contribute to the overall variability. the same olfactory stimulus can be perceived differently by the same subject on different occasions and, as a consequence, olfactory psychophysics has unusually high within-individual variability 
 <cit> , which can be of the same magnitude as variability between individuals 
 <cit> . however, careful psychophysical experiments have also revealed large, stable inter-individual differences in olfactory perception. there are dramatic differences in subjects’ sensitivity to odours 
 <cit>  and the perceived quality and pleasantness of some odours differs greatly between individuals 
 <cit> . the inter-individual differences can be general 
 <cit>  or they can concern specific odours 
 <cit> .

many factors contribute to inter-individual differences in general olfactory acuity, which is a measure of olfactory abilities across different stimuli. a reduced general olfactory acuity can be genetic 
 <cit>  or it can be caused by trauma 
 <cit> , exposure to toxic agents 
 <cit> , neurodegenerative diseases 
 <cit> , or infections 
 <cit> . general olfactory acuity declines with age 
 <cit>  and is lower in men 
 <cit> . in contrast, odour-specific inter-individual differences have only been shown to be influenced by variability in the gene for an odorant receptor that is responsive to the odour 
 <cit>  and by previous experience with the odour in question 
 <cit> .

here we explore all these aspects of variability in a dataset that was collected to identify genetic variations in odorant receptor genes that influence the perception of specific odours 
 <cit> . this dataset, which is made available here in its entirety for data-mining purposes , has three features that make it exceptionally useful for the study of perceptual variability. first, the same psychophysical measures were collected from each subject on two visits on two different days. this allowed us to quantify the relative contributions of inter-individual variability and within-individual variability to overall variability and to control for the latter when desired. to further investigate within-individual variability,  <dig> of the subjects returned for a third and fourth visit more than one year after the second visit. second, our subject population was unusually diverse and closely reflected the age structure and ethnicity of new york city  
 <cit> . this is an advantage over typical psychophysical or psychological studies that rely on the comparatively homogeneous subject pool of college students 
 <cit> . third, we have assessed responses to a large panel of diverse odours. this is a marked difference from typical studies of olfactory perception, which often focus on a limited number of odours. consequently, we have uncovered a large number of odour-specific differences between demographic groups that will inform the study of genetic and environmental influences on olfactory perception.

RESULTS
within-individual variability
to quantify within-individual variability over time,  <dig> of the  <dig> subjects rated the intensity and pleasantness of  <dig> stimuli presented at intervals ranging from  <dig> minutes to over one year. on each of four visits, these subjects rated the  <dig> stimuli twice, approximately  <dig> minutes apart. the second visit was on average  <dig> days after the first visit and the third visit was on average  <dig> days after the first visit. the fourth visit was on average  <dig> days after the third visit . the within-individual variability  was higher for the intensity ratings  than for the pleasantness ratings . furthermore, within-individual variability was odour-dependent. the variability of the perceived intensity of the high concentration of butyric acid , for example, was significantly higher than the variability of the intensity perception of the high concentration of hexyl butyrate . interestingly, for any given stimulus, the responses were as similar when the ratings were spaced over one year apart  as when they were around  <dig> minutes apart . this may seem surprising, but for thresholds it has even been reported that the variability within a day is significantly larger than the variability between days 
 <cit> . day-to-day variability in olfactory perception is therefore largely a consequence of sniff-to-sniff variability. the main causes of within-individual variability are processes that operate on the scale of seconds or minutes such as changes in the stimulus signal-to-noise ratio 
 <cit>  or the reallocation of attention by the subject 
 <cit> , rather than on the scale of hours or days, such as hormonal changes or infections of the upper respiratory tract.
 <dig> for the complete sequence of odours and concentrations used in the study.

variability in general olfactory acuity
for all remaining data evaluation, we minimized the influence of within-individual variability by averaging data from the two first visits. to study the influence of demographic factors on general olfactory acuity, we ranked our subjects according to their overall acuity, yielding a ranking of  <dig>  to  <dig> . general olfactory acuity was composed of both thresholds and intensity ratings . the measure of general olfactory acuity used here is not one of the standardized tests for olfactory acuity, such as the university of pennsylvania smell identification test  
 <cit> , the phenyl ethyl alcohol single staircase odour detection threshold test, or numerous others 
 <cit> . however, by averaging six performance indicators that are influenced by the perception of  <dig> structurally different odours, we obtain a uniquely comprehensive measure of general olfactory acuity.

increased age had a large influence on general olfactory acuity in our population. those above  <dig>  years of age had a lower acuity  than those below  <dig>  years of age . that olfactory acuity declines dramatically with age is well known 
 <cit>  . it is unclear if this decline with age is a part of the normal aging process or the cumulative effect of damage to the olfactory system caused by upper respiratory infections, trauma, or environmental toxins 
 <cit> .

another large influence on general olfactory acuity was gender. in our population, women had a more acute sense of smell  than men , which confirms previous reports 
 <cit>  . the difference in general olfactory acuity between the genders has been previously shown to be more pronounced in older subjects than in younger subjects 
 <cit> , however we found no evidence for this in our dataset .

we also found significant differences between self-reported body type and general olfactory acuity. subjects who rated themselves either underweight  or overweight  had a lower general olfactory acuity than subjects who rated their body weight as “just right”  . it has been suggested that metabolic changes occurring in obese individuals have a negative influence on olfactory acuity 
 <cit> . however, in a recent study it was shown that the olfactory acuity of subjects who experienced dramatic weight loss after gastric bypass surgery did not improve 
 <cit> . the causality may therefore be in the other direction. instead of obesity causing reduced olfactory acuity, olfactory dysfunction could be a contributing factor to the development of obesity. this effect could be mediated by the influence of olfactory function on food choice and food intake 
 <cit>  and is deserving of further study.

consistent with earlier reports on differences in olfactory perception between racial groups 
 <cit> , there were differences in our measure of olfactory acuity between races  , but not between hispanics  and non-hispanics  . other demographic factors such as marital status or education did not correlate with olfactory acuity .

the effect of smoking on the sense of smell is still the subject of debate 
 <cit> . in a study of  <dig>  swedish subjects, no statistically significant relationship between olfactory dysfunction and smoking was found 
 <cit> . among  <dig>  participants from the state of wisconsin in the united states, smoking was associated with increased odds of olfactory impairment in women, but not in men 
 <cit> . among  <dig>  germans tested, smokers had an impaired sense of smell 
 <cit> . an impaired sense of smell has also been observed in other studies 
 <cit> , and our results also suggest that smokers  have lower olfactory acuity than non-smokers  . female smokers  had a lower general olfactory acuity than female non-smokers  and male smokers  had a lower general olfactory acuity than male non-smokers .

variability in sensitivity to specific odours
we next investigated odour-specific differences between demographic groups. previous work suggested that odour-specific perceptual differences can be caused by genetic polymorphisms 
 <cit>  or by learning and experience 
 <cit> . we measured detection thresholds of the musky odour pentadecalactone, the vanilla odour vanillin, and the sweaty sock odour isovaleric acid . subjects also rated the intensity of  <dig> odours at two concentrations .
 <cit> . odour names are labelled according to odour concentration: grey: low; black: high; . subjects were divided by age according to the median of  <dig>  years, which is rounded to  <dig> years for labeling the figure.

odour detection thresholds contributed to our measure of general olfactory acuity . accordingly, all statistically significant differences between thresholds  are between demographic groups that also have different general olfactory acuity. however, differences in the sensitivity to a specific odour do not necessarily reflect differences in general olfactory acuity. although men, who have a lower general olfactory acuity than women, are less sensitive to most odours that have been studied 
 <cit> , males have been shown to be more sensitive to the odour bourgeonal, which has a floral lily-of-the-valley scent 
 <cit> . similarly, african-americans have been shown to have a higher threshold for isovaleric acid than caucasians, but a lower threshold for pentadecalactone 
 <cit> . the same trend is seen in our data, although the differences are not statistically significant . this illuminates the limitation of a general olfactory acuity score, 50% of which is based on the sensitivity to three odours. if there are differences in the tuning of the olfactory system between demographic groups, the general olfactory acuity score may reflect these differences in tuning rather than differences in acuity.

the intensity rating of  <dig> odours allowed us to quantify how much the perceived intensity of specific odours varied across subjects. the same subject rated the same stimuli during the two visits to be of similar intensity. the median of the spearman correlation coefficient for within-individual comparisons was  <dig> . in contrast, different subjects differed widely in their assessment of the intensity of the stimuli. the median spearman correlation coefficient for all pairwise comparisons between subjects was only  <dig> . to identify the factors contributing to this inter-individual variability, we assessed how the perception of different stimuli varied across the major demographic groups in our study. the three stimuli showing the greatest variability between subjects in intensity ratings were the high concentrations of androstenone  and androstadienone , two odorous steroids found in human body secretions 
 <cit> , and methanethiol , a cabbage-like odour present in urine of people who have previously ingested asparagus 
 <cit> . our discovery of the large variability of methanethiol intensity perception is interesting because others have reported variability in the perception of the smell of asparagus urine odour. some individuals cannot perceive the characteristic asparagus urine odour and the percentage of these individuals has been reported to vary between 0% and 50% in different demographic populations 
 <cit> . recently, it has been shown that the inability to smell asparagus urine odour is associated with a single nucleotide polymorphism within a 50-gene cluster of olfactory receptors 
 <cit> .

we and others showed previously that the intensity perception of androstenone and androstadienone—the two most variably perceived stimuli in our study—is altered by genetic variation in the odorous steroid-sensitive odorant receptor or7d <dig> 
 <cit> . here we show in the same subject population that androstadienone was perceived to be stronger by older subjects  and women . we also show here that caucasians perceived androstadienone to be a weaker odour than african-americans . this is consistent with the finding from the national geographic smell survey, which found that african respondents were more sensitive to androstenone than american respondents. this difference is undoubtedly at least partially caused by the fact that the functional rt variant of or7d <dig> is more common in african-americans than in caucasians 
 <cit> .

among the other statistically significant differences in intensity perception between demographic groups it is remarkable that asians perceive each odour of the homologous series of nonyl aldehyde, decyl aldehyde, and undecanal to be stronger than caucasians . the difference in the intensity perception of the high concentration of nonyl aldehyde is the largest difference between demographic groups that we found. we have no mechanistic explanation for this interesting perceptual difference in asians, but the observation bears further investigation. it is also worth noting that we found that men perceive bourgeonal to be more intense than women . our results confirm a previous study that showed that bourgeonal is the only known odour that men are more sensitive to than women 
 <cit> . three odours were perceived as more intense by non-perfume users .

variability in perceived pleasantness of specific odours
the same  <dig> odours at two concentrations that were rated for intensity were also rated for pleasantness. in general, there was much stronger agreement in the subject population about the pleasantness of the stimuli  than about their intensity . however, perceived pleasantness also varies between individuals and it is known to depend on genetic variation 
 <cit> , cultural background 
 <cit> , and conditioning 
 <cit> . we found that intensity and pleasantness judgements were correlated, especially for unpleasant odours , meaning that unpleasant odours were generally perceived to be more intense than pleasant odours. across all subjects, the eight most pleasant odours were food odours such as vanilla, citrus, minty, and cinnamon odours, while the seven least pleasant odours were fatty acid derivatives associated with the sour smell of rancid butter or body odour . the biggest variability in pleasantness perception was found for floral odours  . the two most pleasant stimuli were the two concentrations of ethyl vanillin, followed by the high concentration of vanillin . ethyl vanillin was rated to be more pleasant than vanillin by all demographic groups . the least liked odour was isovaleric acid , followed by isobutyric acid , and isobutyraldehyde  . throughout our subject population, odours perceived to be most and least pleasant were remarkably stable .
 <dig>  only the  <dig> most pleasant and the  <dig> most unpleasant stimuli are shown for each group. odour names are labelled according to odour concentration: grey: low; black: high. the inset shows the legend for the histograms . subjects were divided by age according to the median of  <dig>  years, which is rounded to  <dig> years for labeling the figure.

however, there were some dramatic differences between demographic groups. statistically significant differences in pleasantness perception are shown in figure 
 <dig>  for  <dig> of the  <dig> stimuli the pleasantness rating differed significantly between african-american and caucasian subjects . the biggest difference between younger and older subjects was that older subjects perceived anise, the odour of liquorice, to be more pleasant .
 <cit> . odour names are labelled according to odour concentration: grey: low; black: high; . subjects were divided by age according to the median of  <dig>  years, which is rounded to  <dig> years for labeling the figure.

the first published differences in pleasantness perception of odours between women and men were described in  <dig> 
 <cit> . in that study, women rated camphor, menthol, citronella, and ferric valerian as more pleasant than men, whereas men found cedarwood oil, pine oil, musk, and tonka beans to be more pleasant 
 <cit> . a similar heterogeneity was found in the 1980s in the national geographic smell survey, where amyl acetate and mercaptan were rated as more pleasant by men than by women, but rose and eugenol as more pleasant by women than men 
 <cit> . furthermore, it was shown in a large study  that the odorous steroid androstenone is perceived to be less pleasant by women than by men 
 <cit> . the finding that women like androstenone less than men was not reproduced in our study. the difference in perceived pleasantness of eugenol, menthol, citronella, and cedarwood oil could also not be reproduced in our study. instead, we found seven new stimuli whose pleasantness was perceived differently by men and women . for guaiacol, the odour of wood smoke, both concentrations were perceived to be significantly more pleasant by men. the high concentration of guaiacol showed the largest difference between men and women .

what accounts for these historical differences in gender-dependent pleasantness between our study and earlier studies? it may be that the perceived pleasantness of odours has a cultural component 
 <cit>  and culture changes over time. pleasantness perception is likely to be determined at least partially by cultural associations. we propose that the associations men and women had with odours in the 1920s and the 1980s are different from what they are in the 2000s.

possibly because of the cultural component of odour pleasantness perception, all the odours that were perceived to be more pleasant by perfume users were odours used in perfumes  . octyl aldehyde and nonyl aldehyde are key ingredients of perfumes, including the classic scent chanel no.  <dig> 
 <cit> . perfume use may result in these odours being rated as more pleasant, or, alternatively, those who perceive these odours to be more pleasant are more likely to use perfumes.

geranyl acetate was perceived to be more pleasant by caucasians than by asians .

variability in odour quality perception
in addition to investigating the influence of demographic factors on intensity and pleasantness perception, we also assessed the perception of specific olfactory qualities. we tested olfactory qualities associated with three odours, androstenone, pentadecalactone, and vanillin, by asking subjects to assign descriptors from a list of  <dig> standard odour descriptors 
 <cit>  . these  <dig> descriptors were grouped into eight categories and assigned a colour code . after correcting for biases in descriptor usage by subtracting the descriptors used to describe the solvent, several differences in perceived odour quality emerged for each of the three odours tested. the descriptors applied to androstenone were largely based on the foulness of the smell . as expected, pentadecalactone, a synthetic musk odour that is often sold under the brand name exaltolide®, was described mainly with terms that can be applied to perfumes , whereas for vanillin, perfume and food terms were used . the differences between demographic groups in assigning descriptors to androstenone , pentadecalactone , and vanillin  can uncover different associations or different perceptual qualities of the stimulus. androstenone was more likely to smell “musky” and “aromatic” to women, whereas men found it to be more “chemical” and “sickening,” reflecting gender differences in the perceived qualities of the stimulus .

CONCLUSIONS
we have investigated the factors that influence olfactory perception in a large set of psychophysical data collected from a diverse population of subjects from the new york city metropolitan area. we found that within-individual variability did not differ more when tests were repeated months apart than when they were repeated minutes apart, suggesting that variability between tests is caused almost entirely by processes operating on a time-scale of minutes or seconds. we showed that general olfactory acuity correlates with age, gender, smoking habits, body type, and race. in addition we have identified over  <dig> cases in which sensitivity to a specific odour, or the intensity or pleasantness perception of a specific odour, differed significantly between demographic groups. we also studied in detail how the perceived odour quality of three odours differs between demographic groups.

our results illustrate the complex composition of inter-individual variability in odour perception. if we for example consider the intensity rating of the high concentration of androstenone, which is the most variable of all the ratings reported here, we can assign multiple factors to the variability. one group of factors that contribute to this variability are factors that influence general olfactory function. among those are genetic factors 
 <cit> , which have been shown to explain about 20% of perceptual variability 
 <cit> . in addition there are environmental factors that contribute to the variability of olfactory acuity, such as prior upper respiratory infections, trauma, and environmental toxins 
 <cit> . the influence of environmental factors has been estimated to be larger than the influence of genetic factors 
 <cit> . however, the variability of the intensity perception of androstenone is not only caused by variability in general olfactory acuity. there are further factors that influence not all odour perception, but specifically the perception of androstenone and similar odours. among these are environmental and genetic factors. the most important environmental factor that influences androstenone perception in an odour-specific fashion is prior exposure to the odour 
 <cit> . the most important genetic factor that has an odour-specific effect is probably variability in odorant receptor genes 
 <cit> . for the intensity perception of androstenone at high concentration in the subject population presented here, genetic variability in one of these receptors, or7d <dig>  has been shown to explain almost 40% of the perceptual variability 
 <cit> .

the variability, subjectivity, or unreliability of olfactory perception is a major hurdle in understanding this enigmatic sense. knowledge of the causes of perceptual variability will inform experimental designs in which the variability is controlled for. recently, progress has been made in elucidating the genetic causes of inter-individual differences in the sense of smell 
 <cit> . together with large psychophysical studies of demographic influences on smell perception like the one presented here, this research may one day make it possible to predict inter-individual differences in smell perception. ultimately this approach has the potential to shed light on the innate and cultural factors that influence sensory perception and aesthetic preferences.

