BACKGROUND
alternative splicing  is a biological process that occurs during the maturation step of a pre-mrna, allowing the production of different mature mrna variants from a unique transcription unit. as is known to play a key role in the regulation of gene expression and transcriptome/proteome diversity  <cit> . first considered as an exceptional event, as is now thought to involve the majority of the human multi-exon genes, from 50% to 74%  <cit> . this observation raises new issues for genome annotation, especially concerning the computational gene finding process that generally provides only one exon-intron structure per sequence.

in the context of structural gene prediction, two classes of approaches are usually considered. in the first approach, usually denoted as intrinsic or ab initio, the only type of information used for gene prediction lies in the statistical properties of the various gene elements . on the contrary, so-called extrinsic approaches essentially rely on the existence of similarities between the sequence to annotate and other known sequences . several existing gene finding tools are essentially intrinsic : this is the case for genscan  <cit> , hmmgene  <cit>  or slam  <cit> . for such a gene finder, the predicted gene structure is defined as an optimal prediction, that is the most probable according to its underlying probabilistic model. in the presence of as however, a unique prediction is not sufficient. one obvious possibility is to look for suboptimal predictions. this can be done for a classic hmm-based gene finder by a modification of the viterbi algorithm, thus providing the set of the k best predictions. this approach has been applied eg. in hmmgene or in fgenes-m . another way to obtain suboptimal solutions from a hmm is to do hmm sampling  <cit> . this method, which consists in randomly generating parses according to the posterior probabilities, has been implemented in the gene finder slam. usually, a very large amount of samples are needed to generate just a single prediction that differs from the optimal one. genscan adopt a different approach and search for alternative exons not represented in the optimal prediction. this is done using a forward-backward algorithm to identify potential exons for which the a posteriori likelihood is larger than a given threshold.

in addition to the fact that all these exclusively intrinsic approaches cannot take into account transcript evidences, they suffer from two major problems of sensibility and specificity:

first of all, these methods assume that predictions representing as variants should have a probability which is very close to the optimal probability according to the underlying gene model. this is however quite arguable, especially when the alternative structure significantly differs from the optimal one. actually, when an as variant eg. shifts from a strong to a weak or a non-consensus splice site or shows a complete coding exon skipping event, it is quite unlikely that the probability will remain in the neighborhood of the optimum since it will not be able to incorporate the corresponding splicing or coding score.

moreover, a strong specificity problem has been observed for this approach. since a very large number of alternative predictions can always be produced for any sequence, it is essential to be able to distinguish those reflecting real as variants from in silico false positives. to perform this, and as long as as sites dedicated prediction tools are unavailable, the probability of a prediction alone cannot be sufficient and additional evidence is required.

in opposition to the purely intrinsic approach, the analysis of experimental data can provide useful information. more specifically, sequences of mature transcripts resulting from as provide reliable evidence of the existence of the as event. large scale studies have already been undertaken to detect as evidences from transcript alignments and to collect them in databases such as eg. hasdb  <cit> , asdb  <cit> , asap  <cit> , asd  <cit> , eased  <cit>  or prosplicer  <cit> . some software tools have also been designed to perform and/or exploit transcript alignment with the aim of identifying alternative gene structures. such extrinsic annotation tools include geneseqer  <cit> , aspic  <cit> , tap  <cit> , and pasa  <cit> . except for geneseqer which is more focused on performing spliced alignment, the three other software adopt the same strategy: using genomically aligned transcripts, the aim is to determine the exon-intron structure compatible with the greatest number of transcripts. another approach, cluster merge  <cit> , has been recently used in the ensembl annotation system  <cit>  to identify minimal sets of transcript variants compatible with genomically aligned ests evidences.

unlike intrinsic methods, extrinsic approaches take advantage of transcript information. however, they also suffer from some limitations : first they entirely depend on the availability of transcribed sequences which bounds their sensitivity. with little exceptions , they cannot predict a splice site if it is not represented in a transcript-to-genome alignment and therefore require a total coverage of each gene with all exon-intron boundaries. this can be problematic considering the ests fragmented nature. moreover, when such methods can take advantage of a total gene coverage, the cds localization remains to be done and the pure transcript predictions may not respect elementary coding gene properties . furthermore, overlapping transcripts are sometimes assumed to come from the same mature mrna and are therefore merged. this may lead to the fusion of two overlapping transcripts coming from exclusive inconsistent mrna variants, thus forcing the prediction to respect a chimeric virtual assembly.

finally, and because experimental transcripts cannot exist for every existing gene, both intrinsic and extrinsic information are needed inside an annotation pipeline  <cit> . the predictions provided by two different approaches can be different and even inconsistent, and merging them together requires a careful inspection of human curators, as performed in  <cit> . a fully integrative method alleviates all these problems. grailexp  <cit>  seems to be the only gene finder that tried to go in this direction. however, it can only consider as events leading to complete exon inclusion/retention, ignoring thus approximatively half of the as cases  <cit> . the underlying approach remains unpublished.

to extend the domain of application of gene prediction to alternatively spliced gene structure prediction, we have designed an intrinsic/extrinsic integrative annotation method with the following aims:

• for a given genomic sequence, an optimal gene structure prediction is produced, as usual.

• in addition to this optimal prediction, for every transcript sequence providing evidence of as, an optimal prediction consistent with this splicing form is also provided.

• each additional or alternative gene structure prediction has to be supported by some biological evidence.

• full-length transcript coverage is not required for a complete gene structure identification.

• each prediction satisfies the usual constraints on gene structure. a correct proteic coding gene is defined by a succession of one or more exons separated by introns flanked by splice sites. it contains a cds between a start and a stop codon, and no in-frame stop in coding exons.

our aim is to combine the advantages of the intrinsic and extrinsic approaches in an integrative system allowing for as detection based on the analysis of genomic aligned transcript sequences. the method has been implemented inside eugÈne-m, a new version of the arabidopsis thaliana eugÈne gene finder  <cit> , and applied to a reference genes set.

RESULTS
to evaluate the interest of eugÈne-m compared to existing transcripts-based approaches, we applied it on the spl <dig> arabidopsis thaliana gene. this gene codes for the squamosa promoter-binding protein-like  <dig>  has  <dig> exons and two known alternative mature mrna variants, both supported by a distinct full-length cdna . the genomic alignments of these cdnas provide two correct and reliable gene structures used as reference annotations. the structures differ only by the 3' extremity of the 9th exon. however, beyond these  <dig> complete cdnas, only the first and the two last exons are covered by ests. this partial est coverage configuration is interesting because without the full-length cdnas , finding a correct gene structure with pure extrinsic assembly tools would not be possible.

given only the genomically ests alignments, we applied eugÈne-m on the genomic sequence containing the spl <dig> gene. since two ests  show incompatible alignments , eugÈne-m computes two additional predictions, each being consistent with one of them. the first alternative prediction is the same as the optimal one and corresponds to one variant; the second corresponds to the other variant.

for a more extensive test, we applied eugÈne-m on araset  <cit> , a data set of arabidopsis thaliana curated genes recently used in the assessment of geneseqer  <cit> . since eugÈne has already been evaluated on this benchmark set, performing as one of the most accurate gene finder  <cit> , the aim of this test is to provide an estimation of an alternatively spliced genes ratio on a reference set. predictions are available in the additional files. on the  <dig> araset reference genes,  <dig> show at least two alternative predictions, that were carefully analyzed. this is summarized in table  <dig>  all these predictions but two correspond to potential alternative splicing events. among the two remaining ones, a first predicted as event corresponds to an incompatibility caused by an apparently incompletely spliced est. the other is more interesting since it is caused by two ests from two different genes lying on opposite strands and overlapping on their 3' ends. in this case, eugÈne-m is forced to predict two overlapping genes, one on each strand, which effectively address the usual impossibility for existing gene models to predict overlapping genes. of course, these predictions, as all in silico expertise, require experimental verifications to be confirmed. if we assume the  <dig> remaining genes are effectively subject to as, this yield to an as rate of ~ <dig> %, a ratio in the same order as previously estimated, from  <dig> %  <cit>  to  <dig> % .

discussion
in the recent assessment of geneseqer on this araset data set, only three as cases were reported  <cit> . however, the authors only reported as cases that were detected in geneseqer high-quality alignments and producing introns differing from the araset annotated introns. we therefore verified that our alignments were consistent with the geneseqer assessment alignment data available in the arabidopsis thaliana genome database atgdb  <cit> . we noticed an alignment difference for only one of our alternative est , not present in the atgdb because of its dbest entry date . we also checked if the as variants predicted by eugÈne-m were already reported in the as sections of the atgdb  <cit>  and of the tigrdb  <cit> . only  <dig> of our detected as predictions were already reported in both databases, and  <dig> were missing in all of them , confirming that this methodology can help to automatically discover new potential as cases, even on a well studied dataset.

the analysis of these as cases confirms that as seems to be much less frequent in a. thaliana than in homo sapiens. nevertheless, this as ratio estimation is expected to increase in the future with the growth of transcript data availability. another interesting point is the nature of the variants: on this gene set, the majority of as cases involves a simple acceptor or donor alternative splice site. notice however that since eugÈne-m's underlying model allows arbitrary alternative gene structure to be predicted, it is not limited to the prediction of such simple as events and can perfectly cope with complex as events, as found in mammals. this methodology can also be integrated in other existing gene finders where the score of a gene structure is defined as the sum of elementary scores of the signals and nucleotides involved in the gene structure .

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we have presented a new method to deal with alternative splicing in annotation and gene prediction. this integrative approach combines the advantages of an intrinsic and an extrinsic process to incorporate as detection into ab initio gene finding. we showed that this method allows the discovery of new alternative spliced genes, with the reliability of extrinsic annotation and the potential exhaustiveness of ab initio gene prediction.

