BACKGROUND
the equatorial forests of central africa are one of the most biologically diverse regions in the world. understanding the mechanisms that gave rise to such extraordinary tropical diversity remains a subject of intense interest to evolutionary and conservation biologists
 <cit> . critical to this debate has been the role that pleistocene climate change has played in tropical vertebrate speciation. the periodic fluctuations in climatic conditions that resulted from earth’s orbital shifts are well known to have affected the range dynamics of many temperate taxa
 <cit> . however, the extent to which these fluctuations impacted the distribution and diversification of tropical forest taxa has been a subject of intense debate. proponents of pleistocene refuge theory  have argued that the drier, cooler temperatures experienced during successive glacial maxima led to the repeated fragmentation of formerly contiguous forests, which in turn led to allopatric speciation of forest-associated taxa. although there is currently little evidence to suggest that tropical forest refugia played a major role in the amazon
 <cit> , support for their role as drivers of evolutionary diversification in tropical africa is much greater . however, the majority of studies to date suggest that these effects are most evident at the population level
 <cit>  but see
 <cit>  with most species divergence times pre-dating the pleistocene
 <cit> .

the duikers in the subfamily cephalophinae  constitute an ideal group for testing the role of pleistocene refugia in tropical vertebrate speciation because of their recent origin in the late miocene and subsequent rapid radiation
 <cit> . currently, three duiker genera are recognized:  the recently derived, species-rich, forest dwelling cephalophus  the dwarf philantomba and  the monotypic savanna specialist sylvicapra. jansen van vuuren and robinson
 <cit>  have further sub-divided cephalophus into three major mitochondrial lineages comprising the giant duikers , east african red duikers  and west african red duikers . to date, support for these lineages has been based solely on single mitochondrial gene genealogies that may not accurately reflect the evolutionary history of this group. furthermore, the position of the two remaining taxa, c. adersi and c. zebra, remains unresolved and appears to be highly labile between studies
 <cit> .

the goal of the present study is therefore to estimate a well-supported species tree for duikers using a combination of mitochondrial genes and nuclear introns previously shown to be highly informative in resolving relationships between other closely-related african bovids
 <cit> . we then use this tree to re-evaluate the evolutionary relationships of major lineages within this group and test the hypothesis that speciation of many duikers occurred during the pleistocene epoch using a fossil calibrated relaxed molecular clock
 <cit> .

RESULTS
the final aligned data matrix contained four unlinked nuclear dna regions and two mitochondrial dna regions for a total of  <dig> characters, of which  <dig> were from mitochondrial and  <dig> were from nuclear loci . results from the pair-wise ild test between the two mitochondrial partitions fail to reject the null hypothesis that both loci are congruent. as expected, the mitochondrial partition contained a greater proportion of variable sites  relative to the nuclear matrix . the mitochondrial partition contained  <dig> parsimony informative characters  while the nuclear partition contained  <dig> parsimony informative characters . the consistency index  and retention index  values in the mitochondrial partition  are lower than those of the nuclear matrix , indicating higher levels of homoplasy in the mitochondrial dataset.

patterns of sequence variability among individual mitochondrial and nuclear markers, combined mitochondrial genes, combined nuclear loci, and combined mitochondrial and nuclear loci. these data comprise the number and percentage of variable sites, the number and percentage of parsimony informative characters , the consistency  and retention  indices, and the suggested model of nucleotide substitution, as selected under the bayesian information criterion . gtr, hky, g and i represent the general time reversible model, the hasegawa-kishino-yano model, the alpha shape parameter describing gamma distributed rate variation, and a proportion of invariant sites, respectively.

the results of the pair-wise ild tests between nuclear loci reject the null hypotheses that the four nuclear genes are congruent with one another . individual nuclear gene genealogies estimated using maximum parsimony , maximum likelihood  and bayesian analysis  methods recovered different topologies  and these differences were evident regardless of method. given that there was generally little support for most of the nodes within the individual nuclear gene trees, many of these differences between gene genealogies likely represent soft polytomies. however, there is also significant support for some of these differences. for example, the mgf genealogy supports two clades of giant duikers  while the thy genealogy supports only one clade . the thy genealogy also supports the placement of s. grimmia as sister to the remaining cephalophinae  with philantomba sister to the giant duikers , unlike the prkcl genealogy, which supports philantomba as sister to the remaining cephalophinae  or the sptbn genealogy, which supports philantomba as sister to only the red duiker clades .
1: table s <dig> lists support values by node for this phylogeny.
1: table s <dig> lists support values by node for this phylogeny.
1: table s <dig> lists support values by node for this phylogeny.
1: table s <dig> lists support values by node for this phylogeny.

all four genealogies support the monophyly of philantomba . sylvicapra was sister to some or all of the giant duikers in three of the four nuclear trees  but this relationship lacked significant support. within cephalophus, support was generally weak or lacking for the giant, east and west african red duiker lineages described by van vuuren and robinson
 <cit>  although the stbn <dig> genealogy supported the monophyly of the west african red duiker lineage  and the thy genealogy recovered the giant duiker lineage . the position of c. adersi and c. zebra varied across genealogies and remained unresolved or weakly supported, with the exception of the mgf genealogy which supported c. zebra as sister to the c. jentinki/c. dorsalis clade  and the thy genealogy which supported c. adersi as sister to the east and west african red duikers .

as results from ild and sh tests suggested that the mitochondrial and nuclear topologies are incongruent , both datasets were first analysed separately and then combined. the mitochondrial tree of all species within cephalophinae  shows weak support for the monophyly of philantomba , but has strong support for the sister placement of these taxa relative to all other cephalophinae . sylvicapra is sister to the giant duikers, although this node has weak support . within cephalophus, there is strong support for the monophyly of the giant duikers , the east african red duikers , and the west african red duikers , but weak support for their placement relative to one another. the position of c. zebra and c. adersi is unresolved. there is also weak support for the paraphyly of c. rufilatus relative to c. nigrifrons  and strong support for the paraphyly of c. callipygus relative to c. ogilbyi and c. weynsi .
1: table s <dig> lists support values by node for this phylogeny.

in nuclear concatenated matrices, the harmonic mean of the log likelihood of the partitioned combined mitochondrial and nuclear bayesian analysis  was equal to − <dig>  compared to the log likelihood for the unpartitioned analysis  of − <dig> , giving a value of  <dig> ln bf = − <dig>  and providing strong evidence against a partitioned model. alternatively, when the mitochondrial data are excluded from analyses, bayes factor analysis found strong evidence for the partitioned model .

the concatenated nuclear tree  shows strong support for the monophyly of philantomba . however, the sister position of this genus relative to the other duikers is not supported. nuclear analyses also support a sister relationship between sylvicapra and the c. silvicultor/c. spadix group , making both the genus cephalophus and the giant duiker lineage paraphyletic. there is also support for the monophyly of the east african red duiker lineage , the west african red duiker lineage , and a sister relationship between these two red african duiker lineages . cephalophus adersi is sister to both the east and west african red duikers  and c. zebra is sister to the c. jentinki/c. dorsalis group . unlike the mitochondrial tree, c. rufilatus and c. nigrifrons form reciprocally monophyletic clades  in the nuclear tree. however, c. harveyi is paraphyletic with respect to c. natalensis, as is p. monticola to p. maxwelli. finally, c. callipygus and c. ogilbyi form an unresolved polytomy.
1: table s <dig> lists support values by node for this phylogeny. boxes show major lineages on a grey scale, starting with the giant duikers in white, then the savannah duiker, the east african red duikers, the west african red duikers, and the dwarf duikers in darkest grey.

the concatenated mitochondrial and nuclear combined analysis yielded an almost completely resolved tree topology . philantomba is both monophyletic and sister to the remainder of the cephalophinae. cephalophus was paraphyletic, with sylvicapra as sister to the monophyletic giant duiker clade. the east and west african red duiker lineages are monophyletic and are sister to one another. while their placement is not strongly supported by all methods of estimation, bayesian support places c. adersi as sister to the east and west african red duiker lineages . placement of c. zebra as sister to the giant and savanna duiker lineages is not supported.
 <dig>  thickened branches indicate nodal support by both ba posterior probability  values ≥  <dig>  and ml bootstrap support  ≥  <dig>  additional file
1: table s <dig> lists support values by node for this phylogeny.

analyses in beast recovered the same topologies as those obtained by ba methods. however, the tree estimated using both nuclear and mitochondrial data was better resolved with higher support and narrower confidence intervals than the tree estimated from nuclear analysis alone. for this reason, we discuss only the results of estimation from both nuclear and mitochondrial data, although ages for nodes recovered in both analyses are presented in table
 <dig>  the split of philantomba from all other members of the cephalophinae was estimated to have occurred during the late miocene at  <dig>  ma . this is followed by the divergence of the giant duiker and sylvicapra lineage from the red duikers at  <dig>  ma , with c. zebra and c. adersi occupying a sister position relative to these two major groups. this major split is then followed by a subsequent split between the east and west african red duiker lineages at  <dig>  ma  during the pliocene. with the exception of the dwarf duikers p. monticola and p. maxwelli all sister duikers species are estimated to have originated during the pleistocene . these sister species pairs comprise c. jentinki and c. dorsalis, c. nigrifrons and c. rufilatus, c. natalensis and c. harveyi, c. spadix and c. silvicultor, and c. callipygus and c. ogilbyi.

divergence times estimated by beast based on either total evidence  or nuclear only datasets. divergence time estimates are the median age of the posterior distributions in million years of age and the 95% highest posterior density  intervals are indicated in brackets. label numbers refer to the topology of figure
 <dig> 

discussion
past attempts to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the cephalophinae have met with considerable challenge
 <cit> , likely owing to the recent and rapid radiation of this group
 <cit> . using a combination of mitochondrial and nuclear markers, the present study provides the most well supported phylogeny to date. this study also provides convincing support for the position of philantomba as sister to the remaining cephalophinae and the recognition of the genus, as recommended by jansen van vuuren and robinson
 <cit> . in contrast, there is no support for sylvicapra whose sister relationship to the giant duikers leaves cephalophus paraphyletic. instead, our findings suggests that s. grimmia represents the sole savanna-dwelling member of the giant duiker lineage within cephalophus and likely evolved from a forest-dwelling common ancestor, further reinforcing grubb's
 <cit>  belief that habitat transitions occur primarily from forest to savannah. while jansen van vuuren and robinson
 <cit>  were correct in hypothesizing that the savannah duiker diverged early in the group’s evolutionary history, this study shows that its return to the savannah does not predate the appearance of other forest-dwelling taxa. the present phylogeny also provides much stronger support for the three main lineages of cephalophus identified by jansen van vuuren and robinson
 <cit>  and for the first time provides significant support for their placement relative to one another. the failure of this and earlier studies to place c. adersi and c. zebra in relation to these major lineages is more likely to be a reflection of the rapidity with which these older taxa may have radiated rather than a failure to resolve species nodes.

a comparison of the mitochondrial and nuclear dna phylogenies also shed light on the evolutionary processes operating within this group. because mitochondrial dna has a quarter of the effective population size of nuclear dna, mitochondrial haplotypes generally sort much more rapidly
 <cit> . thus, in recently diverged lineages it is expected that the paraphyly observed in mitochondrial dna should would also be reflected in the nuclear data
 <cit> , as is observed for c. natalensis/c. harveyi and c. ogilbyi/c. callipygus. incomplete lineage sorting would also explain the paraphyly observed in the nuclear dna of species that exhibit reciprocally monophyletic relationships in mitochondrial analyses, as appears to be the case for c. sylvicapra/c. spadix and p. monticola/p. maxwelli. however, c. nigrifrons and c. rufilatus do not follow either of these patterns, exhibiting a paraphyletic relationship in mitochondrial analyses and a reciprocally monophyletic relationship in nuclear analyses. one explanation for these findings is that mitochondrial introgression between c. nigrifrons and c. rufilatus, followed by extensive back-crossing to the original parental taxa, may have obscured mitochondrial relationships but maintained their monophyly at the nuclear level. these two taxa occupy parallel distributions across central african, providing ample opportunities for hybridization. interestingly, bayesian analysis of the nuclear data provides support for a sister relationship between c. nigrifrons and the c. natalensis/c. harveyi clade, indicating that c. nigrifrons and c. rufilatus may not be sister taxa, as previously mitochondrial analyses suggest
 <cit> .

we also report the surprising finding that while the origin of most major lineages within the subfamily date to the late miocene/early pliocene, many duiker species arose during the pleistocene. from the mid-miocene climatic optimum onwards, the earth has experienced a gradual cooling trend that continued through the plio-pleistocene
 <cit> . the onset of much drier, colder periods at the boundary between these two epochs and subsequent intensification of glacial cycles throughout the pleistocene is thought to have provided important opportunities for the diversification and increased turnover of african vertebrate species, including many arid-adapted bovids
 <cit> . grassland expansion during glacial maxima would have confined forest adapted species to fragments of suitable habitat and broken up the formerly contiguous equatorial african rainforest belt into several major refugia to the west, center and east of africa
 <cit> . such geographic isolation is thus postulated to have provided ideal opportunities for the allopatric fragmentation and speciation of tropical forest species
 <cit> ; reviewed in
 <cit> .

despite the intrinsic appeal of this hypothesis, examples of pleistocene-era tropical forest speciation are few. opponents of tropical pleistocene refuge theory have argued that many species divergence times pre-date the pleistocene
 <cit>  or that forest refugia simply acted as reservoirs of genetic variation but did not drive speciation per se <cit> . divergence times reported for many central african taxa support this claim
 <cit> ; but see
 <cit> , although there is ample evidence for intra-specific diversification within many groups including tropical forest mammals
 <cit> .

although our results are surprising, the divergences times we observed here are also consistent with earlier estimates for this group
 <cit> . moreover, many sister species occupy neighbouring yet allopatrically distributed species ranges. this is witnessed by the east versus west and western central african  distribution of c. spadix and its sister taxon c. silvicultor, a pattern mirrored by the intra-specific structure of the roan antelope 
 <cit> . similarly, we have also observed splits between taxa that occupy a west versus western central african distribution, notably: 1) c. jentinki  from c. dorsalis  2) c. ogilbyi  from c. callipygus  and 3) p. maxwelli  and p. monticola . this pattern is similar to the diversification of the murid rodent , a forest associated taxon whose intra-specific distribution is also believed to have been driven by allopatric speciation during refugial isolation
 <cit> . similarly, there is ample genetic evidence to suggest that the split between eastern and western gorillas  arose during the pleistocene as a result of climate-induced changes in forest cover this period
 <cit> . lastly, we also observed a pattern of north versus south speciation in the forest-dwelling c. nigrifrons and its savanna-dwelling sister species c. rufilatus, as well as an east versus south african species split between c. harveyi and c. natalensis. remarkably, of these sister species pairs, it is only in the case of c. ogilbyi and c. callipygus that their ranges overlap. taken together, these data strongly suggest a pattern of pleistocene-era fragmentation that led to the distribution of the sister species pairs that we see today.

the divergence times of the duikers however contrasts with findings from another forest bovid subfamily  whose estimated speciation times range across the miocene and pliocene between  <dig> to  <dig> ma
 <cit> . more recent studies of tragelaphus scriptus also point to a large sub-specific diversification within this taxon whose timing might also have been driven by pleistocene climate change
 <cit> . this then raises the question of the nature of species boundaries within the cephalophinae and other african bovids and whether the timing of the radiation observed here more accurately reflects sub-specific diversification and/or incipient speciation, as is evidenced by several instances of paraphyly and/or hybridization between sister taxa.

unlike earlier studies of the subfamily, the present study is the first to use both nuclear and mitochondrial data to estimate a species tree, and a fossil calibration point to date divergence times of duikers to the pleistocene. the pattern of vertebrate radiation observed here fits that advocated by avise et al. <cit>  where it has been postulated that pleistocene glaciations either initiated intra-specific differentiation or furthered the speciation of lineages whose origin predated the pleistocene. further work should therefore investigate the extent of gene flow between recently derived species and use a coalescent approach to assess divergence times within this group
 <cit> .

conservation implications
an accurate estimation of a species tree is often a useful precursor for guiding conservation and management decisions
 <cit> . phylogenetic analysis in this study finds significant support for the recognition of a distinct west african red duiker taxon c. rubidus which is geographically-restricted and was previously treated as a subspecies of c. nigrifrons within the east african red duiker clade. this apparent conflict lends strength to jansen van vuuren & robinson's
 <cit>  recommendation that this taxon should be managed as a distinct species, elevating its conservation status from threatened to endangered
 <cit> . the relationship between c. callipygus and the cites protected species c. ogilbyi also appears problematic. inclusion of nuclear data further substantiates the lack of any clear genetic distinction between these two taxa and is consistent with a history of either recent or on-going hybridization and/or incomplete lineage sorting. given the results of the present study, it seems unlikely that any mitochondrial or nuclear marker will be able to differentiate these two taxa, posing a challenge to the regulation of the bushmeat trade
 <cit>  or wildlife monitoring studies of field collected feces
 <cit> . further work should explore patterns of range-wide population genetic variation between these two taxa in order to better understand their species status and potential for hybridization.

CONCLUSIONS
fluctuations in climate and increasing aridity over the past few million years are thought to have played an important role in shaping diversification of many african taxa
 <cit> . although many previous studies have shown that the majority of speciation events date to the pliocene , pleistocene-era climatic oscillations are also thought to have played an important role in shaping patterns of diversification, particularly at the population level . here we report on a remarkably recent radiation of a group of duiker whose sister species pairs appear to date predominantly to the pleistocene. as is the case for other forest artiodactyls, taxa within this group are tied to forest environments, thus highlighting the potential importance that pleistocene refugia may have played in the speciation of forest-dwelling species. data from this study also highlight several areas of inconsistency between our current understanding of duiker taxonomy and the evolutionary relationships depicted here. consistent with their recent origin, several sister species groups exhibit paraphyletic relationships and/or evidence of recent hybridization. further work should therefore aim to sample more widely across these sister taxa in order to better understand the geographic range of paraphyletic lineages and identify potential areas of introgression. these findings may also prove particularly relevant to future conservation efforts, given that many species are presently regulated under the convention for trade in endangered species and are therefore targets for the bushmeat trade.

