BACKGROUND
sex-biased genes, i.e. those that differ in expression level between males and females, may be subject to differing selective constraints depending on the sex in which they are expressed or they may experience conflicting selective pressures in males and females . previous studies of drosophila melanogaster have shown that male-biased genes, especially those expressed in reproductive tissues, consistently exhibit high levels of adaptive protein evolution  <cit> . genome-wide comparisons of the ratio of the nonsynonymous substitution rate to the synonymous substitution rate  also indicate that male-biased genes are more functionally divergent between closely-related drosophila species and are less likely to have identifiable orthologs between distantly-related species than genes with female-biased or unbiased expression  <cit> . a limitation of these studies is that they rely on gene expression data from d. melanogaster for sex-bias classifications and, thus, are not informative with respect to differences in sex-biased gene expression or sex-biased gene evolution between lineages.

in contrast to the studies that focused primarily on d. melanogaster, a recent sage  study found no accelerated rate of protein evolution for male-biased genes in d. pseudoobscura  <cit> . this study measured the rate of evolution by the proportion of nonsynonymous substitutions  between species and confirmed a higher rate of protein evolution in genes that had male-biased expression in both d. melanogaster and d. pseudoobscura, but found no evidence for an increased rate of evolution of genes that had male-biased expression only in d. pseudoobscura. the latter genes were only about half as divergent as the former and showed evolutionary rates similar to those of female-biased and unbiased genes. these results suggest that patterns of sex-biased gene evolution may have changed since the split of the d. melanogaster and d. pseudoobscura lineages. to further investigate this possibility, we analyzed sex-biased gene expression and dna sequence polymorphism in d. ananassae, a species within the melanogaster group that serves as an outgroup to all species within the melanogaster subgroup, but is more closely related to d. melanogaster than d. pseudoobscura  <cit> .

d. ananassae is distributed throughout the subtropical and tropical regions of the world. in contrast to d. melanogaster, d. ananassae is a species displaying significant population structure  <cit> . the demographic history has been investigated previously, with the ancestral range of the species being defined as a region of southeast asia that existed as a single landmass  during the late pleistocene around  <dig>  years ago  <cit> . ancestral populations are expected to have colonized asia and the south pacific since the last glaciation and human migration to oceania.

in this paper, we use species-specific microarrays to investigate sex-biased gene expression in d. ananassae for a set of genes previously investigated in d. melanogaster. we find that 60% of these genes show conserved sex-bias, while 40% differ in their sex-bias classification between the two species. using multilocus statistical tests that compare ratios of polymorphism and divergence at synonymous and nonsynonymous sites, we detect a general signal of adaptive protein evolution in d. ananassae. however, this signal is not stronger for male-biased genes than for female-biased or unbiased genes, which is consistent with there being differences in sex-biased gene evolution between the d. melanogaster and d. ananassae lineages.

RESULTS
sex-biased gene expression in d. ananassae
to investigate sex-biased gene expression in d. ananassae, we designed a species-specific microarray of pcr-amplified exon sequences from  <dig> genes  whose orthologs had been previously classified as male-biased, female-biased or unbiased in d. melanogaster . this set of genes was of particular interest because the vast majority  had been studied at the population-genetic level in d. melanogaster and estimates of the rate of adaptive evolution in the melanogaster subgroup were already available  <cit> . after quality control, we obtained sufficient hybridization signal to reliably classify  <dig> genes . of the remaining genes, we were able to classify  <dig>  using the d. ananassae whole-genome microarray data of zhang et al.  <cit> . in total,  <dig> of the  <dig> genes  were classified, with  <dig> male-biased,  <dig> female-biased, and  <dig> unbiased .

to examine the conservation of sex-biased gene expression between species, we compared the above d. ananassae classifications to those previously determined for d. melanogaster. the majority of genes  showed a conserved expression pattern, with the same bias in both species . however, 37% of the genes were classified as sex-biased in only one species, and 4% showed the opposite sex-bias in the two species . overall, male-biased genes showed the greatest conservation: 72% of the genes with male-biased expression in d. ananassae also had male-biased expression in d. melanogaster, 65% of the genes with female-biased expression in d. ananassae also had female-biased expression in d. melanogaster, and 48% of the genes with unbiased expression in d. ananassae also had unbiased expression in d. melanogaster. of the genes that were sex-biased in only one species, most  were sex-biased in d. melanogaster, but unbiased in d. ananassae . three genes  were male-biased in d. ananassae, but female-biased in d. melanogaster, while two genes  were female-biased in d. ananassae, but male-biased in d. melanogaster . for cg <dig>  the molecular function is described as ribonuclease h activity and rna binding. it is involved in the rna metabolic process. the molecular function of cg <dig>  is described as atp binding and unfolded protein binding. the gene is involved in protein folding. for cg <dig>  the function is given as unfolded protein binding and heat shock protein binding. it is also involved in protein folding. for the two remaining genes, no functions or biological processes are described. all described functions refer to what is known for d. melanogaster.

phylogenetic relationship of the focal species
for analysis of evolutionary rates and tests for adaptive evolution, it is critical to have an appropriate outgroup species. two recent molecular phylogenetic studies suggested that d. atripex and/or d. phaeopleura might serve as an appropriate outgroup to d. ananassae for these purposes  <cit> . however, these studies used a small number of loci that sometimes gave conflicting results. to further investigate the phylogenetic relationship of these species, we used the concatenated amino acid sequences of  <dig> genes that we sequenced in both d. atripex and d. phaeopleura  and for which sequence data were available from d. ananassae, d. melanogaster, d. simulans, and d. pseudoobscura. the concatenated alignment of  <dig>  amino acid positions was used to generate a phylogenetic tree by bayesian inference . the tree topology was strongly supported  and indicated that d. atripex and d. phaeopleura are more closely related to each other than either is to d. ananassae. thus, both of these species can be used as an outgroup to d. ananassae. furthermore, the divergence between d ananassae and d. atripex/d. phaeopleura is similar to the divergence between d. melanogaster and d. simulans, which facilitates the comparison of evolutionary patterns between the melanogaster and ananassae subgroups .

levels of polymorphism and divergence
we surveyed dna sequence polymorphism in a sample of  <dig> isofemale lines from bangkok, thailand for a subset of  <dig> genes used in our microarray analysis . this set included  <dig> male-biased genes,  <dig> female-biased genes, and  <dig> unbiased genes. fourteen of these genes differed in their sex-bias classification between d. ananassae and d. melanogaster. in addition, we sequenced all genes in a single strain of either d. atripex or d. phaeopleura to use as an outgroup. for  <dig> genes we were able to get sequences from both d. atripex and d. phaeopleura, revealing that both exhibit similar levels of divergence to d. ananassae  and that the choice of outgroup does not bias estimates of interspecific divergence .

a for the dmel vs. dsim comparison, sex-bias classifications come from d. melanogaster microarray data. for the other comparisons, sex-bias classifications come from d. ananassae microarray data. "m", male-biased; "f", female-biased; "u", unbiased.

comparison of the divergence between d. ananassae and d. atripex/d. phaeopleura with the divergence between d. melanogaster and d. simulans for the different sex-bias classes of genes suggests that the accelerated rate of evolution of male-biased genes is limited to the melanogaster subgroup . when comparing d. melanogaster and d. simulans, values of dn and dn/ds are consistently higher for male-biased genes than for female-biased or unbiased genes, which is not the case for comparisons of d. ananassae to either d. atripex or d. phaeopleura .

however, there is no significant difference in dn/ds between male-biased genes on the different lineages . it should be noted, however, that the number and identity of the genes are not constant among the three comparisons.

levels of dna sequence polymorphism in the bangkok population of d. ananassae are comparable to levels in an ancestral african population of d. melanogaster . on average, synonymous polymorphism is slightly higher in d. ananassae than in d. melanogaster, suggesting that the former has a slightly larger effective population size . this is consistent with the bangkok population representing an ancestral population of d. ananassae  <cit> . taken together, levels of polymorphism and divergence suggest that our d. ananassae population and outgroup species are appropriate for comparison to the african d. melanogaster population with d. simulans as an outgroup.

a the average number of nucleotide differences per synonymous site.

b the average number of nucleotide differences per nonsynonymous site.

c mean nucleotide diversity  at synonymous sites.

d mean nucleotide diversity  at nonsynonymous sites.

we also investigated levels of synonymous polymorphism on the x chromosome relative to the autosomes in both d. ananassae and d. melanogaster. this provides an estimate of the effective population size of males and females in each species. the ratio is expected to be 3/ <dig> if there is an equal number of breeding males and females in the population. if there is sexual selection acting on males, the male effective population size will be reduced and the x:autosome polymorphism ratio will be increased above 3/ <dig>  after standardizing polymorphism by divergence to correct for possible differences in mutation rate between the x and the autosomes, we find that the x:autosome polymorphism ratio is greater than 3/ <dig> for both species . to test the significance of this, we multiplied the x chromosomal values by 4/ <dig> and compared them to the autosomal values with a mann-whitney test. for d. melanogaster, the difference was significant , indicating that the original ratio was significantly greater than 3/ <dig>  for d. ananassae, an x:autosome polymorphism ratio of 3/ <dig> could not be rejected . there was no significant difference in the x:autosome polymorphism ratio between d. ananassae and d. melanogaster .

a the ratio of x chromosomal to autosomal effective population size estimated from θs/ds.

mcdonald-kreitman tests
to evaluate the type of selection operating on individual genes, we applied single-locus mcdonald-kreitman  tests  <cit>  to the  <dig> genes for which we had polymorphism data from d. ananassae and divergence data from either d. atripex or d. phaeopleura. in total, six genes  gave a significant mk test result . half of the significant genes departed from neutrality in the direction of positive selection  , while the other half departed from neutrality in a pattern consistent with either balancing or weak purifying selection . these are likely to be cases of weak purifying selection, as average values of tajima's d  <cit>  are significantly negative at nonsynonymous sites , which suggests that many segregating nonsynonymous polymorphisms are slightly deleterious.

a first letter indicates expression in d. ananassae, second letter expression in d. melanogaster . the last three rows show all male-, female-, and unbiased genes according to the classification in d. ananassae.

b the total number of synonymous fixed differences.

c the total number of nonsynonymous fixed differences.

d the total number of synonymous polymorphisms.

e the total number of nonsynonymous polymorphisms.

f p-value was determined by g-test when applicable, otherwise by fisher's exact test.

p-values  were determined as the proportion of  <dig> simulations giving a tajima's d value less than or equal to the observed.

a comparison of our mk test results to those from d. melanogaster/d. simulans  <cit>  revealed that, in all but one case , the individual genes showing significant evidence for positive selection  differed between the two lineages . most genes significant for positive selection were male-biased in at least one of the species. however, the proportion of positively-selected male-biased genes in d. ananassae  was not as high as in previous studies of d. melanogaster where 7/ <dig>  of autosomal male-biased  <cit> , and 7/ <dig>  of x-linked male-biased genes  <cit>  gave significant mk tests for positive selection. of the three genes with significant mk tests for positive selection in d. ananassae, one  showed conserved male-biased expression between d. ananassae and d. melanogaster, while two  were male-biased in d. melanogaster, but unbiased in d. ananassae .

to further investigate expression class-dependent patterns of evolution, we constructed  <dig> groups of genes . the first nine classes were partitioned with regard to sex-bias in d. ananassae and d. melanogaster. this allowed us to compare genes with conserved sex-bias between the two species with genes showing sex-bias in only one species or genes showing a reversal of sex-bias between species. the final three classes were partitioned solely on expression in d. ananassae, without regard to expression in d. melanogaster. application of the mk test to the summed values of polymorphism and divergence within each group  <cit>  revealed a significant departure from neutrality in the direction of positive selection for genes with conserved male-biased expression and for genes with male-biased expression private to d. melanogaster, whereas the female-biased and unbiased genes did not differ significantly from the neutral expectation . the genes with male-biased gene expression private to d. ananassae also did not differ significantly from the neutral expectation.

symbols are the same as in table  <dig> 

aα =  <dig> - . asterisks indicate the significance of the summed data as determined by a g-test .

b excluding low frequency  polymorphisms.

estimation of the proportion of adaptive amino acid replacements
we also used a multi-locus version of the mk test to estimate α, the fraction of amino acid replacements between species that were fixed by positive selection  <cit> . for this, we divided the genes into six different groups. first, we considered male-, female-, and unbiased genes that had conserved sex-biased expression between d. melanogaster and d. ananassae. second, we considered the genes according only to their bias in d. ananassae. we could not consider all  <dig> groups of genes mentioned above, because some of the groups contained too few genes to allow maximum likelihood analysis . because the segregation of slightly deleterious nonsynonymous mutations can lead to a downward bias in the estimate of α, we excluded all polymorphisms  segregating at frequency ≤ 15% from our analysis  <cit> .

for the genes with conserved sex-biased expression between species, we observed a significant signal of positive selection only for those with conserved male-biased expression, although in all cases the mean estimate of a was greater than zero . however, when we considered the genes only by their sex-bias classification in d. ananassae we found evidence for adaptive evolution in all three classes of genes, with higher α estimates and more significant departures from neutrality detected for female-biased and unbiased genes than for male-biased genes . thus, the increased rate of adaptive evolution seen for male-biased genes appears to be limited to those with conserved male-biased expression between the two species. for d. ananassae, estimates of α were 43%, 60%, and 53% for male-biased, female-biased, and unbiased genes, respectively.

discussion
although sex-biased expression was conserved between d. ananassae and d. melanogaster for the majority of the genes we analyzed, a large minority  showed a gain, loss, or reversal of sex-biased expression between species . in a previous microarray study, ranz et al.  <cit>  found that 20% of genes showed a gain, loss, or reversal of sex-biased expression between d. melanogaster and d. simulans. the higher percentage observed in the present study is likely attributable to the greater evolutionary distance separating d. melanogaster and d. ananassae , which provides more opportunity for expression changes. consistent with this, a previous sage study found that 34% of genes changed their sex-biased expression pattern between d. melanogaster and the more distantly-related d. pseudoobscura  <cit> .

several aspects of our experimental design might also contribute to the gene expression patterns described above. first, the genes on our array were not a random set, but instead were enriched for those showing strong sex-biased expression in multiple, independent experiments in d. melanogaster. thus, we might expect to see an overrepresentation of genes that are sex-biased only in d. melanogaster, and an underrepresentation of genes that are sex-biased only in d. ananassae. indeed, this is what we find: of the  <dig> genes that are sex-biased in only one species,  <dig>  are sex-biased in d. melanogaster, while only  <dig>  are sex-biased in d. ananassae . a second factor that may influence our results is that our d. ananassae classifications come from a combination of our own experimental data and those from a published whole-genome microarray study  <cit>  and the two studies differ in their design and replication. our own microarray experiments examined only a small set of genes, which allowed for many replicate probes per gene to be present on each array. we also enforced strict quality control to exclude genes with weak hybridization signal . the use of the published whole-genome arrays allowed us to classify more genes, but the classification may be less reliable due to the lower replication and the increased problem of multiple testing that weakens the statistical analysis. indeed, the whole-genome data classify a higher fraction of unbiased genes , which would be expected since the null hypothesis of these comparisons is that there is no difference in expression level between males and females. also, it should be noted that the whole-genome arrays of zhang et al.  <cit>  only identified ~12% of the d. ananassae transcriptome as sex-biased, while the previous studies that our d. melanogaster classifications are based on identified 20-70% of the transcriptome as sex-biased  <cit> . this difference is most likely the result of differences in experimental design and statistical power between the studies, not an underlying difference in the amount of sex-biased expression between the two species, as zhang et al.  <cit>  also reported similarly low percentages of sex-biased genes in six other drosophila species, including d. melanogaster.

despite the presumably weaker power to detect sex-biased expression in d. ananassae, we observed  <dig> genes that were sex-biased in d. ananassae, but unbiased in d. melanogaster . for  <dig> of these genes, the ancestral expression state could be inferred using microarray data from the outgroup species d. pseudoobscura  <cit>  . interestingly,  <dig> of these  <dig> genes showed a match between the d. melanogaster and the d. pseudoobscura classification, suggesting that sex-biased expression was gained on the d. ananassae lineage in the vast majority of cases. the ancestral expression state could also be inferred for four of the five genes that showed a reversal of sex-bias between d. melanogaster and d. ananassae. three of these genes were female-biased in d. melanogaster and d. pseudoobscura, but male-biased in d. ananassae. one gene was male-biased in d. pseudoobscura and d. melanogaster, but female-biased in d. ananassae. however, this gene  also differed in its sex-bias classification between our custom microarrays  and the whole-genome d. ananassae microarrays   <cit> . thus, it is possible that the sex-biased expression of this gene is strain- or condition-dependent. this was the only such conflict between the two d. ananassae expression datasets, although there were  <dig> cases where a gene was classified as sex-biased in one dataset and unbiased in the other.

our survey of dna sequence polymorphism in d. ananassae is the largest performed to date in terms of number of loci investigated and the first to examine genes with sex-biased expression. overall, the level of polymorphism in the d. ananassae population from bangkok, thailand is similar to that in an ancestral african d. melanogaster population, which is consistent with bangkok being within the ancestral species range of d. ananassae  <cit> . when considering all loci we find that d. ananassae has slightly more synonymous polymorphism than d. melanogaster , which suggest that the former has a larger ne. consistent with this interpretation, nonsynonymous polymorphism and the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous polymorphism are lower in d. ananassae . this is expected if most segregating nonsynonymous mutations are slightly deleterious, as is suggested by their negative values of tajima's d , because purifying selection is more effective at removing deleterious mutations when ne is large.

multi-locus analyses of polymorphism and divergence indicate that adaptive protein evolution is prevalent in d. ananassae, with estimates of α in the range of 50-60% . these α values are remarkably similar to those estimated for other drosophila species , which suggests that there is a consistently high rate of adaptive protein evolution throughout the genus. however, despite the strong overall signal of positive selection acting on d. ananassae proteins, we do not see clear differences in the prevalence of adaptive protein evolution among male-, female-, and unbiased genes. this contrasts with previous results from d. melanogaster that indicated an increased rate of adaptive evolution in male-biased genes  <cit> , but is consistent with the results of metta et al.  <cit> , who found accelerated rates of evolution  for d. melanogaster male-biased genes, but not d. pseudoobscura male-biased genes. we see the same general trend for dn  values in our data, which are highest for the male-biased genes of d. melanogaster, but lower for the male-biased genes of d. ananassae . taken together, these results suggest that male-biased genes have experienced an increase in the rate of adaptive protein evolution since the divergence of the ananassae and melanogaster subgroups .

the above results could be explained if sexual selection drives the evolution of many male-biased genes and the prevalence of sexual selection differs between the two subgroups. in ancestral d. melanogaster populations, x-linked synonymous polymorphism is significantly greater than 3/ <dig> of autosomal synonymous polymorphism  <cit> , which is expected if sexual selection acts on males . we observe a similar pattern for d. ananassae , suggesting that sexual selection does not differ greatly between the species. however, due to the relatively small number of d. ananassae loci, we cannot detect a significant difference between the observed x:autosome diversity ratio and the expected ratio of 3/ <dig>  nor can we detect a significant difference in this ratio between d. ananassae and d. melanogaster. thus, we cannot exclude the possibility that sexual selection is weaker in the d. ananassae lineage. mate-choice experiments, however, indicate that there is significant female mate preference in d. ananassae  <cit>  and that male courtship song plays a major role in female mate discrimination  <cit> . furthermore, it has been shown that d. ananassae males are subject to stronger intrasexual selection than females and that male mating success is correlated with morphological traits, such as body size and sternopleural bristle number  <cit> . these findings suggest that sexual selection plays an important role in the species' evolution.

the observed differences in male-biased gene evolution between d. ananassae and d. melanogaster could also be influenced by the particular genes that were investigated. our initial gene set was enriched for genes that showed strong and consistent sex-biased expression across multiple d. melanogaster microarray experiments. on average, the subset of male-biased genes showed a 12-fold male-bias in d. melanogaster, but only a 5-fold male bias in d. ananassae. while it is difficult to directly compare male/female expression ratios across different experiments and microarray platforms, it is likely that most of the genes investigated had a stronger male-bias in d. melanogaster than in d. ananassae. if the degree of male bias is correlated with the rate of adaptive evolution across the genus, as it appears to be in the melanogaster subgroup  <cit> , it could explain differences in male-biased gene evolution between the lineages. this possibility could be addressed in future studies focusing on genes with exceptionally strong male-biased expression in d. ananassae. however, there is not a significant correlation between dn/ds and the male/female expression ratio within our d. ananassae dataset . in general, the female-biased genes included in our study showed weaker sex-biased expression than the male-biased genes in d. melanogaster . this might explain why expression conservation between d. melanogaster and d. ananassae was greater for male-biased genes than female-biased genes , as highly biased genes are more likely to de detected as significant, while weakly biased genes are more likely to be non-significant and classified as unbiased.

CONCLUSIONS
although sex-biased gene expression is abundant in drosophila species, the sex-biased expression pattern of many genes differs between species. species-specific microarray data indicate that 26% of genes with a strong sex bias in d. melanogaster show no detectable sex bias in d. ananassae, while 12% of genes with unbiased expression in d. melanogaster show significantly sex-biased expression in d. ananassae. the accelerated rate of adaptive evolution seen for male-biased genes in d. melanogaster is not observed for male-biased genes in d. ananassae, which suggests that there are differences in sex-biased gene evolution between the two lineages. this is in agreement with a previous study on rates of protein evolution in d. pseudoobscura  <cit>  and suggests that the rapid adaptive evolution of male-biased genes is unique to the melanogaster subgroup and not a general pattern in drosophilids. despite these differences, the overall signal of adaptive protein evolution is strong in d. ananassae  and is consistent with previous estimates throughout the genus.

