BACKGROUND
tropical rain forests  are the most biodiverse terrestrial ecosystems on the planet  <cit> . they are characterised by a closed, multilayered canopy dominated by flowering plants  and occur only in frost-free areas with high mean monthly temperatures and precipitation, and low seasonality  <cit> . today, trf covers just 7% of the earth's surface  <cit>  in equatorial zones of the americas, africa and the indo-pacific, and is highly threatened by human activity  <cit> . the origin and evolution of species-rich biomes raises fundamental questions in evolutionary biology  <cit>  and, as such, the diversification of trf has been much debated  <cit> .

even though it is generally agreed that trf is a relatively old biome, the location and timing of its origin remain uncertain mainly because the fossil record for tropical regions is highly incomplete, especially during the cretaceous  <cit> . some direct  <cit>  and indirect  <cit>  evidence suggests that trf was present in the mid-cretaceous period ) at middle paleolatitudes  while other studies indicate that the first paleoflora attributable to modern day trf are found in the early paleocene of north america  <cit>  and late paleocene of south america  <cit>  and africa  <cit> .

whereas previous views suggested that the trf biome has been ecologically stable over long periods of time  <cit> , more recent data indicate that it is highly dynamic  <cit>  having fluctuated both in extent  <cit>  and in the diversity of plants that it sustains  <cit> . these views have led to three general evolutionary hypotheses that explain the high levels of present day species diversity found within trf:  early, rapid speciation in response to favourable climatic conditions followed by a deceleration of diversification rates due to global cooling  <cit>  and contraction of trf ;  constant diversification rates coupled with low extinction rates leading to a gradual accumulation of lineages in response to a long-lasting and stable tropical ecosystem ; and  an increase in diversification rates towards the present in response to climatic, tectonic or biotic changes . these hypothetical processes result in alternative lineage accumulation through time and thus different patterns of inferred branch length distributions . several phylogenetic studies of trf plant groups have provided evidence in support of the recent cradle model of diversification  <cit> . however, these studies were restricted to low taxonomic levels  and thus do not enhance our understanding of how these hypotheses might apply throughout the entire history of trf, for example, on the long-term diversification dynamics of trf. in contrast, studies of the early diversification of trf plant lineages that permit tests of the above hypotheses are rare.

in the absence of a complete fossil record for tropical rain forests, family-level diversification analyses of large pantropical angiosperm groups that are ecologically characteristic of trf can provide important insights into the historical construction of the biome  <cit> . in this respect, the pantropical palm family  presents an ideal study group. first, palms are among the most important and characteristic components of trf ecosystems worldwide in terms of species diversity , abundance of individuals and impact on the environment  <cit> . based on the excellent taxonomic knowledge for this family  <cit> , we calculated that over 90% of its species diversity is restricted to trf . water and energy-related variables are strong determinants of palm diversity  <cit>  and fundamental anatomical constraints inhibit palms from colonising cold environments  <cit> . second, the known history of palms extends far back into the cretaceous although the details of the spatiotemporal origin of the family remain controversial  <cit> . direct evidence from unambiguous fossils associated with palms suggest that the family was already present during the turonian  while more doubtful fossils have been recorded since the aptian . more recently, several molecular clock estimates based on angiosperm wide phylogenies suggested a stem age for the family ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> ma  <cit> . these studies were based on a very limited sampling within the family and thus do not provide reliable approximations for the crown node age and early diversification history. to date, most estimates of palm ages have focused on subfamily  <cit>  or tribal levels  <cit> .

here we investigate the origin and diversification of palms in space and time using the first complete generic-level sampling for any important trf-restricted plant family  <cit> . we estimated speciation events under a bayesian framework using a relaxed molecular clock approach , while the spatial origin of the family was inferred under a maximum likelihood method that implements the dispersal-extinction-cladogenesis model  <cit> . finally, we use palms as a model to explore the evolution of trf biodiversity by testing which of the three trf diversification hypotheses outlined above corresponds to the diversification history of the family.

RESULTS
evolutionary origin of palms
the fossil-calibrated molecular dating of a complete genus-level palm supertree  <cit>  provides for the first time minimum age estimations for all major groups of the palm family . the resulting chronogram  suggests that the diversification of extant lineages of palms started in the mid-cretaceous period at the albian-cenomanian boundary  108- <dig> ma). the cretaceous represents an important period for plant evolution as it witnessed the rise and diversification of flowering plants  <cit> . the fossil record indicates that from the albian to the middle cenomanian angiosperms diversified extensively, becoming more abundant relative to other plants and establishing themselves as a major part of paleofloras by the end of that period  <cit> . our maximum likelihood analysis of geographic range evolution indicates that the most likely distribution of the most recent common ancestor of palms was centred on present day central/north america and eurasia, which corresponds to the laurasian landmass at that time . notably, the oldest reliable palm fossils  have all been discovered in europe and north america  <cit> . a laurasian origin for palms was previously suggested by uhl and dransfield  <cit>  based on the prevalence of putatively primitive lineages in the northern hemisphere. from this ancestral area several subsequent dispersal events are inferred into the equatorial regions of south america, africa and south east asia, the present day distribution of palms. finally, our ancestral biome analysis suggests that the earliest palm lineages were restricted to trf , a result that was further supported by a test of phylogenetic signal of the biome. in fact, adaptation to non-trf biomes did not arise until the paleocene within the fan palm subfamily coryphoideae. thus, our results support the notion that palms originated in a trf-like biome and started to diversify during the mid-cretaceous period in laurasia.

bold entries indicate values significantly different from other states.

a <dig> = tropical rain forest restricted;  <dig> = mangrove restricted;  <dig> = non-rain forest restricted.

hpd = highest posterior density; ma = millions of years.

origin of tropical rain forests
the presence of trf during the mid-cretaceous period is controversial because pre-cenozoic fossils associated with trf are notoriously sparse  <cit>  in contrast to the relatively well documented fossil evidence of trf during the early cenozoic from equatorial to relatively high palaeolatitudes  <cit> . the earliest fossil flora interpreted as characteristic of trf was found in the early cenomanian from several formations in north america, for example, the dakota formation of kansas , which is consistent with our results. however, these conclusions, which were based on the physiognomy of leaf characters, such as shape and size, that are generally associated with megathermal vegetation  <cit> , have been questioned by some authors . several studies have suggested that during the cretaceous plant biodiversity was highest at mid paleolatitudes where the climate was more favourable while equatorial latitudes were exposed to a drier and hotter climate unlikely to have supported trfs  <cit> . in addition, simulations of major vegetation distributions during the mid-cretaceous period  indicate that the presence of trf in the cenomanian of north america and eurasia as well as other parts of the world is plausible  <cit> . finally, indirect evidence is provided by a diversification study of malpighiales, a large plant order mainly restricted to trfs. using a molecular clock approach, it was estimated that the origin of this order dates to around  <dig> ma with subsequent diversification during the cenomanian  <cit> , implying the presence of trf at that time.

even though molecular dating methods have been criticised in relation to interpretations of trf origins  <cit>  and are not assumption free, such approaches have played important roles in understanding the construction of other species rich biomes  and provide important insights when the fossil record is sparse or incomplete. molecular dating of palms, one of the most characteristic trf plant families, provides additional evidence that modern trf might have already been in place  <dig> ma, significantly earlier than suggested by unequivocal fossil evidence  <cit> . it is most likely that formation of the trf biome was a gradual process and thus the precise time at which modern trfs can be recognised may be impossible to pinpoint. however, our results and other evidence discussed above  <cit>  imply that the assembly of the trf biome had already started during the mid-cretaceous period and was not just a strictly cenozoic process. it is puzzling that, to our knowledge, no macrofossil of palms has been recovered in cenomanian deposits of north america  <cit> . however, our results suggest that palms were just starting to diversify at this time and may not have been widespread, thus reducing the frequency of fossilization and probability of later discovery. interestingly, studies of other species-rich trf plant families yield timings for the earliest extant lineage diversification events  that largely post-date palms, for example leguminosae , annonaceae  and rubiaceae . this would imply that palms represent one of the first extant plant families to have diversified within trf since its origin. thus, palms not only play a major role in present day trf  <cit> , but also appear to have been a key component in the assembly and diversity of this biome since the earliest stages of its evolution.

early diversification of tropical rain forests
to depict global diversification at the family level and test the hypotheses of trf diversification, we generated a semilogarithmic lineage-through-time  plot as well as 95% confidence intervals based on  <dig>  randomly selected posterior trees from the beast output . ltt plots are widely used to characterise the diversification of clades as a function of time  <cit> , but they are sensitive to incomplete taxon sampling  <cit> , as is the case here . however, our sampling is phylogenetically representative and non-random as we included 100% of all described palm genera. such a sampling strategy has the advantage of representing all the deeper nodes of the phylogeny and can provide a good estimation of diversification history up to a point in time after which undersampling at shallower nodes biases the inference  <cit> . in order to restrict the interpretation of our ltt plot to the more accurately estimated parts we used a novel approach to identify a threshold after which the potential impact of incomplete taxon sampling becomes too important to permit accurate analyses of diversification rates . based on the chronogram, the percentage of total missing palm species increased sharply from 12% to 28% after circa  <dig> ma . interpretation of the ltt plot was thus restricted to the period prior to that point in time  and all nodes occurring after the  <dig> ma threshold were excluded from subsequent analyses.

between  <dig> ma and  <dig> ma, the ltt plot forms an almost straight line, which suggests that the palm family underwent a constant rate of diversification without any major shifts or radiations  <cit> . this is also statistically supported by the better fit of the pure-birth model of diversification  on the ltt plot than any other model tested ; aic = akaike information criterion). moreover, the Δaicrc was not significantly different under the null hypothesis of diversification rate consistency when calculated from  <dig>  phylogenies simulated under the pure-birth process . finally, the γ statistic  <cit>  also supported a constant rate hypothesis as it was not significantly different from zero . these results lend support to the museum model  in which diversification rates remain constant and extinction rates are low  <cit> . this hypothesis was thought to be the consequence of the old and ecologically stable conditions of trf over millions of years. even though such views have now been replaced by the notion of greater dynamism in trf evolution  <cit> , the biome itself has never completely disappeared  <cit>  and has persisted in refuges during unfavourable climatic times. the existence of such refuges may have allowed comparatively old lineages to persist and contribute to present day species diversity. for example, lineages of another diverse trf plant family, annonaceae, were shown to have persisted in possible trf refuges of east and west africa for over  <dig> million years  <cit>  even during climatically unfavourable times . we suggest here that trf refugia may have played a similar role throughout the history of the palm family and, as a result, global palm species diversity is at least partly the result of a gradual accumulation of ancestral lineages through time, and cannot be attributed to ancient or recent speciation bursts alone.

at finer time scales, palm species diversity and diversification rates most likely fluctuated with extinction rates possibly increasing and decreasing at specific time frames in the past, perhaps in relation to climatic and geological changes. for example, studies of the palynoflora through the late paleocene-eocene thermal maximum in colombia indicate an increase in palm morphospecies after this time . thus, it is probable that different clades within palms underwent alternative diversification scenarios leading to a heterogeneous pattern of diversification among the lineages within the family. however, our study implies that over a larger time scale these changes did not influence the overall global pattern of diversification in palms, at least until  <dig> ma. this is also apparent during the major extinction episode at the cretaceous/paleogene boundary , which had no statistically significant effect on diversification rates .

to date, relatively few family-level studies have provided evidence for the museum model of tropical plant diversification . this pattern contrasts with the study of malpighiales evolution, which indicated that all major lineages originated within a short timeframe suggesting an early rapid speciation of the order, although no detailed diversification analysis was undertaken for this group  <cit> . interestingly, meta-analyses based on a large number of species-level dated molecular phylogenies of a range of plants and animals have also underlined the importance of the constant rate diversification model  <cit> . indeed a large number of phylogenies fitted the simplest model of diversification. for example, morlon et al.  <cit> , using a novel coalescent-based approach, found that  <dig> out of  <dig> phylogenies studied  better fitted the yule process  than alternative models. even though these results were obtained from a wide range of organisms occurring in different ecosystems, it nevertheless underlines the importance of such a simple process for explaining present day diversity.

given the threshold of  <dig> ma imposed on our ltt plot , there is little indication about recent  diversification patterns. however, it is clear that in order to attain present day species diversity , rates must have increased, which suggests a shift in diversification that occurred after  <dig> ma. this could have been achieved either by accelerating diversification rates, consistent with the 'recent cradle' model, or simply by higher overall constant rates. recent high speciation rates within other trf plant genera have been documented  <cit>  and it seems likely that rapid speciation occurred within some species-rich palm genera given the very young stem node age estimations we inferred for them . in fact, the 'museum' and 'recent cradle' hypotheses are not mutually exclusive; both mechanisms could be at work, possibly within different palm lineages and different time frames. for example, both the 'ancient' and 'recent' cradle models of diversification have been identified within the trf-restricted leaf beetle family  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results from one of the most important trf plant families suggests that present day trf biodiversity can at least in part be explained by a steady accumulation of lineages dating back to the mid-cretaceous period and is not just the result of rapid radiations, either recent  <cit>  or ancient  <cit> . the analysis of additional family-level diversification patterns of other trf restricted plant groups will undoubtedly shed more light into the evolutionary forces that have led to the immense diversity of species found within modern trf today.

