BACKGROUND
exposure to dna damaging agents can cause mutation and cell death and may ultimately lead to disease. protection from this damage is provided by a host of dna repair and cell cycle checkpoint proteins that collectively represent numerous pathways to help in the recovery response  <cit> . in humans, there are approximately  <dig> dna repair and cell cycle checkpoint proteins that serve to ensure the repair of damage caused to dna  <cit>  and most of these have functional homologues in s. cerevisiae. recently, studies have shown that proteins with additional cellular functions beyond dna repair and cell cycle regulation may ameliorate the toxic effects of agents that cause dna damage  <cit> .

genome-wide phenotyping studies to identify genes involved in cellular recovery after exposure to dna alkylating agents, such as methyl methane sulfonate , indicate that a vast array of cellular processes are required for the recovery of s. cerevisiae. transcriptional profiling demonstrated that up to 30% of the s. cerevisiae ~ <dig> genes respond upon exposure to mms in a time-, agent- and dose-dependent manner  <cit> . given this vast transcriptional response to damaging agents like mms and the knowledge that, in addition to dna, these agents can also damage proteins, rna and lipids, we set out to identify the transcriptional response specifically caused by damage to dna.

here we compared the responses of s. cerevisiae upon exposure to γ-radiation, a non-selective oxidant that attacks dna , lipids, carbohydrates, proteins and small metabolites in cells, with the response of s. cerevisiae to a panel of enediyne antibiotics that are known to damage dna and not other cellular molecules   <cit> . the enediyne family is a structurally diverse group of dna-cleaving molecules that undergo reductive activation, presumably by glutathione in vivo, to form a diradical intermediate that binds with high affinity  in the minor groove of dna and abstract hydrogen atoms from deoxyribose. this "radiomimetic" damage leads to the formation of well-defined proportions of single- and double-stranded dna lesions unique to each type of enediyne  <cit>  the proportions of which are noted in table  <dig>  with no damage to dna bases, the enediynes specifically oxidize the deoxyribose moiety to produce either direct strand breaks with various sugar residues or phosphate groups attached to the 3'- or 5'-ends of the breaks, or various unstable oxidized abasic sites  <cit> .

expression profiling experiments have been performed using some of these agents independently  <cit> . however, there are no studies that directly compare the responses of these enediynes to each other and to that of γ-radiation under identical conditions. we establish four key findings:  under conditions of similar cell survival, exposure to non-selective γ-radiation results in more extensive reprogramming of s. cerevisiae transcription than does exposure to the dna-selective enediynes;  in response to dna-strand breaks induced by both the non-selective and selective treatments, s. cerevisiae induces genes involved in dna repair and the general stress response and represses genes encoding for ribosomal biogenesis;  a considerable fraction of the response upon exposure to γ-radiation was not mimicked by treatment with the enediynes; and  the "dna damage signature" as described by gasch et al.  <cit>  in s. cerevisiae is associated with single-strand breaks in dna. these results have implications for our understanding of the cellular responses arising from damage to specific components of the cell.

RESULTS
genome-wide responses of s. cerevisiae upon exposure to enediynes and γ-radiation are partially overlapping
the expression patterns of yeast genes were monitored in s. cerevisiae exposed to the enediynes calicheamicin γ1i, esperamicin a <dig> and neocarzinostatin, and to γ-radiation. care was taken in these studies to control the conditions of the treatments, including cytotoxicity , exposure time , and exposure temperature . the reproducibility of the dose-lethality relationships of the agents is indicated by the highly similar concentrations of calicheamicin and neocarzinostatin producing 20–25% lethality in the dby <dig> strain employed for these studies and in another strain, by4741: 1– <dig>  nm vs.  <dig> – <dig> nm for calicheamicin, and  <dig> – <dig>  nm vs. 2– <dig> nm for neocarzinostatin, respectively . statistically significant transcriptional changes were determined for treated cells versus untreated  using local pooled error analysis with a correction for false discovery rate . the stringent selection criteria for gene expression change  identified changes in  <dig> orfs  across all experiments. hierarchical cluster analysis displays the similarities and differences between the expression profiles of the enediyne and γ-radiation treated s. cerevisiae . the highest similarities in expression responses were seen for the three enediyne treatments, which showed more similarity to each other than to γ-radiation as visualized in the dendrogram in the hierarchical cluster . the difference between the response of the enediynes and γ-radiation was also identified using principal component analysis  with the highest similarity found between the responses of the enediynes, which clustered separately from γ-radiation . pca showed that the largest percentage of variability within the dataset  was attributable to treatment effect . although s. cerevisiae treated with the enediynes did show highly similar responses in genome-wide modulation relative to γ-radiation, there were minor differences within the responses induced by neocarzinostatin, calicheamicin and esperamicin. these differences influence the presence of the subdendrogram generated via hierarchical cluster analysis within the enediynes , as well as the principal component analysis where neocarzinostatin response differs moderately from that of calicheamicin and esperamicin . although these minor differences exist within the response to enediyne treatment, the overall responses were highly similar to each other and strikingly different to that of γ-radiation.

common and unique responses of s. cerevisiae upon exposure to enediynes or γ-radiation
as shown in figure  <dig>  comparisons of the gene expression responses of the collective enediynes to γ-radiation identify four primary sectors:  those that were similarly induced upon exposure to enediynes and γ-radiation;  those that were induced upon exposure to γ-radiation but repressed upon exposure to enediynes;  those that were similarly repressed upon exposure to enediynes and γ-radiation; and  those that were repressed upon exposure to γ-radiation and induced by enediynes . gene ontology enrichment analysis identified biological processes significantly enriched within each of these four sectors . in general, the absolute fold change of the enediyne treatment was lower than fold changes observed with γ-radiation. we hypothesize that this difference is based on the specificity of the damage generated by the enediynes versus the nonspecific nature of the cellular damage caused by exposure to γ-radiation.

common responses were identified to treatment with both enediynes and γ-radiation representing 55% of the modulated transcripts . genes induced by both enediynes and γ-radiation  were represented by  <dig> gene ontology categories,  <dig> of which are involved in dna repair . the most significant class enriched was that of response to stress  and includes msn <dig>  msn <dig>  dun <dig>  and rad <dig>  genes repressed by both enediynes and γ-radiation  were represented by  <dig> gene ontology categories. among these  <dig> categories, significant enrichment was seen in the ribosomal large subunit biogenesis  . interestingly, both the induction of stress response genes and repression of ribosomal protein synthesis genes are two of the hallmarks of the environmental stress response  in s. cerevisiae. the esr was identified by brown and colleagues where a commonly responding set of genes  was modulated upon exposure to a wide variety of environmental stressors including temperature shock, hydrogen peroxide and hyper- and hypo-osmotic shock  <cit> .

despite the common response to treatment with enediynes and γ-radiation described above, a substantial fraction  of the genomic response induced by γ-radiation was repressed by the enediynes and vise versa suggesting that much of the response to the enediynes is not "radiomimetic." specifically  <dig> transcripts of the total  <dig> modulated transcripts demonstrated opposite directionality between γ-radiation and the enediynes. genes that were induced by γ-radiation but repressed by enediynes  were enriched for  <dig> gene ontology categories . the most significantly enriched class was mutagenesis  and includes pol <dig> and cdc <dig>  the final class included transcripts repressed upon exposure to γ-radiation and induced by enediynes . a significantly enriched gene ontology class includes chromatin assembly/disassembly  including htb <dig>  hht <dig>  and hht <dig> .

regression analysis identified gene induction that associates with double-strand or single-strand damage
using the various proportions of single- and double-strand deoxyribose oxidation data shown in table  <dig>  we performed regression analysis of gene expression responses to treatment with each of the enediynes and γ-radiation. the results identified  <dig> orfs with transcriptional induction that associates either with double-strand or single-strand damage . as shown in table  <dig>  positive association was identified with  <dig> orfs demonstrating elevated expression in response to double-strand lesions and  <dig> orfs with elevated expression in response to single-strand lesions . while these correlations are significant  for direct strand breaks, the correlation increases substantially when total deoxyribose oxidation is considered . the distinction between direct strand breaks and total deoxyribose oxidation involves the formation of oxidized abasic sites by γ-radiation and the enediynes. these lesions consist of the 2'-deoxyribonolactone and 2-deoxypentose-4-ulose derived from 1'- and 4'-oxidation of deoxyribose in dna, respectively, and are present in more than 75% of calicheamicin- and neocarzinostatin-induced double-strand lesions dna damage  <cit> . the abasic sites are not taken into account in most studies of "strand break" formation by oxidizing agents , an hypothesis that warrants further study.

interestingly, orfs with regulatory association with single-strand breaks show an enrichment of gene ontology categories including response to stress , and dna replication  . within this single-strand break associated gene set there is an enrichment of genes belonging to the "dna damage signature" in s. cerevisiae including dun <dig>  rad <dig>  rnr <dig>  and ybr070c. the dna damage signature, identified by brown and colleagues, includes nine genes: the dna damage repair genes rad <dig> and rad <dig>  ribonucleotide reductase subunits rnr <dig> and rnr <dig>  dna damage activated kinase dun <dig>  and uncharacterized genes yer004w and ybr070c  <cit> . the "dna damage" signature was identified by comparing expression programs in s. cerevisiae that were modulated by a range of environmental stresses including heat shock, oxidative stress, reductive stress, osmotic shock and amino acid starvation to those elicited specifically by dna damage induced by the alkylating agent methylmethane sulfonate  and ionizing radiation   <cit> . although it is not surprising that here we identify the dna damage signature gene set as associated with γ-radiation , it is noteworthy that there is a specificity of the activation of the dna damage signature gene set to single-strand damage.

the induction of the dna damage signature gene set was muted in cells deficient for the atr homolog, mec <dig>  as well as cells deficient for dun <dig>  which indicates these genes are downstream and targets for the mec <dig> pathway  <cit> . in contrast to the single-strand break associated gene set, genes associated with double-strand damage are enriched for gene ontology categories that include cell cycle regulation . interestingly, no dna repair or stress responses categories were significantly enriched within this gene set. these results suggest that there is differential genomic modulation in response to single-strand or double-strand dna damage in s. cerevisiae .

comparisons with published studies of enediyne-induced changes in gene expression
expression profiling experiments have been performed using calicheamicin  <cit>  and neocarzinostatin  <cit> . several major experimental differences make it impossible to directly compare the data generated here with those of the published studies. the calicheamicin studies performed by schaus et al. employed the yph500α strain of s. cerevisiae and significantly higher  drug concentrations  <cit> , while the neocarzinostatin studies of watanabe et al.  <cit>  utilized strain by <dig> and the holoantibiotic form of the drug . in addition to the absence of publicly available expression data sets for these studies, neither reported any measure of enediyne-induced cytotoxicity or other biological response that could be used to normalize the resulting transcriptional data.

CONCLUSIONS
genome-wide expression profiling in s. cerevisiae has resulted in the understanding that a robust response is mounted upon exposure to agents that damage dna. here we discern the components of the transcriptional response of s. cerevisiae that are specifically due to particular types of dna damage, namely that of single- or double-strand dna damage arising from deoxyribose oxidation. these studies were conducted with a panel of three dna-selective enediyne antibiotics  that produce different proportions of double- and single-strand deoxyribose damage in dna, with genome-wide responses compared to those induced by the non-selective γ-radiation. we find at doses producing similar toxicity, exposure to non-selective γ-radiation results in more extensive reprogramming of the s. cerevisiae transcriptome than exposure to each of the three enediynes. the extensive response to γ-radiation may reflect the non-specific nature of the oxidative attack on dna , lipids, carbohydrates, proteins and small metabolites in cells. a striking finding is that only a modest fraction of the response upon exposure to γ-radiation was mimicked by treatment with the enediynes. we find that, in response to dna strand breaks induced by both the non-selective and selective agents, yeast induce genes involved in dna repair and stress response and repress genes encoding for ribosomal biogenesis. we also identify that the dna damage signature in s. cerevisiae is more closely associated with single-strand breaks in dna, than with double-strand breaks.

