BACKGROUND
the pig industry in scotland is a small but very well organised industry which focuses on assured production of high quality farrow-to-finish pigs, with a large proportion of outdoor herds. the scottish pig sector comprises over  <dig>  pigs  <cit>  and accounts for nearly 7% of the uk pig herd  <cit> . the industry contributes about  <dig> % of the scottish agricultural output  and is associated with exports worth £ <dig> million  <cit> . however, pig prices have not kept up with the cost of production and the scottish pig industry has declined in size by more than 34% in the last decade. in comparison, the number of cattle and sheep farms decreased by  <dig> and 14% in the same period  <cit> . as such, the industry is probably more vulnerable than other livestock sectors to threats such as exotic or emerging diseases that, if introduced into the pig population, would undoubtedly have major economic consequences.

in addition to commercial producers, scotland has a number of small pig producers, including “backyard” producers, crofters and small holdings. although this sector of the industry may represent a small proportion of the pig industry in term of the numbers of animals reared, more than two thirds of the pig producers in scotland report less than  <dig> pigs . evidence from other countries have shown considerable interaction between small pig producers and commercial producers  <cit> , whether directly, through the trade of live animals, or indirectly, through the use of slaughterhouses, market facilities and haulage services. in addition, they represent the least-well regulated sectors of the industry where biosecurity may be sub-optimal  <cit> . as such, their impact on disease transmission during outbreaks may have been underestimated  <cit> . to ensure early detection, management and control of any future emerging infectious disease outbreak, knowledge of the degree of interconnection as well as on spatial and temporal aspects of animal movements between non-commercial and commercial producers is therefore critical. however, such information is rare, as most information collected, is based on large commercial farms  <cit>  or is obtained from countries where non-commercial pig farming is limited  <cit> . for instance, 5%, 11%, 15% and 19% of registered farms report less than  <dig> pigs in denmark, netherlands, belgium and sweden, respectively  <cit> .

the scottish livestock electronic identification and traceability database , which was introduced in november  <dig>  is a unique resource for better understanding the inter-connectivity of pig movements between all types of producers. under scottish  <cit>  and european legislation  <cit> , all pig keepers moving animals are not only required to register online with scoteid and electronically record any movements ahead of time but also report details of any haulage company employed for the transport. the objectives of this research were threefold. first, to use the scoteid database to characterize movements between pig premises in scotland, specifically, quantifying the amount, frequency and distance of movements between pig premises. second, to investigate different movement patterns in the scottish pig industry which may affect the risk of disease spread. in particular, we focus on the role of small pig producers. finally, acknowledging that disease may spread between farm premises through contaminated livestock vehicles  <cit> , we aim to explore the frequency of usage of livestock hauliers within the scottish pig industry.

RESULTS
movement numbers and premises types
overall,  <dig>  batches of pigs were recorded moving animals between  <dig> known unique premises during the 17-month study period. a description of the numbers of movements, stratified by types of pig producer , are described in table  <dig>  the number of movements originating and departing from premises of different producer types is described in table  <dig>  in total,  <dig>   of all pig movements terminated at slaughterhouses. of these,  <dig>   were direct movements between a pig producer and a slaughterhouse; the remaining  <dig>  moved from a market to a slaughterhouse.

a
aall premises, including markets, shows ground, ferry terminals, slaughterhouses and farms.

bactive premises defined as those that sent or received pigs during the study period.

a
b
movements were classified by location type and region. also shown are movements of at least  <dig> pig when a professional haulier is used for transportation.

anumber of premises.

bproportion of movements using a haulage company.

the interconnectivity of pig movements between all types of premises  is shown in figure  <dig>  as expected, the network was dominated by movement to slaughterhouse. even though small producers outnumber commercial producers , 83% of these movements to slaughter were made from professionals  or from non-assured commercial producers  . when movements to slaughterhouses were excluded, most movements occurred directly between producers , or between a producer and a market collection centre , but a small number of movements also occurred between producers and shows . although most movements occurred between producers of similar type, movements between producers of different types also occurred . for instance, 13% and 4% of movements from professional producers were sent to a non-assured commercial producer or to a small producer, respectively; whereas 43% and 22% of movements from non-assured commercial farms were sent to a professional or a small producer, respectively. in contrast, only  <dig> % of movements from small producers were sent to commercial producers .

the calculated values of the e-i  index, a measure of group assortativity, between producer types are described in table  <dig>  professional producers and small producers showed tendencies to strictly receive  or send  pigs to producers with the same producer type, whereas non-assured commercial producers tended to trade  with professional or small producers rather than other non-assured commercial producers. looking at weekly e-i indices , mean estimates were similar to what was calculated over the whole study period, but variations occurred, particularly for movements received by small and non-assured professionals.

farm type
a
region
c 
region
d 
bold numbers show where the computed mean weekly external–internal  index of pig movement connections was considered significantly different from the non-assortativity hypothesis .

aestimates computed for movements involving agricultural holdings only.

bmean and the q1-q <dig> range of the distribution of the computed e-i index for the  <dig> complete weeks recorded in the study period.

conly scottish regions are reported, estimates computed for movements involving agricultural holdings and gathering places.

donly scottish regions are reported, estimates computed for movements to slaughter only.

batch size
there were  <dig> , <dig> animals represented by  <dig>  movements. of these,  <dig>   pigs were moved to be slaughtered . of these  <dig>  pigs,  <dig>   came from professional producers,  <dig>   came from non-assured commercial producers and  <dig>   came from small pig producers . median batch size of slaughter and non-slaughter movements are described in table  <dig>  while small producers move significantly less pigs per batch , non-assured commercial producers and professional pig producers moved similar batch sizes.

timing of movements
during the 17-month study period, there were  <dig> possible days of movement activity. on 514 days, at least one movement was recorded . overall, a median of  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  movements were carried out each day, week and month, respectively; among which  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  were made between producers. looking at the broad contact rate between producers, small producers rarely moved pigs to another producer , whereas non-assured and professional producers moved pigs with a mean frequency of  <dig> /day  and  <dig> /day , respectively. similarly, there was a 10- to 20-fold difference in the rate of pigs sent to slaughterhouse from small producers in comparison with non-assured and professional producers. indeed, small producers sent pigs to slaughter with a mean frequency of  <dig> /day , whereas non-assured and professional producers sent pigs with a mean frequency of  <dig> /day  and  <dig> /day , respectively.figure 2a shows the total number of batches of pigs moved daily during the study period. there was a clear weekly pattern, with most pig movements  occurring from monday to thursday . the timing of movements was associated with its purpose  and the producer type of origin . in particular, while movement to producers occurred throughout the week, movements to slaughterhouse were cyclical, with most of these movements occurring on monday and only a few occurred from friday to sunday . in contrast, little seasonal variation was observed for batches sent to either another producer  or to slaughter  from both professional  and non-assured  commercial producers across the  <dig> first month of the study period . however, there was an obvious seasonality in movement from small producers, regardless of the movements were sent to another producer  or to slaughter . indeed, there were significantly more movements to slaughter occurring in autumn  than in the rest of the year , while more movements to producers  were recorded in both spring  and summer .

distances and location of movements
the distribution of distances travelled per batch of pigs is shown in figure  <dig>  the overall median distance was 65 km  but this differed depending on the purpose of the movement. median distance to slaughterhouses was 95 km  from the premises of origin, whereas non-slaughter movements were shorter . however, movements of more than 400 km were 20% more likely  to be carried out between producers than between any other types of premises . figure  <dig> explores the relationship between the number of animals per batch and the distance travelled. overall, there is a weak but statistically significant positive correlation between batch size and distance moved . this correlation is weakened when it is restricted to movements between farms , but strengthened  for movements to slaughter only.

overall, small producers tended to move pigs in significantly smaller distances than other commercial producers, whether it was for slaughtering their animals  or for other purposes . however, pigs from small producers may still travel long distances; with the maximum distance  similar to that of commercial farms  . the distribution of distances travelled by each batch between producers as a function of the producer type of destination and departure is described in figure  <dig>  most distances between producer types are small; median distances ranged from  <dig>  km  to 48 km . in contrast, pigs moving from professionals to small producers  and pigs moving from non-assured to professional producers  appeared to travel longer distances in comparison to the others.

the interconnectivity of scottish regions via pig movements is described in figure  <dig>  when excluding all batches of pigs sent to slaughter, movements within regions dominated the flow of pigs in scotland ; with “east scotland”, the region with the largest number of commercial producers, showing more intra-regional movements than expected given its number of farms. excluding “east scotland”, there was a strong linear relationship between the number of movements carried out within each region and their number of farms . table  <dig> shows the e-i index for premises regrouped per region, once all movements to slaughter have been excluded. in concordance with figure 6a, producers in “highlands and islands” and in “east scotland” prefer to move animals within the same region, whereas those in the rest of scotland were not discriminatory.

although more batches are moved across scotland for slaughter than for non-slaughter purposes , the importance of within-region flow still remains. indeed, when looking at the assortativity of movements to slaughter only , slaughterhouses in “highlands and islands”, “south scotland” and “east scotland” significantly tend to receive pigs from local pig producers, while slaughterhouses in “scotland central belt” tend to receive pigs from other regions. in contrast, producers in “highlands and islands” prefer to send their pigs to slaughterhouses within the same region , whereas those in the rest of scotland were not discriminatory.

there was nearly a 7-fold difference between movements going south and north across the border between scotland and england, regardless of the purpose of the movement . of the  <dig> cross-border movements to slaughter, 89%  went south ; similarly, 84%  of cross-border pig movements to farms, markets or show grounds went also south . these cross-border movements represented 6%, 24% and 22% of all movements to slaughter from small, non-assured and professionals producers, respectively. similarly, 11%, 21% and 11% of the non-slaughter movements from small, non-assured and professionals producers crossed borders, respectively. among the  <dig> cross-border movements to farm, markets and show grounds departing from scotland,  <dig>  and  <dig>  originated from “east scotland” and “south scotland”, respectively; with both sending pigs to “yorkshire and the humber” , “north east england”  and “north west england” . in addition, 26% of cross border movements from “east scotland” had as destination the “east of england”. concomitantly,  <dig>  of the  <dig> cross-border movements originating from england and wales originated from these northern english regions , with  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  of the  <dig> cross-border movements arriving in “east scotland”, “south scotland” and “scotland central belt”, respectively.

movements by hauliers
there were  <dig>   movements that reported the use of a haulage company , whereas  <dig>  reported the use of personal vehicles . the remaining  <dig>  movements did not show any records of using a haulier or not. overall,  <dig> unique registered haulage companies and three stock improvement companies were used, with a median of  <dig> movements  per company over the whole period. of all movements using haulage,  <dig>   departed from a producer, the remaining  <dig> departed from markets , and ferry collection centres . in contrast, a producer was the destination for only a third  of these movements. the remaining  <dig> movements had slaughterhouses , markets  and ferry  as a destination .

overall,  <dig> farms reported the use of at least one haulage company, among which  <dig>  both received and sent pigs; and  <dig>  and  <dig>  were only sending and receiving pigs, respectively. overall, farms used a range of  <dig> to  <dig> unique haulage companies to send pigs . when movements to all gathering places were excluded, farms used a range of  <dig> to  <dig> hauliers  to send pigs to other farms, with professional producers using significantly more unique haulage companies  than small producers . in contrast, professional and non-assured  producers used a similar number of unique haulage companies to send pigs.

among the  <dig> haulage companies recorded in scoteid during the study period,  <dig>  moved pigs between farms. as such, between  <dig> and  <dig> farms  were connected by a single haulage company. it is worth noting that, among the  <dig> farms connected by a single haulage company, individual farms were only trading directly with  <dig> to  <dig> others . in addition,  <dig> of the  <dig> hauliers operated within a single region, with a mean of  <dig>  regions  and a maximum of  <dig> regions. table  <dig> shows the proportion of movements using a haulage company between different scottish regions. there is a clear disparity between regions: “east scotland” had a high level, “scotland central belt” and “south scotland” had a medium level, and “highlands and islands” and “mid scotland and fife” had a low level of haulage use.

use of a haulier is strongly dependent on the producer type of departure. regardless of the premises type of destination, professional producers were four times more likely to use a haulier than a non-assured producer , whereas small producers were  <dig> times less likely  than a non-assured producer. the magnitude of these associations was amplified when movement to all gathering places were excluded. professionals were nearly  <dig> times  more likely than non-assured producers to use haulage, whereas small producers were  <dig> times  less likely to use haulage than non-assured producers.

compared to shorter distances, movements of more than 200 km were more likely to be made using hauliers . the odds of using haulage increased with each log10-unit increase in the number of kilometres travelled . figure  <dig> shows the number and distance distribution of movement between producer types using either a haulier or own vehicles. in addition to the fact that all producer types showed some movements using private vehicles, it is clear that they behaved differently when moving animals. while movement of pigs from professionals to small producers  or to non-assured producers  were more likely made using private vehicle than using a haulier, the distance travelled to small producers using a haulier was significantly greater than that using other means . pigs from non-assured producers were more likely to be transported using hauliers when moving to professional producers  in comparison to another non-assured producer, whereas movements to small producers were more likely made using private vehicles . however, distances travelled using hauliers were significantly greater than using private vehicles for all departure types . finally, small producers used more often hauliers to move pigs to non-assured  and professional  producers than when moving pigs to other small producers.

discussion
this is the first study to use data from a national electronic system for pig traceability to describe, in detail, pig movements occurring between different types of producers including backyard and hobby producers. this study had a clear objective to provide better information on the level of interaction between the different actors, commercial and non-commercial, in the scottish swine industry. the recent epidemic of african swine fever in the eastern european region has highlighted the involvement of non-commercial swine producers in the spread of swine fevers via animal movements  <cit>  and the threat that they may pose to both national and regional swine industries  <cit> . therefore, a better understanding of these relationships is crucial for identifying likely routes of disease incursion and transmission prior to disease detection, and identifying weaknesses in biosecurity, surveillance and contingency planning. such knowledge is a key component in the development of a representative, and therefore more robust, biosecurity and surveillance planning which would secure the resilience of the scottish swine industry to any incursion of exotic notifiable diseases.

movement of live pigs leading to disease transmission by direct contact is an important route of transmission for swine pathogens  <cit> . therefore quantifying the movement patterns of pig keepers, including small producers, provides valuable information to inform disease models and risk assessments. however, other transmission routes can also be important, depending on the pathogen. transmission via fomites is another important route of disease transmission for a number of pathogens  <cit> , and could include transmission via vehicles or personnel that visit more than one type of pig unit, potentially providing additional links between commercial and non-commercial units. spread of infectious disease, such as classical swine fever or porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus, via the movement of contaminated semen have been demonstrated in europe  <cit> . however, there is little information available on interactions between producers through semen, despite the potential importance of semen in the spread of disease within and between countries. whilst commercial pig semen producers maintain high biosecurity to reduce the risk of pathogen transfer, it is not known how common use of semen is between smaller producers, who may use other sources of semen. swill feeding is also thought to have been responsible for the initial incursion, and in some cases ongoing spread, in outbreaks of swine diseases, including classical and african swine fevers and foot-and-mouth disease  <cit> . however, swill feeding is not currently permitted in uk. whilst wild boar play a role in transmission of swine pathogens in other areas, the wild boar population in scotland is thought to be too low to maintain disease, although wild boar could be responsible for local transmission. knowledge of all important transmission routes is critical for preparing for future incursions of exotic notifiable diseases and for the creation of accurate and reliable computerised disease outbreak models that may be used to inform policy. quantification of pig movements conducted in this study provides detailed and valuable information on one transmission route, but also highlights a number of other transmission routes for which there are important knowledge gaps, particularly around the potential role of small scale pig producers.

historically, characterisation of the interactions between commercial and non-commercial swine producers has been difficult and is rare in the scientific literature. many previous studies were reliant on questionnaire surveys which invariably suffer from reporting bias and/or non-representative sampling of the study population  <cit> . here, we used a national movement database where information on movements is electronically reported by farmers themselves. under scottish  <cit>  and european legislation  <cit> , all pig keepers moving animals are required to provide information on pig movements within scotland, and between scotland and england, as well as details on transportation type and location of all deliveries. as such, scoteid provided detailed information on pig movements in scotland at sufficient resolution to allow analyses. a potential limitation of using self-reported data is that some movements may not be reported   <cit>  or erroneously labelled   <cit> . misinformation bias is likely to be minimal in scoteid because of cross-referencing procedures which are in place to assure accurate reporting; farmers are indeed required to  be registered to the national pig keeper database and enter existing postcodes and premises identifier prior to reporting movements, and  report any movement that they receive. although reporting bias may also be  minimised by these cross-referencing procedures, underreporting still remains possible and therefore result in an underestimate of the number of movements that occur between premises, particularly between those that do not keep pigs for commercial purposes. it was also difficult to define the production type for all farms trading pigs in scoteid. although pig producers that belong to a health quality scheme could be differentiated as a function of their production system , this was not possible with certainty for the remaining producers. as a consequence, the structural level of businesses  that policy targets when facing emergency could not be defined nor extracted from other readily available databases for scotland. instead, after discussion with the scottish swine industry, producers were regrouped into three categories according to their pig population size, movement activity and health quality assurance scheme membership. these categories were considered the most representative of different production types, and were also likely to reflect characteristics such as the level of biosecurity carried out on farm. indeed, the degree of biosecurity on livestock farm has been shown to be related to  management practices and size  <cit> , and  quality health assurance scheme membership  <cit> . this information is particularly relevant to disease transmission and response planning exercises  <cit> . however, providing more details on premises production types and the purposes of movements  would drastically increase the potential of such analyses to inform policy.

in this study, although the majority of movements were to a slaughterhouse, we found that a high connectivity between commercial and non-commercial swine producers still remains when considering non-slaughter movements, particularly between small and non-assured producers . this finding is in clear contrast to what has been previously considered and reported in europe  <cit> ; although based on a combination of  expert opinion and  published literature from countries where non-commercial pig farming is limited. alternatively, a questionnaire survey targeting all known pig holdings in new zealand  <cit>  showed an outcome similar to what was found in scotland. nevertheless, not all movements have the same impact on the risk of pre-detection disease spread. professional producers are responsible for the majority of the animals moved , frequently transporting a large number of animals either for slaughter or to other premises and travelling larger distances to get their pigs marketed . in contrast, scottish small producers are characterised by a low number of movements, with a low number of pigs per batch and shorter distances travelled . thus if not detected, an incursion occurring among small producers would be limited and less likely to involve wide geographic spread but a disease incursion spreading via professional producers could feasibly generate geographically widespread epidemics through exposure of a large number of farms and animals. given that three times more non-commercial producers move pigs than commercial ones , this is consistent with results from modelling exercises showing that epidemic take-offs are unlikely to occur in the scottish swine industry, should a highly infectious disease be introduced  <cit> . however, in that study, the model parsimoniously assumed that all primary outbreak farms would be reported, on average, in four weeks, regardless of the heterogeneity in the farm population size and biosecurity measures occurring on farm. while these figures on detection period are consistent to what was observed during epidemics of classical swine fever in the uk and the netherlands  <cit> , the latter only involved commercial farms where veterinary inspection are routinely carried out. however, there are likely to be characteristics of small producers, such as less regular visits by veterinarians and lower standards of biosecurity  <cit> , which could negatively impact on the efficiency of surveillance systems, thereby allowing incursions in small producers to remain undetected for significant periods of time. in this case, the risk of pre-detection spread of disease could increase and magnify the potential of the scottish swine industry to initiate epidemics of swine diseases.

it was interesting to note that only small producers showed seasonal variations in their movements, with more outward movement to other producers in spring/summer followed by a peak of movement to slaughter in autumn . this pattern is likely to reflect smallholders who buy weaners in spring to finish over the summer months. seasonal variations in small scale production have been previously observed in the caucasus where a peak of movement to slaughter has been reported for the end of the year celebrations  <cit> . quantification of this seasonal pattern is useful as movement peaks are likely to influence disease transmission and therefore be of importance when managing disease incursions or considering disease control options, particularly the impact of movement restrictions. whilst movements to slaughter present less of a risk of onward transmission, increased movement of young pigs between producers would increase the risk of spread of any pathogens present.

according to our results, both small and professional producers demonstrated tendencies to trade animals with farms of similar features . this finding suggests that the likelihood of spillover of disease from small producers into the commercial pig sector is low. this finding was surprising. although we anticipated that professional producers  would trade with other professionals, we expected small producers to buy pigs indiscriminately from commercial and non-commercial producers, because they do not produce sufficient pigs to enable the sustainability of their production system. we therefore anticipated that small producers would show a high degree of interaction with other producer types. although such a hypothesis may partly explain the observed difference between the selling  and buying  behaviour in this sector , this clearly did not outweigh the importance of within-type trade. in contrast, non-assured commercial producers showed a high degree of trade  with other producer types . together with similar level of production outputs but possibly reduced biosecurity standards than professional producers, it is therefore plausible that non-assured producers may represent a bridge between the commercial and non-commercial sector of the industry, potentially allowing undiagnosed pathogen to spread throughout the industry. to test this hypothesis, network analysis can be applied to further explore the connectivity between producers via the movement of pigs  <cit> , identify characteristics that may increase the influence of some producers on the spread of pathogen  <cit>  and whether this influence is permanent or restricted in time  <cit> . such an analysis will be the subject of another paper.

the role of livestock haulage in the spread of pathogens within and between sectors of the industry is likely to be important since animal transporters may act as fomites and spread pathogens onto farm premises and their surroundings  <cit> . in the scottish swine industry, haulage is mostly used by commercial professionals and, to a lesser extent, by non-assured commercial producers, whereas small producers rarely use hauliers for transporting their pigs . we also showed that haulage has the potential to increase the interconnectivity between farms within the commercial sector of the industry, without showing any evidence of direct exchanges of animals. indeed, during the study period, a single haulage company may have connected  <dig> farms, of which, only a fraction were directly trading animals. these results are relevant when preparing for future incursions of exotic notifiable diseases as this degree of connectivity could increase the rate of pathogen dissemination across both the scottish and gb swine industries. although regulations are in place for assuring that livestock haulage vehicles are regularly cleansed and disinfected in an attempt to limit the risk of widespread dissemination of pathogens  <cit> , effective cleansing and disinfection can be difficult to achieve, both logistically  <cit>  and in terms of compliance  <cit> . together with improving disease awareness and biosecurity knowledge among producers and haulage companies, ensuring that procedures are optimised to reduce the risk of transmission via contaminated haulage vehicles is of high importance, particularly within the commercial sector.

during the study period, half of the haulage companies that moved pigs between producers operated within a single region. this result is in agreement with the local clustering of haulage use observed in a survey of quality assured producers in gb  <cit>  and may create some geographical limitations to disease spread. in contrast, nearly 20% of movements to slaughter were sent across the border to england, especially in regions close to the border and in the east of england . although this pattern of pig movements to england highlights the reduced capacity of the scottish slaughterhouses to process pigs, particular attention should be paid to its implication in the spread of diseases between england and scotland. increased cross-border movements of live animals and vehicles between england and scotland is likely to significantly increase the risk of disease incursion from one country to another, either directly or due to returning vehicles  <cit> . from the point of view of livestock disease regulation agency, surveillance should therefore be modulated as a function of the frequency of incoming movements and the density of movements within scotland. as such, targeting producers in “south scotland” and “scotland central belt”, as the likely entry point from cross border movements would likely be the most cost-efficient surveillance strategy for cross-border incursions. in contrast, farms in “mid scotland and fife” may be tagged with a lower priority as it seems relatively isolated from farms in the other regions in terms of trade .

CONCLUSIONS
this study has shown that the non-commercial and the commercial sectors of the scottish swine industry coexist, showing a level of connectivity greater than expected and characterised by relatively frequent on- and off-movements of animals. we further identified differences between producer types in several animal movement characteristics which are known to increase the risk of disease spread. specifically, distance travelled and the use of haulage were found to be significantly different between producers and dependent on the type of the producer of origin of the pig movement. as well as providing interesting insight into the structure of the swine industry in scotland, our findings provide crucial information which policy makers may use to develop more robust biosecurity and surveillance plans. these latter would secure the resilience of the scottish swine industry to incursions of exotic notifiable diseases. further research is being conducted to determine biosecurity and animal trading behaviours of small pig producers throughout scotland. together with our findings, results of these studies may shed some lights on the impact of the non-commercial swine sector on the spread of notifiable diseases and, ultimately, on the quality of the contingency procedures currently in place to face incursions in scotland and gb.

