BACKGROUND
significant differences in gene expression between tissues, disease states or treatment groups steer the direction of much research. it is imperative therefore, that mrna quantification methods are standardized, accurate and unbiased. due to its sensitivity, qpcr has become the standard method for measuring levels of gene expression. quantification of pcr may be relative or absolute, and traditionally has been performed using non-specific intercalating dyes or gene-specific fluorescent probes. these methods, although widely used, are known to have many fundamental problems, despite considerable efforts over the last 20 years to overcome these.

relative quantification using intercalating dyes is the most common method used. it is simple and cheap to perform, but relies on the use of one or more reference genes, against which the mrna concentrations of the genes of interest  are normalized  <cit> . the optimal number and choice of reference genes is determined empirically, but various useful computational methods help researchers in this regard  <cit> . a suitable reference gene must be stably expressed between the experimental groups, have similar amplification efficiency and abundance to the gois. in reality this is rare, and reference genes often introduce bias into an experiment, leading to erroneous interpretation of results  <cit> .

absolute quantification is performed by constructing a standard curve for each goi and plotting the quantification cycle  values against log of a dilution series of known goi amount. these standards, comprising purified pcr product, plasmid dna constructs or synthetic oligonucleotides spanning the pcr amplicon, are amplified, as are any experimental errors. this is important as the standard curve provides both the efficiency of the amplification primers and the amount of goi in the unknown samples. ideally, a new standard curve is generated each time a sample is quantified, but in practice, due to the complexity of the method, many researchers generate a standard curve once and use it repeatedly to quantify samples over a period of time. this produces inaccurate results as the efficiency of amplification may vary across samples, with time, or between the target used to generate the standard curve and the ‘real’ target within a complex sample  <cit> .

the minimum information for publication of quantitative real-time pcr experiments  guidelines  <cit>  were introduced to facilitate standardization of the experimental and reporting practices in qpcr, to enable more reliable and unequivocal interpretation of qpcr results. these have helped enormously, but the fundamental problems associated with identifying suitable reference genes for an experiment, or having to generate standard curves for each goi, are still present and can result in misinterpreted data.

accucal™, a universal accurate calibrator, was developed to address these problems and aid in standardizing measurement in qpcr.

RESULTS
quantification using accucal
to address the long-standing problems of traditional pcr quantification methods  <cit> , a methodological solution must integrate easily into each qpcr run, provide accurate results and ideally be universally applicable.

the method relies on accucal-d, a double stranded dna calibrator for use with intercalating dyes, or accucal-p, a single stranded, fluorescently labelled calibrator for probe-based qpcr assays. an initial optimization is required, but following this, the accucal method involves three simple steps . realcount™ software was developed to automate the computational steps.fig.  <dig> quantification of pcr amplified nucleic acid using accucal calibrator. a the workflow associated with using accucal to quantify input nucleic acid amount in each pcr, b accucal calibrator was diluted so that  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 200 ng in sso fast evagreen supermix were added to respective wells of a pcr plate and subjected to  <dig> amplification cycles. c the fluorescence intensity of each accucal calibrator  was plotted against the amount  and a linear regression line fitted to generate the calibration curve. d ten-fold dilutions of lambda dna, ranging from  <dig>  ×  <dig> –  <dig>  ×  <dig> copies/pcr, were amplified in quadruplicate in sso fast evagreen supermix on the same plate as the accucal calibrators. e the calibration curve was used, alongside the calculated efficiency of each amplification reaction and the cycle numbers between the take-off point  and second derivative maxima for each amplification reaction, to quantify the mean starting amount of dna in each pcr. the standard error of the mean is also presented. f the theoretical and determined number of copies/pcr, plus sem, were plotted against each other and a regression line drawn to demonstrate the agreement between the two values



to determine the accucal-d range to use, the initial optimization was performed under the same reaction conditions as for dna amplifications. in the example shown, a range of 0–140 ng, was optimal, as this spanned the exponential portion of the amplification curves, where the amount of amplified target is directly proportional to the input amount  <cit> , and gave a linear calibration curve with r <dig> value of  <dig>  . this determination only needs to be performed once, provided reaction conditions of all subsequent pcrs remain constant.

to show the quantification accuracy of accucal-d, we amplified serial ten-fold dilutions of known quantities of a 92 bp amplicon from lambda dna, from  <dig>  ×  <dig> –  <dig>  ×  <dig> copies, in quadruplicate alongside accucal-d, at the predetermined amounts, and plotted the calibration curve . the efficiency of each amplification reaction was then determined by realcount using known algorithms  <cit> . finally, using the efficiency values and calibration curve, the mean amount of input dna, and standard error of the mean, was calculated for all cycles during the exponential phase of each amplification curve using realcount . a regression analysis between the determined values and the theoretical amount seeded into the pcr yielded an r <dig> of  <dig>   demonstrating the utility of the accucal-d method and its accuracy in absolute quantification of real-time qpcr.

accucal-d relies on an intercalating dye to generate fluorescence, but the dye:accucal-d fluorescence ratio is unknown. to understand this relationship, we developed a probe-based version of accucal, accucal-p. a 92 bp amplicon from a range of concentrations of lambda dna was amplified and detected using either a fam-labelled hydrolysis probe or evagreen intercalating dye. both accucal-d and fam-labelled accucal-p were included on the pcr plate and were used independently to quantify the lambda dna detected by both markers. the quantification using either accucal-d or accucal-p, for both sets of pcr amplifications, yielded indistinguishable results for each dilution with no significant differences between the slopes when theoretical number of copies is plotted against determined number of copies . accucal-p and the hydrolysis probe are labelled with one fam moiety per dna molecule, and report the same fluorescence per dna molecule as the evagreen dye does under these qpcr conditions.fig.  <dig> quantification using both accucal-d and accucal-p. a five, ten-fold dilutions of a known quantity of lambda dna, ranging from  <dig>  ×  <dig> to  <dig>  ×  <dig>  were amplified twice in quadruplicate and detected using either evagreen, the intercalating dye in sso fast mastermix, or a fam-labelled hydrolysis probe specific to the target amplicon. in both cases, accucal-d and accucal-p calibrators were included on the same plate and used to independently quantify the starting amount of input dna in each pcr. the theoretical amount versus the calculated amount, determined by either accucal-d or accucal-p, using the evagreen dye  or the hydrolysis probe , was plotted and the linear regression of each is shown in the graph on the right. b five, ten-fold dilutions of a known quantity of lambda dna in quadruplicate were amplified in sso fast mastermix using primers to give a 501 bp amplicon. accucal-d and accucal-p calibrators were included on the same plate and were used to independently quantify the starting amount of lambda dna in each pcr. the theoretical amount versus the calculated amount, determined by either accucal-d or accucal-p, for the 501 bp amplicon, was plotted and the linear regression of each is shown in the graph on the right. c five, ten-fold dilutions  of a known quantity of lambda dna were amplified in various mastermixes  on the different qpcr platforms indicated over 2– <dig> pcr runs. the theoretical amount versus the mean calculated amount, determined by accucal-d, across all platforms was plotted and the linear regression is shown in the graph on the right. the mean number of calculated copies/pcr and sem are shown in each case



to determine the range of amplicon sizes for which accucal-d quantification can be used, we also amplified lambda amplicons of 501 bp. amplicons of 92 bp to 501 bp covers the spectrum of amplicon sizes that are typically amplified by qpcr. again, accucal-p and a fam-labelled template-specific hydrolysis probe were used as a comparator for accucal-d and intercalating dye. the results show that the quantification is similar for both amplicon sizes whether this is calculated using accucal-d or accucal-p, with neither slope differing significantly from  <dig> . this suggests that the dye and probe fluorescence remains constant over this range of amplicon sizes and therefore accucal can be reliably used to quantify any amplicon within this range.

to evaluate the performance of accucal-d in a variety of dye-based mastermixes on a number of real-time qpcr platforms, eight independent research groups were provided with accucal-d and reagents for lambda amplification . each laboratory amplified their gois and known input amounts of lambda under a range of conditions typical for those laboratories. the results show that accucal-d provides an accurate, absolute quantification of known concentrations of lambda dna in these varied and independent tests . when compared collectively across all platforms, the mean determined quantification correlates perfectly with the theoretical number of copies in each pcr .

when integrated onto each qpcr run under the same conditions as the goi, accucal provides robust absolute quantification over a range of input amounts and amplicon sizes, in dye- or probe-based assays.

accucal provides confidence in relative quantification analysis
relative quantification e.g. ΔΔcq  <cit>  and pfaffl  <cit>  analyses, has traditionally been the simplest and most commonly used method of pcr quantification. although accucal provides absolute quantification, it can be applied relatively.

to compare accucal-d with ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses, we assessed levels of cd <dig> and interleukin  <dig> receptor alpha chain  variants. activation of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells  reveals a repertoire of splice variants of these genes which reflect a predisposition to multiple sclerosis  <cit> . we conducted experiments to measure levels of cd <dig> and il7r in human pbmcs via qpcr following 24 h activation with varying amounts of phorbol myristate acetate  and ionomycin . absolute quantification of the qpcr was performed using accucal-d and realcount . relative quantification was assessed by expressing the absolute accucal-d values relative to the no pma/ionomycin control, or by traditional ΔΔcq or pfaffl analyses using glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase  as a reference gene and the unstimulated cells as a control . for pfaffl analysis, the efficiencies calculated by realcount were used.fig.  <dig> quantification of cd <dig>  il7r and gapdh in pbmcs stimulated with 0–1x pma/ionomycin. a absolute quantification of cd <dig>  il7r and gapdh in pbmcs stimulated with  <dig>   <dig> x,  <dig> x and 1x pma/ionomycin  by realcount software following qpcr using accucal-d calibrators. b relative expression levels of cd <dig> and il7r in pbmcs stimulated with  <dig>   <dig> x,  <dig> x and 1x pma/ionomycin . the hatched bars are relative expression levels determined by ΔΔcq using gapdh as the reference gene and no pma/ionomycin as the control sample, solid bars are relative expression levels determined by pfaffl analysis, using gapdh as reference gene, unstimulated cells as controls and individual efficiency values calculated by realcount software, and the checkered bars are quantified by realcount software following inclusion of accucal-d in the same pcr run, and expressed relative to the no pma/ionomycin control. c representative overlay graphs from flow cytometry showing relative measurement of cd <dig> and il7r in the same population of pbmcs stimulated with  <dig> ,  <dig> x ,  <dig> x  and 1x pma/ionomycin  as in . **** p <  <dig>  relative to respective no pma/ionomycin control, n = 4



both the absolute and relative analyses showed the expression of il7r was 3– <dig> fold lower in stimulated cells  compared to unstimulated cells whereas any differences in the levels of cd <dig> were of no great significance. in this experiment, the interpretation of the qpcr data from the ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses was the same as that provided by accucal-d . the assumption for ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses is that the level of gapdh reference gene remains constant between treatments. importantly, absolute quantification using accucal-d indicated that this was indeed the case . the results of the qpcr analyses were supported by flow cytometry, showing no difference in the level of cd <dig> expression and a 3– <dig>  fold decrease in expression of il7r in the treatment group compared to the untreated cells .

importantly, accucal-d and realcount analysis provides data regarding the expression levels of all genes, including the reference gene, between treatments/groups , and the individual efficiencies for each amplification reaction, which are not available using ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses.

accucal supersedes traditional quantification analyses
prostate epithelium-specific phosphatase and tensin homolog knockout  induces prostate pathology  <cit>  and modifies prostate specific androgen receptor  expression in mice as determined by immunohistochemistry  or western blot . the western analysis showed that levels of β-actin  protein were constant and were used to determine relative protein expression levels. the ar protein content was significantly greater  in prostate tissue from peptenko mice compared to wild-type .fig.  <dig> quantification of protein and mrna levels of androgen receptor  in mouse anterior prostate. a representative immunohistochemistry showing ar protein expression  and differential pathology in prostate of wt and peptenko mice. b quantification of ar protein by western blot in anterior prostates of wt  and peptenko  mice, using β-actin  as a loading control to determine relative protein levels. c relative quantification of ar by ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses using actb as the reference gene and wt as the control. d qpcr of ar and actb in wt  and peptenko  mice. e comparison of theoretical versus determined quantification of serial dilutions of plasmids containing ar or actb amplicons, by either traditional standard curves  or use of accucal and realcount . f absolute mrna copy number quantification of ar and actb reference gene in the anterior prostate of wt  and peptenko  mice as determined by rt-qpcr with accucal calibrators and realcount software  or standard curves . g absolute quantification of a number of reference genes using accucal and realcount for both wt  and peptenko  mice. h comparison of relative quantification methodologies for ar. ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses used either actb or hmbs as the reference gene and wt as the control, and accucal  and standard curve  absolute values were expressed in a relative manner to wt as the control. all graphed data is displayed as mean ± sem. **** p < <dig> , ** p =  <dig> – <dig> , * p =  <dig> – <dig>  by independent two sample t-test between expression of androgen receptor or β-actin mrna or protein in peptenko mice compared to wt mice, or between relative expression methods compared with ΔΔcq and pfaffl performed using actb as reference gene



to determine whether these complex assays could be replaced by mrna analysis using qpcr, we pcr amplified ar and actb from prostate rna extracted from wt and peptenko mice. initially, relative quantification was undertaken by traditional ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses with actb as the reference gene and wt as the control. actb was chosen as the protein was stably expressed between groups . the ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses indicated that there was no significant change in ar expression levels in peptenko mice compared to wt . it is known that protein and mrna levels do not necessarily correlate  <cit> , which may explain this result. alternatively, the relative qpcr analysis may be incorrect. examination of the amplification plots suggested a greater expression of ar, as well as actb, in the prostate of peptenko mice .

to resolve this issue, we used absolute quantification via accucal-d, or standard curves, to determine the levels of ar and actb in peptenko and wt mice. the results demonstrated that expression levels of each gene had similar absolute quantifications by both methods  and were significantly higher in prostate from peptenko mice than wt mice for both standard curve and accucal-d . when expressed in a relative manner, ar expression in peptenko mice was  <dig>  fold higher than wt mice by standard curve quantification and  <dig>  fold higher by accucal-d quantification. both of these were significantly different from the ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses using actb as a reference gene , but were in accord with the western blot results. in this example, the ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses were not accurate because the reference gene used changed similarly to the goi between the phenotypes .

additionally, we quantified, with accucal-d, a number of other possible reference genes to use for normalization. there was no significant difference between the expression of ribosomal protein l <dig>  and hydroxymethylbilane synthase  between wt and peptenko, but the remaining reference genes were all expressed significantly more abundantly in the prostates of peptenko mice than wt mice, highlighting the difficulty in finding a suitable reference gene in some experiments . we then repeated the ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses using the least variable reference gene, hmbs, and the results  were very similar to those obtained using accucal-d or standard curve quantification, and significantly different from the ΔΔcq and pfaffl analyses undertaken using actb as a reference gene .

in the exemplar described, accucal-d provided an alternative quantification method, independent of reference genes, where these are difficult to find . importantly, we have also shown that absolute quantification by standard curve perfectly matched accucal-d analysis . this demonstrated that the protein and gene expression levels of ar/ar correlated, allowing the use of mrna analysis by qpcr as a faithful reporter assay. notably, accucal provided this information much more simply than the standard curve method, and a single calibration curve could be used to quantify all genes investigated concurrently.

discussion
traditional relative and absolute methods of qpcr have many, well-accepted flaws and errors  <cit> . the miqe guidelines sought to minimize these, but the problems associated with reference genes, and the need to construct a standard curve for each goi, remain. to overcome these limitations, an accurate, universal calibrator  was developed.

accucal can be included in any dye-  or probe-based  qpcr experiment. the technology works robustly for amplicons up to 500 bp in length over a dynamic range of ≥ <dig> copies, and in a range of mastermixes, real-time pcr platforms and laboratories. a range of accucal concentrations is included in each qpcr run and used to generate a calibration curve to quantify the amount of any goi. significantly, accucal fluoresces proportionally to the amount of dna in the well but is not pcr amplified, thus minimizing errors in quantification   <cit> . customized software, realcount, automates the quantification calculations, streamlining data analysis.

essential to current relative quantification methods are reference genes and the assumption that these do not change between treatments or groups. many studies have shown that commonly used reference genes vary with experimental conditions and between tissues, while some, such as actb and gapdh, have pseudogenes  <cit>  which may produce specific amplification products in an mrna-independent fashion  <cit> . the miqe guidelines recommend the use of multiple reference genes to provide a more accurate normalization  <cit> . however, in some experiments, this can be very difficult to achieve, as exemplified in our mouse prostate example. accucal provides quantification independently of reference genes and is therefore a much simpler method to use and is devoid of these problems.

reference genes are also often included in gene expression studies to account for differences in reverse transcription  efficiencies between experiments. these have been shown to often result in relative gene differences of 2– <dig> fold or more  <cit>  depending upon the rna concentration and integrity, the rt enzyme used, the priming strategy employed, the sample used and reaction conditions  <cit> . rt differences have also been shown to be gene dependent which questions the validity of using any gene as a normalizer for rt and pcr and may mask results, leading to erroneous interpretation of data. methods that help resolve differences in rt efficiency are required, but in their absence, differences in gene expression < <dig> fold need to be construed cautiously.

accucal allows the researcher to objectively see any differences in absolute gene expression of all genes. this potentially unmasks differences in rt efficiency and provides valuable information regarding reference gene expression, giving confidence, or otherwise, to the researcher about reference gene choice or rt differences. in cases where reference genes are stable, the results generated by accucal and traditional relative methods agree, but when the reference gene expression is not stable between samples, relative quantification leads to incorrect interpretation, whereas accucal provides an unbiased, interpretable result.

the current gold standard in qpcr is absolute quantification using standard curves. comparison of the quantification of ar and actb by accucal or standard curves demonstrated that the results were completely interchangeable. the major impediments of standard curve analysis include i) the requirement to obtain standards for each goi; ii) the need to generate a separate standard curve for each goi for each qpcr run; iii) the efficiency obtained from the standard curve may not be representative of the samples used in experiments; and iv) cost and time involved  <cit> . thus, standard curves are laborious, whereas a single accucal calibration curve, and analysis by realcount, can be used to quantify all gois on the same pcr plate, thereby making the accucal method simpler, cheaper and quicker to perform.

pcr efficiencies are rarely perfect and they may vary between samples even under identical reaction conditions, e.g. due to slight differences in the quantity of inhibitors present  <cit> . a small change in efficiency from  <dig>  to  <dig>  over 30 cycles equates to a 57 % difference in input dna calculation, while a change from  <dig>  to  <dig>  over the same range makes 365 % difference -1) ×  <dig>  where e is efficiency and n is cycle number). methods that assume perfect efficiency  such as ΔΔcq analysis  <cit>  are thus flawed  <cit> . the ‘pfaffl’ method  <cit>  of analysis is more accurate as it uses the efficiencies of the individual primers. however, these efficiencies are onerous to obtain, requiring a standard curve to be generated for each goi. over the last 10– <dig> years, many researchers have made progress in developing algorithms for single sample kinetic pcr analysis . we have selected one of these  <cit>  for incorporation into realcount software to automate individual efficiency calculations and therefore improve upon the accuracy of the quantification over traditional methods which use an averaged or assumed efficiency.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have shown that accucal provides an easy alternative to traditional qpcr quantification methods. accucal removes the bias of troublesome reference genes and provides the accuracy of standard curves without the hassle. it can be used in every qpcr experiment to standardize dye- or probe-based assays. realcount software automates the quantification process. the simplicity of accucal, its broad utility and the ability to quantify all gois on a pcr plate, make accucal a truly universal calibrator.

