BACKGROUND
understanding the genetic basis of human inherited disorders is one of the primary goals of medical genetics. by applying the knowledge gleaned from this research, disease prevention and treatment can be improved. currently, there are more than  <dig> human genes known to be associated with particular mendelian disease phenotypes. the analysis of this group of genes from a global perspective has already revealed interesting insights about the nature of human disease  <cit> .

several reports have analysed the conservation pattern of disease genes compared to the rest of genes  <cit> . human disease genes have been found to be more conserved at the protein level, in general, than the remainder of the human proteome  <cit> , and most have been found to possess homologues in the mouse and rat genomes  <cit> . furthermore, a study of human genes involved in disease found lower non-synonymous substitution rate  in the disease genes compared to generic genes  <cit> . another study of sequence conservation at the nucleotide level between human and rat found only a small difference between the ka/ks ratio of human disease genes and non-disease genes, although a significantly more elevated synonymous substitution rate  in the disease genes was discovered  <cit> . analysis of the chimpanzee genome also found a higher synonymous substitution rate in disease genes that was attributed to a higher relative frequency of cpg dinucleotides  <cit> . recently another work reported the analysis of human-rodent ka/ks ratios of disease genes compared to housekeeping and the rest of genes, finding that housekeeping genes are the most conserved group with disease genes showing intermediate values between the housekeeping and other genes  <cit> .

these studies have treated the disease genes as homogeneous datasets and in doing so have neglected an inherent difference within the sets of genes, namely the molecular genotype underlying the disease state. many autosomal mendelian disease phenotypes can be understood in terms of dominant and recessive mutations affecting a particular gene. in cases in which the mutation is said to be dominantly-acting, a mutation to a single allele of the gene is sufficient to cause the disease state. genes susceptible to disease-causing mutations in this way are often haploinsufficient. the mutation can cause loss of function of the protein by dominant negative effects, or reduced or compromised functioning. diseases caused by recessive mutations require both alleles to be affected, as the production of a functional protein from one allele is often enough to satisfy physiological requirements .

the phenomenon of dominance and recessitivity in diploid organisms was first recorded quantitatively by gregor mendel in  <dig>  <cit> , and the evolution of dominance has been a topic of debate between geneticists for the last century  <cit> . fisher, in  <dig>  reported that most mutations observed in drosophila were recessive to the wild-type alleles  <cit> . he attributed this to a balance between recurrent mutations and their elimination by natural selection. however, wright  challenged this hypothesis stating that unrealistically high levels of selective pressure were necessary for the evolution of dominance in this manner  <cit> . he proposed that dominance was an inherent consequence of physiology. kascer and burns  developed a metabolic model for dominance congruent with wright's physiological model  <cit> . however, the metabolic model has been criticised because it is solely based on the kinetic properties of metabolic enzymes  <cit> .

previous studies have analysed human disease genes in terms of the nature of the mutation underlying the disease phenotype  <cit> . however the focus of these studies has been mainly on differences in the functional classification of dominant and recessive disease genes. jimenez-sanchez et al. showed that diseases caused by genes coding for enzymes were predominantly recessive, whereas disorders in which the causative gene coded for a transcription factor were, in the main, dominantly-acting  <cit> . lopez-bigas et al. have reported similar results and further demonstrate that dominant human disease genes have closer paralogues than recessive disease genes  <cit> . kondrashov and koonin reported that haploinsufficient  disease genes have more paralogues in the human genome than haplosufficient  genes  <cit> .

however, none of these studies has investigated differences in sequence conservation between disease genes depending on their mode of inheritance. smith and eyre-walker  <cit>  analyse gene evolution in the jimenez-sanchez et al. dataset and report higher conservation in dominant disease genes compared to recessive disease genes, but this study also observes less selective constraints on disease genes compared to non-disease genes, a result that is contrary to evidence from other reports, and could be due to the small number of genes analysed  <cit> .

we have undertaken a comprehensive study of the molecular evolution of the autosomal human disease genes depending on their mode of inheritance; namely genes affected by dominant mutations and by recessive mutations. we have investigated differences in coding sequence divergence, protein conservation, human paralogy, c. elegans lethality, protein function, gene structure and severity of disease. the comparison of the evolutionary patterns of dominant and recessive disease genes reveals important differences between these two sets of genes that can be understood in terms of their different hereditary nature, giving further insights into the understanding of hereditary human diseases.

RESULTS
differences in level of protein conservation between disease proteins affected by dominant or recessive mutations
the division of disease genes reveals that depending on the mode of inheritance the level of conservation of the protein is different. human proteins encoded by genes affected by dominant mutations are more conserved in mouse than those encoded by genes affected by recessive mutations  test =  <dig>  × 10-6; tables  <dig> &2). when we plot the frequency distributions of the protein conservation scores  of the different sets of genes, we observe that the set of dominant disease genes  has a significantly different distribution to recessive disease genes   test =  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  table  <dig> and figure 1) and both sets of disease genes are significantly different to the non-disease genes . recessive disease genes display a sharp decrease in frequency at high levels of protein conservation scores , a trend not apparent in dominant disease or non-disease genes. consistent results are observed with the analysis of cs in other vertebrates, namely rattus norvegicus, gallus gallus, takifugu rubripes, and danio rerio .

level of protein conservation of paralogues of dominant and recessive disease genes
previously, it has been reported that genes involved in disease have less conserved paralogues than human genes in general  <cit> , presumably because highly similar paralogues can potentially compensate for a mutated protein  <cit> , in which case a disease might not be observed. this is confirmed by our analysis, in which the average conservation score  of paralogues is  <dig>  for human disease genes and  <dig>  for non-disease genes . however, by classifying the disease genes by the mode of inheritance of the phenotype, we can see that significant differences are observed between genes involved in dominant or recessive diseases , in congruence with previous results  <cit> . the average cs value of paralogues of recessive disease genes is  <dig> , while that of dominant disease genes is  <dig> , even higher than for the non-disease genes. however, when we examine the sequence conservation pattern of paralogues more closely, we observe that non-disease genes have a higher proportion of highly similar paralogues  than either of the disease gene groups . this difference is more pronounced in recessive than in dominant disease genes. to assess these differences statistically we calculated z-scores and p-values for dominant and recessive disease genes against  <dig>  randomly generated sets of proteins. recessive disease genes have a significantly lower than expected number of highly conserved paralogues . the number of dominant disease gene paralogues with cs >  <dig>  is, however, not significantly different to that expected by random sampling of the proteins. in conclusion, the lower number of less conserved paralogues in disease versus non-disease genes can be entirely attributed to the recessive disease genes.

selective pressures acting on dominant and recessive disease genes at the dna level
we analysed the level of conservation at the dna level of these sets of genes in order to obtain a better understanding of the selective pressures acting on them. we examined non-synonymous  and synonymous  coding sequence substitution rates, as well as intron sequence substitution rates , from human-chimpanzee orthologues  <cit> . ka is indicative of the selective pressure acting on sites that involve a change of amino acid, while ks is more reflective of the background mutation level. disease genes taken together show lower ka values than non-disease genes , in agreement with previous results  <cit> . however, the strongest differences are found between the two types of disease genes , with an average ka of  <dig>  for dominant disease genes and of  <dig>  for recessive disease genes . dominant disease genes are thus evolving more slowly, in general, than recessive disease genes or non-disease genes, which indicates that they are subjected to stronger selective constraints. interestingly, although the average value of ka between disease recessive and non-disease genes is very similar , the distribution of ka values for these two sets is clearly different . in fact, we observe a much lower proportion of disease recessive genes with very low ka value  while intermediate ka values are over-represented in this group of genes . this is in agreement with the observed distribution of conservation scores  in which an under-representation of recessive disease genes is observed for very high conservation scores.

disease genes show higher ks values, for both dominant and recessive genes, than the rest of human genes . these differences could be ascribed to varying mutation rates in the genome, however the similarity in mean ki values  and non-significant differences for the mann-whitney test  for all groups would seem to negate this. huang et al. reported a significantly elevated ks level in human disease genes compared to non-disease genes in an analysis between human and rat genes  <cit> . this phenomenon was also discovered in the analysis of the chimpanzee genome  <cit> .

due to the differences observed in ks between disease and non-disease genes it is necessary to analyse any differences in the ratio ka/ks between these groups of genes. this analysis confirms that, as observed in the conservation score and ka analyses, dominant disease genes exhibit the lowest evolutionary rates , while disease recessive genes have a similar average ka/ks value to the rest of genes , although the distribution of ka/ks values between these two groups of genes is again very different .

consistent results are found in the analysis of ka, ks, and ka/ks in human-mouse-dog orthologues .

essentiality in dominant and recessive disease genes
our analysis shows that recessive disease genes are under-represented among highly conserved genes. one possibility is that in highly conserved proteins the occurrence of double mutations, as observed in recessive disease genes, is often associated with lethality, in which case a disease condition will not be observed. to assess this we mapped the genes from our study to c. elegans gene orthologues that have been previously classified as wild type , disease  or lethal  according to rnai data  <cit> . genes that are lethal when disrupted are considered "essential genes".

firstly we determined that essential genes are significantly more conserved than wt genes . the next question was whether recessive disease genes were under-represented among essential genes. the data show that the set of recessive disease genes has a lower proportion of c. elegans essential genes  than the set of dominant disease genes . in addition, only 47% of dominant disease orthologues have no phenotypic effect  when mutated, in comparison to 61% of recessive disease orthologues and 58% of non-disease gene orthologues.

evolutionary conservation rates by functional annotations
previously it has been found that the proportions of different functional annotations in dominant and recessive disease genes are not the same  <cit> . diseases caused by mutations in genes coding for enzymes and transporters are mostly recessive, while mutations in transcription regulators, structural molecules, nucleic acid binding genes and signal transducers are primarily dominant. therefore, it could be that the differences in evolutionary rates between dominant and recessive disease genes are due to the dissimilarities between the different types of functional genes and not due to distinct evolutionary histories of these two sets of genes. in order to rule out this possibility each human disease gene was classified according to the molecular function of its protein product as determined by gene ontology  'slim' terms  <cit> , and the conservation score in mouse and ka/ks values between human and chimpanzee of dominant and recessive disease genes in each of the functional annotations were assessed . despite the variation in conservation values observed between the different functional classifications, we observe consistently higher conservation scores and lower ka/ks values  in the set of dominant disease genes compared to the recessive disease genes. these results confirm that the evolutionary differences observed between dominant and recessive disease genes are due to different selective pressures acting on these two sets of genes during their history and not simply due to varying proportions of functionally dissimilar genes in each group.

in addition, when paralogues of dominant and recessive disease genes are similarly analysed, the higher conservation of dominant disease gene paralogues is evident in each functional group .

evolutionary conservation rates by severity of disease
analysis of the evolutionary constraints of disease genes, as indicated by human-chimpanzee ka/ks values, when categorised by the severity of disease displays a trend of reduction in selective pressure with decreasing severity of disease . while this pattern is clearly evident in recessive disease genes, it appears to be more complicated in dominant disease genes. however, disease genes of both modes of inheritance that result in severe phenotypes  are more conserved than genes in which the consequent disease does not severely affect the reproductive fitness of an individual.

gene structure of autosomal dominant and recessive disease genes
previously, it has been found that genes involved in hereditary diseases have different gene structure properties compared to the rest of genes in the human genome  <cit> . in particular, disease genes have longer coding sequences, more exons and more alternative splicing  <cit> . these specific sequence properties are thought to be due to the higher probability of suffering disease-causing mutations of genes that are longer and have more complex splicing patterns  <cit> . we analysed the structure of genes involved in autosomal dominant and recessive diseases to elucidate any differences between the two groups.

we have confirmed previous results, finding that the group of disease genes has, on average, a higher number of exons , a higher number of alternative transcripts , and a longer gene sequence  and coding sequence  compared to the complete set of human genes. all these differences have been tested using the mann-whitney and kolmogorov-smirnov tests and are significant. a similar analysis comparing the set of genes involved in autosomal recessive or dominant diseases shows no significant differences in the protein or gene length or in the number of alternative transcripts between these two sets of genes. however, there is a marginally statistically significant difference in the number of exons .

discussion
our analysis reveals that the selective pressures on human autosomal disease genes involved in dominant and recessive disorders differ significantly. dominantly-acting disease genes appear to be more conserved than recessively-acting genes. in addition, we have confirmed previous results showing that disease genes are generally more evolutionarily conserved than other human genes  <cit> .

previously it has been found that the proportions of different functional annotations in dominant and recessive disease genes differ substantially  <cit> . therefore, it could be that the nature of the conservation pattern is determined solely by the function of the protein. however analysis of the conservation levels for the two groups of disease genes within each go slim functional category  would appear to refute this, as in all categories, dominant disease genes are consistently more conserved than recessive disease genes. other factors have been shown to correlate with the protein evolutionary rate. in a recent report it has been shown that the age of a protein is inversely correlated with its evolutionary rate, that is, that older proteins evolve more slowly than proteins of more recent origin  <cit> . however, we have found that, in spite of the fact that recessive disease genes show higher evolutionary rates, they are better represented among old genes than dominant disease genes .

overall, the results presented here show that the mode of inheritance of a gene is an important determinant of its rate of evolution. according to the nearly neutral theory of evolution slightly deleterious mutations may become fixed in populations  <cit> . recessive genes should accumulate a larger number of such mutations than dominant genes, as in the former the mutant will be "hidden" from selection while heterozygous  <cit> . a higher fixation rate of slightly deleterious mutations in recessive genes would result in higher ka/ks ratios in this type of gene  <cit> .

analyses of the conservation levels of genes involved in recessive diseases have shown a significant decrease in frequency at high levels of conservation  or low ka/ks ratio ). the most plausible explanation for this effect is that genes with high degree of conservation may be enriched for human essential genes, which cannot be involved in a recessive disease since a double mutation in them would be lethal. the analysis of rnai phenotypes in c. elegans of human orthologues for the three groups of genes analysed supports this. we find that a slightly higher proportion of lethal genes in the set of dominant disease genes and a higher proportion of genes with no effect  in the recessive disease set. however, we still find a considerable proportion of genes that are essential in c. elegans but classified as recessive disease genes in human. this may be due to the fact that, although the set of essential genes in c. elegans is likely to be enriched with human essential genes, there will also be cases in which the gene is essential in c. elegans but not in humans.

it has been suggested that essential genes should evolve at slower rates than non-essential genes  <cit> . certainly, previous works have shown that essential genes in bacteria  <cit>  and yeast  <cit>  are highly conserved, although there have been some controversial results  <cit> . we have found that the level of conservation of human genes tends to be higher when the corresponding orthologue in c. elegans is essential than when it is not lethal. this supports the hypothesis that the sharp decrease of recessive disease genes at high conservation levels could be related to the paucity of human essential genes in the recessive disease set.

therefore, it is possible that the greater degree of conservation exhibited by dominant disease genes vs. recessive disease genes is an effect of the higher likelihood of fixation of slightly deleterious non-synonymous mutations in the recessive disease genes coupled with an under-representation of highly conserved genes in this same dataset.

in addition, we analysed the conservation of disease genes according to the severity of the disease . our analysis reveals that the conservation of both dominant and recessive disease genes is highest in the category in which disease results in death before the onset of puberty, i.e. reproductive fitness equal to zero from a population genetics perspective. we acknowledge that the partition of disease genes into these rudimentary groups is a simplification, however, it serves to give insight into the relationship between disease severity and selective constraints.

we have also confirmed that disease genes show higher ks values, for both dominant and recessive genes, than the rest of human genes . huang et al. reported similar results in an analysis between human and rat genes  <cit> , and this phenomenon was also discovered in the analysis of the chimpanzee genome  <cit> . furthermore, in this analysis the authors ascribe the higher ks level in disease genes to the more abundant presence of the mutation-susceptible cpg dinucleotide in disease genes. they report that when cpg dinucleotides are excluded from the analysis, the difference in ks rates between the two sets of genes becomes non-significant.

the tendency of non-disease genes to have closer paralogues than disease genes has previously been attributed to the fact that a close paralogue may be able to ameliorate the effect of a loss-of-function mutation in a gene by virtue of its similar functionality  <cit> . we find that recessive disease genes, which contain mainly loss-of-function mutations, have a deficit in close paralogues that could compensate for the loss of function. on the contrary, dominant disease genes, although possessing closer and hence more functionally similar paralogues, may not be reprieved from a disease state by the existence of close paralogues due to their dominant-negative effects. in addition, haploinsufficient genes  may be more dosage-dependent, in which case retention of paralogues may be advantageous  <cit> . however, the difference observed between the two groups of disease genes could also be due to less selective pressure on a recessive disease gene after gene duplication. alternatively, gene duplications in dominant disease genes could be more recent than similar events in recessive disease genes. as can seen in table  <dig>  the difference in the conservation level of paralogues is not determined by protein function.

in this study we have focused on autosomal genes that are affected by recessively- and dominantly-acting mutations that lead to a disease phenotype. we readily acknowledge that we do not highlight other relevant groups of genes such as x-linked disease genes and imprinted genes  <cit> . however, cursory evidence of x-linked disease gene evolution is included .

CONCLUSIONS
we highlight significant differences between disease genes, in terms of protein and dna sequence conservation, paralogy and essentiality, when categorised by their mode of inheritance.

our analysis reveals that genes affected by dominant disease mutations are more conserved than recessive disease genes. we attribute this to the fact that recessive mutations remain hidden from selection while heterozygous, which would allow recessive disease genes to accumulate a larger number of slightly deleterious mutations that eventually could become fixed in populations.

a number of studies have attempted to predict disease genes computationally using features such as sequence length, paralogy, sequence conservation, range of tissue expression, amino-acid composition and splicing signals among others  <cit> . these studies have treated disease genes as a homogeneous dataset. we suggest that the differences between dominant and recessive disease genes should be accounted for in future disease gene-prediction studies.

