BACKGROUND
type ii restriction endonucleases  form one of the largest groups of biochemically characterized enzymes . they usually recognize a short  palindromic sequence of double-stranded dna and catalyze the hydrolysis of phosphodiester bonds at precise positions within or close to this sequence, leaving "blunt" ends or "sticky"  overhangs. they form restriction-modification  systems together with dna methyltransferases  of the same or a similar sequence specificity, whose enzymatic activity leads to methylation of the target sequence and, consequently, its protection against the cleavage by the rease  <cit> . type ii rm systems behave as selfish "toxin-antitoxin" genetic modules; they undergo rampant horizontal transfer and parasitize the cells of prokaryotic hosts to ensure the maintenance of their dna  <cit> . the activity of the rm systems manifests itself by destruction of dna molecules without the required methylation patterns, e.g. dna molecules of invading phages or plasmids, or the genomic dna of their host cells that once had the rm genes but have lost them.

the activity of reases is the target of selection pressure involving various agents: their host, the invading dna molecules, and their competitors including other rm systems  <cit> . presumably because of the absence of simple constant selection pressure on the rease activity, they undergo rapid divergence, and as a consequence, different rease families exhibit very little sequence similarity . besides, there is formidable evidence, mainly from crystallographic analyses, that these enzymes have originated independently in the evolution on at least several occasions.

thus far, reases have been found to belong to at least five unrelated structural folds. most of reases belong to the pd-xk superfamily of mg2+-dependent nucleases, which also includes various proteins involved in dna recombination and repair  <cit> . two reases with different folds have been found to be mg2+-independent: r.bfii belongs to the phospholipase d  superfamily of phosphodiesterases  <cit> , while r.pabi exhibits a novel "half-pipe" fold  <cit> . a number of reases have been predicted to be related to the hnh superfamily of metal-dependent nucleases, which groups together enzymes with various activities, such as recombinases, dna repair enzymes, and homing endonucleases  <cit> . for some of these reases from the hnh superfamily, bioinformatics predictions of the active site have been substantiated by mutagenesis; examples include r.kpni  <cit> , r.mnli  <cit> , and r.eco31i  <cit> . finally, r.eco29ki and its two close homologs have been predicted to belong to the giy-yig superfamily of nucleases that includes e.g. dna repair enzymes and homing nucleases  <cit> ; this prediction has been recently supported by mutagenesis of the r.eco29ki active site  <cit> . among of all rease folds, the mechanism of action of giy-yig and half-pipe nucleases is least well understood, and no co-crystal structures are available for any member of these superfamilies.

a recent large-scale bioinformatics survey of type ii rease sequences  <cit>  indicated that for about 81% of experimentally characterized  enzymes, the three-dimensional fold can be predicted based on advanced bioinformatics analyses, mainly protein fold-recognition and analysis of amino acid conservation patterns and secondary structure prediction . however, the other reases remain unassigned to known folds and the architectures of their active sites and potential mechanisms of action remain obscure.

r.hpy188i is one of the reases, for which no fold prediction have been made thus far. r.hpy188i recognizes the unique sequence, tcnga, and cleaves the dna between nucleotides n and g in its recognition sequence to generate a one-base 3' overhang  <cit> . its orthologs are found among many, but not all, strains of helicobacter pylori that have been tested with respect to the rease activity  <cit> . in this work, we present the results of a bioinformatics analysis that has detected remote relationship between r.hpy188i and known giy-yig nucleases thanks to utilization of metagenomics sequences to generate a multiple sequence alignment with enhanced evolutionary information. we suggest that this approach could be applied to predict structure of other proteins, for which fold-recognition analyses done with standard alignments have failed.

RESULTS
initial bioinformatics analysis of r.hpy188i and its homologs
the lack of overall sequence conservation among reases, the absence of invariable residues even in the active site and the presence of several alternative folds makes structure prediction and generation of multiple sequence alignments for these enzymes a non-trivial task. in order to predict the structure of r.hpy188i, we used the genesilico meta-server, which is a gateway to a number of third-party algorithms . in particular, we predicted the secondary structure of this enzyme and carried out the fold recognition analysis to identify the structures of potentially homologous proteins in the protein data bank that could serve as modeling templates. unfortunately, querying the meta-server with r.hpy188i sequence alone has not revealed any significant matches to proteins of known structure . of all methods used, only hhsearch revealed a match to giy-yig nucleases, albeit at the 9th position of the ranking, with a score that did not indicate statistical significance .

most of fold recognition methods make their predictions not for a single sequence, but for a multiple sequence alignment generated by psi-blast searches of the non-redundant  ncbi database . analysis of an independently carried out psi-blast run against that database  revealed only one nearly identical sequence, of rease r.hpyf17i that exhibits only  <dig> amino acid difference and  <dig> additional amino acids at the n terminus . the results of fold recognition analysis starting from r.hpyf17i or from an alignment of r.hpy188i and r.hpyf17i, were the same as those starting from r.hpy188i alone. thus, r.hpy188i can be considered an "orfan"  <cit> , at least with respect to the nr database.

previously, in the course of bioinformatics analysis of r.nlaiv enzyme, we found that inclusion of sequences from metagenomics projects can increase information content of a multiple sequence alignment and improve detection of remote homologies, in particular for proteins with very few homologs in the nr database  <cit> . thus, we carried out a new psi-blast search for r.hpy188i , of the env_nr database , obtained from the ncbi server database. this search revealed  <dig> sequences, with e-values ranging from 3e- <dig> to 3e- <dig>  again, running fr analyses for these sequences gave no significant matches to any structure. nonetheless, a psi-blast search of a database comprising both nr and env_nr revealed an increased number of sequences. in the search,  <dig> sequences including  <dig> from marine metagenome  <cit>  were found to exhibit significant scores  and a conserved pattern of residues -y-x9--i-g  associated with a predicted β-hairpin structure that remotely resembled the genuine bipartite giy-yig motif. fr analysis of a multiple sequence alignment calculated for the sequences returned by the psi-blast search revealed the relationship of these sequences to the giy-yig superfamily, according to the following servers: hhsearch , ffas , mgenthreader , fugue , inub . according to the livebench evaluation, all these scores indicate higher reliability than the threshold of approximately 5% false positives  and in our experience can be taken as reasonably confident 3d fold prediction. further, the consensus predictor pcons selected 1yd <dig> as a preferred template with score  <dig> , a value almost exactly at the threshold. thus, we estimate that a probability of incorrect fold prediction for the r.hpy188i family is around 5%.

we conclude that utilization of evolutionary information from metagenomics sequences can greatly increase the information content of a multiple sequence alignment, to the point where a reasonably sized family can be detected for a sequence, which appears as an "orfan" when only the nr database is considered. an extended multiple sequence alignment that includes metagenomics sequences together with proteins from the nr database can then be used as a sensitive probe in protein fold-recognition, for detection of remote homologies to proteins of known structure.

molecular modeling of r.hpy188i
it is well known that fold recognition methods can produce artifacts. for instance, sequence alignments to wrong templates can reveal misleading local similarity of amino acid residues, and generate structures that are completely misfolded. thus, in order to substantiate the sequence-based prediction of membership of r.hpy188i in the giy-yig superfamily , we decided to build a model of its structure and evaluate its quality on the three-dimensional level. although the giy-yig domain of uvrc  <cit>  has been identified as the preferred structure, fold recognition alignments reported by different methods exhibited differences. thus, we used the "frankenstein's monster" approach to simultaneously generate a model of the protein core and optimize the target-template alignment by generation, evaluation, and recombination of alternative models  <cit> . this approach has been evaluated as one of the best template-modeling methods in casp <dig> and casp6; we have also used it to generate accurate models of reases r.sfii  <cit>  and r.mvai  <cit> , which were confirmed by independent crystallographic analyses  <cit> . the final alignment  indicated that regions 1– <dig>  89– <dig>  and 113– <dig> of r.hpy188i lack the counterpart in giy-yig domains of known structure and cannot be modeled "by homology".

initially, we attempted to fold regions 1– <dig> , 89– <dig>  and 128– <dig>  using rosetta , while keeping the rest of the model 'frozen'. however, the resulting models  exhibited relatively poor packing . thus, we subjected these models to refinement with the refiner method  <cit> , using additional restraints on secondary structure, according to the consensus prediction reported by the meta-server. recently, we have used this approach to correctly predict the structures of miaa, miab, and miae enzymes  <cit> . among all the refined r.hpy188i models, the one with the lowest predicted deviation to the native structure  has been selected as the final model  and subjected to further analyses.

analysis of the r.hpy188i model
comparison of the r.hpy188i model with the much smaller template structures of giy-yig domains of uvrc and i-tevi homing endonuclease  illustrates the challenge of modeling, in particular with respect to regions that have no counterpart in the templates and have been added de novo. nonetheless, our model obtained very good scores, which suggests that it is likely to be well-folded and that potential errors are unlikely to occur in the structurally most important regions. parts modeled de novo do not form an autonomously folded domain. instead, they pack against the homology-modeled giy-yig core. the secondary structure in the model fulfills the restraints used during model building; interestingly, a part of the n-terminal loop  has formed a small β-sheet with a part of the insertion . the model reveals the predicted configuration of the putative active site of r.hpy188i, comprising amino acid residues y <dig>  k <dig>  r <dig>  y <dig>  e <dig>  and q <dig> . in comparison with the giy-yig domains analyzed so far  <cit> , r.hpy188i and some of its homologs are the first to exhibit k  at position corresponding to y <dig> of uvrc and y <dig> of i-tevi  and q  at the position corresponding to n <dig> of uvrc and n <dig> of i-tevi .

the mechanism of phosphodiester bond hydrolysis has not been elucidated experimentally for any protein from the giy-yig superfamily, however a tentative mechanism has been proposed based on analysis of the crystal structure of a giy-yig domain from the uvrc enzyme  <cit> . in analogy to that tentative mechanism, the divalent metal ion may function as lewis acid, while e <dig> of r.hpy188i may be responsible for metal coordination, k <dig>  may function as a general base, and r <dig> may stabilize the negative charge of the free 5' phosphate after dna cleavage. the hydoxyl group of y <dig> of uvrc has been proposed to accept a proton from a nucleophilic water molecule while simultaneously transferring its proton to the metal-bound hydroxide  <cit> . the amino group of k <dig> might act in a similar way.

interestingly, among the afore-mentioned residues of the putative active site, r <dig>  is not absolutely conserved in the r.hpy188i family alignment. however, in a number of r.hpy188i homologs, a corresponding arg residue  is found not in the α-helix, but in another loop, on the opposite side of the active site . the distributions of r <dig> and r104/ <dig> are exactly complementary. modeling of the active site variants with the arg residue in these alternative locations  revealed that the positively charged guanidino group at the tip of its side chain can assume spatially similar location as in the "orthodox" position. this finding suggests that r104/ <dig> may fulfill the same role of phosphate binding as r <dig> despite being attached to a non-homologous position in the protein backbone. such a spatial "migration" of a catalytic residue has not yet been observed in enzymes from the giy-yig superfamily; however, it has been reported for two different residues  in a number of nucleases from the pd-xk superfamily  <cit> . thus, it will be interesting to test experimentally the functional significance of the swapped arg residue in the newly discovered giy-yig enzymes described in this work.

in addition to potential catalytic residues, the model of r.hpy188i  revealed a pair of semi-conserved cysteines  in the vicinity of the alternative positions of the afore-mentioned arg residue . the presence of these two cys residues is strongly correlated: they co-occur in  <dig> sequences and a single member of this pair is present only in  <dig> sequences. both cys residues are absent from all  <dig> members of the r.hpy188i family that possess a shorter variant of the intervening loop . it is tempting to speculate that this pair of cys residues might have a functional role, e.g. somehow stabilize the longer variant of the loop that may be involved in protein-dna interactions. in the model they are sufficiently close to each other to form a disulfide, which is however unlikely to happen in nature due to the generally reducing environment of the bacterial cytoplasm, which prevents oxidation of sulfhydryl groups  <cit> . alternatively, if r.hpy188i forms a dimer like most of type ii restriction endonucleases, they could form an intermolecular zn-bindig site. unfortunately, our model cannot provide detailed clues as to the function of c <dig> and c <dig>  hence we propose them as interesting targets for experimental characterization.

analysis of the protein surface with respect to the distribution of sequence conservation and the electrostatic potential  reveals that the surface of r.hpy188i is mostly positively charged. the predicted catalytic residues line up a bottom of a pocket with an overall neutral charge that is surrounded by a charged rim. most of that rim exhibits positive charge , suggesting its possible role in the dna binding. however, one side of the rim exhibits local concentration of negative charge, suggesting potential involvement in interactions with the positively charged metal ion.

phylogenetics and genomic context analysis of the r.hpy188i family
in order to interpret the structural and genomic features of different r.hpy188i homologs in the evolutionary context, we have calculated a phylogenetic tree for the entire family . it reveals that the r.hpy188i family comprises two subfamilies with different characteristic features . all the members of the r.hpy188i branch contain the phosphate-binding arg residue at the "orthodox"  <dig> position. all of them, except for two sequences from environmental samples, contain the aforementioned pair of cysteines. on the other hand, members of the r.hpyaorf481p branch possess the phosphate-binding arg in the "alternative" location  and lack the aforementioned pair of cys residues .

r.hpy188i and its close homolog r.hpyf17i are the only members of this protein family for which some function has been determined  <cit> . like virtually all type ii restriction enzymes, their genes are closely associated with genes encoding a dna modification methyltransferase with cognate specificity. thus, checking whether functionally uncharacterized members of the r.hpy188i family are also genetically linked with dna methyltransferase homologs is a convenient way to predict whether they could constitute a restriction-modification system. unfortunately, most of r.hpy188i members had been identified in metagenomic sequences, which typically contain only short fragments of genomic dna and may not necessarily include the associated mtase gene together with the rease gene. nonetheless, we carried out analysis of dna sequence context for r.hpy188i homologs to identify their neighbors and attempted to predict their cellular function beyond the putative generic nuclease activity.

it turned out that  <dig> members of the r.hpy188i family are flanked with dna mtase homologs . for the remaining  <dig> homologs, the existence of a flanking mtase gene could not be verified because of incomplete nucleotide sequences that did not extend beyond the rease-like gene. we identified flanking mtase genes for  <dig> out of  <dig> members of the r.hpy188i branch and  <dig> out of  <dig> of the r.hpy481p branch . conserved association of members of the r.hpy188i family with dna mtases suggests that  all of them are or used to be a functional restriction-modification system.

n.a., not applicable.

a the order of the sequences is the same as their order in figure  <dig> 

b end of the cloned dna fragment or end of the sequenced part of the cloned fragment. 5' or 3' indicate missing sequence data at the 5' or 3' side of the putative nuclease or mtase gene .

c a homologous mtase is described by its rebase name.

d the mtase gene includes an internal gap .

e a mtase gene was not detected on one side of the rease gene, but the other side is not available for analysis, thus the presence of the mtase cannot be either excluded or confirmed.

f the clone contains an internal gap , which overlaps with one end of the gene.

g probably a combination of rearrangement and frameshift

ha frameshift mutation splits the mtase gene.

i genomic neighborhood includes also m.hpyhorf460p .

j genomic neighborhood includes also r.hpy99xip  and m.hpy99xi .

kgenomic neighborhood includes also r.hpyaorf483p  and m.hpyaorf483p .

l another putative rm system comprising m.cuporf235p  and cup <dig>  is inserted into the cuporf237p rm system.

all but two  mtases of the r.hpy188i branch are closely related to m.hpy188i . the remaining two members  are accompanied by truncated homologs of m.hpy99orf1012p and m.esass1928p. in the case of  <dig> we cannot exclude that a second mtase closely related to m.hpy188i is present on the unsequenced side of the rease gene. on the other hand,  <dig> appears to lack an m.hpy188i homolog in its immediate neighborhood. the mtases accompanying r.hpy188i homologs number  <dig> and  <dig> have mutually homologous sections and therefore exhibit similarity to each other. the catalytic domains of their full-length homologs m.hpy99orf1012p and m.esass1928p are closely related to each other , while they do not show close similarity to m.hpy188i. this suggests that the mtase neighbors of  <dig> and  <dig> belong to a subfamily of mtases  that is distinct from a subfamily of m.hpy188i, although all these proteins belong to the same gamma class of n-mtases.

in the r.hpyaorf481p branch,  <dig> out of  <dig> detected mtase homologs are members of one family of closely related sequences, exemplified by m.hpyaorf481p. interestingly, these proteins are members of the alpha class of n-mtases, which is topologically different from the gamma class represented by m.hpy188i . finally, one member of the r.hpyaorf481p branch  is associated with a mtase related to m.muni, a member of beta class of n-mtases  <cit> . the lack of evident sequence similarity between members of the three classes of mtases and their different topology suggests that their ancestors have diverged long before the divergence of r.hpy188i and r.hpyaorf481p. this indicates that reases have exchanged their mtase partners at least twice in the evolution of the hpy188i family of rm systems.

several systems from the hpyaorf481p branch appear to be associated with another rm system . the most interesting case is observed in the genome of campylobacter upsaliensis rm <dig>  where another putative rm system has been inserted into the cuporf237p system comprising homologs of r.hpyaorf481p and m.hpyaorf481p. insertion of a restriction-modification gene complex into another restriction-modification gene complex has been already suggested to have occurred in helicobacter pylori  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results reveal that r.hpy188i and its homologs are new members of the giy-yig superfamily, despite the fact that they exhibit two deviations from the consensus catalytic motif of the superfamily. first, r.hpy188i exhibits lys instead of tyr of the "yig" half-motif. second, in one branch of r.hpy188i family, a presumably catalytic arg residue is missing at its typical position in sequence, but instead is found in a non-homologous position that nonetheless allows for spatial conservation of the guanidino group potentially involved in phosphate binding. our discovery provides important insight into sequence diversity of giy-yig nucleases and suggests that other members with unusual active sites might await discovery. in this context, the theoretical model of r.hpy188i structure developed in this work will serve as a convenient guide for experimental analyses aimed at understanding of the cleavage mechanism of giy-yig nucleases.

our phylogenetic analysis shows that the r.hpy188i family can be subdivided into two branches, one comprising close homologs of r.hpy188i itself, and the other comprising close homologs of r.hpyaorf481p. members of either branch are characterized by a different set of features, including localization of residues predicted to participate in the enzymatic activity and possibly in structural stability. they are also found associated with mtases from different classes. last, but not least, sequence context analyses revealed that in the family of r.hpy188i homologs, comprising mostly sequences detected in metagenomics data, all genes that have appropriate flanking sequences present in the database, are accompanied by a putative dna mtase gene or its fragment, suggesting that they all are or used to be functional restriction-modification systems.

