BACKGROUND
the infraorder anomura represents a highly diverse group of decapod crustaceans comprised of hermit crabs, mole crabs, king crabs, squat-lobsters and porcelain crabs. the fossil record contains representatives of nearly all extant families and spans the norian/rhaetian   <cit>  to holocene. anomurans have colonized a wide variety of ecosystems including freshwater, anchialine cave, terrestrial and hydrothermal vent habitats, and are distributed from the ocean’s surface to depths more than 5000 m  <cit> . their morphological and ecological diversity are of doubtless scientific interest, but anomurans also represent an important economic commodity as evident in major commercial fisheries for some king crab and squat lobster genera  <cit>  and the common use of hermit crabs as pets in the aquarium trade. moreover, some species are threatened or endangered due to rarity in nature, e.g., pylochelidae  <cit> , overfishing, e.g., lithodidae  <cit> , or habitat loss, e.g., aeglidae  <cit> . thus, improved understanding of these groups bears not only on appreciation of their diversity and ecology, but also strategies for their conservation.

anomuran classification has long been fraught with controversy . early classifications from the 19th to the first half of the 20th centuries were based on adult morphological characters including mouthparts, antennae, gills, pleon type, and/or larval characteristics. these classifications often differed in higher-level composition and, in some cases, the infraordinal name . since these studies, various researchers have proposed changes in the classification scheme  <cit> , many of which remain actively debated. more recently, molecular and/or morphological data have been used to reevaluate anomuran relationships  <cit> . as currently defined, extant anomura contains  <dig> superfamilies,  <dig> families,  <dig> genera, and more than  <dig> species  <cit> . although the monophyly of anomura is widely accepted  <cit> , the elucidation of internal relationships among families, genera, and species using modern methods is dynamic and under continuous debate  <cit> .

one of the most debated evolutionary questions within anomura is phylogenetic relationships between hermit and king crabs. since the early 1800’s , studies have suggested king crabs and hermit crabs are close relatives, despite first appearances to the contrary. king crabs are among the largest arthropods and have a crab-like body shape, whereas hermit crabs are relatively small and depend on a shell for protection. despite glaring morphological differences as adults, an affinity between king crabs  and hermit crabs  has been long suggested  <cit> . although most accept this claim, the evolutionary pathways and hypothesized ancestor of both groups has been debated for decades, with two major hypotheses being proposed. the first suggests that the lithodids  evolved from a pagurid-like ancestor   while the second suggests the opposite evolutionary pathway . here we revisit these hypotheses in light of new phylogenetic data to test the “hermit to king”/“king to hermit” evolutionary pathway.

additional controversy over anomuran relationships stems from apparently rampant examples of convergent and/or parallel evolution in body forms. anomurans span an impressive array of body configurations that include: 1) crab-like forms 2) squat-lobster forms 3) hermit crab forms with pleonal  symmetry  and 4) hermit crab forms with pleonal asymmetry . recent studies suggest that the acquisition of a crab-like body form, known as carcinization , has occurred multiple times during evolution of the group  <cit> . brachyura, all of which possess a “crab-like” body shape or slight modifications to this form, dominates decapod diversity with 6550+ species  <cit> , and is considered the sister clade to anomura  <cit> . given the success of brachyuran crabs, it has been hypothesized that acquisition of a crab-like form may have acted as a key innovation  <cit> , possibly impacting diversification rates within these lineages. for the first time, we explore diversification patterns in anomura and specifically test if carcinized lineages underwent unusually rapid diversification rates. if the emergence of the crab-like form promoted diversification we would expect the overall rate in carcinized lineages to be high compared to net of diversification across anomura. additionally, we test if the acquisition of different body forms ) arose once or multiple times during the emergence of the anomurans and reconstruct the evolutionary pathways of these transitions.

divergence dating is a powerful tool used to estimate the timing and origins of diversity, morphological traits, habitat shifts, and diversification. although nearly all the family-level groups of anomura are represented in the fossil record, the discovery has not been as frequent as that of other decapod groups . two factors, variations in cuticular sclerotization and habitat preference, are likely responsible for the limited occurrence of anomuran fossils. many taxa are weakly calcified, whereas others possess well-calcified claws and poorly calcified carapaces and pleons. in addition, habitats currently occupied by anomurans, including freshwater, terrestrial, intertidal marine, deep marine, and hydrothermal vent areas are strongly underrepresented in the fossil record. despite these limitations, we incorporate  <dig> fossil calibrations to estimate the origin of lineages and major events during anomuran evolutionary history, including the transition of body forms and shift into freshwater and terrestrial environments.

here, we present the taxonomically broadest and largest dataset yet assembled. we combine sequences generated by traditional sanger and next-generation  <dig> sequencing methods with morphological characters, including 19/ <dig> extant families and  <dig> species, to estimate phylogenetic relationships, character state evolution, divergence times, and diversification patterns among major lineages of this diverse clade of crustaceans. our comprehensive sampling, in combination with modern integrative approaches, allows us to present the most complete evolutionary picture for the infraorder anomura to date.

RESULTS
our study includes representatives from  <dig> of the  <dig> anomuran families and  <dig> outgroup taxa sampled across decapoda  . alternative outgroup sampling schemes did not affect internal relationships among anomura. the optimal models of evolution for each gene selected in modeltest were as follows: gtr + i + g 18s, 28s, h <dig> and tvm + i + g 12s, 16s. several sequences downloaded from genbank were excluded from the analysis due to contamination after a blast search and/or strange alignment results .

an “n/a” not available indicates missing sequence data. new sequences are indicated as kfxxxxxx.

phylogenetic analyses
alternative outgroup selections did not affect internal anomuran relationships. with all outgroups included, brachyura was recovered as the sister taxon. the bayesian analysis from the combined molecular + morphology dataset recovers anomura as a monophyletic group with high support . the majority of the nodes  are recovered with very high support . three families are recovered as para- or polyphyletic . with the exception of three families  each having a single representative, the remaining families were found to be monophyletic  with high support. blepharipodidae, hippidae, and albuneidae  group together with very high support , being sister to the remaining  <dig> anomuran families. lomisidae, eumunididae, kiwaidae, and chirostylidae  form a clade with high support  and are sister to aeglidae . munidopsidae, galatheidae, munididae, and porcellanidae  form a clade with high bayesian support . within the galatheoidea, munididae is paraphyletic with the galatheids nested within the group. pylochelidae, parapaguridae, diogenidae, coenobitidae, paguridae, hapalogastridae, and lithodidae  form a statistically supported clade . six of the seven anomuran superfamilies are monophyletic . the remaining superfamily, paguroidea is found to be paraphyletic and includes the superfamily lithodoidea .  <dig> genera were found to be poly- or paraphyletic .

the molecular-only phylogeny  is similar to our combined phylogeny, with most differences being found in placement and composition of paguroidea. unlike the combined phylogeny, which recovered paguroidea as paraphyletic, paguroidea was found to be polyphyletic. the family pylochelidae was recovered as polyphyletic according to molecular data but was monophyletic when morphology was added. parapaguridae was sister to a clade containing pylochelidae, aeglidae, lomisidae, eumunididae, kiwaidae, and chirostylidae, similar to the results of tsang et al.  <cit>  based on nuclear protein coding genes. as in the combined phylogeny, coenobitidae is nested within the diogenidae, and lithodoidea nested within the paguroidea. within lithodoidea of the molecular–only phylogeny, hapalogastridae was found to be paraphyletic, with representatives of the genera hapalogaster and oedignathus at the basal  and derived  end of the tree. however lithodoid relationships in the molecular-only phylogeny should be interpreted with caution as many were recovered with little to no support. in the combined phylogeny hapalogastridae was found to be a monophyletic and sister to lithodidae . the remaining superfamilies were monophyletic as recovered in the combined tree . twelve genera were found to be poly- or paraphyletic . some deep splits and short branches in the molecular-only phylogeny should be interpreted with caution, as support is low.

alternative hypotheses
alternative hypotheses regarding monophyly of the families paguridae, diogenidae, hapalogastridae, lithodidae, munididae, pylochelidae, and the superfamily paguroidea  <cit>  were tested using the shimodaira-hasegawa test . three of the seven hypotheses were found to be significantly worse than our unconstrained topology . the remaining four hypotheses were not found to be significantly worse than our unconstrained topology . hypotheses that tested a “king to hermit” evolutionary pathway were all significantly worse than the alternative  as recovered in our best ml tree .

character evolution
to infer evolutionary pathways, body forms  and habitat types  were optimized across our combined phylogeny using ancestral state reconstruction methods . analyses indicated that a crab-like ancestor gave rise to all extant anomuran lineages. in addition to the earliest branching clade, hippoidea, carcinization occurred independently three times during the evolution of the group, twice through squat lobster-like intermediaries  and once through an asymmetrical hermit crab-like ancestor  . the squat lobster-like form arose once as an early branching lineage and gave rise to the crab-like clades, lomisidae and porcellanidae. within the hermit crab lineages, the symmetrical pleon arose once within the pylochelidae. the asymmetrical pleon arose once within the paguroidea, but was subsequently partially reverted to the ancestral symmetrical condition  within the crab-like lithodidae and hapalogastridae . we traced the colonization of freshwater and semi-terrestrial habitats by the families aeglidae and coenobitidae . both transitions occurred via marine ancestors . in combination with divergence time results, we can make predictions about the timing of these events . maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood methods recovered similar ancestral state reconstructions for body form and habitat , so only the likelihood analyses are presented.

divergence time analysis
the divergence dating program beast was used to estimated origins and radiations of major lineages based on  <dig> fossil calibrations . all parameters reached convergence for individual runs. beast estimated the divergence of the anomurans from the true crabs, brachyura, to be in the permian  mya, figure  <dig>  square a). the most recent common ancestor of all present-day families radiated shortly afterwards in the triassic representing the origin of the earliest branching clade  estimated in the norian . additional speciation events leading to these present-day families occurred throughout the cretaceous . the exclusively freshwater family aeglidae diverged in the early cretaceous  with rapid speciation of present day species occurring since the mid-miocene . the families lomisidae, eumunididae, chirostylidae, and kiwaidae all originated in the cretaceous . squat lobsters and porcelain crabs within the superfamily galatheoidea originated in the early jurassic  and split into the munidopsidae and remaining families during the pliensbachian, early jurassic . the other galatheoid families, munididae and galatheidae, arose soon thereafter within the tithonian, late jurassic  while porcellanidae emerged in the aalenian, middle jurassic . the oldest family of hermit crabs, the symmetrical pylochelids, branched from the remaining hermits around  <dig> mya in the norian, late triassic . the origin of the asymmetrical hermit crab lineages followed soon after in the pliensbachian, early jurassic . two hermit crab families were recovered as non-monophyletic assemblages , which resulted in multiple timing of origins for these families. parapaguridae split from one clade of diogenidae  in the bathonian, middle jurassic , while the family coenobitidae is found nested within a slightly older clade of diogenidae , which includes most present day genera. paguridae is not monophyletic, because of the internally nested lithodidae and haplogastridae. the most recent common ancestor of the pagurid + lithodid + hapalogastrid clade was placed in the late cretaceous  with lithodidae and hapalogastridae splitting from one another around  <dig> mya .

number corresponds to nodal placement as assigned in figure  <dig> 

diversification analyses
the reworked version of medusa  <cit>  was used to detect whether any clade within the anomuran tree was best explained by independent diversification models, and to specifically address whether acquisition of the crab-like form resulted in an increase of diversification rates. the background tempo of diversification across the anomuran tree is characterized by a speciation rate lambda of  <dig>  lineages/myr, and our results suggest that the diversification of anomurans is characterized by two periods where the tempo of diversification changes . a slow speciation rate is detected in the lineage leading to the monotypic and carcinized family lomisidae, and an increase rate occurred in the squat-lobster family chirostylidae. the ancient but species-depauperate branch leading to the monotypic family lomisidae was optimally modelled separately with maximum likelihood estimate of lambda =  <dig> . the rate shift that occurred in the branch leading to the family chirostylidae was characterized by a speciation rate lambda of  <dig>  . all three resulting clade-specific diversification models were optimally fit as yule models .

discussion
phylogenetic relationships
recent studies on anomuran evolution have used molecular data  <cit> , morphological  data  <cit> , or a combination of the two  <cit>  to resolve phylogenetic relationships. these studies have dramatically increased our understanding of anomuran relationships and resulted in several major changes within higher-level classification  <cit> . the instability of anomuran taxonomy in recent years highlights the need for continued phylogenetic study of this group at many levels, and we for now elect to follow the most recent and up-to-date classification scheme  <cit> .

our total evidence approach combines  <dig> molecular  and  <dig> morphological  characters from  <dig> species to recover the anomuran phylogeny . the addition of morphological data increased the support for many intra-familial and superfamily relationships that were poorly supported in the molecular-only phylogeny . as mentioned previously, anomurans have undergone dramatic changes in higher-level classification based on recent phylogenetic studies. galatheoidea has been revised recently to exclude aeglidae, kiwaidae, and chirostylidae  <cit> , and include only galatheidae, munididae, munidopsidae, and porcellanidae  <cit> . with the recent revision of galatheoidea, all superfamilies were recovered as monophyletic , except for paguroidea . we found lithodoidea to be nested within paguroidea, which is in accordance with all recent combined  and molecular-based phylogenetic studies  <cit> . an affinity between certain lithodidae  and paguridae  has been suggested since the early 1800’s , based on morphological characters including mouthparts, gills, and pleonal characters. however, the evolutionary pathways of the two groups continue to be debated  with all recent evidence pointing to a “hermit to king” hypothesis.

family-level relationships were well resolved in the combined analysis  and in accordance with recent changes in classification  <cit> . in  <dig>  eumunida and pseudomunida were removed from chirostylidae and included in the newly erected eumunididae, and the new family munididae was erected on the basis of morphological and molecular evidence  <cit> . our results generally support these taxonomic revisions, recovering the eumunididae as a monophyletic group, but finding munididae to be possibly paraphyletic . galatheidae was found nested inside munididae, but alternative topologies that recovered munididae as monophyletic were not significantly worse than our best estimate . deeper sampling within both families is needed to resolve family and genus level relationships. the families galatheidae, munidopsidae, and porcellanidae were all recovered as monophyletic with high support . the paraphyly and/or polyphyly of diogenidae and paguridae is consistent across the combined and molecular phylogenies and in accordance with recent phylogenies that have sampled sufficiently within these families  <cit> . alternative hypotheses proposing the monophyly of these families  were rejected using s-h tests, confirming our findings . coenobitidae  was deeply nested within diogenidae  while paguristes and areopaguristes are more closely related to parapaguridae  than to other members of diogenidae . this relationship was first proposed by boas  <cit> , which he collectively called the paguristinen. the families pylochelidae and hapalogastridae were found to be polyphyletic in the molecular analysis , but monophyletic in the combined analysis . although we did not find pylochelidae to be polyphyletic in our combined tree, alternative molecular-based and morphological phylogenies have recovered similar results that suggest a polyphyletic pylochelidae  <cit> . additionally, there is morphological support for polyphyly among pylochelids separating trizocheles and mixtopagurus from the remaining pylochelid genera .

generic relationships within anomura seem to be much less resolved than superfamily and family level relationships. we found several genera to be poly- or paraphyletic , in agreement with previous studies  <cit> . most instances of non-monophyly occur within highly speciose genera , suggesting deeper sampling and continued research needs to be undertaken on these groups.

king to hermit and hermit to king evolution: historical to recent hypotheses
although past studies have shown an affinity between paguridae  and lithodidae , the evolutionary pathways and ancestry of these anomuran lineages have been debated for the past two centuries. the traditional and prevalent hypothesis posits that lithodids are free-living hermit crabs that abandoned shell use and underwent a series of morphological changes  resulting in a crab-like form. it has been argued that the asymmetry of the lithodid female pleon, in particular, is evidence of asymmetrical hermit crab ancestry. boas  <cit>  was the first to suggest the evolution of lithodids specifically from pagurid ancestors, and based on morphology proposed the ancestral pagurid to be closely related to nematopagurus and pylopagurus. bouvier  <cit>  similarly derived the lithodids from the pagurids, agreeing with boas on the structural pleonal similarities between these two groups. however, bouvier also proposed a series of gradual and linear progressive stages in the transformation of the pagurid pleon, starting from a pagurid precursor to various genera of hapalogastrids  and lithodids . in modern times, this concept of pagurid and lithodid evolution was brought to attention when cunningham et al.  <cit>  coined the phrase “from hermit to king” in applying molecular analysis to study hermit crab and lithodid phylogeny, and was then widely popularized  <cit> . a subsequent morphologically-based phylogenetic study by richter and scholtz  <cit>  supported this same evolutionary view of pagurid and lithodid evolution. recently, a study that examines the hemolymph vascular system in hermit and king crabs found close similarities in arterial systems of the dorsal cephalothorax  <cit> .

an alternate, opposite view, often stated as the “king to hermit” evolutionary hypothesis, was proposed by mclaughlin and lemaitre  <cit> . using morphological characters and an unusual application of cladistic methodology, mclaughlin and lemaitre explored possible evolutionary pathways of carcinization across anomura . they acknowledged that the crab-like form might have arisen multiple times across the anomura, but in the case of pagurid/lithodid evolution they concluded that the opposite evolutionary trajectory was more plausible, i.e., the transition was from a “crab-like” body form to a ‘hermit-crab” body form through a series of habitat change, calcium loss, and consequential adult morphological adaptations. subsequent studies showed that the linear evolutionary scenario proposed by bouvier did not correspond to the ontogenetic changes that take place in the megalopa to juvenile crab stages in at least  <dig> species of eight lithodid genera  <cit> . based on observations of the complex changes in pleonal tergites from megalopa to juvenile crab stages, these studies demonstrated that adult lithodid pleonal tergite structure in several species was the result of decalcification and sundering, not secondary calcification and fusion as had been proposed by bouvier.

our recent phylogenetic reconstruction of anomurans based on molecular and morphological data supports the traditional “hermit to king” hypothesis in congruence with all recent studies  <cit> . with the largest number of taxa and most robust molecular/morphological dataset ever used in a phylogenetic study of anomurans, our study once again shows lithodoidea to be nested within paguridae. moreover, our conclusions are consistent with the fossil record, which suggest hermits are much older  than king crabs . finally, topology testing rejects the “king to hermit” hypothesis and finds it as significantly worse than the alternative   .

while there is undeniable evidence of a close relationship between hermits and king crabs, it is less clear how morphological changes associated with carcinization may have proceeded within the lithodoidea. a recent study comparing hermit and king crab circulatory systems identified several vascular changes that occurred as the result of carcinization, arguing for more comparative studies that look at morphology  and development  <cit> . however, only with a clear phylogenetic hypothesis can many of these studies be correctly interpreted. recent molecular or combined morphological-molecular phylogenies recover conflicting evolutionary relationships, although only three lithodoid genera  have been used in previous analyses  <cit> . our phylogenetic reconstruction  shows the less carcinized and less calcified hapalogastridae as sister to lithodidae, in agreement with virtually every study since bouvier’s in the 19th century. but within lithodidae, and in contrast to bouvier’s linear hypothesis, our study places cryptolithodes, the most heavily calcified and carcinized lithodid, as an early branching lineage followed by more derived genera . it thus appears that the process of heavy calcification may have appeared at least twice in lithodid lineages. more lithodoid genera/species are needed to examine the process of carcinization within the lithodoidea and to properly test bouvier’s and boas’ earlier hypotheses . in conclusion, while recent, modern studies, including ours, overwhelmingly and clearly support a “hermit to king” evolutionary scenario, it is also clear that the evolutionary process and concomitant morphological changes  that occurred within the lithodoidea to produce the various degrees of crab-like forms in that family, is at best poorly understood.

in our reaffirmation here of the “hermit to king” hypothesis, we revealed a close relationship between lithodoidea and the pagurid, discorsopagurus . curiously, the same close relationship has surfaced in previous studies  <cit> . this revelation is important to highlight because the “hermit  to king ” hypothesis presupposes a distinctly asymmetrical shell-dwelling hermit crab-like ancestor from or close to the paguridae, or more precisely pagurus, as proposed by early  <cit>  as well as modern studies  <cit> . however, pagurus is currently a taxonomic and paraphyletic conundrum of more than  <dig> species, and it remains unknown which of the different lineages within “pagurus” could be the most likely candidate for lithodoid ancestry. the close relationship between discorsopagurus and lithodoidea may suggest a discorsopagurus-like hermit crab as the precursor to the crab-like lithodoids. all species of discorsopagurus are tube-dwellers, not shell-dwellers, and show pleonal asymmetry only in having unpaired pleopods. the genus is relatively small in size compared to the typically large-sized lithodoids with a distribution across both sides of the north pacific, from the sea of japan to puget sound and the straits of juan de fuca, washington  <cit> . the relationship between discorsopagurus and lithodoids may not be coincidental in the north pacific region where d. schmitti  and all other discorsopagurus species are found  <cit> . this region harbors the highest diversity of lithodoids, so it is plausible to expect closely related species  in similar areas. future studies with increased sampling within these groups will shed light into the evolutionary pathway of lithodoids from paguroid  ancestors.

divergence times and character evolution
our divergence dating analysis estimated the origin of anomura to be in the late permian  from a symmetrical crab-like ancestor . this is consistent with many higher-level decapod phylogenies finding anomura and brachyura as sister clades  <cit> , including the present study . results estimate that the earliest diverging anomurans are the hippoids , consistent with recent molecular estimates  <cit> . although this date is considerably older than the hippoid fossil record, closely related extinct forms extend into the triassic and present day hippoidea are found in substrates underrepresented in the fossil record. the superfamily hippoidea containing blepharipodidae, hippidae, and albuneidae, has been described as being similar to primitive brachyurans  <cit> , and ancestral reconstruction analysis confirms that the present day hippoids were derived from crab-like  predecessors . the next radiation occurred in the late triassic, giving rise to the squat-lobsters and crab-like superfamilies chirostyloidea and galatheoidea, aegloidea, lomisoidea, and the hermit crab and crab-like superfamilies paguroidea and lithodoidea. our results suggest these superfamily clades were derived from a squat-lobster-like ancestor approximately ~ <dig> mya . interestingly, our divergence time and character reconstruction analyses  are consistent with fossil evidence, and more specifically, the discovery of platykotta akaina, the oldest known anomuran fossil  <cit> . platykotta akaina, with a possibly squat-lobster-like body form, dates back to the late triassic  and has strong morphological affinity with the superfamilies chirostyloidea and galatheoidea. this fossil was found as part of a biotic assemblage suggesting that platykotta akaina thrived in tropical-subtropical waters and lived in the subtidal with connections to the open ocean  <cit> .

around  <dig> mya a squat-lobster like ancestor gave rise to a unique superfamily of anomurans, aegloidea. aegloid crabs represent the only freshwater anomuran family and can be found in caves, lakes, and streams throughout the neotropical region of south america  <cit> . apart from a single species of freshwater hermit crab, clibanarius fonticola <cit> , the transition into a completely freshwater environment only occurred in extant aeglidae . fossil evidence suggests freshwater aeglids once inhabited marine waters, based on the fossil representative, haumuriaegla glawssneri, found in new zealand from late cretaceous rocks  <cit> . in combination with our divergence time analyses, we hypothesize that the complete transition in freshwater occurred sometime between the late cretaceous and miocene. this transition appears to have allowed for rapid diversification approximately  <dig> mya .

from approximately  <dig> mya to  <dig> mya, the families of galatheoidea radiated and diversified. these include the squat lobsters families munidopsidae, munididae and galatheidae, and the porcelain crab family porcellanidae. the porcellanids diverged in the middle jurassic  from squat-lobster like ancestors, but a crab-like body form evolved by the tithonian  based on fossil evidence and ancestral reconstruction analyses. this was the first occurrence of carcinization from a squat-lobster or hermit-like ancestor within anomura . interestingly, henderson  <cit>  and ortmann  <cit>  suggested porcellanid crabs were derived galatheids despite the differences in body shape and form, and this is consistent with our current evolutionary hypothesis.

lomisoidea and chirostyloidea diverged around  <dig> mya from a squat-lobster like ancestor. this body form was retained within the chirostyloids and underwent further carcinization, attaining a crab-like form in the monotypic lomisidae, endemic to australia.

early hypotheses based on larval evidence proposed hermit crabs evolved as two independent lineages, coenobitoidea and paguroidea  <cit>  and recent studies continue to explore superfamily and family level relationships  <cit> . in our combined analysis, the hermit crab families, pylochelidae, parapaguridae, diogenidae, coenobitidae, and paguridae, formed a monophyletic group with the inclusion of lithodidae or king crabs, and hapalogastridae. we estimated these families arose early in the evolution of anomura, approximately  <dig> mya. the symmetrical hermit crabs, pylochelidae, are unique with most having complete body symmetry and in utilizing broken gastropod shells, siboglinid tubes, and coral pieces for shelter and protection, in contrast to other hermit groups that commonly use coiled gastropod shells  <cit> . our analysis suggests pylochelids branched early in the evolution of hermit and king crabs, consistent with morphological and fossil evidence that place them as a basal primitive lineage  <cit> . the oldest hermit crab fossils, jurapylocheles malutka, ammopylocheles mclaughlinae and eotylaspis wehnerae <cit>  of kimmeridgian age , belong to the families pylochelidae and parapaguridae . this is consistent with our divergence time analysis, which recovers these families as early branching lineages. diogenidae, coenobitidae, and paguridae typically possess an asymmetrical pleon accompanied by an enlarged right or left chela. according to our combined analysis, pleonal asymmetry in hermits appears to have been derived once in the evolution of the anomurans, most probably between 200– <dig> mya. this contrasts with the results obtained by tsang et al.  <cit> , who proposed that the pleonal asymmetry evolved independently in two different hermit crab lineages, once in parapaguridae, and a second time in diogenidae, coenobitidae, and paguridae. these contrasting differences are the result of incongruent phylogenies based on total evidence  and molecular only approaches  <cit> . note, however, that our molecular-only analyses recover similar results to those of tsang et al.  <cit> . the semiterrestrial coenobitids colonized land from a marine ancestor sometime between  <dig> and  <dig> mya . the emergence of diogenidae , coenobitidae , and paguridae  all predate their first appearance in the fossil record . carcinization occurred for the third time in the crab-like superfamily lithodoidea between 29– <dig> mya from an asymmetrical hermit-like ancestor. this estimation is consistent with other timing estimates of king crab carcinization  <cit> .

carcinization
the crab-like body form was recovered in our study as the ancestral state for all the anomurans. in our study, all alternative body forms were present  early in the divergence of the anomurans. from these ancestral character states, carcinization occurred independently three times during the evolution of anomura, once in the lithodoidea through an asymmetrical hermit intermediate, and twice in lomisidae and porcellanidae through squat lobster intermediates . these evolutionary pathways of the crab-like form, twice from squat lobster intermediaries and once through an asymmetrical ancestor, corroborates recent hypotheses  <cit> . however, our tree differs significantly from tsang et al.’s study  <cit>  in the deep ancestral origins of carcinization. tsang et al.’s hypothesis suggests a symmetrical hermit crab-like ancestor predated the squat lobster and asymmetrical intermediaries, whereas we recovered a crab-like ancestor to predate these intermediaries. we acknowledge that our analysis recovers two deep nodes that are unresolved, however symmetrical reconstruction at these nodes seems unlikely . it must also be noted that the most recent common ancestor of anomura is unresolved in the tsang et al. analysis, although it appears to be a crab-like or symmetrical hermit ancestor. the major differences in the two analyses stems from the differences in phylogeny and more specifically the monophyly  or polyphyly  <cit>  of paguroidea and families therein . there is agreement with tsang et al. in the sister group relationship between paguridae and lithodoidea, although tsang et al. used only four lithodid genera  and did not include representatives of hapalogastridae. in addition, both studies provide strong evidence for the intermediary ancestors directly predating carcinization across anomura  and once through asymmetrical hermit , figure 3a).

the multiple cases of carcinization among the anomurans have been noted since the early 1900s. borradaile  was the first to propose the term carcinization to explain the crab-like aspects of the hermit crab porcellanopagurus and the tendency of anomurans to achieve this form, a phenomenon unique to anomura not evident in other decapod lineages . the emergence of the crab-like form is not ‘evenly distributed’ across our phylogeny, first occurring in the older lineages porcellanidae and lomisidae and only more recently within the superfamily lithodoidea. some questions naturally arise. why did carcinization occur independently three times during the evolution of the anomura? why did the presumably shell-dwelling asymmetrical hermit crab ancestors of lithodid king crabs forsake the use of shells for protection, which already provided them with survival advantage? morrison et al.  <cit>  suggest that the crab-like form might represent a key innovation that is associated with an evolutionary advantage, possibly due to the greater mobility and agility provided by this morphology. this seems to be evident within the true crabs, or brachyura, which dominate decapods in terms of species richness  and have thrived in marine, freshwater, and terrestrial environments. although diversification seems to be low in the crab-like anomurans when compared to the brachyurans, fossil evidence and divergence time analyses suggest crab-like anomurans are much younger when compared to the closely related true crabs . furthermore, the crab-like porcellanids are one of the oldest  and most diverse families of anomurans . lithodids represent an even younger lineage, originating ~ <dig> mya, but comprising over  <dig> extant species. it is plausible that a crab-like form may hold some evolutionary advantage when considering age and diversification within anomura, although this does not seem to hold true for all groups that underwent the crab-like transition . a second hypothesis explains the possible advantage of carcinization from a hermit-like ancestor. previous studies have suggested a free-living body form may have a selective advantage in obtaining food resources when unconstrained by a gastropod shell  <cit> . an example can be seen in the semi-terrestrial hermit crab, birgus latro, a species that in the adult stages has lost dependence on shells as protection for the pleon, and instead has developed a calcified body  <cit> .

diversification rates
the extraordinary morphological and ecological diversity of anomurans has long fascinated evolutionary biologists. previous studies covering a wide range of faunas have shown how morphological or ecological factors may influence the course of subsequent evolutionary diversification  <cit> , and in particular for anomurans it has been hypothesized that the acquisition of the crab-like form may have acted as a key-innovation  <cit> .

our analysis reports the pattern of diversification in anomura to be characterized by a low net rate of diversification, with two major changes in the rates of speciation along its evolutionary history. the initial diversification of the group during the late permian was characterized by slow rates of diversification and it was not concomitant with major family radiations, which took place from the jurassic onwards.

a significant change in the tempo of diversification was identified within the speciose squat-lobster family chirostylidae, which has a higher speciation rate than the overall tempo of diversification across the anomuran tree . recent studies based on the munidid squat-lobster genus paramunida suggest that dramatic environmental change may provide great geological and habitat complexity, which in turn promotes isolation and rapid diversification  <cit> . the fact that both families, chirostylids and munidids, diverged during the late triassic  and currently occupy deep-sea habitats suggests that similar geological and environmental changes may also have driven major diversification within the munididae, which shifted habitats at some point because the jurassic forms are nearly all coral-reef associated. currently, the family chirostylidae accounts for 7% of all anomuran species, but the true diversity is underestimated and about  <dig> new species are in hand of taxonomists  <cit> . clearly, a more accurate phylogenetic framework is needed to interpret in detail the exceptionally high speciation rates reported here.

the monotypic family lomisidae showed a strikingly lower rate than the overall tempo of diversification in anomura. lomis hirta is anomalous in its prolonged persistence despite an inferred speciation rate of zero . these taxa, old lineages with few extant species, have been reported in several invertebrates and vertebrates  <cit>  and more recently in butterflies  <cit> , suggesting that extremely low rates of diversification characterize these groups. high extinction rates could also account for this pattern; however, we report that a pure-birth yule model best explains our data. under a high-extinction scenario we would expect to see an overabundance of more recently arisen species that simply have not yet gone extinct; such a pattern is not observed in our phylogeny.

our analysis failed to identify a correlation between the timing of branching events  and the evolutionary history of carcinized lineages, which suggests that the acquisition of a crab-like form did not play a major role in shaping extant anomuran biodiversity. however, a major limitation of the medusa approach is that rate shifts cannot be assigned below the level of phylogenetic resolution  <cit> , which prevents us from evaluating if the highly carcinized family lithodidae underwent an unusual rapid diversification event. the lack of a rate shift in the branch leading to the three collapsed families  does not necessarily imply that subclades within that group have not experienced changes in the tempo of diversification, which may be masked by the lack of taxonomic resolution among these taxa. thus, further studies which focus on clarifying the systematics of the infraorder, with particular emphasis on the families paguridae, hapalogastridae, and lithodidae, are necessary to examine the role of carcinization in anomuran diversification.

CONCLUSIONS
anomuran relationships have been the topic of long debate, likely because of their extraordinary morphological and ecological diversity and their common targeting in fisheries. here we estimate evolutionary relationships among  <dig> families,  <dig> superfamilies, and  <dig> species of anomurans based on morphological and molecular data to provide the most robust anomuran phylogeny to date. many families and genera appear to be poly- or paraphyletic suggesting further taxonomic revisions at these levels. carcinization evolved multiple times during the evolution of anomura whereas transition into exclusively freshwater or semi-terrestrial environment occurred in the families aeglidae and coenobitidae, respectively. divergence times date the origin of the group in the late permian, with subsequent radiations through the jurassic and cretaceous. results suggest that anomurans diversified under low speciation rates with two major changes in the tempo of diversification. first insights suggest that the acquisition of the crab-like form did not play a major role in shaping the extant diversity of anomura, but further examination is required in order to confirm this pattern.

