BACKGROUND
whereas traditional field and morphological studies continue to discover new species  <cit> , complexes of phenotypically similar unrecognised taxa are now increasingly identified through molecular systematic examination of 'known' taxa  <cit> . documenting this wealth of 'cryptic species'  is a priority of modern systematic research  <cit> . all species, however, are not equal: their phylogenetic distinctiveness  can vary enormously  <cit> . many clades are characterised by relative morphological stasis over very long time periods  <cit> ; within such groups, 'cryptic species' might be divergent lineages as ancient as ecologically diverse nominal 'genera' or even 'families' of more morphologically variable clades  <cit> . identifying such ancient cryptic diversity is likely to provide important insights into biogeographic history and processes of morphological stasis, and is essential for the effective allocation of conservation resources to preserve the maximal breadth of evolutionary diversity  <cit> . nonetheless, even though the techniques are readily available, cryptic species assessments have not systematically integrated techniques such as internally calibrated molecular dating to assess the phylogenetic diversity  <cit>  of newly identified taxa.

pygopodoid  geckos are a gondwanan radiation of lizards restricted to australia and surrounding islands  <cit> . a recent molecular phylogenetic study of the pygopodoids, found the monotypic genus crenadactylus to be among the most divergent extant lineages  <cit> . the single nominal species in the genus, crenadactylus ocellatus is a secretive scansorial lizard, australia's smallest gecko species , and broadly distributed across isolated patches in the west, centre and north of australia  <cit> . two papers have examined the taxonomy of this species over the last three decades and four subspecies are now recognised  <cit> . a more recent molecular study revealed very deep genetic divergences between these nominal subspecies  <cit> ; and at least one recognised subspecies  also spans multiple widely isolated and disjunct biogeographic regions  <cit> , suggesting the genus may harbour additional species level diversity.

crenadactylus are rarely collected over much of their range, many northern populations are known from very few sites and poorly represented in museum collections, and it is only through recent extensive fieldwork that sufficient samples have become available for a comprehensive genetic analysis. in this study we used independent mitochondrial  and nuclear  loci to estimate specific and phylogenetic diversity within the nominal species 'crenadactylus ocellatus' from localities spanning its wide range across arid and semi-arid australia. populations for which there was congruent evidence of lack of gene flow and historical independence  were regarded to represent candidate species . this new sampling and data revealed a striking instance of severe underestimation of phylogenetic diversity, with important ramifications for conservation and understanding the environmental history of australia.

RESULTS
species diversity and distributions
an initial principal co-ordinates analysis  of allozyme data for all  <dig> individuals  revealed the presence of six primary clusters, one for each of six different geographic regions: south west, carnarvon basin, cape range, pilbara, kimberley, and central ranges. each cluster was diagnosable from all others by 6- <dig> fixed differences, supporting their status as distinct taxonomic entities . follow-up pcos on each cluster found only modest within-group heterogeneity  in all but one regional cluster, namely that representing the kimberley specimens. here, pco identified five genetically distinctive subgroups , each differing from one another by 4- <dig> fixed differences , and all differentiated by fixed differences involving "private" alleles at one or more of the loci . a final round of pcos on subgroups kimberley b and kimberley e  did not reveal any obvious genetic subdivision.

matrix of pairwise genetic distances from allozyme data among  <dig> candidate species of crenadactylus. lower left triangle = number of fixed differences ; upper right triangle = unbiased nei d.

bayesian and maximum likelihood phylogenetic analyses of nuclear and mitochondrial data identified these same  <dig> groups as deeply divergent lineages , and reciprocally monophyletic where multiple samples were available . minimum corrected and uncorrected pairwise  genetic divergences between candidate species  were much higher than maximum distances within candidate species  , further emphasising their long periods of historical isolation.

corrected  and uncorrected genetic distances between ten candidate species confounded within 'crenadactylus ocellatus', calculated using  <dig> bp of nd <dig> data.

based on both independent and combined analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data  the basal dichotomy within crenadactylus was between a south/western clade  and a north/central clade . the south/western clade included three parapatric lineages, two endemic to the cape range area and carnarvon coast respectively, and a more deeply divergent lineage widespread throughout the southwest of western australia. the north/central clade comprised an endemic radiation of five allopatric lineages from the kimberley , and a pair of sister taxa from the pilbara region and the central ranges . allopatric populations within the north/central clade are largely restricted to rocky ranges and showed high levels of geographically structured mtdna diversity, while the two widespread taxa in the south/western clade were not restricted to rocky ranges, and were characterised by very low levels of mtdna divergence across their distribution, suggestive of significant recent gene flow or range expansion .

divergence dating and age of cryptic radiation
topology and node support for the pygopodoid phylogeny recovered by the dating analyses was consistent across nuclear and combined datasets, and with similar datasets presented elsewhere  <cit> . the 95% height intervals for all age estimates were relatively wide , due to our explicit incorporation of calibration error. using the estimated age of crenadactylus from the nuclear and combined analysis as secondary prior, the 95% ci for the estimated mean rate of mitochondrial sequence evolution per lineage per million years within crenadactylus was between  <dig> - <dig> %  to  <dig> - <dig> % , broadly consistent with published estimates of rates from other squamate groups   <cit> .

comparison of mean and range  of divergence time estimates for selected outgroup and crenadactylus nodes based on bayesian dating analyses  of three different sets of alignment data. age estimates are in millions of years and letters alongside major splits correspond with labels in fig. 2a.

actual and relative age estimates for the four major clades of pygopodoids ) were broadly similar . however, the estimated age of crown crenadactylus, and the relative age of this radiation in comparison with the other three major australian pygopodoid gecko radiations was significantly older when using combined data as opposed the nuclear data alone . we suggest that the combination of shallow calibration points and saturation of the mitochondrial component of the combined data, and/or stochastic error given the relatively few substitutions in the nuclear dataset may explain this discrepancy. the older dates from combined datasets are viewed as a potential maximum while the younger dates from the nuclear data are viewed as a conservative minimum. nuclear data suggest that the initial diversification of crown crenadactylus occurred in the late oligocene to early miocene ), and that it is probably slightly younger, but nonetheless broadly concurrent with diversification in the other three major australian clades of pygopodoidea . if the combined analysis is more correct than the nuclear only analysis, it would indicate that crown crenadactylus is significantly older . both datasets indicate that the four major geographic isolates of crenadactylus  had all diverged by the late miocene, approximately  <dig> mya.

discussion
cryptic species diversity and conservation
based on the high levels of uncorrected mtdna divergence , multiple fixed allozyme differences, reciprocal mtdna monophyly and deep divergence times we estimate that at least  <dig> lineages of crenadactylus are evolutionarily divergent, non-interbreeding and warrant recognition as candidate species . many of these lineages are further defined by multiple nuclear differences. a full taxonomic revision of the genus is currently in preparation. thereafter, crenadactylus ocellatus will be restricted to the south-west population as the type locality is in the perth area, the three other recognised subspecies will be elevated to full species, and additional new species will be described. ongoing analysis and published data also suggest that at least some of these taxa are morphologically diagnosable on the basis of subtle features of scalation and colouration .

our estimate of total species diversity is almost certainly conservative for several reasons. at least five candidate species are potential short-range endemics  <cit>  : thus, crenadactylus lineages have clearly persisted and speciated in relatively small patches of suitable habitat. this would indicate that known and geographically isolated, but genetically unsampled, populations of crenadactylus from the kimberley and around the queensland/northern territory border  may include additional unrecognised taxa. crenadactylus are secretive, rare, and difficult to collect , and as large areas across northern and central australia have not been intensively surveyed, it seems likely that additional populations  remain undetected. finally, maximum levels of genetic diversity within the central ranges and pilbara candidate species are moderately high , and further work may reveal that these candidate species each comprise complexes of multiple cryptic taxa.

the identification of a clade of five candidate species within the kimberley region of north-west australia is also notable. whereas morphological work has identified micro-endemic allopatric radiations of species within some kimberley invertebrate lineages  <cit> , this is the first genetic evidence for moderately extensive in situ speciation within the region, and the only documented evidence of a moderately diverse  endemic vertebrate radiation. few other areas of similar size within australia contain comparably diverse endemic vertebrate radiations  and tasmania )  <cit> . the results of this and a growing body of other work emphasise the biogeographic importance, environmental complexity, high endemism and phylogenetic diversity of the rugged and poorly known kimberley  <cit> .

most candidate species of crenadactylus are from areas of low human impact however, restricted range taxa with potentially narrow climatic tolerances are particularly vulnerable to rapid anthropogenic climate change  <cit> . the diversity we have uncovered within crenadactylus underlines how an overly conservative taxonomy and patchy sampling may obscure the existence of range-restricted taxa at potentially high risk of extinction. northern australia remains relatively poorly sampled, and ongoing studies indicate it probably represents one of the largest remaining frontier areas for modern systematic research and inventory in a developed country  <cit> . in light of unprecedented global environmental changes and the apparently high levels of endemism within this area, systematic surveys and genetic assessments of diversity to address this oversight should be a high priority. if not, there is a risk that many deeply divergent, but morphologically conservative lineages will disappear before they are even documented.

divergence dates
based on our secondary calibrations, the initial diversification of lineages currently confounded within 'crenadactylus ocellatus' probably began in the mid to early miocene  and potentially at least  <dig> million years earlier. one recognised subspecies of crenadactylus  includes four candidate species  that span the basal divergence of the genus . none of these lineages have been formally recognised or named and they satisfy the definition for cryptic species we are following herein. given that rigorous molecular dating with direct calibrations is rarely integrated into assessment of cryptic species diversity, it remains to be seen how common such deeply divergent cryptic lineages are. however, the divergence times between these unrecognised species of crenadactylus are amongst the oldest documented for any cryptic species of tetrapod, and comparable with the oldest cryptic species identified in vertebrates  <cit> , subterranean amphipods  <cit> , and perhaps exceeded only by copepods  <cit> . in contrast to these studies, our date estimates are also based on internally calibrated trees, as opposed to generalised and often unreliable global estimates for rates of sequence evolution  <cit> .

the depth of divergences among candidate species of crenadactylus  are comparable with vertebrate radiations noted for their extreme morphological conservatism   <cit> . the long-term conservatism of these cryptic radiations of geckos is particularly striking in light of the major environmental changes they have persisted through  and the great morphological plasticity of related lineages such as the legless lizards   <cit> .

our date estimates indicate the extensive evolutionary diversity hidden within the nominal species 'crenadactylus ocellatus' is as ancient as ecologically diverse crown radiations of many iconic endemic australian groups: terrestrial venomous snakes   <cit> , agamid lizards   <cit> , most macropods   <cit>  and murine rodents   <cit> . likewise, while allozyme data cannot provide reliable divergence dates  <cit> , levels of allozyme genetic divergence found within crenadactylus  are similar to the entire australian radiation   <cit>  of 'short-necked' chelid turtles   <cit> . in contrast to the single recognised 'species' of crenadactylus these are all broadly co-distributed radiations of australasian vertebrates that are widespread across biomes, include multiple named genera or even families, and show extensive sympatry and ecological diversity across major lineages currently afforded generic or higher rank.

analysis of nuclear and combined datasets further indicate that initial divergence of the ancestral crenadactylus lineage from other pygopodoids  was broadly contemporaneous with, or even pre-dated, initial diversification of iconic gondwanan australasian clades such as the basal oscine birds  <cit> , most major australasian marsupial families  <cit> , pelodryad treefrogs  <cit> , many major lineages of the proteaceae  <cit> , and nothofagus  <cit> . the divergence of the crenadactylus lineage from other extant geckos also pre-dates current estimates for the initial radiation of most other extant squamate  families in australia by at least 10- <dig> million years  <cit> . the only comparably divergent australian squamate genus identified to date are the cave geckos , however this lineage appears to be  related to an extralimital radiation of geckos in new caledonia  <cit> . thus, crenadactylus is not only unexpectedly diverse, but also the only surviving representative of a relatively ancient lineage. indeed current evidence indicates that it is the most phylogenetically divergent endemic genus in the diverse australian squamate fauna of over  <dig> spp and  <dig> genera  <cit> .

ancient vicars across the australian arid zone
crenadactylus are among australia's smallest terrestrial vertebrates. while small body size increases vulnerability to environmental conditions, it also allows access to micro-refugia inaccessible to larger vertebrates  <cit> . as with other lineages showing outward morphological conservatism over long timescales, an absence of major morphological differentiation since the early miocene also suggests a relatively constrained ecology  <cit> . each of the four major geographic clusters of crenadactylus sampled  are allopatric and restricted to relatively temperate semi-arid or rocky areas, separated by expanses of arid desert. these geographically isolated and deeply divergent lineages of crenadactylus appear to be relatively ancient relics of a former much wider distribution, now greatly attenuated by the expansion of severe aridity.

dated phylogenies for many major australian vertebrate and faunal radiations are now available, and all generally indicate the fauna of the arid zone  is the result of a complete turnover since the estimated onset of aridification around  <dig> mya, and that most endemic lineages are significantly younger than  <dig> mya  <cit> . thus far crenadactylus is the only vertebrate lineage showing strong evidence for a contrasting pattern; the persistence of multiple lineages that pre-date the estimated onset of severe aridification in refugia, both around and within the arid zone. indeed, they are currently the oldest known allopatric sister lineages of australian vertebrates restricted to isolated ranges and relatively mesic coastal pockets through the semiarid to arid west, centre and north of australia.

crenadactylus thus spans both the geographic extent and temporal origins of the arid zone, but does not seem to have adapted to it. like the relatively few other ancient relict lineages present   <cit> , this pattern provides potentially important insights into the spread of aridity. in this case, the timing of diversification of crenadactylus lineages supports the suggestion that semi-arid/seasonally arid conditions  date back to at least the mid-miocene , and that severe aridity dates back to the late miocene . age estimates for the separation of multiple, geographically-isolated candidate species in crenadactylus also provide perhaps the strongest phylogenetic support yet for the hypothesis that significantly arid conditions were already widespread across west and central australia in the 'hill gap', 6- <dig> mya  <cit> , a period where depositional records are poor, making it difficult to assess historical australian climates.

CONCLUSIONS
our data have revealed that the single nominal species 'crenadactylus ocellatus' comprises a moderately diverse and surprisingly ancient complex of numerous unrecognised and highly divergent lineages. the distribution and antiquity of these lineages suggests that with further work incorporating additional sampling, ecological analysis, physiological data and environmental niche modelling, crenadactylus will be an important evolutionary radiation for understanding the deep history of arid australia. more generally, integration of data and techniques from diverse fields into the delimitation of species boundaries is a growing focus of taxonomic work . our results demonstrate how integration of molecular dating techniques into cryptic species analysis can quantify the depth of phylogenetic divergences and reveal patterns of great evolutionary interest and conservation significance within lineages showing outward morphological conservatism.

