BACKGROUND
the pig is the world's most frequently consumed meat animal, and its genetic improvement, particularly in terms of productivity and meat quality, is of interest to livestock science 
 <cit> . to date, intensive genetic improvement of livestock animals has been conducted by using classical selection and mating, but genomic information is required for further improvement. improvements in aspects of the rearing management of pigs, such as feeding and hygiene control, have to be based on knowledge obtained from physiological studies. moreover, the pig is unique among livestock in that it is very useful in biomedical research because of the structural and size similarities of its organs  to those of humans 
 <cit> . improvement in the breeding and rearing of pigs with the help of molecular genetics and physiology, as well as the use of pigs as biomedical model animals, requires fundamental information on pig molecular biology, particularly in terms of the genome and genes.

recently, the international swine genome sequencing consortium  completed its draft sequencing of the pig genome; these sequences will form the basis of further investigations of pig molecular biology 
 <cit> . sequencing of the pig genome will accelerate the development of genetic markers to improve breeds and populations and give basic information on the genes encoded on the genome 
 <cit> . however, genes cannot be precisely localized on the genome solely from information on the genome sequence. determination of precise sequences, structures, and locations requires information on the sequences of expressed genes per se <cit> . the locations and structures of genes on the pig genome are now being explored by using automated systems or by manual inspection by annotators using the otterlace system of the wellcome trust sanger institute to add information to databases such as vertebrate genome annotation  
 <cit> . the sequences of expressed genes are also useful for genome annotation, which is important for isolating the genes responsible for particular traits.

expressed sequence tag  analyses have been conducted by many research groups in pigs and other organisms. more than  <dig> , <dig> pig ests have been accumulated and registered in the public nucleotide databases, and several attempts at transcriptome analysis using next-generation dna sequencing  have been made 
 <cit> . most of the cdna libraries constructed by using traditional methods do not cover the transcription start sites, because the limitations of cloning techniques can cause incomplete synthesis of full-length cdna. on the other hand, the sequences of transcripts obtained by using ngs alone are reconstructed by the compilation of short reads and do not directly reflect the actual structure of the mrna; this may be problematic in considering the alternative splicing products that are actually expressed in the tissues 
 <cit> . as far as possible, it is therefore important to clone full-length mrna transcripts in order to collect gene expression data and use these data in further analyses of expressed genes and of genome annotation in pigs 
 <cit> . cdna clones carrying full-length transcripts have additional benefits—they can be used for protein production in vitro and for exploring promoter sequences on the genome.

so far we have conducted est analysis and sequencing of entire mrna transcripts in pigs by using full-length-enriched cdna libraries. here, we outline the data we have collected and the advantages of their use, particularly in genome annotation of the draft sequence of the pig genome.

RESULTS
pig ests based on full-length-enriched cdna libraries
we have constructed  <dig> cdna libraries for  <dig> different tissues and cell populations by using cloning of cap-structured mrna 
 <cit>  or the smart method 
 <cit> , and we have accumulated  <dig>  ests from 5′-ends  including previously reported  <dig>  ests in our pig expressed gene database 
 <cit> . the ests thus obtained were assembled into  <dig>  contigs consisting of  <dig>  ests, with  <dig>  singlets remaining. the contig containing the largest number of ests carried  <dig> ests with marked similarity to tubulin α <dig> genes. the genes encoding α-tubulin are extremely similar to each other; therefore, the ests encoding α-tubulins were assembled into the same contigs. on the other hand, about 90% of the contigs contained fewer than  <dig> ests , showing that the majority of the ests were based on virtually unbiased mrna sequences. high-quality est reads have been registered in the public nucleotide database .

thirty-two cdna libraries constructed with pig tissues and cell populations were used to generate expressed sequence tags . twenty-three libraries were constructed by using the oligo-capping method 
 <cit> , and five were constructed by using the vector-capping 
 <cit>  method. four libraries were constructed by using the smart method  
 <cit> . ests in contigs are shown, as are those that had a ≥100-bp stretch of phred quality value ≥ <dig> and were not involved in contigs . numbers of cdna clones that were completely sequenced  are also shown. completely sequenced cdna clones derived from pigs cloned from a female subjected to genome sequencing by the international swine genome sequencing consortium are classified by library.

a origins are indicated as pig breeds or lines. different animals in the same breed are designated as described in parentheses. lwd is  × duroc. duroc  designates a duroc individual cloned from a female pig subjected to draft genome sequencing 
 <cit> .

b loci repeated among clones derived from different libraries were removed.

genes and chromosomal locations corresponding to assemblies generated from pig ests
blast similarity analysis 
 <cit>  of the nucleotide sequences of the assemblies  against the mrna sequences of refseq  at the national center for biotechnology information  
 <cit>  revealed that the cdna sequences corresponded to  <dig>  unique human genes . correspondence of the assemblies to the functions of human genes according to the gene ontology terms 
 <cit>  demonstrated that the est collection covered a broad range of porcine expressed genes . about three-fourths of the assemblies showing obvious similarity to protein sequences were estimated to contain start codons, indicating the high efficiency of cloning of entire mrna molecules by the construction of full-length-enriched cdna libraries . ideally, almost all of the clones in the full-length-enriched cdna libraries would contain entire coding sequences . however, at the cloning step in the procedure of cdna library construction, short transcripts that do not cover entire cdss may be cloned preferentially to those containing functional cdss. degradation of rna before library construction may also hamper the cloning of intact cdna sequences in the libraries. even though there are some incomplete transcripts in the ests, full-length-enriched cdna libraries are much more valuable for determining the correct structures of functional mrna than are cdna libraries constructed by using normal methods, because the latter rarely yield intact full-length cdnas 
 <cit> .

numbers of genes that had unique ncbi gene ids and corresponded to contigs and singlets generated by assembly of expressed sequence tags  are indicated. also shown are the numbers that had unique gene ids in the ncbi homologene database  and corresponded to the contigs and singlets generated. numbers in parentheses indicate numbers of gene ids that had no corresponding homologene ids. homologene ids in pigs are not indicated, because there is no homologene id database for pig genes.

est assemblies were estimated to contain start codons if the length upstream of the matches  in the assemblies was greater than that between the start base of the coding sequence and the matched region of the corresponding gene. numbers of assemblies  corresponding to protein sequences in humans, mice, cattle, dogs, and pigs are also shown.

among the human genes matched to the assemblies,  <dig>  corresponded to  <dig>  unique ncbi homologene ids, which are indices of homologs among genomes of different eukaryote species 
 <cit> . this covered about two-thirds of all homologene groups in humans . furthermore, about  <dig> additional genes were also included in the ests, as estimated from the numbers of genes without homologene ids . in total, we estimated that more than  <dig>  different genes were included in the ests thus obtained. however, the numbers of genes included in the est assemblies might in fact increase because of gene duplication specifically occurring in the sus genus.

the est assemblies were mapped on the latest build of the draft sequence of the pig genome sscrofa <dig>  
 <cit> . the entire summed length of chromosomes in the latest draft sequence of the pig genome  is  <dig>  mb, and the  <dig> scaffolds unplaced on any chromosome are a total of  <dig>  mb long 
 <cit> . among the  <dig>  contigs,  <dig>  were mapped on pig chromosomes. among the singlets,  <dig>  of  <dig>  were mapped on the chromosomes . the assemblies were mapped to  <dig>  different loci on pig autosomes and  <dig> different loci on the pig sex chromosomes. in addition,  <dig> loci corresponding to the assemblies were detected in scaffold sequences unplaced in any chromosomes . mapping of loci corresponding to the est assemblies on the draft sequence of the pig genome demonstrated that the ests were derived from regions throughout the whole chromosomes, and that the density of loci on the chromosomes showed periodic change within the chromosomes , possibly corresponding to the g- and r-bands of the chromosomes 
 <cit> . although genes expressed ubiquitously in tissues  were frequently observed, we were able to clone pig transcripts in the est collection derived from more than  <dig>  unique loci distributed throughout the whole genome. this shows that our est resource is valuable for exploring pig gene sequences of interest in various areas of veterinary research.

numbers of est  assemblies and the corresponding independent loci mapped on the pig genome are shown for each chromosome. “forward” and “reverse” indicate that the assemblies were aligned on the chromosomes in the orientation from pter to qter or from qter to pter, respectively.

generation of the collection of pig cdna clones, and complete sequencing of their inserts
the pig cdna libraries used for the est analysis were full-length–enriched libraries, which are ideal for determining the entire sequences of transcripts functioning as protein-encoding mrna. in parallel with the est analysis described above, we selected cdna clones for the sequencing of entire inserts. the cdna clones located at the forefront position in contigs generated by the assembly were selected for sequencing of the entire inserts, because we considered that they were the best candidates for clones carrying entire transcripts. as the est analysis progressed, if cdna clones located upstream of the clones already selected in the contigs appeared, we added these clones into the pipeline for sequencing of the entire inserts. on the other hand, among the singlets that did not join the contigs, there were many clones corresponding to human genes that had no counterparts among the clones selected from the contigs. we also selected these clones to ensure that the cdna collection included a broad variety of genes. in total, we selected  <dig>  clones as candidates for complete sequencing .

selected cdna clones were sequenced by the primer-walking  method 
 <cit> . cdna clones that were difficult to sequence by pw were subjected to transposon-shotgun sequencing  with clone pooling 
 <cit> . to date, we have completed the sequencing of the entire inserts of  <dig>  clones . we excluded the clones that had only repetitive sequences such as short or long interspersed nucleotide elements, and obtained  <dig>  clones in a result , including  <dig>  clones that have already been reported and presented in our cdna database 
 <cit> . among the candidate clones,  <dig> were completely sequenced only by using universal sequencing primers . there were  <dig>  cdna clones sequenced by the pw method and  <dig> by the tps method . the average length of the inserts of the cdna clones thus sequenced was  <dig>  kb. sequencing by the tps method effectively found longer inserts of the cdna clones than by the pw method , even considering the fact that one of the reasons why tps was used on difficult-to-sequence clones was their length. the longest inserts of the clones sequenced by the pw and tps methods were  <dig> and  <dig> bp, respectively. the tps method is highly compatible with automation, because it does not require primer design; however, the total amount of sequencing work is much more than the pw method 
 <cit> . therefore, application of tps may be limited to clones with long inserts or for which many sequencing primers need to be designed.

lengths of cdna clones are shown according to the sequencing methods used. clones sequenced by using the primer walking  method are shown separately according to the number of primer walkings. clones sequenced by using transposon shotgun sequencing  include those that were finished by the tps method after being sequenced by the pw method.

a clones that were completely sequenced just by using universal primers .

genes corresponding to cdna clones
blast similarity analysis of the inserts of the cdna clones sequenced against the mrna sequences of the ncbi refseq  revealed that the cdna sequences corresponded to  <dig>  human genes and more than  <dig>  genes in each of mice, cattle, and dogs . the functions of genes corresponding to more than  <dig>  clones could be estimated by their similarity to human genes and classification according to gene ontology terms . among the human genes matched to the cdna clones,  <dig>  corresponded to  <dig>  homologene ids ; this accounted for 59% of all of the homologene groups of human genes. notably, more than  <dig> genes corresponding to cdna clones have not been classified in homologene, and there may be duplication of gene loci originally occurring in the pig. furthermore, it cannot be ruled out that the cdna clones that showed no similarity to genes of other species encode genes that are functional in pigs. in total, we estimated that the cdna thus sequenced represented more than  <dig>  pig genes by comparative approach of mrna sequences. in addition, cdna clones corresponding to the same homologene id may be duplicated specifically on the pig genome. although clarification of the correct number of genes included in our cdna collection requires the completely sequenced genome sequence of the pig, we estimated the numbers of loci by using the currently publicized draft pig genome sequence .

numbers of genes that had unique ncbi gene ids and corresponded to the sequences of the pig cdna clones are shown at the left side of the table. also shown are the numbers that had unique gene ids in the ncbi homologene database  and corresponded to the sequences of pig cdna clones. the numbers of unique gene ids corresponding to sequences of pig cdna clones that were not mapped at any locations on the draft pig genome sequence  are also shown. in addition, the numbers of genes that had unique gene ids in the ncbi homologene database and corresponded to the sequences of the unmapped pig cdna clones are indicated. numbers in parentheses indicate numbers of unique gene ids that had no corresponding homologene ids. numbers of homologene ids in pigs are not indicated, because there is no homologene id database for pig genes. at the right side of the table, the numbers of cdna clones estimated to contain full-length coding sequences  of pig genes by alignment against the protein sequences of humans, mice, cattle, and dogs in the ncbi refseq database are shown in the first column. pig protein sequences registered in refseq were used in this analysis. the numbers of unique ncbi gene ids corresponding to the cdna clones and the numbers of loci corresponding to the cdna clones examined using the draft sequence of the pig genome  are also indicated .

a we counted the unique ncbi gene ids corresponding to cdna clones that were not mapped on the draft sequence of the pig genome. if the gene ids corresponded to cdna clones both mapped on, and not mapped on, the draft genome sequence, they were counted in both the “loci with gene id” column and the “gene id with cdna unmapped on pig genome” column.

b redundant cdna clones corresponding to genes of more than one species were counted without repetition.

distribution of cdna clones on the draft sequence of the pig genome
as mentioned above in the background, the genome annotation process is greatly accelerated by the mapping of cdna clones on the genomic sequence. we evaluated the usefulness of our collection of pig cdna clones in genome annotation by mapping the clones onto the latest draft sequence of the pig genome . among the  <dig>  cdna clones sequenced,  <dig>  were mapped to  <dig>  independent loci on the pig chromosomes. there were  <dig>  loci mapped on the autosomes and  <dig> on the sex chromosomes . in addition,  <dig> clones were mapped to  <dig> loci on scaffolds that have not been localized on any chromosomes in sscrofa <dig> . among the  <dig> cdna clones that were not mapped to pig chromosomes, and the unplaced scaffold sequences,  <dig> clones corresponded to  <dig> unique human genes. inclusion of those unmapped cdna clones that corresponded to the genes of other mammals yielded a total of more than  <dig> unique genes corresponding to unmapped cdna clones . taking these findings together, we estimated that our pig cdna collection includes transcripts derived from about  <dig>  different loci on the pig genome.

numbers of cdna clones and the corresponding independent loci mapped on the pig genome are shown for each chromosome. “forward” and “reverse” indicate that the cdna clones are aligned on the chromosomes in the orientation from pter to qter and from qter to pter, respectively. numbers in parentheses show clones derived from pigs cloned from a female subjected to genome sequencing by the international swine genome sequencing consortium .

similar to the human genome, the pig genome is estimated to include  <dig>  to  <dig>  genes, because the genome size of pig is comparable to that of human. our sequencing of the cdna clones therefore covered slightly more than half of the entire gene set of the pig. the reason why thousands of genes were not included in our cdna resources may be that the libraries were constructed with tissues of animals that were healthy and not subject to stressors such as infection or starvation. genes that are highly expressed only during acute responses to pathogens or nutritional exhaustion might be difficult to clone in such libraries. in addition, if a gene is rarely expressed in a particular tissue , then the probability that it will fail to be detected in the cloning of  <dig>  transcripts will be more than 50%. to increase the number of cloned genes it would be necessary to normalize the libraries or use tissues derived from animals stimulated by particular stressors.

genes encoded on the genome may be duplicated specifically in particular species but not in others. to detect duplication specifically occurring in the pig genome, we extracted the cdna sequences with the longest open reading frames  from among the clones that we sequenced here for the  <dig>  putative loci on the autosomes and sex chromosomes in sscrofa <dig> . the extracted cdna sequences were compared with human and cattle protein sequences deduced from the ncbi refseq . we estimated that  <dig> human protein sequences and  <dig> cattle protein sequences matched more than one putative locus on sscrofa <dig> . conversely, the total numbers of loci estimated to be duplicated on sscrofa <dig>  in comparison with humans and cattle were  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. however, most of the potentially duplicated loci encoded shorter orfs than their counterparts, implying that the loci were only pseudogenes or that they had arisen from the remaining sequencing errors in the genome sequence. further refinement of the draft sequences of the pig genome will elucidate the duplication of genes occurring in the sus genus.

the cdnas thus analyzed were synthesized by reverse transcription using a poly-dt primer; therefore, most of the clones showed canonical mrna features and had orfs. among the  <dig>  loci mapped on the chromosomes and scaffolds, the representative  cdna clones for  <dig> loci showed no correspondence to the genes of humans, cattle, dogs, or mice. however, most of the cdna clones with no obvious correspondence to the genes of other animals had apparent orfs, and only  <dig> clones did not have orfs for sequences more than  <dig> amino acids long. the average insert length of these  <dig> clones was  <dig> bp, whereas the average for all of the clones was much longer . these “non-coding” transcripts may be transcribed randomly and may have no function, although they may have a certain regulatory function on other protein-coding transcripts.

the draft sequence of the pig genome in its latest build  corresponds to the bacterial artificial chromosome  clones covering 98% of the physical map of the entire chromosome 
 <cit> . in our analysis, about 2% of the unique human genes corresponding to the cdna sequences were not mapped to any chromosomes or unplaced scaffolds, showing that our estimate of the coverage of the whole genome by the draft sequence was correct. refinement of the draft sequence of the pig genome will reveal the precise locations on the pig genome of the loci generating those transcripts that we cloned but that were not mapped, or that we mapped only on unplaced scaffolds.

the cdna libraries that we used included seven libraries constructed by using animals that were cloned from a sow used for draft sequencing of pig genome  
 <cit> . a total of  <dig> cdna clones from four libraries were completely sequenced. among them,  <dig> were mapped to  <dig> loci on the pig genome . these cdna clones will be valuable for genome annotation of the draft sequence generated by the sgsc. in addition, comparison of the cdna sequences of duroc 2– <dig> clones with the draft sequences of the pig genome can be used to estimate the sequencing accuracy of the draft sequence and the frequency of rna editing 
 <cit> , although polymorphisms among the chromosomes of duroc 2– <dig> hinder precise discrimination of such errors and edited bases. we roughly estimated such base changes by aligning cdna sequences derived from duroc 2– <dig> clones with the genome sequences. the region of each cdna sequence that appeared most aligned was extracted, and the adenosine  to guanosine  base changes, which reflected the most representative a to i  rna editing 
 <cit> , were counted. to simplify the estimation, we investigated only a-to-g changes flanked by 5-base matches on both sides. among the cdnas of duroc 2– <dig> clone pigs,  <dig> carried only a-to-g base changes, which totaled  <dig>  in contrast,  <dig> cdnas carried only g-to-a base changes, which totaled  <dig>  therefore, we estimated that about one-fourth of the inconsistency between g and a in the cdnas and the draft sequence, respectively, is caused by rna editing in the pig. alignment of the 3′-utr sequences of the cdnas of duroc 2– <dig> clone pigs showed differences of less than  <dig> % from the draft genome sequence . the differences thus detected included polymorphisms between different chromosomes and bases subjected to rna editing. furthermore, more than half of the aligned  <dig> 3′-utrs  were completely matched to the draft genome sequence. we therefore estimated that the actual error rate in the draft sequences of the pig genome was much less than  <dig> %; the draft sequence was thus reliable.

coverage of coding sequences by cdna clones on the pig genome
we expected that the collection of pig cdna clones that we sequenced would include sequences covering the entire cdss of pig genes. to estimate the numbers of cdna clones covering entire cdss, we investigated the coverage of those protein sequences of humans, mice, cattle, and dogs that showed the greatest similarity to the amino acid sequences deduced from the cdnas. we also examined the distribution of the cdna clones considered to cover entire cdss on the pig chromosomes in the draft genome sequence . among the cdna clones sequenced completely,  <dig>  were estimated to contain entire cdss in their inserts. we estimated that these clones corresponded to  <dig> different loci on the pig chromosomes .

usefulness of the pig cdna collection in genome annotation and other applications
the cdna clones sequenced here were derived from libraries by methods that preferentially cloned intact rna transcripts. about three-fourths of est assemblies showing considerable similarity to known genes carrying the beginning of cdss; we estimated that about half of the cdna clones that were completely sequenced contained entire cdss. an outline of the pig genome sequence is currently available, and use of the sequences of these expressed genes should help in precisely identifying the locations of genes on the genome and in determining the exon–intron structures of the genes. along with the progress made in draft sequencing of the pig genome, automated annotation of the pig genome sequence has been conducted by the pipelines in pre-ensembl/ensembl and publicized through the pre-ensembl/ensembl database 
 <cit> . in the automated pipelines, about  <dig>  pig cdna clones were utilized 
 <cit> ; most of these were derived from our pig cdna sequencing project. our data resources on pig-expressed genes have greatly contributed to prediction of the structures of genes on the draft sequence of the pig genome. in addition, the use of pig cdna sequences that have been completely sequenced accelerates the process of manual refinement of automated genome annotation. until now, many projects for full-length cdna sequencing have been conducted in parallel with genome sequencing in eukaryotic species, and the results of these studies have contributed to our knowledge of gene locations and structures in target species such as humans and mice 
 <cit> . in fact, the pig cdna sequences presented here have contributed greatly to the process of annotation of immune-related genes in the draft sequence of the pig genome by the immune response annotation group 
 <cit> . we expect that additional efforts to annotate other groups of pig genes will be accelerated by the use of our pig cdna sequences.

one of the characteristics of the ests and cdna sequences presented here is that the majority of the sequences were derived from intact mrna with transcription start sites. this has great merit for exploring promoter sequences on the genome sequence 
 <cit> . the consensus sequences bound by transcription factors in the promoter sequences are generally well conserved among species; however, there are many variations in the binding-site sequences of transcription factors, and precise determination of the genomic region of the promoter sequence of each gene is essential for clarifying the efficiency of transcription in cells in response to stimuli 
 <cit> . extraction of the upstream regions of the est assemblies and cdna sequences presented here, combined with direct evidence from, for example, chip-seq studies 
 <cit> , which will be accelerated by using the cdna sequences for transcription factors in pigs, will enable the construction of a variable database for understanding transcriptional regulation of pig genes. notably, we were able to completely sequence  <dig> pig cdna clones associated with “nucleic acid binding transcription factor activity,” as classified according to gene ontology  .

another advantage of this collection of cdna sequences is its usefulness for investigating alternative splicing events in pig genes. we mapped  <dig>  cdna clones to  <dig>  different loci on the pig genome—that is, on average more than two different cdna clones were derived from a single locus. future studies should include a detailed exploration of splicing variants by using the cdna sequences we have sequenced, together with the pig gene sequences presented by other groups.

the cdna sequences and the ests themselves will also be useful in other studies, such as in gene expression analysis and in detecting polymorphisms in pig genes. a number of polymorphisms have been reported in mrna sequences , and it should be emphasized that there are many polymorphisms in cdss that affect the functions of the molecules encoded by the genes that carry the polymorphisms. our explorations of polymorphisms using the cdna sequences and ests presented here have been useful in characterizing the genetic features of pig breeds and populations 
 <cit> . we have also investigated polymorphisms in genes encoding pattern-recognition receptors 
 <cit>  and have demonstrated that some of the polymorphisms observed so far in commercial pig and wild boar populations truly affect the ligand-recognition ability of the molecules encoded by the genes 
 <cit> . in addition, many ongoing studies are revealing the potential associations of gene polymorphisms with economically important traits in pigs 
 <cit> . the use of pig gene sequences, including those presented here, will help greatly in promoting the exploration of polymorphisms that may be candidates for markers for selecting or breeding pigs with distinguished traits 
 <cit> . furthermore, the gene sequences can be used directly to design probes for microarrays. we have developed oligomer microarrays by using sequences derived mainly from the ests and cdna sequences presented here, and we have successfully elucidated the characteristics of changes in gene expression in pig subcutaneous preadipocytes 
 <cit> . designing microarray probes with full-length cdna sequences has benefits in terms of reliability, because the probes are highly specific to the target genes and there is clear evidence of correspondence between the probes and fully annotated genes. full-length cdna sequences will even be valuable in transcriptome analysis with ngs, which will become the mainstream method of expression analysis; these sequences will be useful in determining which short ngs reads belong to gene sequences that truly exert functions in organisms 
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
here, we demonstrated our attempts to collect pig-expressed genes by est analysis and sequencing of entire cdna clones using full-length-enriched cdna libraries. we have so far accumulated  <dig>  ests and  <dig>  cdna sequences. the ests and cdna clones thus sequenced were respectively mapped to  <dig>  and  <dig>  different loci on the latest pig genome sequence sscrofa <dig> ; they corresponded to more than  <dig>  and  <dig>  different genes of other species, respectively. the cdna resource presented here is valuable for annotation of the draft sequence of the pig genome and for exploring promoter sequences on the genome. it will also be valuable for molecular biology–based analyses in pigs, for example for analyses of protein production in vitro.

