BACKGROUND
despite its molecular simplicity, ethylene regulates a number of developmental and physiological processes  <cit> , including leaf and flower abscission, ripening of climacteric fruit and biotic and abiotic stresses. in the species of the cucurbitaceae family ethylene controls sexual expression and is the main determinant of sexual phenotypes  <cit> . thus, the ethylene biosynthesis genes cmacs <dig> and csacs <dig> of melon and cucumber, respectively, regulate the arrest of stamen development in female flowers of monoecious cultivars, and their loss of function mutations lead to the conversion of female into bisexual flowers, and therefore the transformation of monoecious into andromonoecious cultivars  <cit> . in cucurbita pepo, ethylene also regulates the sexual expression of monoecious cultivars, controlling both the precocity and the number of female flowers  <cit> . in fact, the application of blocking agents of ethylene production  or perception  is able to delay female flowering and reduce the number of female flowers per plant, but also to induce a conversion of female into bisexual flowers  <cit> . likewise, female flowers of zucchini produce much more ethylene than male flowers throughout their development and maturation up to anthesis  <cit> .

after pollination and fertilization, fruit set and fruit development is dependent on cell division and expansion promoted by hormones such as gibberellin , auxin and cytokinin  <cit> . auxin is the determinant of fruit set, as has been demonstrated by the study of mutants or transgenic lines for arf or iaa/aux multigene families in tomato and arabidopsis <cit> . however, they seem to be closely related to gibberellin which is able to trigger fruit initiation without changes in auxin signalling genes  <cit> . in the cucurbitaceae family, fruit set and development depend mainly on auxin  <cit> . the application of auxins induces parthenocarpic fruit set and development in cucumber  <cit> , although the application of cytokinin also activates cell divisions in fruits  <cit> , whereas brassinosteroid increase fruit set  <cit> . in zucchini auxin is also shown to be the most effective hormone to induce parthenocarpic fruit development  <cit> , and this growth regulator is commonly applied to promote fruit set and growth in greenhouse production of this vegetable crop.

ethylene has been related with floral organ senescence and abscission after pollination. pollination induces ethylene production in the ovaries and petals, and this ethylene appears to be responsible for coordinating ovary growth and petal senescence  <cit> . the implication of ethylene in fruit set and development was not studied in depth until a few years ago. recent studies have shown an interconnection between early ovule abortion and the size of the silique in arabidopsis ethylene mutants  <cit> . meanwhile, pollination and gibberellin treatments are responsible for downregulating ethylene biosynthesis and signalling genes in tomato immediately after fruit set  <cit> .

since c. pepo morphotype zucchini has a large inferior ovary , it is an ideal species suitable to study fruit set and early fruit development. we have recently observed that a reduction of ethylene in female flowers of zucchini can not only promote the development of stamens in the flower, converting female into bisexual flowers, but also induce the parthenocarpic fruit development in absence of pollination and fertilization  <cit> . this is also true for some cultivars of zucchini squash grown under high temperature conditions  <cit> . to study the role of ethylene in fruit set and early fruit development in zucchini squash, the present paper compares the production of ethylene and the expression of ethylene biosynthesis and response genes between pollinated and unpollinated ovaries of a non-parthenocarpic cultivar, as well as between a parthenocarpic and a non-parthenocarpic cultivar of zucchini squash. moreover, we analysed fruit growth rates as well as ethylene production and the expression of ethylene genes in response to auxin and tiba treatments. results indicate that ethylene is directly involved in fruit set and early fruit development in this species. these two developmental processes require a low level of ethylene production and signalling within the few days after pollination, and the loss of pollination and fertilization is accompanied by an induction of ethylene biosynthesis and signalling 3 days after anthesis, concomitantly with fruit abortion.

RESULTS
different approaches have been used to determine the implication of ethylene in zucchini fruit set and early fruit development. firstly we have determined ethylene production and the expression of  <dig> ethylene biosynthesis and signalling genes in pollinated and unpollinated ovaries and fruits of the non-parthenocarpic cultivar tosca. secondly, we have compared ethylene production and the expression of ethylene genes in the fruits of two contrasting cultivars for parthenocarpy: tosca and cavili. finally, the same two cultivars were used to study the crosstalk between ethylene and auxins in the control of these developmental processes.

ethylene production and ethylene genes expression in pollinated and unpollinated ovaries/fruits of zucchini
it has been shown that the fruits of many zucchini cultivars can initiate their growth in the absence of pollination and hormone application. in fact, in the non-parthenocarpic cv. tosca the growth rate of pollinated and unpollinated fruits were very similar for the first three days , which highlights the natural parthenocarpy of this species. after the third day, however, most unpollinated fruits aborted, and some of them grew at a significantly slower rate than pollinated fruits . in the first  <dig> dpa, the profiles of ethylene production in pollinated and unpollinated fruits were very dissimilar . while ethylene production decreased slightly in pollinated fruits, in unpollinated fruits it increased sharply  <dig> dpa . these results indicate that the decrease in the growth rate of unpollinated fruits that occurs at  <dig> dpa is correlated with a burst of ethylene in the fruit, and that the maintenance of fruit growth likely requires a low level of ethylene.

to detect putative genes regulating ethylene biosynthesis during fruit set and early fruit development, we have analysed the expression of six acs genes and one aco gene from c. pepo . cpacs <dig> was one of the first acs genes isolated from plants  <cit> ; cpacs <dig>  and cpacs <dig> to cpacs <dig> are four unigenes identified by new generation sequencing  of cdna from different squash tissues  <cit> ; available at cucurbigene.net]; and cpacs <dig> and cpaco <dig> have been isolated by pcr strategy with degenerated primers . expression was studied through qpcr at anthesis  and  <dig> dpa . cpacs <dig> was not expressed during this period . at anthesis, the expression of the other  <dig> genes was very low, except for cpacs <dig>  which could explain the basal production of ethylene at this point. this basal expression was maintained in pollinated fruits at  <dig> dpa . nevertheless, in unpollinated fruits the expression of the five acs genes and cpaco <dig> was upregulated at  <dig> dpa. the highest induction was observed in cpacs <dig>  cpacs <dig> and cpacs <dig> , which appear to be the main gene responsible for the ethylene produced at this point.

to determine the molecular mechanisms behind the action of ethylene in fruit set and early fruit development, the relative expressions of six additional ethylene perception and signalling genes were also studied in pollinated and unpollinated fruits over  <dig> dpa. as occurred for cpacss and cpaco <dig>  other genes involved in ethylene perception such as cpetr <dig> and cpers <dig>  as well as in ethylene signalling , also showed an expression profile similar to that of ethylene production . in pollinated fruits, expression levels remained low during early development, while in non-pollinated fruits, all perception and response genes were significantly upregulated at  <dig> dpa , coinciding with the peak of ethylene and the abortion of fruit growth .

ethylene is actively involved in fruit set and early fruit development in zucchini
in order to ascertain whether the differences in ethylene production between pollinated and unpollinated fruits at  <dig> dpa are the consequence of fruit set or fruit abortion, or rather a signal that is actively involved in fruit set and development, we have compared ethylene production and signalling in one parthenocarpic and one non-parthenocarpic variety, as well as in a segreganting population derived from the parthenocarpic one, and determined the effects of ethylene releasing and blocking agents on fruit set and early fruit development.

the hybrid cultivar cavili is able to develop parthenocarpic fruits of commercial size in absence of pollination or hormonal treatments  <cit> . the parthenocarpy of this cultivar is associated with an incomplete andromonoecy, i.e. a partial conversion of female into bisexual flowers, and a delay in floral organ maturation . ovary-bearing flowers of this cultivar can be classified into female flowers with no stamen development , or bisexual flowers showing a certain degree of stamen development , but never reaching the size of stamen in male flowers . at the same stage of development, bisexual flowers always showed a higher ovary and fruit size . we compared the longitudinal growth rate of ovaries/fruits between female and bisexual flowers for a total of 22 days, starting with floral buds of about 4 mm in length . the growth rate of ovary length in bisexual flowers deviated from that of female flowers at twelve days, immediately after anthesis of female flowers . by this time petals of bisexual flowers were still immature and closed but their ovaries kept growing at a much faster rate than those of female flowers. many of the ovaries in bisexual flowers reached a commercial size before anthesis. in fact, many of the bisexual flowers did not reach anthesis in the 24 days of study, and in others anthesis was delayed with respect to female flowers because of a lower growth rate of petals . these results indicate that the parthenocarpy of this cultivar is not only correlated with stamen development, but also with a lower growth rate of petals, which delays maturation of petals and anthesis. given that male flowers require twice as long as female ones to mature and reach anthesis , it is likely that the delay in the maturation of bisexual flowers is associated with their masculinisation, i.e. the presence of stamens.

to assess whether parthenocarpy and partial andromonoecy had the same genetic regulation, we phenotyped the f <dig> population derived by self-pollination of the f <dig> hybrid cavili, which segregates for the two traits. a complete cosegregation between the two traits has been found in the f <dig> generation. of a total of  <dig> plants,  <dig> were completely monoecious, and produced only female flowers, while  <dig> were partially andromonoecious and produced both female and bisexual flowers . although the number of bisexual flowers in the latter varied from 20% to 100%, all of them developed into parthenocarpic fruits, which reached commercial size even before anthesis . the 3: <dig> segregation ratio  indicated that the partial andromonoecy and parthenocarpy of cavili appears to be controlled by at least one dominant gene.

ovary size and ethylene production data were obtained from  <dig> replicates for each flower phenotype. different letters within the same column indicate significant differences between female and bisexual flowers .

sex determination and female flower maturation in zucchini is known to be regulated by ethylene in the earliest stages of flower development  <cit> . therefore, the parthenocarpy of cavili could be the result of a reduction of ethylene in female flowers. we have found that the unpollinated cavili ovaries/fruits produce significantly less ethylene than those of the non-parthenocarpic tosca during the days immediately after anthesis . the production of ethylene was also measured in the ovaries of  <dig> female and  <dig> bisexual sample flowers derived from the f <dig> population of cavili. results indicated that the higher growth rate of fruits in bisexual flowers cosegregated with a significant reduction of ethylene production in the ovary at  <dig> dpa .

all the analyzed acs genes, including cpacs <dig>  cpacs <dig> and cpacs <dig>  which were those that mainly regulate ethylene production in unpollinated ovaries in the days immediately after anthesis, showed no significant differential expression between cavili and tosca unfertilized ovaries at 3dpa or showed higher expression in cavili . only the expression of cpaco <dig> was lower in cavili . it appears therefore that the reduction in ethylene production observed in the unpollinated ovary of the parthenocarpic cultivar cavili is not regulated at the level of transcription. for ethylene perception and response genes, only the transcripts of cpers <dig> showed a lower accumulation of transcripts in cavili , suggesting that perception of ethylene could also be altered in this parthenocarpic cultivar.

to confirm whether a reduction in ethylene production during the development of female flowers was enough to induce the parthenocarpic development of the zucchini ovary, we determined the effects of ethylene releasing and blocking agents on early fruit development. control plants of tosca produced no bisexual parthenocarpic flowers, while those of cavili produced 60% . the application of ethephon significantly reduced the production of bisexual parthenocarpic flowers in cavili, while the application of the ethylene blocking agents sts and avg increased the production of bisexual parthenocarpic flowers not only in the parthenocarpic cavili, but also in tosca . these results demonstrate that ethylene is actively involved in fruit set and early fruit development in zucchini squash, and indeed a reduction of either ethylene biosynthesis or signalling in the developing female flower of zucchini can not only inhibit the arrest of stamens, promoting the conversion of female into bisexual flower, but also to induce the parthenocarpic development of the fruit.

effects of auxins on fruit growth rates and ethylene biosynthesis and signalling
it is known that external application of auxins and tiba, the latter an inhibitor of auxin polar transport, can induce fruit set and early fruit growth in different species. in zucchini, synthetic auxins are commonly used to stimulate the parthenocarpic development of fruit in off-season greenhouse production. we have studied the effects of naa + naamide and tiba  on fruit development and ethylene production in the cultivars cavili and tosca. in the parthenocarpic cv. cavili neither auxins nor tiba were able to alter the longitudinal growth rate of the fruit , suggesting that the ovaries of this cultivar could have a high concentration of auxins. however, in the fruits of the non-parthenocarpic cv. tosca both treatments promoted longitudinal growth of the fruit, although tiba was more effective than naa + naamide . ethylene production in control and treated fruits was negatively correlated with early fruit growth rate. in cavili, ethylene decreased progressively throughout the first  <dig> dpa in both control and treated fruits , while in tosca the only fruits where ethylene was induced at  <dig> dpa were the unpollinated control fruits, which were those which showed the lowest growth rate and finally aborted .

the effect of naa and tiba on the expression of ethylene genes was studied in fruits at  <dig> dpa, when differences in ethylene production were evident between pollinated and unpollinated fruits, and between parthenocarpic and non-parthenocarpic cultivars. in concordance with ethylene production data, acs and aco genes were downregulated by naa and tiba in the fruits of both tosca and cavili at  <dig> dpa , indicating that auxins regulate negatively the production of ethylene in the fruit during the days immediately after anthesis. tiba treatment was more effective than treatment with naa + naamide in reducing the expression of ethylene biosynthesis genes . moreover, the downregulation of cpacs <dig> and cpacs <dig>  the genes which contribute most to the production of ethylene in unpollinated fruits during the days immediately after anthesis, was higher than that observed for cpacs <dig>  cpacs <dig> and cpaco <dig> . the expression of the ethylene receptor cpetr <dig> was similar in control ovaries of tosca and cavili, and was significantly reduced in response to both treatments in cavili, and in response to tiba in tosca. the expression of the other receptor gene cpers <dig> was higher in the non-parthenocarpic cultivar tosca, and it was downregulated by naa and tiba in this cultivar . regarding ethylene response genes, the expression of cpctr <dig> was also downregulated by tiba in the two cultivars , but not by naa; and although the hormonal treatments did not significantly change the expression of cpein <dig>  and cpein <dig>  in tosca , in cavili naa downregulated the expression of both, whereas tiba only reduced the expression of the former. in conclusion, many of the analysed ethylene biosynthesis, perception and signalling genes were downregulated by naa and tiba, two treatments that induce the growth rate of the zucchini fruit in the days immediately after anthesis.

discussion
fruit set and early fruit development is correlated with a downregulation of ethylene biosynthesis and signalling genes
ethylene production and expression data from  <dig> genes covering ethylene biosynthesis and signal transduction pathway in c. pepo have demonstrated that the loss of pollination in a non-parthenocarpic genotype of this species is accompanied by a sharp increase in ethylene biosynthesis and signalling in the ovary at  <dig> dpa. this is true for the  <dig> acs-like genes showing expression in the ovary  and cpaco <dig>  as well as for two ethylene receptors , two ctr1-like genes  and two ein3-like genes . this ethylene signalling in the ovary few days after anthesis is associated with a decline in growth and finally with the abortion of fruit. pollinated flowers, on the other hand, maintain a very low level of ethylene biosynthesis and signalling in the fruit during the days immediately after anthesis, concomitantly with fruit set and development. this lower ethylene signalling is also observed in parthenocarpic fruits of the zucchini cultivar cavili, as well as in the parthenocarpic plants of the segregant selfing progeny of cavili. taken as a whole, these data indicate that the production of ethylene in the ovary few days after anthesis is negative correlated with fruit set and growth.

although the function of ethylene in fruit set and early fruit development has not been studied in depth, it has been reported that the inhibition of ethylene production or response by external treatments with avg, sts or 1-methylcyclopropene , induces fruit set in pear  <cit> , mango  <cit> , mandarin  <cit> , and arabidopsis <cit> , among others. moreover, transcriptome analysis of tomato has recently revealed that many ethylene genes are downregulated at 3dpa in parthenocarpic, pollinated and ga <dig> treated carpels, suggesting a role of ethylene in tomato fruit set and development  <cit> . in this paper we have demonstrated that the inhibition of ethylene biosynthesis  or response  is sufficient to induce the set and early development of the fruit in absence of pollination in both the parthenocarpic and the non-parthenocarpic cultivar. our data therefore not only indicate a clear correlation between low production/signalling of ethylene and fruit set, but also demonstrate that ethylene is directly involved in fruit set and early fruit development.

ethylene genes are highly expressed in the ovary of tomato flowers at anthesis, especially in parthenocarpic genotypes  <cit> , but they are downregulated after fruit set, which suggests that ethylene acts as an antagonist to auxins in fruit set, preventing carpels developing into fruit before pollination and fertilization occur  <cit> . in zucchini, ethylene biosynthesis and signalling genes are induced in developing carpels throughout flower development and maturation up to anthesis but the level of ethylene production in anthesis is lower than that of tomato [unpublished results,  <cit> . therefore, after anthesis the zucchini pollinated ovary maintains its production of ethylene  as well as the expression of ethylene biosynthesis and signal transduction pathway genes. these differences in ethylene gene expression between tomato and zucchini carpel after anthesis could be associated with dissimilar early fruit development in tomato and zucchini. in fact, the tomato fruit does not initiate its development until pollination and fertilization occurs, while in zucchini we have observed that ovaries of pollinated and unpollinated flowers grow at the same rate during the first  <dig> dpa, and it is only after this point when unpollinated fruits reduced their growth and finally abort. it appears therefore that early fruit development requires a low level of ethylene biosynthesis and signalling, and that this level is already low enough in the zucchini ovary at anthesis, but it has to decrease in tomato during the first days after anthesis. the lower production of ethylene in the parthenocarpic fruits of cavili, compared to those of the non-parthenocarpic cv. tosca, and the cosegregation of andromonoecy, parthenocarpy and lower ovary ethylene production in the f <dig> generation of cavili in the days immediately after anthesis, also support this conclusion.

the induction of ethylene biosynthesis and signalling genes in the zucchini ovaries at  <dig> dpa constitutes a positive signal that could be involved in the abortion and senescence of unfertilized ovaries. in zucchini, we have observed that the development of the ovary and the fruit is initiated before the occurrence of pollination and fertilization, and that the fruit continues its development if ethylene is not induced. both pollination/fertilization and parthenocarpy may prevent the induction of ethylene biosynthesis and signalling in the ovary  <dig> dpa. ethylene is known to induce the senescence of the ovary in pea and arabidopsis. treatments with the ethylene action inhibitors sts and  <dig> -norbornadiene retarded ovary senescence and extended the growth time in which the unpollinated carpel was able to respond to gas  <cit> . the loss of ovary response to gas is also correlated with its senescence and the onset of ovule senescence in arabidopsis <cit> , suggesting that ovules play a critical role in promoting fruit set in response to ga in arabidopsis unfertilised ovaries. ethylene produced in the ovules appears to control both the ovule lifespan and the fate of the ovary/fruit  <cit> . although we don’t know the ovary tissue where ethylene is produced in zucchini, the growth of unfertilized ovaries decreases at  <dig> dpa, coinciding with the time at which ovules start to senesce in arabidopsis and pea  <cit> , and with the induction of ethylene biosynthesis and signalling genes. therefore, it is likely that ovule senescence is also the signal that induces the senescence of the whole ovary in zucchini.

the low level of ethylene biosynthesis and signalling in pistils at early stages of zucchini fruit development could be coupled with an induction of auxins, one of the main regulators of fruit set in different plant systems  <cit> . we have shown that the application of auxins and tiba in the flower at anthesis promoted the growth of unfertilized ovaries in the non-parthenocarpic cv. tosca, concomitantly with a reduction in the production of ethylene and a downregulation of many ethylene biosynthesis and signalling genes. however, the ovaries of cavili did not respond to auxins and tiba, suggesting that the parthenocarpy of this cultivar could be caused by an increase in the internal levels of this hormone in the ovary, as has been reported in other species  <cit> . auxins prevented the induction of ethylene at  <dig> dpa in the two cultivars, which was also correlated with a downregulation of many ethylene biosynthesis and signalling genes in the fruit during the days immediately after anthesis. taken together these data indicate that auxins in the ovary prevent the biosynthesis and signalling of ethylene during the transition from flower to fruit in zucchini, mimicking pollination and fertilization processes and promoting fruit set and growth . it is known that ethylene and auxins may act synergistically to control certain growth and developmental processes, such as root elongation and root hair formation, but also antagonistically in other processes, such as hypocotyl elongation  <cit> . as we have shown, in the control of fruit set and early fruit development, ethylene and auxins act antagonistically . the crosstalk of these two hormones in the control of this developmental process in the ovary of c. pepo comes into play at the level of ethylene biosynthesis  and ethylene response . these two important plant growth regulators, have wide-ranging and complicated interactions  <cit> . auxin has been found to regulate ethylene biosynthesis by controlling the transcription of acs in different plant systems  <cit> , but ethylene also regulates auxin biosynthesis in the root meristems of arabidopsis <cit> .

a reduction in ethylene production and/or response induces parthenocarpy in zucchini squash
the parthenocarpic development of the fruit in the cv. cavili has been correlated with the development of stamens in female flowers, i.e. a conversion of female into bisexual flowers. given that ethylene is the main regulator of sex determination in cucurbit species, these data suggest that ethylene is involved in this kind of parthenocarpy. a reduction in ethylene biosynthesis in the pistil, associated with a loss of function mutation in the ethylene biosynthesis genes cmacs <dig> and csacs <dig>  is responsible for the conversion of female into bisexual flowers in melon and cucumber, respectively  <cit> . we have shown that the parthenocarpic cv. cavili produces less ethylene than the non-parthenocarpic cv. tosca during the days immediately after anthesis, and that parthenocarpy cosegregates with andromonoecy and lower ethylene production in the selfing progeny of cavili. moreover, application of ethylene blocking agents at the level of biosynthesis  or response  induced the conversion of female into bisexual parthenocarpic flowers in c. pepo, while ethephon treatments reduced the number of bisexual flowers and therefore the parthenocarpic development of the fruit . since fruit development in these bisexual flowers occurred when the corolla was still closed, and therefore in absence of pollination/fertilization , it is likely that a reduction in ethylene production is enough to induce parthenocarpic fruit development in zucchini squash. therefore it is likely that the parthenocarpy of cavili is caused by a reduction in ethylene production or response in the post-anthesis female flowers. this reduced ethylene biosynthesis or response could be caused by an increase in auxins, which would also explain the parthenocarpic growth of the fruit. nevertheless, given that ethylene can also regulate auxin biosynthesis in arabidopsis <cit> , it cannot be ruled out that ethylene regulates auxin biosynthesis negatively during the set and early development of the fruit.

the reduced ethylene production in the ovary of the parthenocarpic fruit of cavili is not regulated at the level of transcription, since we have shown that the expressions of acs genes do not change between cavili and tosca, or were even higher in cavili for some of the genes analysed, such as cpacs <dig>  therefore, the downregulation of ethylene production in the ovaries of cavili few days after anthesis appears to be regulated at the post-transcriptional level. recent findings suggest that post-transcriptional regulation is an important aspect of the control of acs expression, and that the phosphorylation of the conserved c-terminal regions of acs proteins plays a crucial role in regulating their turnover  <cit> .

on the other hand, ethylene is also involved in the maturation and aperture of zucchini female flowers, and the higher ethylene production of these flowers makes the corolla to mature and open faster than in male flowers  <cit> . reduced ethylene production and/or response in the female floral buds of cavili may not only delay the maturation of petals, as we have observed in the bisexual flowers, but also inhibit the induction of ethylene at  <dig> dpa in absence of pollination. since the flower is not yet open, the ovary follows normal development reaching the size of a normal fruit but on an immature flower that has not yet reached anthesis. from this point of view, fruit set could not be considered an active transition from the static condition of the ovary in the fully developed flower to the active metabolic condition following pollination and fertilization, but rather the normal programmed pattern of ovary development. pollination/fertilization prevents ethylene biosynthesis and signalling after anthesis, allowing the fruit to develop normally. in absence of pollination and or fertilization, however, ethylene signal is induced, promoting the abortion of fruit development.

CONCLUSIONS
figure  <dig> shows a model for ethylene-auxin interaction on sex determination and fruit set in zucchini squash. female floral buds of zucchini squash and other cucurbit species produce more ethylene than male flowers  <cit> . before anthesis, ethylene is necessary to arrest the development of stamen and to maintain the sexual identity of female flowers. in this paper we demonstrate that the ethylene produced in the ovary in the days immediately after anthesis plays an important role as a negative regulator of fruit set and early fruit development in zucchini. pollination/fertilization induces fruit set and development by preventing the production and action of ethylene immediately after anthesis. in absence of pollination/fertilization, ethylene is induced in the ovary, aborting its normal development. auxins can mimic pollination/fertilization by preventing the induction of ethylene and therefore the abortion of fruit development. therefore, the effect of pollination/fertilization on ethylene production and signalling in the ovary could be mediated by auxins .

