BACKGROUND
on the phylogeographic patterns of terrestrial sicilian fauna
since busack  <cit> , the faunal relationships between north africa and iberia have been the focus of numerous molecular phylogeographic studies, yet little attention has been drawn to the consequences that the last landbridge between africa and sicily may have had on mediterranean biogeography. as was the strait of gibraltar, the strait of sicily  is purported to have formed at the end of the messinian salinity crisis , at the miocene/pliocene boundary . the messinian  <cit>  was a geological period from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mya during which the mediterranean sea was isolated from the atlantic ocean, resulting in a large decrease in the mediterranean sea level and the formation of landbridges between africa, europe and most mediterranean islands. this included a well-documented landbridge between africa and a landmass that later became part of sicily, which may be the last terrestrial connection between the african mainland and the island. however, while it is known that sicily and tunisia are at present approximately  <dig> km apart, low pleistocene sea levels of about - <dig> m  <cit>  would have repeatedly drawn the north african paleo-coast and the sicilian landmass closer than ~ <dig> km . in addition, current shoals  <cit>  may be remnants of pleistocene "stepping stone islands" that may have facilitated terrestrial animals, including humans  <cit> , in overcoming the sea barrier. therefore, the phylogenetic depths of sister relationships between sicily and africa may vary as they do for trans-gibraltarian relationships  <cit> . observations of this pattern in widespread taxa might be explained by multiple invasions across the strait of sicily and/or additional potential invasions from the region that now forms the italian  peninsula.

as expected for an island with a long pliocene isolation  <cit> , endemic  forms in several animal groups on sicily have been revealed by molecular analyses . using these methods, some of these species have been shown to be sister taxa to populations from the apennine peninsula  or to be of very recent apennine peninsular  origin . this pattern may be explained by "an intermittent filter barrier in the area of the strait of messina  probably controlled the processes and timing of the late middle pleistocene-late glacial vertebrate faunal dispersal in sicily" . many pleistocene fossil megafaunal elements entered sicily from peninsular italy . however, bonfiglio  <cit>  also hypothesized a lower pleistocene african origin of fossil elephants  as a debatable alternative to derivation from european/italian e. antiquus . other paleontologists have also discussed whether sicily had early pleistocene connections to africa, as in an, in this respect, unresolved investigation of a pleistocene amphisbaenid lizard from sicily  <cit> . all these authors  <cit> , however, refer to the lack of conclusive evidence for a pleistocene landbridge. recent molecular data have suggested phylogeographic links across the strait of sicily, either based on very little data, or, with some speculation on the dating of these divergences .

on green toads in the western mediterranean region and north africa
green toads are widespread in the palearctic region where they have differentiated into several lineages  <cit> . the occurrence of three bisexually reproducing ploidy levels  <cit>  makes them a uniquely interesting vertebrate group. a recent survey of mtdna variation characterized a deeply branched assemblage of at least twelve major haplotype groups  <cit> . other data on green toad variation from north africa have been relatively scarce  <cit> . research has been mainly restricted to faunistics  <cit>  or analyses of single populations  without taxonomic or phylogeographic focus. green toad biology and ecology are relatively well known from the balearic islands  <cit> , corsica , sardinia and mainland italy  <cit> . in addition, morphometric analyses of green toads in italy have been restricted to peninsular and sardinian  populations  <cit>  until morphometric data for a population from northwestern sicily became available  <cit> . otherwise, regional research has been restricted to classical biogeography and faunistics including ecological and taxonomic remarks  <cit>  and studies on phenology  <cit> .

to gain insight into the phylogeography of the region, we test a wide range of possible substitution rates in order to better date the african-sicilian divergence of green toads: based on only two haplotypes from sicily, stöck et al.  <cit>  roughly calibrated their tree by "assuming that the last landbridge between north africa and sicily broke about  <dig>  mya." alternatively, this divergence could be younger. here, we examine genetic data from many individuals and many more localities in tunisia, italy and sicily, to scrutinize the north africa-sicily divergence employing a bayesian coalescent demographic reconstruction method . using two mitochondrial and two nuclear sequence markers and additional morphological, phenological, bioacoustic and biogeographic data, we characterize green toads from sicily as a separate evolutionary lineage that is a sister taxon to african green toads, but substantially different from other western mediterranean green toad forms. these phylogeographic relationships substantiate scarce knowledge on western mediterranean terrestrial biogeography and may have implications for comparative research on the phylogeography of other terrestrial animals in the region.

RESULTS
phylogeographic structure reveals a relationship across the strait of sicily
we found genetic markers in green toads  within our geographic scope  to indicate five major spatially structured lineages .  the first lineage was found on corsica, sardinia, the balearic islands, apennine peninsula and the northeastern extreme of sicily. this clade  was different from other eurasian mainland green toads , whose ranges border northeast to the po river drainage and belong to widespread monophyletic groups in eurasia  <cit> .  although geographically neighboring i, on most of sicily and its surrounding islands another lineage  occurs that is substantially different from the first.  the entire north african range and the off-coast islands constitutes a fifth lineage . the details of the results defining each lineage are described below.

in particular, our analyses shows a deep sister relationship between african  and sicilian  groups and therefore a rarely studied phylogeographic connection across the strait of sicily.

characterization of the groups identified based on the bayesian phylogram
here we consider and name lineages that maintain their evolutionary integrity with respect to other lineages through both time and space and name them as species under the phylogenetic species concept.

bufo balearicus boettger, 1880
for details on taxonomy and nomenclature of bufo balearicus  <cit>  see supporting data in additional file  <dig> . analyses of mitochondrial 16s  and control region sequences of  <dig> green toads from the balearic islands , corsica , sardinia , the entire apennine peninsula , apulia , calabria , marche  and northeastern sicily  form one very well-supported haplotype group . cloned tropomyosine intron alleles  from four representatives each from sardinia , calabria  and northeastern sicily , as well as fragments of rag- <dig> in three individuals each from corsica , sardinia , and calabria  formed similarly highly supported clusters  and demonstrated that nuclear and mitochondrial markers show essentially the same signals.

the control region tree also revealed three well-supported subclades: one comprising toads from corsica and sardinia which exhibit some geographic intermixing between genetically differentiated lineages within the islands; a second much-less structured clade including toads from the entire apennine peninsula from turin, pavia and marche  in the north to apulia  and calabria  in the far south; and a third subclade  containing toads from the balearic islands. subclade structure is evident in the average fst values between each of these subclades : analyses of population structure confirmed high genetic differentiation  between italian mainland and island toads . demographic analyses performed in fluctuate estimated a greater than ten-fold exponential growth rate for the clade on the apennine peninsula than for the mitochondrial group on corsica and sardinia , suggesting population expansion on the mainland. however, log-likelihood tests did not reject a scenario of zero growth . growth of the mainland population was also not significantly supported by the mismatch distribution analysis in which the observed distribution matched an expected distribution for an expanding population; however, the shape and magnitude of the observed and expected distributions are very similar, suggesting some support for expansion on the mainland . by contrast, this analysis, both graphical and statistical, supports stable populations on corsica and sardinia . tajima's d estimates for all balearicus groupings were not significant, and thus population expansion was not indicated by this test.

* = 2neμ estimate of the distribution of coalescence times in the population at the time the sample was taken, estimated by fluctuate

@ = exponential growth parameter estimated by fluctuate.

# all values non-significant

the bayesian phylogenetic analysis shows b. balearicus to be reciprocally monophyletic on the mitochondrial level, albeit using a subsample of individuals within each group, with respect to all other green toads; thus our data corroborate the proposal that b. balearicus be given the status of a separate species .

bufo boulengeri lataste,  <dig>  <cit> 
while exhibiting some internal structure, all north african control region  and 16s mitochondrial sequences  of toads between the atlantic coast of morocco  and the nile valley of egypt , including the off-coast islands of kerkennah , djerba  and lampedusa , form a well-supported monophyletic cluster  that is a sister clade to mitochondrial sequences of toads from sicily , but that differs from toads from the middle east  <cit> . mitochondrial sequences show moderate differentiation between all islands considered together  and north african mainland haplotypes , suggesting recent faunal exchange. fluctuate suggested population growth for the green toads on the african mainland, as well as for all boulengeri considered together; log likelihood tests rejected no growth scenarios for both groupings . tajima's d calculated for the mainland group indicated some support for population expansion ; however, the mismatch distribution analysis did not support a growth model.

tropomyosine intron sequences in african samples from libya , tunisia  and lampedusa  exhibit the same tree topology as the mitochondrial markers and constitute a highly supported clade  that differs substantially from tropomyosine sequences from two sicilian green toads . the very conserved rag- <dig> marker shows two african samples in a polytomy with eurasian green toads, from which both b. balearicus and two samples each from sicily and lampedusa differ.

bufo n. sp
this taxon was identified on most of sicily  and two close islands . demographic analyses performed in fluctuate estimated θ to be an order of magnitude lower than that estimated for all other green toad groups examined except the mainland balearicus group . although the log likelihood test did not permit rejection of a no growth scenario, the very low initial θ estimated by the analysis indicates that few individuals may have founded the lineage. similarly, the observed mismatch distribution is not statistically identical to the expected distribution under a sudden growth model . however, the unimodal peak is shifted to the left of the distribution and very tightly matches the expected distribution for a recently expanded population . finally, tajima's d did not indicate deviation from neutrality, and thus a scenario of population expansion cannot be invoked with this measure.

bufo n.sp. exhibits reciprocal monophyly for both mitochondrial markers  with all other groups/taxa . the rag- <dig> phylogram shows toads from sicily and lampedusa forming a well-supported  clade that differs from all sampled african and eurasian green toads . for all mitochondrial and nuclear markers, bufo n.sp. shows a much greater genetic distance from italian mainland b. balearicus than from b. boulengeri, which inhabits all of north africa. taken together, as for the two preceding taxa, phylogenetic divergence of bufo n. sp. is evident and we acknowledge this by describing it as new species .

bufo viridis  and old isolates
the haplotype group representing this taxon, as previously shown by stöck et al.  <cit> , was found exclusively in the very northeastern part of italy, northeast of the po river . so far, two very well supported monophyletic and geographically widespread mtdna groups of green toads are known from the balkan region. the haplotype group dominating asia minor  and that of b. viridis  apparently co-occur in greece. however, neither of the two was found off the adriatic coast on the croatian islands of krk and cres . instead, a very well supported separate clade  formed by two sequences of toads from those islands revealed an apparent relict group, which is more closely related to b. viridis than to b. variabilis , but further data are required to confirm this relationship.

age of african-sicilian vicariant separation
divergence time estimates for the principal mitochondrial  clades recovered are shown in table  <dig>  we provide the 95% highest posterior density intervals  as well as the mean of the sampled values. time estimates are based on the reconstruction of the most common recent ancestor for the mtdna control regions under the coalescent . the 95% hpd, although overlapping, show consistent values within and between clades. divergence between african and sicilian haplotypes falls within the range of  <dig>  and  <dig>  my  for the control region. divergence time estimates were also derived using the 16s data . results were similar to those obtained using the mtdna control region ; split of balearicus/viridis clades: 95% hpd from  <dig>  and  <dig>  . all the dates estimated in our analysis seem to represent post-messinian divergence events.

multivariate morphometric comparisons
a discriminant analysis using all  <dig> characters demonstrated the distinctness of toads from sicily by correct reclassification of 100% of individuals into the four groups from:  sicily,  n-africa,  corsica and sardinia, and  the apennine peninsula. although encoded as belonging to different geographic groups, the genetically more closely-related groups  and  of the b. balearicus clade showed fewer differences , making us confident of the power of the analyses' and this morphometric dataset. however, in order to test for potential over-parameterization of the analysis, we also reduced the number of morphometric characters to five, which again reclassified 100% of the individuals into their four respective groups.

discussion
a phylogeographic relationship between africa and sicily
we have demonstrated a sister relationship on the mitochondrial and nuclear levels between green toads from sicily  and those from the entire north african range . the phylogenetic depth of this divergence, which may range between  <dig>  my and  <dig>  my  for the control region and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  my  for the 16s rrna, probably excludes human introduction and reveals an infrequently-studied phylogeographic relationship in terrestrial vertebrates. this evolutionary connection may be significant for the phylogeography of the mediterranean and have implications for research on other terrestrial animals. while some biogeographic studies have suggested common ranges for terrestrial vertebrates , and paleontologists discuss a possible early pleistocene faunal exchange with north africa , so far, very few molecular studies have suggested any genetic relationships within terrestrial vertebrates across the strait of sicily. two examples come from species , for which human introduction elsewhere at circum-mediterranean sites has been demonstrated and for which african-sicilian relationships have never been demonstrated using any nuclear sequence data. despite some recent speculation , a possible african origin of terrestrial sicilian fauna has rarely been thoroughly tested with molecular methods, and never using any nuclear sequence, and thus supported by both mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data. to our knowledge, a genetic african-sicilian link has only been inferred in two other terrestrial species, but even these have ambiguous information on timing and direction:  phylogenetic inference based on allozymes regarding relationships among chalcides lizards from sicily, africa, the apennine peninsula and sardinia  <cit>  showed sicilian skinks most closely related to italian mainland skinks , while lizards from tunisia appeared genetically almost identical to sardinian chalcides, interpreted as a human introduction from tunisia into sardinia. very recently, however, giovannotti et al.  <cit>  found two sicilian chalcides mtdna haplotypes to have a sister relationship with tunisian and sardinian haplotypes  and interpreted this as a possible lower pleistocene  colonization event of sicily  from north africa.  using allozymes and cytochrome b, zangari et al.  <cit>  assessed lineage relationships among discoglossid frogs from multiple locations in the western mediterranean . these authors showed a deep divergence of some mtdna haplotypes across the strait of sicily, but also some nearly identical haplotypes across sicily, tunisia and algeria. while the authors commented imprecisely  that the "spread of discoglossus between europe and africa should have occurred at the end of the messinian salinity crisis", they interpreted closely-related haplotypes across the strait of sicily as "little genetic differentiation detected among algerian and tunisian d. auritus with respect to maltese and sicilian d. pictus suggest  a very recent isolation", without further interpreting or dating their results. the significance of land connections for faunal exchanges between africa and sicily is mildly challenged by the well-known salt tolerance of green toads. gordon  <cit>  experimentally demonstrated survival of b. viridis in seawater for several hours or days. breeding and swimming in brackish  pools and waters  <cit>  as well as estuaries has been observed  <cit> . therefore, green toads may have the potential for transmarine dispersal. the distance from africa to sicily , however, can be considered a very strong barrier, even during low sea levels . in addition, external fertilization  requires that several adults or larvae disperse in order to found new populations. this and the early divergence time  of african and sicilian lineages make it more plausible that toads with a terrestrial life style dispersed via land connections than by rafting. this hypothesis was supported in the recent study of terrestrial chalcides lizards , which estimated a similar divergence between tunisian and sicilian clades  to the one we propose for green toads. however, several papers have suggested the ability of anurans to overcome large sea barriers  <cit> , especially in the tropics, where swimming islands may facilitate rafting. therefore, comparative phylogeographic data from other terrestrial species in sicily and north africa would be necessary to test the feasibility of competing hypotheses.

divergence time estimates based on molecular data normally rely on external calibration points from the fossil record or from well-known paleogeographic events. because neither fossil nor paleogeographic calibration points were available, we calculated divergence times using an uncorrelated relaxed molecular clock and a range of substitution rates for the two mitochondrial fragments. we acknowledge a potential limitation, that is, the use of only mtdna to determine divergence times, which may lead to overestimation of the splitting dates. this overestimation may occur because the most recent common ancestor  of the haplotypes  does not necessarily correspond to the real temporal split of the populations but may precede the actual divergence of the populations  <cit> . we consider substitution rates between 1% and 3% per lineage per my to be reasonable values for amphibian mtdna  although they have not been empirically assessed in green toads. when regions with highly repetitive motifs are absent, as in green toads, the control region tends to show higher rates of substitution than the rest of the mitochondrial molecule  <cit> . thus, the substitution rates selected here are conservative, higher than the rate for the rest of the mitochondrial molecule, but lower than the fastest observed rates for the control region in other taxa. higher rates would imply younger dates for the splitting of the african and sicilian lineages. this point is illustrated by our temporal estimates from the mitochondrial 16s gene which we obtained applying a slower substitution rate, which ranged from  <dig> –1% per lineage per my . the two markers, with different substitution rates, yield similar 95% hpd time intervals.

although the values reported should be regarded with the caveats mentioned, it is highly improbable that the vicariant event that separated the african and sicilian green toads took place during the messinian , that is, earlier than the range of dates estimated by this method. instead, it is very likely that the africa-sicily divergence is post-messinian. in order to validate the hypothesis proposed here and to test competing paleobiogeographic scenarios, a formal comparative phylogeographic study including more genetic markers and other terrestrial species in sicily and north africa would be necessary. several new comparative phylogeographic approaches have been proposed  <cit> , each requiring the inclusion of more data for a more reliable statistical inference to be obtained.

historical biogeography of bufo balearicus
the second major result of our study is that green toads from most of the apennine peninsula, corsica, sardinia and the balearic islands represent a separate taxon, which is different from other eurasian green toads on the mitochondrial and nuclear levels. three b. balearicus subclades emerged from our mtdna control region data; the subclade on corsica and sardinia exhibited basal haplotypes and the most substantial structure. these observations suggest speciation of b. balearicus on these islands around  <dig>  mya to  <dig>  mya . the earliest green toad fossils in italy are known from the late miocene from the northeast  and from the pliocene in the southeast  of the apennine peninsula  <cit> . they have also been identified from the pleistocene of corsica and sardinia  <cit> . corsica and sardinia had landbridges to  the apennine peninsula during several geological periods . although a narrow strait may have mostly separated corsica/sardinia from tuscany  <cit> , paleontological  <cit>  and phylogeographic data  suggest limited early pleistocene faunal  exchange between these islands and the mainland.

this same signature is suggested by our data. the balearicus clade widespread on the apennine peninsula displayed a mismatch distribution visually, but not statistically fitting that expected for a population that underwent a sudden expansion . similarly, the coalescent simulation program fluctuate estimated a growth parameter ten times higher for the peninsular group than for the island balearicus clade , suggesting recent expansion, perhaps after its arrival on the mainland; however, a no growth scenario could not be rejected statistically. tajima's d did not support a demographic expansion in either of the balearicus groups separately, or combined. the northeastern range limit of b. balearicus appears to be the po river drainage, which may also be the southwestern boundary for b. viridis. recent mapping of green toad distributions in italy  <cit> , however, shows an apparently continuous range from the northeast  to the southwest  across the po drainage. it is likely that the groups are in contact in that area; discerning contacts and possible hybridization dynamics represent challenging future research topics. indeed, the po drainage seems to be a biogeographic border and/or contact zone between variously related taxa of amphibians and reptiles  or, it is considered a "source of genetic variability"  <cit> .

fossils demonstrate the presence of green toads on the balearic islands from the upper pleistocene of mallorca  <cit> , but early human introduction from corsica was proposed as the source of green toads on these islands  <cit> . our data show toads from mallorca and menorca to be nested within the mitochondrial clades from the apennine peninsula and corsica/sardinia, and thus corroborate serum albumin data on toads from mallorca and corsica that prove them more closely related to each other than to green toads from palestine, africa, and greece  <cit> . we cannot locate the exact geographic origin of balearic green toads with our current data; faster evolving nuclear markers and denser sampling in regions of possible origin are required. our data also corroborate provisional allozyme data  that associated toads from corsica, sardinia and nw-italy  with a ~ <dig>  nei's distance from toads from vienna based on a upgma dendrogram .

although calabria consisted of islands until the pleistocene  <cit> , episodic upper pleistocene faunal exchange across the strait of messina is well documented by the fossil record  <cit> . while few amphibians crossed the strait of messina  <cit> , b. balearicus haplotypes have been detected in northeastern sicily .

biogeography of bufo siculus n. sp
our phylogeographic findings agree with paleogeographic and fossil data  <cit> , which suggest a long plio-pleistocene isolation of sicily. after their "out of africa" origin, green toads apparently spread across most of sicily, where they are well known from the pleistocene fossil record  <cit> . so far, no phylogeographic signature of the pliocene subdivision of sicily into two islands was detected. the effective population size of mtdna in bufo siculus n.sp., as inferred from θ  is small .

the distribution analysis indicated an observed distribution in the b. siculus clade that was unimodal and visually congruent with the distribution of expected values for a sudden population expansion, although not quite statistically significant . the distribution for this clade is extremely compressed to the left, indicating very low numbers of mismatches and low variance. this profile may indicate an even more recent expansion in this group than in the mainland b. balearicus group. the fluctuate analysis also did not statistically permit rejection of a no-growth scenario for this clade, and tajima's d did not fit the expectation for an expanded population.

however, the high similarity among mtdna haplotypes across the entire island is consistent with the known high mobility of green toads, exemplified by fast post-pleistocene re-colonization of northern europe by two haplotype groups  <cit> . the current range of b. siculus appears to follow a pattern known in another sicilian endemic, the lizard podarcis wagleriana, that is widespread across sicily but absent in the very northeast  <cit> .

our data reveal taxonomic identity  of toads on favignana island  and ustica island ; green toads on the aeolian islands may be members of the geographically proximate b. balearicus . detection of calabrian b. balearicus haplotypes in northeastern sicily  suggests their relatively recent invasion; either during pleistocene sea level lows  <cit> , by rafting across the narrow strait of messina, or possibly by human introduction. it remains unknown whether both taxa  occur in sympatry in northern sicily as range maps suggest  <cit> , and whether they would hybridize, given the considerable mtdna and breeding-phenology differences. bioacoustic data in the potential contact zone will also help to illuminate this question.

description of a new species
mitochondrial and nuclear, morphometric and other preliminary biological data show that green toads from most of sicily represent a separate lineage. sicilian green toads have been physically separated by the strait of sicily from their closest african relatives for long evolutionary periods. in order to acknowledge these facts, and to raise the potential conservation status of this form, which represents an island endemic, we hereby describe it as a new species.

bufo siculus n. sp
holotype
an adult female, p <dig> , collected november,  <dig>   <dig>  by m. lo valvo, monte pellegrino reserve , palermo, sicily, italy; for nomenclature and morphological description: additional files  <dig> and  <dig> 

paratypes
zfmk  <dig> , zfmk  <dig> , zmb  <dig>  and mvz  <dig> to mvz  <dig> : italy, southeastern sicily, mouth of san leonardo river, m. lo valvo leg. 2005; mzpa a <dig> ; nme a 1490/ <dig> . for morphometric details of two adult paratypes see table  <dig> in additional file  <dig> 

diagnosis
a medium- to large-sized green toad that differs from all other, especially all circum-mediterranean green toad species, by its distinct mitochondrial haplotype group. bufo siculus exhibits strong variability in coloration with adult males showing less contrast in marbled patterns than females. brownish to olive  spots often form light dorsal stripes , a character rarely found in other green toads of italy, but which is quite common in b. boulengeri from north africa. the new species is distinguishable from its geographic neighbor,b. balearicus , which exhibits pinhead-sized red  or brownish  spots around tips of lateral glands, by the lack of these spots. bufo siculus almost never shows a reddish-orange coloration, characteristic of many b. balearicus, the only form of the subgroup with which it may co-occur on sicily. in sicily, the ratio vdt/ed  is smaller in b. siculus  than in allo- or parapatric b. balearicus , but similar to that of african b. boulengeri . in life, b. siculus has a dark yellowish-golden iris.

variation
the morphometric variation of topotypic b. siculus with a focus on sexual dimorphism has been recently studied by lo valvo & giacalone  <cit>  in  <dig> males and  <dig> females. in other parts of its range, stronger variability in size occurs.

karyotype
diploid, 2n =  <dig> chromosomes; a mitotic metaphase is shown in figure 5b.

advertisement calls
an advertisement call from the type locality  shows a green toad trill  consisting of a series of up to  <dig> actively pulsed notes with a constant duration separated by constant internote intervals . single notes show a symmetrical amplitude increase and decrease as typical of actively pulsed calls in palearctic green toads. note series are interrupted by  intervals of more than  <dig> s . sonagram and oscillogram  reveal deviations in pulse structure at the beginning of the call, with increasing frequency and signal intensity, as is typical of the subgroup  <cit> . the fundamental frequency of the advertisement call, from the topotypic male shown in figure  <dig>  was  <dig> hz. the advertisement calls are similar in their note repetition rate  to and typical of other diploid members of this complex  <cit>  but deserve further investigation with higher sample size across a range of temperatures.

distribution
breeding phenology
breeding phenology may be explained by phylogenetic history. lo valvo & giacalone  <cit> , and sicilia et al.  <cit>  reported differences between italian mainland  and sicilian green toads: b. siculus exhibits a much longer, potentially bimodal breeding period , and high plasticity similar to african b. boulengeri , versus a short reproductive period in spring  that is typical of b. balearicus.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings on green toads give the first combined mitochondrial and nuclear sequence evidence for a phylogeographic connection in terrestrial vertebrates across the strait of sicily. given the available literature on substitution rates of the anuran d-loop and 16s rrna, which range conservatively from 1% to 3% to higher rates  <cit>  and from  <dig> % to 1%  <cit> , respectively, we argue that the african-sicilian divergence of green toads may be younger  than estimated by the present analyses. this points towards a post-messinian  faunal exchange between africa and sicily. this relationship may have implications for comparative phylogeographic research on other terrestrial animals that co-occur in north africa and sicily. we highlight the necessity for similar phylogeographic studies that use more molecular markers to provide accurate estimates of the potential vicariant events and barriers, as well as the precise dating of the splits between the lineages involved.

