BACKGROUND
high-density genomic tools, such as dna microarrays, provide an important opportunity to study the global response of genomes to particular stressors or conditions. unfortunately, commercially-available dna microarrays exhibit several disadvantages when applied to toxicological investigations. for example, in toxicology, the lack of representation of toxicologically-relevant genes on commercial microarrays is an important problem. statistical issues arising from existing commercial array designs present additional limitations for toxicogenomics experiments. on high-density commercial arrays, the thousands of genes that are not involved in toxic response pathways may remain relatively stable across exposures, thereby weakening the statistical power necessary to identify responsive elements of the genome  <cit> . conversely, focused arrays that contain a limited number of features associated with particular biochemical pathways often lack technical and biological control features, such as gene replicates, quality assurance controls and/or normalization features, that are required for experiments in which a large proportion of genes may exhibit differential expression. a final impediment of commercial arrays in applications such as toxicogenomics is their high cost, which hinders the ability to conduct experiments with sufficient numbers of biological samples/replicates. as a result, the use of custom-made focused microarrays has become a popular alternative, allowing the study of genes relevant to a specific hypothesis.

to address the limitations of commercial arrays in toxicogenomics investigations, we have developed a custom mouse oligonucleotide microarray, the hc toxarray™, which, by virtue of including genes that respond to a variety of chemical and physical stressors, is more relevant for toxicological studies. furthermore, we have incorporated an extensive series of controls useful for both quality control and normalization of small focused arrays. typical microarray analyses rely on normalization methods that assume absence of global transcript shifts, or that use internal control features such as housekeeping genes . these normalization approaches are not appropriate for focused arrays with small sets of genes  <cit> . global unbalanced changes are expected due to small array size and gene selection based on pathways predicted to be involved in a particular response. furthermore, chemical exposures or other parameters  may affect the stability of housekeeping gene expression  <cit> . therefore, innovative normalization methods are required for these focused arrays  <cit> ). the issue of performance measures and quality control standards must be addressed if microarrays are to be applied as tools in regulatory toxicology and risk assessment.

in this study, we describe novel array design features that address the above issues. specially positioned internal and external control  series on toxarray™ were developed and characterized in order to eliminate the effects of these biological variables as well as reduce additional technical sources of variability, including uneven hybridization artifacts, minimal spot replication and print tip carryover. sensitivity of the array spots to low-abundance rna species was also estimated. validation of the ec series for normalization and comparison with another common normalization strategy was achieved by determining the gene expression profile in mouse liver samples following treatment with the hepatotoxin phenobarbital.

RESULTS
description and positioning of control spots
we developed an external control  dilution series using the arabidopsis thaliana chlorophyll synthase gene that involves spike-in of a single concentration of the chlorophyll synthase crna to hybridize against spotted dilutions  of a single oligonucleotide representing the gene within each sub-grid of the toxarray™ . spots of the ec dilutions series were printed in duplicate and in some cases in triplicate. random dilutions from the series were printed in an evenly spaced pattern within each subgrid, among the oligonucleotide spots representing mouse genes. several negative control spots, including a random  <dig> mer pool and randomized hexamers, were included to assess non-specific hybridization. a specific pattern of buffer spots was positioned to allow calculation of cross-spot carryover during printing.

evaluation of background, cross-hybridization, signal intensity range and concentration dependence for toxarray™ external control features
a blastn search of the  <dig> base oligonucleotide sequence across genbank, embl, pdb and ddbj sequence repositories showed significant homologies only with arabidopsis thaliana, oryza sativa and zea mays dna and rna sequences. as expected, hybridization of universal mouse reference rna  or b6c3f <dig> liver rna did not result in detectable signal from any of the ec probe dilutions . the spotted a. thaliana ec dilution series was designed to cover the full range of signal intensities obtained with murine-specific oligonucleotides on the toxarray™, from background levels to saturation . standard deviation of the log <dig> intensity ratios across the range of ec spike-in self vs. self hybridization results obtained in the presence of murine crna  was approximately  <dig>  , prior to normalization. in comparison to the ec spike-in result, a much larger variance was observed in the log <dig> intensity ratios typical of a b6c3f <dig> liver sample vs. stratagene universal reference rna hybridization result . the large variation in intensity ratios in the murine crna hybridizations were expected to occur due to widely varying abundances of specific mrnas within these two very different murine rna sources  <cit> .

a reciprocal dilution experiment was performed to determine the extent to which on-slide concentrations of an oligonucleotide were mimics of the effects of variable concentrations of the solution-phase crna partner in bi-molecular hybridization reactions and therefore suitable for normalizing experimental variations in crna hybridization. results from the on-slide dilution series were compared to results from a reciprocal dilution series of the spike-in reference crna made in solution. hybridization of the spotted dilution series with mouse rna containing a single spike-in concentration of the external reference rna produced identical profiles of signal intensities compared to the signals obtained from multiple slides hybridized with serial spike-in dilutions of the external reference rna .

estimation of sensitivity of toxarray™ to low-abundance mrna species
the fractional sensitivity of the toxarray™ oligonucleotide spots was estimated from hybridizations of the serial dilutions of a. thaliana crna into a constant amount of crna  made from the murine polya+ mrna, as shown in figure  <dig>  the smallest fraction tested,  <dig>  , gave significantly greater signal intensity than background from buffer-only spots located on the same slide . this level of sensitivity was greater than that necessary to detect one polya+ mrna molecule per cell based upon estimates of approximately  <dig>  mrnas per cell  <cit> .

detection of positional artifacts using the ec series
because each individual on-slide dilution is printed two to three times within each sub-grid, the design allows for a simple evaluation of differential hybridization  on every array. for example, in initial experiments we detected differential hybridization from right to left and top to bottom of our early slides  that was related to the location on the slide relative to the port of injection of hybridization solution on the automated hybridization station. to some extent, the median of the four widely spaced replicate subgrids would normalize less severe systematic end-to-end and side-to-side variations in hybridization intensity that might be produced by automated hybridization station solution injection, since increased hybridization in one area would tend to be compensated by decreased hybridization in another. in the rna profiling experiment reported in this work, hybridization results with similar defects were excluded, in favor of patterns with less overall difference in intensities across the slide .

assessments of negative control spots and print-tip carryover
all three types of negative controls  showed similar signal intensities within sub-grids indicating: 1) low background signal from the slide substrate and printing process, and 2) that the presence of non-specific oligonucleotides within a spot did not create hybridization artifacts . the amount of print-tip carry-over of oligonucleotides from spot-to-spot during the printing-process was determined by considering the signal of buffer spots that were printed prior to  and immediately following the saturated signal  associated with the  <dig> μm a. thaliana oligonucleotide . percent cross-spot contamination was calculated by subtracting the signal of the buffer-only spot  from the mean of spots printed immediately following a saturated signal , divided by the mean signal intensity of the saturated spot  minus the buffer-only background  . a plot showing a chip with a high proportion of cross-spot contamination for several print groups  is shown in figure  <dig>  using this measure, the average cross-spot contamination in the separately printed arrays of the pb rna profiling experiment was  <dig> %  and  <dig> %  for cy <dig> and cy <dig> respectively.

two additional estimations of carryover artifact amount and frequency could be made from other spot juxtapositions existing within each subgrid. in the first case, three  <dig> μm spots were printed prior to three random- <dig> mer oligonucleotide pool spots. this situation was directly comparable to most of the oligonucleotides representing murine genes, in that carryover from the first spot would be deposited into the following  <dig> μm spot, rather than buffer. among arrays employed in the pb experiment described below, we found that the frequency of pins displaying carryover from  <dig> μm ec spots into the  <dig> mer pool spots was less  than the estimate from the  <dig> μm spot analysis. by design, both  <dig> μm spots and the  <dig> μm ec spots gave hybridization signals that were near to, or fully saturated, thus providing optimal levels of signal to determine carryover. there was also a single rpl <dig> spot printed ahead of a buffer spot in each grid. rpl  <dig> usually also had very high signal levels that approached or reached signal saturation in most hybridizations, allowing another independent estimation of carryover. only a single pin displayed carryover in the pb experiment. when measured with the  <dig> and  <dig> μm ec spots and rpl <dig> spot described above, that pin produced 2/ <dig>  2/ <dig>  0/ <dig> individual spots with significant carryover , respectively.

comparison of two normalization procedures for detection of differential gene expression using toxarray™ and rt-pcr validation of presumptive differential gene expression
male b6c3f <dig> mice were given oral doses of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  mg/kg pb or solvent control. cy-labeled liver crna was hybridized against mouse reference crna , and maanova was used to examine whether the toxarray™ could detect both expected and novel differential expression resulting from pb exposure. the first analysis employed a composite lowess normalization of microarray intensity values. this approach calculated a lowess normalization of the median values of all data in each print-tip group in addition to a lowess normalization of the chip ec titration series. a normalization constant that combined these two into an intensity-dependent, weighted average was used  <cit> . we found a total of  <dig> genes that were differentially expressed ; table 1) with respect to the overall treatment effect. these p-values obtained from the fs-statistic were estimated using  <dig> permutations with residual shuffling. pairwise comparisons showed that  <dig> of these genes expressed differential abundances of rna at the highest dose of pb , while  <dig> were found to be differential at the  <dig> mg/ml dose. no genes were identified as differentially expressed in pairwise comparisons at the  <dig> mg/kg dose, nor at the lowest dose .

the  <dig> genes with significant pairwise comparisons after ec normalization were analysed for possible print-tip carryover artifacts, since in the array batch used in the experiment, one of the twelve printing pins had produced carryover effects . four of the  <dig> genes were located within the suspect print group; however, none of the four oligonucleotides were printed in positions likely to have been affected by carryover effects, such as locations following a differential gene or a gene with very high relative expression.

in a second analysis of the same data, using a standard lowess without incorporating the ecs,  <dig> genes were statistically significant  after a fdr adjustment based on the james-stein estimator . between the two analyses, there were  <dig> genes that were in common ,  <dig> genes specific to the ec-normalized analysis and  <dig> specific to the lowess normalized analysis .

to select a sub-set of genes for rt-pcr analysis, microarray gene expression data normalized with ec and without ec  were sorted according to the fdr adjusted p-values. a list of genes for each type of normalization was derived, in which p-values less than  <dig>  were recorded for the fdr adjusted overall treatment effect and for one of the pairwise comparisons, comparing the treated samples to the control. the union of the two lists consisted of  <dig> probes, with a total of  <dig> pairwise comparisons. two additional probes  were also included, since earlier statistical calculations  had indicated both significant pairwise comparisons and overall effects, but these values were not confirmed in the analyses presented in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  results from the microarrays for these  <dig> overall and pairwise comparisons plus the results from rt-pcr analyses for  <dig> of these comparisons are presented in table  <dig> 

the rt-pcr analyses included all  <dig> pairwise comparisons from the two microarray normalizations that gave conflicting conclusions on whether the respective  <dig> probes detected differentially expressed mrnas . based on these  <dig> comparisons, the results from the normalization using the composite lowess  revealed  <dig> comparisons that were in agreement with the rt-pcr results, compared to  <dig> out of  <dig> based on the results from lowess normalized data. additional rt-pcr analyses were done using rna samples which gave microarray results  that were in agreement between the ec and without ec analyses . all six microarray probe results were confirmed to be correct, although two pairwise comparisons for two of the probes conflicted with the rt-pcr results. results from the rt-pcr were used to determine the true positives, false negatives, false positives and true negatives, and to calculate the sensitivity, specificity and the efficiency of the normalization methods . using the ec series  yielded higher sensitivity, specificity and efficiency compared to not using the ec series for normalization, considering either all pairwise comparisons or just those in disagreement.

two chi-square contingency table analyses comparing the results from the rt-pcr and the results from both microarray analyses were conducted. only the  <dig> probes that were in disagreement between the two microarray results were included and a yates correction  was applied. the rt-pcr and the results from the composite lowess indicated an association with a p-value of  <dig> , whereas rt-pcr and the results from the lowess normalized data without the external controls showed no association .

effect of spot replication on detection of differential gene expression using toxarray™
the effect of spot replication  on the power of toxarray™ to detect differences in expression was estimated by conducting the ec-based and lowess-based normalizations, using one randomly chosen spot per array. the number of genes identified as significantly differentially expressed was reduced in the single-spot analysis to  <dig> and  <dig> genes revealed by ec and lowess normalization, respectively, compared to  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, by the 4-spot analysis. only eight of the  <dig> genes identified in common in the 4-spot analysis were also identified in common in the single spot analyses . however, several other genes identified in common by the 4-spot analysis were partitioned into one of the two single-spot analyses: four of eight genes specific to the non-ec single-spot normalization  and two of five genes specific to the single-spot ec normalization . thus, approximately half of the genes found in common from the 4-spot analyses were found by either single spot analysis. smaller proportions of genes specific to either normalization in the 4-spot analysis were found to be differential by the single spot analyses: 2/ <dig> for non-ec  and 2/ <dig> for ec . one gene specific to the single-spot ec normalization and two genes specific to the single-spot non-ec normalization were not identified by the respective 4-spot analyses, reducing the proportion of genes found by the single spot analyses to  <dig>  and  <dig>  for ec and non-ec, respectively, in this comparison of spot replication effect.

discussion
appropriate quality controls and protocols for assessment of printing and hybridization in microarray experiments are crucial for ensuring high-quality data and establishing performance standards. despite this, controls used for specifically addressing these issues are rarely reported in microarray publications. in addition, the development of features for normalization within, and between arrays is critical for all microarray applications, and is particularly relevant to the application of small focused arrays where a relatively large portion of the pathways may show changes in gene expression.

we developed an ec dilution series using the spike-in of a single arabidopsis chlorophyll synthase gene hybridized to a series of dilutions of the complementary oligonucleotide printed on the microarray. in contrast with other external spike-in procedures that use a mixture of varying amounts of different control rnas spiked into total rna to derive signals across a range of intensities , our approach maintains a constant single input of external rna, while varying the dilution of the ec oligonucleotide on the slide itself. this simple and flexible method allows a more robust quantitation of the spike-in compared to other methods. in addition, the ec series was designed to cover the full range of signal intensities  over the toxarray™, reaching both background and saturated intensities . the array incorporates a design that allows the use of the ecs, in combination with negative control spots, for detection of several technical problems that may arise in the printing, hybridization or scanning of a microarray, permitting correction or exclusion during subsequent analyses. differential intensities of dye fluorescence on microarrays may arise from factors related to physical or chemical properties, differences in the efficiency of incorporation during probe synthesis and as a result of variations in scanner operation. these ec features can be applied in combination with lowess to normalize such systematic effects. dye bias due to differential hybridization that, in part, may result from concentration-dependent effects within or between target crna populations and array spots that might arise during hybridization and washing procedures, may also be subject to this type of normalization. in this regard, it has been shown that tethered nucleic acid probes can behave differently depending on the nature of their supports  <cit> , but here it was shown that the hybridization pattern derived from dilution of the ec oligonucleotide on the toxarray™ slide surface was a close mimic of the pattern of hybridization resulting from similar dilutions of labeled crna in solution. a close relationship between these two concentration vs. intensity curves permits subsequent normalization adjustments of variations in murine crna hybridization intensity ratios, without introducing large errors. composite lowess adjustments across the range of ec intensities on each array would be likely to represent similar differences in concentration-dependent hybridization amounts of murine genes, across samples.

subtle unequal hybridization resulting in spatial patterning in dye fluorescence across an array might be undetected by visually examining the arrays, but may be revealed by the presence of increased variances of cy3/cy <dig> ratios among the  <dig> ec replicates and four gene replicates of each grid. ec features might also be used to control positional and slide-to-slide hybridization effects that are more erratic, such as those resulting from exclusion by bubbles, by taking an average of the ecs within a subgrid, dividing each spot within the subgrid by the ec average, followed by multiplication of each spot by an overall slide average using the external controls. this would be done for each channel separately. further refinements in normalization can be envisioned that would employ attributes of the ec hybridization curve, other than its average value. a systematic examination of these alternate approaches has not yet been made.

the limited sequence homology of the a. thaliana oligonucleotide among the genomes of organisms with published sequence information, suggests possible applications to gene expression studies in a wide variety of organisms. since oligonucleotide probes designed with constraints on length, g+c% and secondary structure produce similar, parallel hybridization values over large crna concentration ranges  <cit> , the choice of oligonucleotide used to produce an ec series in the manner we have described is not necessarily restricted to the sequence employed in the present experiments.

the placement of negative control features within the toxarray™ design is an innovative approach to allow for the evaluation of cross-spot contamination during the printing process. negative controls following either a saturated signal or a buffer spot were used to demonstrate the carry-over of oligonucleotides within print-tip groups in a print-run    <cit> . carry-over can significantly impact analysis of differential expression if low intensity spots are printed following spots that vary in intensity and occasionally show high signals. similarly, carryover effects would degrade the usefulness of the ec series. each print-run should be evaluated to ensure that this effect is minimized, especially with the  high fractional sensitivity of the toxarray™ . the knowledge of cross-spot contamination could be incorporated into the selection of genes for rt-pcr confirmation and final analysis of differential gene expression, or print tip groups with unacceptable levels could be removed from the analysis.

lastly, the toxarray™ incorporates  <dig> replicates of each oligonucleotide spot distributed into separate subgrids on each slide. this degree and placement of spot replication can significantly increase the reliability of fluorescence measurements of gene expression levels  <cit>  and would thereby decrease variability of two-color ratios. indeed, fewer genes were identified as differentially expressed based upon single oligonucleotide spots as compared to the four replicates in this study.

we exposed mice to a known hepatotoxin to test the hypothesis that global normalization approaches for focused microarrays will generate a higher proportion of false findings, relative to an approach using external features. composite normalization incorporating the ec features  resulted in a list of  <dig> genes with adjusted p-values less than  <dig> . the predominant pathways represented among the genes that were differentially expressed included stress response, growth differentiation, apoptosis and xenobiotic metabolism. among the latter, cyp2b <dig>  cyp2b <dig>  gsta <dig> and ephx <dig> were validated by rt-pcr. the induction of these pathways is consistent with the known pathologic effects of pb. this response was employed to provide confirmation, when verified by rt-pcr, that the composite normalization would score higher, as expected, on all measures of effectiveness, compared to the global normalization approach.

we expect the composite normalization to be even more superior in experiments where larger portions of genes are responsive. although pb was an effective modifier of gene expression in this study of murine liver, only about  <dig> genes of the total  <dig> on toxarray™ might have been categorized by rt-pcr as significant responders, predicting from the existing microarray data and the observed frequencies of rt-pcr confirmation. this was a small proportion  of genes represented on the array. increased numbers of responding genes might have been expected, given higher pb doses or a longer treatment period.

the relatively greater effectiveness of the ec composite normalization approach has also been found in a complementary study examining murine liver response to polychlorinated biphenyl exposure, in which  <dig> genes were validated using rt-pcr . the summary statistics presented in this study should be interpreted with care as there was some potential for selection bias in the choices made for rt-pcr validation among the genes identified as differential by both normalization procedures. however, we are currently carrying out additional rt-pcr experiments with other microarray datasets to achieve more representative estimates.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate the application of a simple external control dilution series, in combination with a novel dna array design, to yield improved detection of differential gene expression and provide quality control measures. the appropriate placement of controls and replication of probe spots allows for quantification of positional hybridization effects and cross-spot contamination. the application of a composite normalization, which incorporates an external control dilution series, results in an improvement in the sensitivity and predictivity of the test, as well as a minimization in false positive detection. dilution of oligonucleotides on the microarray itself provides an innovative approach allowing the full dynamic range of the scanner to be covered with a single gene spike-in.

