BACKGROUND
while the prostate cancer death rate has been decreasing steadily in the u.s. since the 1990s, prostate cancer remains the second leading cause of cancer death in men, with an estimated  <dig>  deaths predicted to occur in  <dig>  <cit> . when the disease is confined to the prostate, it can be cured by radical prostatectomy or irradiation therapy. however, there are no curative therapies for locally advanced, recurrent, or metastatic diseases. there is, therefore, a need to investigate alternative treatment strategies to improve these outcomes. one such approach is the use of cytotoxic gene therapy vectors directed against prostate cancer cells.

several prostate cancer gene therapy strategies have been or are currently being evaluated in clinical trials  <cit> . these treatments have been well tolerated and have shown some indications of biological activity. in  <dig> and  <dig>  the chinese state food and drug administration  approved the first gene therapy-based products for cancer treatment: gendicine  and h <dig>   <cit> . the effectiveness of these two adenovirus-based products are quite encouraging for similar vectors being developed in the us, advexin  and onyx- <dig> .

the ideal vector for prostate cancer gene therapy would be one that is both prostate-specific yet still elicits highly induced expression of the therapeutic gene. previously, we developed and characterized a novel gene therapy regulation system known as the positive feedback loop with prostate specificity, or pflps, regulation system  <cit> . this system initiated a positive feedback loop of gene expression specifically in cells of prostate origin while retaining prostate-specificity even at moi as high as  <dig>  <cit> . the pflps system was developed by making specific modifications of the tet-off regulation system  to include the prostate-specific arr2pb promoter .

while the pflps regulation system worked well for inducing gfp expression, incorporation of the pro-apoptotic fasl-gfp fusion into the pflps system gave only modest levels of cytotoxicity . in an attempt to improve the cytotoxicity of our vector, we developed an alternative strategy for achieving amplified prostate-specific transcriptional regulation. this system, which we have named the differentially suppressible tetracycline regulated expression system, or distres, was incorporated into a replication-incompetent ad vector deleted in e <dig>  e <dig>  and e <dig> , and is similar to pflps, as it incorporates positive feedback loop amplification of gene expression as a result of incorporation of the tre-arr2pb promoter. however, the distres regulation strategy differs from pflps in that it investigates an alternative mechanism for regulating gene expression by including additional transcriptional regulatory elements to differentially suppress transgene expression depending on the cell type transduced.

in this study, we describe the development and characterization of our new distres regulation system. the distres system demonstrated highly induced, prostate-specific gene expression when incorporated into a complex ad vector. in the presence of dihydrotestosterone , these levels could be induced to levels up to  <dig> times higher than that of the cmv promoter and up to  <dig> times higher than our non-specific tet-regulated control. in addition, when fasl-gfp expression was mediated by the distres system, this vector demonstrated prostate-specific cytotoxicity, even in the fasl-resistant lncap cell line. prostate-specific regulation from the distres system, therefore, serves as a promising new regulation strategy for future applications in the field of cancer gene therapy and gene therapy as a whole.

RESULTS
design of the differentially suppressible tetracycline regulated expression system 
the tet-off system was originally designed by hermann bujard's group  <cit> . in this system, the tetracycline-regulated transcriptional activator protein  was developed to have binding affinity for a tandem repeat of dna sequences known collectively as the tetracycline-responsive element . binding of tta to the tre causes transcriptional activation of downstream promoters. the addition of tetracycline or its analog, doxycycline, to the system causes the tta to lose its affinity for the tre, and therefore, results in a loss of transcriptional activation.

bujard's group also developed an opposing system, which utilizes the tetracycline-regulated transcriptional silencer protein   <cit> . like tta, tts binds to the tre and loses its affinity for the tre in the presence of tetracycline or doxycycline. opposite from tta, however, binding of tts to the tre leads to transcriptional silencing  of downstream promoters. therefore, differential expression of tta in certain contexts and tts in other contexts can be utilized to either turn "on" or "off" a particular gene's expression, respectively.

our first generation tet-regulated, prostate-specific  vector  <cit>  was developed by a slight modification of the tet-off system in which the tta was driven by the prostate-specific arr2pb promoter instead of by the cmv promoter . this vector lacked the positive feedback loop incorporated into both the pflps and distres vectors. it also demonstrated a low level of detectable transgene expression in non-prostate cells. we believed this to be the result of a slight induction of the tre promoter even in the absence of tta expression. to improve this system, we developed the pflps system.

in the pflps regulation system, we cloned the tre upstream of the arr2pb promoter to develop a prostate-specific, tta-inducible promoter known as the tre-arr2pb promoter . using the tre-arr2pb promoter to drive the expression of both tta and gfp led to a positive feedback loop which was only activated in prostate cells  <cit> . this activity was effective at inducing gfp expression, but fasl-gfp induction was somewhat modest.

in order to amplify prostate-specific expression further, we developed the novel distres regulation system. in this system we added two transcriptional silencer proteins, the tts protein and the lac repressor  protein, to the positive feedback loop design in order to differentially suppress gene expression depending upon the cell type transduced. the conceptual difference between pflps and distres is that in distres, the gene of interest is driven by the original tre promoter instead of the prostate-specific arr2pb-tre promoter. from our previous experience with ps/tr, we found that the original tre promoter often has some low level activity even in the absence of tta expression. to counteract this activity, we added the tts suppressor to decrease background transgene activation in non-target cells. however, in the setting of a prostate cell, tts is not induced due to negative regulation from the lacr repressor .

the design of the distres regulation system as cloned into an ad <dig> vector deleted in e <dig>  e <dig>  and e <dig>  is depicted in fig.  <dig>  control ad vectors include ad/gfptet, which expresses gfp under the control of the traditional tet-off regulatory system, ad/cmv-gfp, which expresses gfp under the control of the strong, constitutively active cmv promoter, and ad/c.lacz, which expresses β-galactosidase under the control of the cmv promoter. the designs of our earlier generation ps/tr and pflps vectors are also shown.

in the distres vector, three transgene cassettes were cloned into the right-end of the genome, which includes the following:  tre-arr2pb promoter driving lac repressor  gene expression, cloned in reverse orientation,  arr2pb promoter driving tta expression, cloned just downstream of the tre-arr2pb.laci cassette such that the tre has bi-directional activity on both the laci and tta genes, and  original tre promoter controlling gfp expression, cloned downstream of the arr2pb.tta cassette . in addition, a transgene cassette containing a newly developed lacr-responsive promoter  was cloned into the left-end of the genome and controlled tts gene expression .

the cloning capacity of our e1/e3/e4-deleted ad vector is approximately  <dig>  kb. therefore, several strategic cloning measures had to be taken in order to conserve sufficient space to include all four transgene cassettes into a single complex adenovirus vector . in addition, special consideration was made in the construction of this complex rad vector based upon our previous findings regarding interference from the e1a enhancer. because we previously had found that the basal activity of both the tre and the arr2pb promoters were significantly affected by interference from the e1a enhancer  <cit> , we designed the ad/gfpdistres vector so that all tre and tre-arr2pb promoters were away from the e <dig> region by placing them near the right itr . meanwhile, the transgene cassette containing the lacr-responsive promoter driving tts expression was cloned near the left itr . the theoretical mechanism of action of the distres regulation system is diagrammed in fig.  <dig> 

levels of prostate-specific expression from ad-delivered distres are greater than that induced by either the cmv promoter or tet-regulated controls
in order to determine the prostate-specificity of the ad/gfpdistres vector, two prostate cancer cell lines, lncap and pc3/ar, and two non-prostate cell lines, hela and u251mg, were chosen for in vitro analysis. since the arr2pb promoter is known to be inducible by androgen   <cit> , the lncap cell line was chosen specifically because it is one of the few prostate cancer cell lines available that express functional androgen receptor . the pc- <dig> cell line is known to be ar negative, and therefore, an ar stable transfectant pc- <dig> cell line  was chosen  <cit>  for the ad/gfpdistres characterization studies. in order to directly compare vector activity in prostate versus non-prostate cells, all cell types were infected in the presence of dht, even though dht would not likely be present under physiological tissues.

for in vitro analysis, both prostate and non-prostate cell lines were infected with ad/gfpdistres vector and controls . due to differing transduction efficiencies among cell lines, each cell type was infected at an optimized moi, based on pilot dose response studies conducted with the ad/gfptet vector. data are represented as fold gfp expression, setting infection with the ad/cmv-gfp control vector at  <dig>  as demonstrated in fig.  <dig>  ad/gfpdistres vector induced high levels of gfp expression in the prostate cancer cell lines without a loss in prostate specificity. in pc3/ar cells, the ad/gfpdistres vector induced gfp expression to levels similar to the non-specific, constitutively active ad/cmv-gfp control. remarkably, gfp induction by the ad/gfpdistres vector in lncap cells was not only significantly higher than that seen with ad/cmv-gfp  but also significantly amplified, even in comparison to the ad/gfptet vector . in fact, the activity from ad/gfpdistres was over 30-fold higher than ad/cmv-gfp and over 10-fold higher than the highly induced tet-regulated ad/gfptet vector, when transduced in lncap cells. meanwhile, the levels of gfp expression in the hela and u251mg cells were similar to background, with a low level of gfp expression seen in hela cells.

the ad/gfpdistres vector demonstrates improved prostate-specific gfp induction compared to the earlier generation, ad/gfpps/tr and ad/gfppflps vectors
we wanted to determine whether the distres system had improved upon our earlier generation designs, the ps/tr and pflps systems. in order to conduct a comparative analysis of these three prostate-specific regulation systems, we infected lncap and u251mg cells in parallel with ad/gfpps/tr, ad/gfppflps, ad/gfpdistres, ad/gfptet, or ad/c.lacz and assayed for gfp expression . as demonstrated in fig.  <dig>  the activity of the ad/gfpps/tr vector  was less than that induced by either ad/gfppflps or ad/gfpdistres in lncap cells at all moi's tested. overall, the ad/gfpdistres vector demonstrated the highest levels of prostate-specific gfp expression at all moi's tested. in addition, the ad/gfpps/tr vector demonstrated more non-specific expression in u251mg than either ad/gfppflps or ad/gfpdistres, except at moi  <dig>  where the ad/gfpdistres vector loses some of its specificity. finally, fig.  <dig> visually demonstrates the difference in gfp induction and specificity of ad/gfpdistres versus ad/gfptet in lncap and u251mg cells at moi  <dig> 

distres-mediated fasl-gfp cytotoxicity is prostate-specific
in order to characterize the distres regulation system in the context of a prostate cancer therapeutic, we first subcloned the fasl-gfp fusion gene in the place of the gfp gene within ad/gfpdistres, resulting in the ad/fasl-gfpdistres vector. we then infected the same panel of prostate and non-prostate cell lines described in fig.  <dig> with ad/fasl-gfpdistres vector and controls and assayed for resultant cell viability . since each cell type showed varying sensitivities to adenovirus-delivered fasl-gfp, we infected each cell type at moi values determined during pilot studies to induce maximal cytotoxicity in response to ad/fasl-gfptet control.

the cytotoxicity of all of the prostate-specific vectors was prostate-specific, as there was increased cell viability in the u251mg and hela cells when compared to the ad/fasl-gfptet control. in lncap, cell viability in ad/fasl-gfpdistres-transduced cells was greatly reduced although not to the same degree as our positive control for apoptosis, ad/fasl-gfptet. in pc3ar, similar levels of cell viability were seen among the three prostate-specific vectors.

in comparison to the ps/tr and pflps vectors, the distres vector demonstrated the highest level of cytotoxicity in lncap cells. however, the cytotoxic activity of ad/fasl-gfpdistres compared to mock infection was not statistically significant. although the cell viability studies did not reveal a statistical difference between ad/fasl-gfpdistres and control, both prostate cancer cell types did demonstrate the typical cell-rounding morphology as a result of ad/fasl-gfpdistres infection . however, u251mg seemed to be somewhat affected by ad/fasl-gfpdistres infection, as well.

discussion
a wide range of gene therapy vector approaches is being investigated as potential cancer therapeutics including manipulation of cell cycle control, apoptosis strategies, suicide gene therapy, tumor-selective replicating virus vectors, angiogenesis therapy and immunotherapy. recent successes in cancer gene therapy include the approvals of the ad/p <dig> vector known as gendicine from sibiono genetech co. and the oncolytic ad vector known as h <dig> from sunway biotech co. for clinical use in china  <cit> . the activity of both of these adenovirus-based vectors takes advantage of the fact that over 50% of all cancers have mutations in p <dig>  additionally, evidence from onyx's onyx- <dig> and sunway's h <dig> vectors appear to indicate that these oncolytic vectors also have activity in non-p <dig> mutant cancer cells as well  <cit> .

when designing gene therapy vectors for the treatment of cancer, along with selection of therapeutic transgene, an equally important aspect to take under consideration is how to target gene expression. this is particularly important considering that the two initial phases of clinical characterization  focus on safety. the cancer gene therapy vector most likely to demonstrate a significant clinical result will be one that initiates a large therapeutic index , while keeping toxicity to normal tissues at a minimum. the use of an amplified feedback loop strategy to tightly regulate yet highly induce gene expression may be key to the development of additional cancer therapeutic vectors.

in this study, we have constructed and characterized a novel transcriptional regulation system that incorporates both an amplification feedback loop, as well as two tissue-selective repressor elements, which differentially suppress specific transcriptional events, depending upon the cell type transduced. this differentially suppressible tetracycline regulated expression system  demonstrated prostate-specific transgene induction, as the ad/gfpdistres vector was found to induce gfp expression levels in pc3/ar cells to levels similar to that of the cmv promoter, a promoter which is well-recognized as a strong, constitutively active promoter of non-specific gene expression. moreover, the ad/gfpdistres vector induced gfp expression levels in lncap cells to levels that significantly exceeded those of both the cmv promoter as well as the tet-regulated system. this induction by ad/gfpdistres was approximately  <dig> times the activity of ad/cmv-gfp and approximately  <dig> times the activity of ad/gfptet. additionally, the ad/gfpdistres vector retained specificity in the two non-prostate cell line controls, hela and u251mg. levels of gfp expression from the ad/gfpdistres vector, upon transduction of these non-prostate cell lines, were similar or slightly higher than background.

finally, although lncap cells are known to be resistant to fasl-mediated apoptosis, the ad/fasl-gfpdistres vector demonstrated cytotoxic effects in lncap and somewhat modest effects in pc3ar cells. this overcoming of fasl resistance was seen previously with our tet-regulated ad/fasl-gfptet vector  <cit> , and we believe it is due to an overexpression of fasl-gfp overcoming a certain threshold in these resistant cells. once the cells are saturated with fasl-gfp, the cell then appears to become susceptible to the fasl-mediated apoptosis.

a two-step transcriptional amplification  system has been described which utilizes a gal4-vp <dig> fusion protein instead of tta for amplification of gene expression  <cit>  and is similar to our previous ps/tr system  <cit> . in transfection experiments, zhang et al. demonstrates a 10-fold increase in prostate-specific luciferase expression in lncap, compared to cmv  <cit> . in another report, block et al. claims an amplification of up to 590-fold of luciferase expression in skco <dig> cells compared to cmv  <cit> . similar results have not been repeated by other groups using the tsta system. the specificity of block et al's vector, however, was greatly compromised as a result. in their negative control cell line, hepg <dig>  their ad.mucbin-luc vector demonstrated 7-fold higher gene expression than cmv at moi  <dig>  the authors do not explain the reasoning for this very high background activity in non-target cells  <cit> . such increased expression in non-target cells could potentially be mitigated utilizing a system similar to distres. however, it is difficult to compare the two systems since many papers do not describe the activity of the tsta in non-target cells. further study will need to be conducted to truly compare the two systems.

the distres transcriptional regulation system has three characteristics that separate it from other regulation systems published in the literature:  differential expression of two transcriptional repressor proteins  depending on the cell type transduced;  incorporation of a positive feedback amplification loop of prostate specific gene expression; and  the cloning of the entire system into a single complex recombinant ad vector, thus preventing the need for co-infection with two or more separate ad vectors. in fact, most ad vectors published in the literature  contain only a single transgene cassette. this, therefore, makes the progressiveness of the ad/gfpdistres and ad/fasl-gfpdistres vectors rather uncommon as both of these vectors each contained four expression cassettes.

application of the distres regulation system is not restricted to only the gene therapy treatment of prostate cancers. its complex transcriptional regulation concept could be transferred to other tissue types by simply incorporating different tissue-specific promoters, thereby expanding its potential utility to include gene therapy of other cancers and molecular genetic applications other than cancer, such as the gene therapy treatment of genetic disorders, development of gene-based vaccines expressing immunogenic bacterial or viral antigens, and development of new transgenic mouse models that require highly induced, organ-restricted expression of a particular gene of interest. finally, the effective transcriptional regulation afforded by distres could be combined with current methods of transductional regulation including manipulation of ad fiber knob  <cit>  and use of bi-specific antibodies  <cit>  to further improve the targeting of gene therapy vectors to specific cell types and therefore increase the specificity and the safety of the vectors.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed and characterized a novel transcriptional regulatory system that demonstrates highly induced, prostate-specific expression that retains its tissue-specificity. such a regulation system could be potentially modified to include tissue- or cancer-specific promoters in the place of the arr2pb promoter as well as any desired therapeutic transgene and thus is ideal for several molecular genetic and gene therapeutic applications that require highly induced, organ-restricted expression of a particular gene of interest. this transcriptional regulation can also be combined with transductional regulation systems to increase the specificity and the safety of current gene therapy vectors. the distres regulation system, therefore, serves as a promising new approach for the transcriptional regulation of therapeutic genes for future molecular genetic and therapeutic applications.

