BACKGROUND
ophiostomoids are the most common mycelial fungi associated with bark beetles. within this group is ophiostoma ulmi, the causative agent of the first incident of one of the most destructive plant diseases, dutch elm disease , starting from the early 1910s in europe and north america  <cit> . the far more aggressive species ophiostoma novo-ulmi accounts for a second ded pandemic which was initially recorded in britain and is believed to have spread to north america from central europe in the early 1940s  <cit> . as a consequence of both occurrences, the majority of mature dutch elm trees were destroyed in north america, europe and central and southwest asia. these incidents had tremendous economic impacts on the global forestry and horticultural industries. unfortunately, bark beetle disease is still a major threat to the remaining north american elm trees, especially in western canada yet very few resources are directed towards their control because the molecular basis for o. ulmi pathogenicity is still not understood  <cit> .

ded is a result of the bark beetle attacking the bark of trees and penetrating into the soft tissue where they feed on nutrients within the phloem  <cit>  concurrently, ophiostoma fungi are transferred by the beetles to the phloem network where they colonize on the soluble tissues and block the transport of nutrients and water throughout the trees. this colonization of ophiostoma and competition for nutrients produces an irreversible disease phenotype in mature elm trees, leading to the eventual death of these trees. the two subgroups o. novo-ulmi and o. ulmi are classified as aggressive and non-aggressive, with o. novo-ulmi being the aggressive species  <cit> . further, they have distinct biological differences, such as growth rate, temperature optimum and colony appearance. as expected, the non-aggressive species is a weak elm pathogen in contrast to the aggressive o. novo-ulmi species, but both species produce characteristically distinct levels of the toxin protein, cerato-ulmin which is important in protecting infectious propagules from desiccation and is thought to act as a parasitic fitness factor for the organism  <cit> .

interestingly, attempts to cross o. novo-ulmi with o. ulmi are frequently rejected by the aggressive o. novo-ulmi female fungi. the hybrid progenies from successful crosses are usually of low competitive fitness and show low growth rate, decreased pathogenicity, low cerato-ulmin protein production and usually sterile females  <cit> . the differences in biological traits between the aggressive and nonaggressive species point towards incompatibility in their genomic composition. thus, the genome sequence of these two species would present a unique opportunity for comparative analysis to understand the basis for their pathogenicity, and genomic incompatibility.

biotransformation strategies have been developed for the use of o. ulmi protein extracts in the production of thermoplastic materials. while the protein identities and composition of such mixtures remain uncharacterized due to a lack of an available genome sequence, the quality and consistency of the thermoplastics produced is sufficient for the manufacturing of certain products  <cit> . such approaches are highly attractive from an environmental standpoint for the use of renewable resources in manufacturing processes. therefore, the application of o. ulmi has gained tremendous interest in recent years and has resulted in multiple patents. unlike white-rot and brown-rot fungi  whose genomes are sequenced and annotated and are used in a plethora of commercial applications  <cit> , o. ulmi’s recent emergence in commercial application was based solely on its ability to modify plants polysaccharides. this rather coarse approach in utilizing o. ulmi protein extracts in polysaccharides biotransformation is restricted because of a lack of a sequenced genome. similar to the phanerochaete fungi, the sequencing of o. ulmi would provide tremendous opportunities for its use in industrial applications.

here, we report a first draft of the genome sequence and annotation of ophiostoma ulmi strain w <dig>  to validate the quality of the gene annotations, we employed est sequences from ophiostoma novo-ulmi <cit> , mrna-seq sequences, and ortholog sequences from three other fungi, grosmannia clavigera <cit>  and two model organisms neurospora crassa <cit>  and saccharomyces serevisiae <cit> . we found that multiple lines of evidence support the quality of the gene annotations. an initial search for genes involved in the pathogenicity of the fungus was performed. the availability of the complete genome sequence should facilitate further studies of ophiostoma ulmi and may be an important step toward development of molecular strategies for controlling ded.

RESULTS
genome sequence assembly and annotation
using a whole genome shotgun sequencing strategy, we sequenced the o. ulmi genome to an average coverage of 200× by paired-end sequencing . a  <dig> -mb genome sequence was obtained by assembling approximately  <dig> million illumina reads. genome statistics are given in table  <dig> 

to annotate the genome, we combined an ab initio method with a comparative gene-finding approach. first we obtained gene models using the ab initio method genemark es-v <dig>   <cit> . the main motivation for this approach was that it takes as input data the genomic sequence alone and requires no other input data such as training sets of known genes from o. ulmi or genes from other species. in order to identify conserved genes that were not found by the ab initio method, we used exonerate  <cit>  to align protein sets from n. crassa <cit>  and g. clavigera <cit> . we chose n. crassa and g. clavigera because they are fully sequenced and annotated and both organisms are closely related to o. ulmi. this gene prediction strategy yielded  <dig> genes in the o. ulmi genome, covering 45% of the total genome. in our final gene set, the vast majority of gene models  were taken from the ab initio gene-finding method because most of them have start and stop codons in comparison to genes predicted by exonerate. comparative genome analysis revealed that approximately 71% of the annotated genes have orthologs from at least one of the three species, g. clavigera, n. crassa and s.cerevisiae.

we next compared the features of the o. ulmi genome with those reported for g. clavigera and n. crassa. the g + c content for all three species is approximately 50%. the number of predicted protein-coding genes for o. ulmi, g. clavigera and n. crassa varies considerably  but the average gene density of o. ulmi is one gene per  <dig>  kb which is very similar to that of g. clavigera and n. crassa, having one gene per  <dig>  kb and one per  <dig>  kb respectively. the average gene length of o. ulmi is  <dig>  kb, slightly higher than  <dig>  kb for g. clavigera and  <dig>  kb for n. crassa . the mean number of introns per gene is  <dig>  for o. ulmi, which is somewhat less than  <dig>  for g. clavigera and  <dig>  for n. crassa . the sizes of introns in o. ulmi are similar for the three fungal species compared .

identification of o. ulmi gene orthologs and phylogenetic analysis
to evaluate the evolutionary relationships between o. ulmi and other fungi where a complete genome sequence was available, we identified orthologs of o. ulmi, g. clavigera, n. crassa, and s. cerevisiae, using inparanoid  <cit> . applying this approach we identified  <dig> ortholog with g. clavigera,  <dig> with n. crassa and  <dig> with s. cerevisiae. phylogenetic analysis was performed with the amino acid sequences of the  <dig> genes for which we have a one-to-one ortholog relationship for each species with o. ulmi. we computed the likelihood of four possible trees with s.cerevisiae as the outgroup using paml  <cit> . the tree, shown in figure  <dig>  was found with 90% bootstrap support for more than 80% of the orthologous groups. to estimate the distances between species, we took the median value of each branch length  from the  <dig> genes for which we have a one-to-one ortholog relationship for each species. the total distance between g. clavigera and o. ulmi is more than  <dig>  subs. per site, which is consistent with a previous analysis on two genes  <cit> . our analysis indicates that o. ulmi is a representative of a divergent clade for which, to our knowledge, no complete genome sequences currently exist.

validation of genome annotation
in order to provide support for our gene models, we employed three sets of data. first, we used the published expressed sequence tags  library from o. novo-ulmi <cit> . using est2genome model with default parameters from exonerate  <cit> , we mapped the est data to the o.ulmi genome. we then looked for gene models that overlapped with positions in the genome mapping back to the est data. we found that 91% of the gene models had expression evidence from est data.

we next compared our annotation to o. ulmi mrna-seq read data we generated. mapping mrna-seq reads back to the genome using a short read aligner , we found the average coverage to be  <dig>  reads per base pair. computing the coverage for coding segments of the gene models , we found the coverage in coding regions to be  <dig>  . thus, the average coverage is 58% higher within our predicted coding regions than in the genome overall, providing evidence that our gene predictions are enriched for bona fide genes in o. ulmi . despite this high average coverage, approximately 20% of the gene models have coverage of less than  <dig>  we speculate that this may result from either lack of expression in the condition that the mrna was extracted, or errors in gene prediction.

a typical distribution of the mrna-seq reads for a region of 20 kb in the genome is shown in figure  <dig>  gene o <dig> exemplifies a high-confidence gene prediction because there are approximately  <dig> reads covering it and the coverage drops to zero at the predicted intron-exon boundaries. on the other hand, gene o <dig> is an example of imperfect prediction because there is evidence for expression outside of the predicted coordinates.

as part of our evaluation of the gene model predictions, we have also included gene models with orthologs to at least one of the three other comparative species g. clavigera, n.crassa and s. cerevisiae. significantly,  <dig> % of our predictions were found to have 1-to- <dig> orthologs in other species and given that orthologs are often similar in function  <cit> , this suggests that most of our predicted genes can be assigned a function based on comparison with genes of other well-studied organisms. this further supports the assertion that the gene models described here are accurate.

overall, ~99% of the gene models have at least one type of evidence with ~62% of them having all three types of evidence . this analysis indicates that our draft genome assembly and gene annotation is of high quality.

protein domain analysis
previous studies suggested that specific genes of a pathogen are important for its pathogenicity  <cit> . for the fungi o. ulmi and the closely related species o. novo-ulmi, it was suggested that a hydrophobic protein cerato-ulmin and a colony type gene col <dig> were directly correlated to the fungi causing ded in elm trees  <cit> . to check for the occurrence of other related genes , we searched our predicted gene set using these genes as queries. for both the hydrophobic protein cerato-ulmin and col <dig>  high confident single matches are found using blast- <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  . while consistent with the accuracy of our gene predictions, these searches did not identify new pathogenicity related genes.

using the sequenced o. ulmi genome, we performed a global domain analysis by searching the entire predicted gene set for protein domains from the pfam database  <cit> . in total,  <dig> protein domains were found in our o. ulmi gene set. comparison of the protein domains amongst the three fungal species showed that o. ulmi has  <dig> families in common with g. clavigera and  <dig> families in common with n. crassa, while  <dig> of the identified domains are found only in o. ulmi. however, of those,  <dig> are domains of unknown function with little information available for them. the remaining  <dig> unique protein domains are not among those known to play a crucial role in pathogenicity and host-plant cell-wall degradation, such as glycosyl hydrolase, glycosyl transferase and oxidases. further, we did not observe significant expansion of protein families important in virulence. for instance, the glycosyl hydrolase family is represented by  <dig> genes in o. ulmi compared with  <dig> genes in g. clavigera and  <dig> genes in n. crassa. overall, our comparison of domain content with g. clavigera and n. crassa suggests that these three species are very similar. furthermore, the gene families appear to be highly conserved since no outstanding expansions of protein domain families could be detected in o. ulmi.

as another approach to identify virulence factors, we searched for gene models previously known to be associated with pathogenicity in other organisms. to do this, o. ulmi gene models were compared against phi-base  <cit> , a database of  <dig> fungal-verified virulence and pathogenicity related genes  <cit> . comparing our results to g. clavigera and n. crassa, we find that the number of genes from o. ulmi, g. clavigera, and n. crassa with matches to pathogenicity related genes from phi-base were similar across all three species ; this indicates that there is no obvious expansion in the number of pathogen related genes in o. ulmi. while total numbers were similar, a small number of genes from phi-base represented unique matches for each species . these genes are important because they could be responsible for specific characteristics in each species. three phi-base genes were found to match only to o. ulmi . one of these genes, ctb <dig> from cercospora nicotianae, is annotated as a putative fad/fmn- or nadph-dependent oxidoreductase in the cercosporin toxin biosynthetic pathway of c. nicotianae. cercosporin is a toxin which plays an important role in the pathogenicity of many phytopathogenic cercospora species  <cit>  and may therefore represent an important virulence factor in o. ulmi.

metabolic network reconstruction
with the pfam and phi-base analyses indicating overall gene content of o. ulmi to be similar to other organisms, we attempted a more detailed analysis of the pathogen’s metabolism. reconstruction of the metabolic network for o. ulmi was achieved by integrating several automated datasets together with ortholog mappings to s. cerevisae. in total  <dig>  genes  map to enzymatic activity based on ec number annotation. this number aligns well with the yeast consensus metabolic reconstruction, consisting of  <dig> genes   <cit> . o. ulmi shares 79%  of its enzymes with s. cerevisae.

mapping o. ulmi enzymes to kegg metabolic pathways provides a unique perspective to highlight pathways that are either conserved amongst fungi  and have been lost in o. ulmi, or that are unique to o. ulmi and may play a role in causing disease in its host, the elm tree . for instance, pathways for fatty acid biosynthesis and the metabolism of d-arginine and d-ornithine have noticeably fewer enzymes in o. ulmi compared to s. cerevisae . other pathways such as anthocyanin biosynthesis and photosynthesis related are plant-specific and as expected appear to be missing from the fungal species. of interest are a number of pathways that have noticeably greater proportions of enzymes in o. ulmi compared to s. cerevisae including glycosphingolipid biosynthesis , glycan degradation , lipoic acid metabolism, and drug metabolism by enzymes other than cytochrome p <dig> . these activities, particularly those related to glycan degradation, are likely to play an important role in the success and survival of o. ulmi as a phytopathogen.

endopolygalacturonase  has been identified in o. ulmi , and is involved in cell wall degradation. epg belongs to the polygalacturonase  family of enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of pectin compounds which comprise 30% of the primary cell wall in plants  <cit> . previous studies have implicated pgs as virulence factors in other phytopathogens including botrytis cinerea <cit>  and alternaria citri <cit>  where the enzyme could assist host invasion, tissue destruction and similar processes associated with plant disease. a recent study assessing the role of epg in o. ulmi, however, suggests that the enzyme functions as a parasitic fitness factor as opposed to a virulence factor, given that targeted disruption of the gene led to a reduction in pectin-degrading activity and not a lethal phenotype  <cit> . other pectinase enzymes such as pectin methylesterase  and pectinase  present in o. ulmi likely act in concert to contribute to successful invasion of the host. the production of pg enzymes is particularly important for the success and survival of o. ulmi as it is a pathogen that enters the host directly through a pre-existing wound and therefore lacks specialized penetration structures  <cit> . moreover, a role as a minor virulence factor is possible and when combined with other virulence factors, epg represents a potential target for the control of ded.

in general, core essential pathways such as those related to amino acid, carbohydrate, energy, and nucleotide metabolism are highly conserved across both fungi and plants . interestingly, a recent study by oliveira et al. <cit>  showed that elm trees inoculated with o. novo-ulmi had significantly reduced contents of glucose, fructose, starch and sucrose, suggesting that carbohydrate metabolism pathways are important to the pathogenicity of the fungus. consistent with this hypothesis, the genes encoding carbohydrate metabolism enzymes seem to be highly expressed in o. ulmi based on our mrna-seq data . moreover, functional categorization of an est library for o. novo-ulmi revealed that the majority of est sequences associated with metabolism had the greatest representation in carbohydrate metabolism  <cit> . these results suggest that, while metabolic reconstruction predicts o. ulmi has similar enzyme complements for a number of pathways such as those involved in carbohydrate metabolism to s. cerevisae and a. thaliana, expression profiles are an essential component to assessing the functionality of specific pathways. in addition, the close phylogenetic relationship to o. novo-ulmi might also hint that the pathogenic role of o. ulmi is at least partially a result of decreasing the plant’s carbohydrates, consequently reducing the efficiency of photosynthesis, and eventually leading to plant senescence.

discussion
ophiostoma ulmi caused the first emergence of ded, one of the most destructive plant diseases in the last 100 years  <cit> . in addition, because of its starch modification characteristics, o. ulmi has been used in industry for bioplastic production  <cit> . however, compared to the more aggressive species o. novo-ulmi, little is known about the basic biology of o. ulmi.

in this paper, we sequenced the genome of o. ulmi using next generation sequencing. our genome sequence annotation contains  <dig> gene models. est data from the closely related species o. novo-ulmi, mrna-seq data and orthologous genes in other species provide strong evidence for the quality of our annotation. using genome-scale analysis, we estimated the phylogenetic relationship and distance of o. ulmi to n. crassa and g. clavigera. finally, we compared the protein domains and matches to phi-base in our gene models with two other fungal species, g. clavigera and n. crassa to search for genetic features that may yield important clues about the different lifestyles of the species.

through metabolic reconstruction, we identified certain families of enzymes that may play a role in the virulence of the fungus. significantly, we identify a cell wall degrading enzyme, epg, which may be involved in host-pathogen interactions. the contribution of the gene to virulence has been examined in other fungi, with evidence demonstrating that epg is required for full virulence and infection of the host tissue  <cit> . nevertheless, the full role of the enzyme in pathogenicity for o. ulmi has yet to be elucidated.

CONCLUSIONS
our contribution here was to generate a high-quality genome sequence and annotation for o. ulmi. with this in hand, future research will achieve a deeper understanding of the processes by which the fungi colonize and, break down cell wall components and damage elm trees. furthermore, because of the starch modification and plastic improvement features of the fungus, availability of the fungus genome may help develop new industrial processes for bioplastic production.

