BACKGROUND
salmonella enterica is an intracellular facultative anaerobe gram-negative that infects a variety of hosts, which include mammals, avians and reptiles. in human beings, s. enterica causes over  <dig> million cases of disease worldwide annually, which may vary from gastroenteritis and diarrhea to severe life-threatening systemic disease   <cit> . the outcome of the disease depends on both the serovar of samonella and the host susceptibility. salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium , can infect humans and animals, but causes different syndromes in each host. in humans, salmonella produces enterocolitis, but in mice it causes a systemic illness that resembles human typhoid fever. because of this, s. typhimurium is widely used as a model organism to study the host-pathogen interactions that contribute to the onset of the systemic disease  <cit> .

the pathogenic strategy of s. typhimurium includes penetration of the mucosal barrier, invasion of non-phagocytic cells of the intestinal mucosa and survival and replication inside macrophages of the spleen and liver during the systemic phase. the ability of s. typhimurium to survive to host defense mechanisms and to cause disease has been directly linked to genes encoded in pathogenicity islands, which are large horizontally acquired regions of the chromosome. of outstanding importance are two type three secretion systems , which together with cognate effector proteins are essential for cell invasion, intracellular survival and, therefore, for mice colonization  <cit> . besides, factors encoded in the genomic backbone of salmonella are also important for virulence in the murine model  <cit> .

yqic is a 99-residue protein of s. typhimurium  which belongs to the cluster of orthologous groups  <dig> . this cog includes  <dig> members , encoded in genomes of pathogenic, non-pathogenic and symbiotic bacteria. in spite of the high conservation of this cog across bacterial species, no description of the in vivo function of any member has been reported. in this work, we carried out microbiological studies which demonstrate that yqic is required for the pathogenesis of s. typhimurium in the murine model, since a null mutant is highly attenuated when inoculated both orally and intraperitoneally. we also show that this protein is dispensable for cell invasion and intracellular replication in murine macrophages and human epithelial cell lines, but it is necessary for efficient growth at the mammalian host physiological temperature outside the cells. the microbiological results are complemented by biophysical and biochemical studies. these analyses demonstrate that yqic shares properties with the recently reported bmfp from brucella abortus  which include a trimeric coiled-coil structure and the ability to induce membrane fusion in vitro  <cit> . the results presented here contribute to elucidate the function of members of the cog  <dig> and their biological role.

RESULTS
s. typhimurium yqic is a trimeric protein with a high helical content
yqic is a 99-residue protein of s. typhimurium  which belongs to the cluster of orthologous groups  <dig> . the bioinformatic analysis of the primary sequence of yqic predicts a high helical content  http://www.predictprotein.org, including two helical segments that span the n- and c-terminal halves of the protein . both helical segments are amphipathic but only the c-terminal one is predicted to form a coiled-coil structure http://groups.csail.mit.edu/cb/paircoil/paircoil.html. yqic secondary structure was experimentally determined by its far uv circular dichroism spectrum , which showed a typical signature of an alpha helical protein. the percentage of helical structure of yqic, estimated through the analysis of its cd spectra using k2d program , agrees with the percentage of amino acids involved in the predicted n- and c-terminal alpha helices.

on the other hand, we studied the oligomeric state of yqic by chemical cross-linking and static light scattering. chemical cross-linking of yqic yielded trimers as the largest products when the amount of cross-linking reagent was increased . moreover, analysis of yqic by static light scattering coupled to size exclusion chromatography showed a single homogeneous peak with a molecular mass of  <dig>  kda, in agreement with a trimeric structure .

the characteristics described here are similar to the structural features that we have previously reported for brucella abortus bmfp, which is a member of the cog  <dig> that only conserves 22% sequence identity with yqic  <cit> .

yiqc promotes membrane fusion in vitro
as yqic shares structural properties with bmfp, we investigated if this protein also conserves the membrane fusion activity reported for bmfp  <cit> . with this aim, we measured the increase in the size and aqueous content mixing of phospholipids vesicles produced after yqic addition. changes in the size and aggregation state of vesicles were evaluated by turbidity measurements at  <dig> nm whereas the aqueous content mixing was evaluated by measuring the fluorescence of the tb-dpa complex produced upon fusion of vesicles containing tbcl <dig> or dpa encapsulated in their aqueous interior phase, and the percentage of mixing was calculated as described in materials and methods. experiments were carried out on small unilamellar vesicles composed of a mixture of dppc and dppa in a 75: <dig> molar ratio, both at acid or neutral ph. yqic produced both a significant increase in the turbidity  and aqueous content mixing  in the vesicle solutions, mainly at acid ph, after addition of yqic. these results indicate that yqic has a ph-dependent in vitro fusogenic activity.

subcellular localization of yqic
to determine the subcellular localization of yqic, we performed a mechanical lysis fractionation procedure. a wild type s. typhimurium culture grown to late log phase was harvested by centrifugation, mechanically disrupted and fractionated by ultracentrifugation. this procedure allows for the separation of bacterial proteins into two fractions: the supernatant, which contains cytoplasmic and periplasmic proteins, and the pellet fraction, which contains the inner and outer membrane proteins. fractions were then analyzed by immunoblotting using an anti-yqic polyclonal antibody. yqic was localized in the two fractions, although lower levels of yqic were found in the membrane fraction . this result indicated that yqic is both soluble and membrane associated inside the cell. as a control, we used an antibody against the periplasmic protein mbp  <cit> , which was only detected in the supernatant fraction.

evaluation of a yqic defective strain phenotype in vitro
the in vivo functions of the members of the cog  <dig> are unknown. to investigate the role of yqic protein in s. typhimurium, we constructed an s. typhimurium atcc  <dig> null mutant in yqic through allelic exchange. the resulting strain was named  <dig> Δyqic::cat. the gene yqic is encoded divergently to the ribb gene and convergent to the glgs gene in the s. typhimurium chromosome. thus, it appears that yqic is transcribed as a monocistronic element, and polar effects upon allelic exchange are not expected. the successful elimination of the yqic gene was corroborated by pcr analysis and a western blot assay of cell lysates of  <dig> Δyqic::cat and its complemented derivative , using a polyclonal antibody raised against yqic . as a first approach to assess the effect of the mutation in the physiology of salmonella, we tested the effect of temperature in the replication of yqic mutant strain in lb. no difference in the growth pattern of the yqic mutant strain compared with the wt was detected at 28°c . however, an increased generation time at 37°c was observed for  <dig> Δyqic::cat, where the average generation time was  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  minutes for s. typhimurium  <dig> and  <dig> minutes for  <dig> Δyqic::cat . this difference in growth was enhanced when the strains were incubated at 42°c, where the average generation time was  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  minutes for the wt strain and  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  minutes for the Δyqic::cat mutant strain. at both temperatures, trans complementation with the plasmid encoding yqic restored the wild-type growth curve pattern to  <dig> Δyqic::cat. these results indicate that the mutation of yqic affects the ability of s. typhimurium to replicate at physiological and high temperatures. no growth curve pattern alteration was observed for the  <dig> Δyqic::cat strain when incubated in m <dig> minimal media or acid lb  at 28°c , which indicates that the yqic mutant is neither auxotrophic nor acid sensitive.

survival of the stm-yqicmutant in cultured cells
the pathogenicity of s. typhimurium is critically dependent on its ability to infect and multiply into eukaryotic cells. we investigated whether the  <dig> Δyqic::cat strain was affected in its ability to invade and survive within cultured eukaryotic cells. j <dig> murine macrophages and hela human epithelial cell lines were infected with wt s. typhimurium and  <dig> Δyqic::cat strains. as the  <dig> Δyqic::cat strain grows defectively at physiological temperature, all strains were grown at 28°c prior to infection. infected cells were kept at 37°c and viable intracellular bacteria was determined in cell lysates at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hours after infection. in both cell types, no differences were detected at all time points examined in the cfu recovered from cell lysates infected with the wt or the yqic mutant strains . this result indicates that the yqic gene does not contribute to neither salmonella entry nor intracellular survival in the cell types assayed.

role of s. typhimurim yqic in virulence
in spite of the clear effect of the yqic mutant strain on growth at 37°c, we did not observe any defect in colonizing and surviving inside in vitro cultured eukaryotic cells grown at 37°c. thus, we evaluated the virulence of the yqic mutant in the murine model. to this aim, we performed oral infections with s. typhimurium atcc  <dig>   <dig> Δyqic::cat and  <dig> Δyqic::cat trans-complemented with yqic in balb/c mice. as illustrated in figure  <dig>  no survival was registered by day  <dig> in mice inoculated with wt strain. however, the yqic mutant showed complete attenuation in virulence, as all mice infected with this strain survived along the 30-day period of the experiment. the yqic gene provided in trans fully complemented the  <dig> Δyqic::cat phenotype, causing 100% mice death by day  <dig>  in addition, we determined the ld <dig> of s. typhimurium atcc  <dig> and  <dig> Δyqic::cat in mice inoculated intraperitoneally as described in materials and methods. a dramatic increase in the ld <dig> was observed in the yqic defective strain , as compared with the wt  . together, these results clearly show that yqic is required for s. typhimurium virulence in the murine infection model.

groups of the indicated number of mice were inoculated intraperitoneally with different doses of s. typhimurium atcc or s. typhimurium strain and survival was recorded for up to  <dig> days.

discussion
in this work we have characterized the yqic protein of s. typhimurium. yqic shares common structural and biochemical characteristics with its previously reported orthologous bmfp protein of brucella abortus  <cit> , although these proteins share only 22% of sequence identity and brucella spp and salmonella are phylogenetically distant bacteria. the common structural characteristics between yqic and bmfp, namely high alpha helix content, coiled coil c-terminal and amphipathic alpha helix n-terminus, are also predicted by bioinformatics analysis for other proteins of the cog  <dig> . this structural conservation strongly suggests a common function for the members of this cog.

in addition, we demonstrated that yqic has membrane fusogenic activity, like bmfp and other trimeric coiled-coil and/or amphipathic proteins  <cit> . this activity is higher at acidic ph. a similar fusogenic activity at low ph was observed for b. abortus bmfp . the fusogenic activity could be relevant as many processes that involve bacterial or host cell membrane fusion events are important for pathogenic bacteria to successfully establish host infection. in this regard, both s. typhimurium and b. abortus penetrate the cell by phagocytosis, and reside within a host vacuole that rapidly undergoes acidification. this drop in the ph serves as a signal for the expression of bacterial factors that alter intracellular membrane traffic in order to set their replicative niche  <cit> . the improved yqic activity at low ph could indicate that this protein is active at the vacuolar stage of the bacterial infection. it is interesting to highlight that yqic shares structural similarity with s. typhimurium-sipb protein, as both are predominantly alpha helical in aqueous solution and have a coiled-coil domain involved in trimerization  <cit> . sipb is an effector protein essential for salmonella invasion secreted through the spi-1-encoded t3ss and was the first bacterial protein reported to display membrane fusogenic activity  <cit> , however the function of this membrane fusogenic activity in the bacterial pathogenesis has not been clearly defined  <cit> . the activity of yqic may be required during the interaction of salmonella with the host cell to hijack membrane trafficking pathways. this would probably be accomplished by competitive inhibition, mimicking eukaryotic membrane fusogenic proteins, such as the snares  and inhibiting lysosomal fusion with the salmonella-containing vacuoles. current work is addressing whether yqic is translocated to the host cell.

alternatively, the yqic-membrane fusogenic activity could be required during the biogenesis of bacterial outer membrane vesicles , which are spherical bilayered structures liberated from the outer membrane in gram negative bacteria  <cit> . omv act as delivery vesicles for bacterial toxins into host cells, promote quorum sensing, are involved in stress response, inhibit phagosome-lysosome fusion during bacterial growth within macrophages and are important constituents of the matrix of gram-negative and mixed bacterial biofilm  <cit> . to date, the machinery that cause vesicle formation remains elusive but it may be expected that a protein with membrane fusion activity could be involved in this process  <cit> . in this regard, in spite of the lack of a signal peptide or transmembrane domains we demonstrated that yqic can be localized both soluble and associated to membranes. this localization pattern was also observed for b. abortus bmfp . subcellular localization pattern of yqic may be in tune with its hypothetical function in biogenesis of omv, as soluble and membrane-bound states of yqic can be related to transient associations of this protein with the outer membrane. at this point, is interesting to note that omv produced by shigella flexneri contain ipab, a sipb homologue which also displays membrane fusion activity  <cit> . accordingly, many of the bacterial species conserving an yqic homolog have been shown to generate omv  <cit> . further work is needed to investigate the possible role of yqic in the biogenesis of omv.

the in vivo importance of yqic was demonstrated by the fact that this protein is necessary for s. typhimurium virulence in the murine model, as an yqic mutant strain was unable to kill mice within the period of time assayed and had a significantly higher ld <dig>  the basis for this attenuation in virulence may be related to the observed defect to grow at physiological temperature in vitro. temperature represents a common environmental challenge that microorganisms should be able to sense and respond to in order to survive  <cit> . many other single gene mutations produce temperature-sensitive, virulence-attenuated salmonella strains. examples include smpa, which encodes for an outer membrane lipoprotein, uspa, which encodes for an universal stress response protein and the genes for degp and degq proteases  <cit> . interestingly, temperature sensitivity could not be the only factor responsible for the virulence attenuation observed for the yqic mutant, as this strain was still able to invade and replicate inside macrophages and epithelial cell lines incubated at 37°c. these phenotypes may be due to differences in the metabolic status and environmental conditions affecting bacteria replication in rich media under laboratory conditions and inside the eukaryotic cell.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated in this work that s. typhimurium yqic shares structural and biochemical characteristics with b. abortus bmfp, in spite of their relatively low sequence identity. thus, members of the cog  <dig> may accomplish a conserved function among phylogenetically distant bacteria. this function may be necessary to display full virulence. this seems to be the case, as in a parallel work we observed virulence attenuation when analyzing a b. abortus bmfp-defective strain . this work is the first demonstration of the in vivo importance of a member of the cog  <dig>  however, future research is necessary to clarify the physiological processes in which the membrane fusogenic activity and possibly other unknown functions of yqic are required.

