BACKGROUND
an improvement of our knowledge on gene composition and expression is essential to investigate the molecular basis of fruit ripening and to define the gene pool involved in lipid and phenol metabolism in an oil crop species as olive, characterized by a peculiar fatty acid and antioxidant composition.

the availability of complete genome sequences and large sets of expressed sequence tags  from several plants has recently triggered the development of efficient and informative methods for large-scale and genome-wide analysis of genetic variation and gene expression patterns. the ability to monitor simultaneously the expression of a large set of genes is one of the most important objectives of genome sequencing efforts. in this respect, the  <dig> pyrosequencing technology  <cit>  is a rather novel method for high-throughput dna sequencing, allowing gene discovery and parallel efficient and quantitative analysis of expression patterns in cells, tissues and organs.

in the past few years, several studies based on comparative high throughput sequencing of plant transcriptomes have, indeed, allowed the identification of new gene functions, contaminant sequences from other organisms, alterations of gene expression in response to genotype, tissue or physiological changes, as well as large scale discovery of snps  in a number of model and non model species, such us maize, grapevine and eucalyptus  <cit> .

olive is the sixth most important oil crop in the world, presently spreading from the mediterranean region of origin to new production areas, due to the beneficial nutritional properties of olive oil and to its high economic value.

it belongs to the family of oleaceae, order of lamiales, which includes about  <dig> families for a total of about  <dig>  species. members of this order are important sources of fragrances, essential oils and phenolics claiming for numerous health benefits, or providing valuable commercial products, such as wood or ornamentals. information on the genome sequence and transcript profiles of the entire clade are completely lacking.

olive is a diplod species , predominantly allogamous, with a genome size of about  <dig>  mb  <cit> . in spite of its economical importance and metabolic peculiarities, very few data are available on gene sequences controlling the main metabolic pathways.

olive accumulates oil mainly in the drupe mesocarp and its content can reach up to 28–30% of total mesocarp fresh weight. olive oil shows a peculiar acyl composition, particularly enriched in the monounsaturated fatty acid oleate , deriving from the desaturation of stearate. oleate can reach percentages up to 75–80% of total fatty acids, while linoleate , palmitate , stearate  and linolenate  represent minor components. the final acyl composition of olive oil varies enormously among varieties. environmental factors, such as temperature and light during fruit ripening, can deeply influence the balance between saturated and unsaturated fatty acids  <cit> .

the chemistry of phenolic oleosides is attracting an increasing interest of pharmacological research and agri-food biotechnology, and the biochemical pathway leading to their biosynthesis and regulation has been recently deeply evaluated  <cit> , even if the genetic control still remains completely unknown.

secoiridoids represent the most important class of phenolics and they arise from simple structures, like tyrosol and hydroxytyrosol, to quantitatively more important conjugated forms like oleuropein, demethyloleuropein, 3-4dhpea-eda and ligstroside  <cit> . oleuropein is the main secoiridoid, representing up to the 82% of total biophenols, known as the bitter principle of olives and responsible for major effects on human health and for releasing phytoalexins against plant pathogens  <cit> . another secoiridoid with relevant health functions is oleocanthal   <cit> .

developing olives contain active chloroplasts capable of photosynthesis, thus representing significant sources of photoassimilates. while chlorophyll is localized mostly in the epicarp, the mesocarp contains significant amounts of other photosynthetic pathway components, such as phosphoenol pyruvate carboxylase  <cit> .

olive fruit development and ripening, takes place in about 4– <dig> months and includes the following phases: i) fruit set after fertilization, ii) seed development, iii) pit hardening, iv) mesocarp development and v) ripening. during the ripening process, fruit tissues undergo physiological and biochemical changes that include cell division and expansion, oil accumulation, metabolite storage, softening, phenol degradation, colour change . oil synthesis starts after pit hardening, reaching a plateau after 75– <dig> days, while the phenolic fraction is maximum at fruit set and decreases rapidly along fruit development.

this work is aimed at defining the transcriptome of olive drupes and at identifying ests involved in phenolic and lipid metabolism during fruit development. drupes from two cultivars have been used: a widely cultivated variety characterized by a very high phenolic content, and an oleuropein-lacking natural variant; two developmental stages, at completed fruit set and at mesocarp development, representing diverse sets of expressed genes, were analyzed using  <dig> pyrosequencing.

RESULTS
sequencing output
the starting materials to explore the olive fruit transcriptome were fruit pools from two olea europaea cultivars, coratina and tendellone , showing striking differences in their biophenol accumulation pattern . c is cultivated in the apulia region and represents the most widely cultivated variety of italy, while t is a minor cultivar locally spread in central italy. a previous ssr analysis reported a very high genetic distance between them  <cit> . these cultivars also differ markedly in their oleuropein concentration . in contrast, the content of the 3-4dhpea-eda intermediate compound was similar between genotypes .

four enriched full-length ds-cdna collections  were obtained and their  <dig> pyrosequencing provided a total of  <dig>  sequence reads, corresponding to  <dig>  mb, with an average read length of 217– <dig> nt, depending on the cdna sample . the 4-step procedure adopted by the parpest pipeline to process the  <dig> est reads is summarised in figure  <dig> 

hq reads: quality passed reads, hq bases: quality passed bases.

ests were masked to eliminate sequence regions that would cause incorrect clustering. targets for masking include simple sequence repeats , low complexity sequences  and other dna repeats. the number of ests masked for each category, as well as the total nucleotides that were masked, are shown in table  <dig> 

*the total nucleotides masked is given in brackets

the most frequent dna repeats, identified using repbase as the filtering database, were ribosomal rna ; ltr retrotransposons from the bel type family, gypsy and copia; non-ltr retrotransposons from the cr <dig> superfamily and, finally, a batch of retro pseudogenes  .

in order to assess est redundancy in the whole collection and provide a survey of the olea europaea drupe transcriptome, masked est sequences were pair-wise compared and grouped into clusters, based on shared sequence similarity. as a consequence, the obtained clusters are ests which are most likely products of the same gene. each cluster was then assembled into one or more tentative consensus sequences , which were derived from multiple est alignments. as described in methods, tcs within a cluster shared at least 90% identity within a window of  <dig> nucleotides. therefore, the presence of multiple tcs in a cluster could be due to possible alternative transcripts, to paralogy or to domain sharing. in addition, all the ests that, during the clustering/assembling process, did not meet the match criteria to be clustered/assembled with any other est in the collection, were defined as singleton ests. the combination of tcs and singletons are referred to as unique transcripts.

the total number of clusters generated was  <dig> . they were assembled into  <dig>  tcs comprising  <dig>  est reads. the tc length ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>   nucleotides, while tc average length was  <dig> nucleotides.  <dig>  were the clusters assembled into multiple tcs . the total number of singleton ests  was  <dig> , with an average length of  <dig> nucleotides .

the analysis of the full est collection from this work revealed an average gc-content of  <dig> %, ranging from less than 16% to more than 63%.

database web interface
the olea est database consists of a main relational database  which collects raw as well as processed data generated by parpest. this is supported by three local satellite databases: myenzyme, a local copy of the enzyme repository which was built by parsing the enzclass.txt and the enzyme.dat files  retrieved from the expasy ftp site; mygo, a mirror of the gene ontology database, which was built by running the seqdblite mysql script  downloaded from the go database archives; mykegg, which was built by parsing xml files of the kegg pathways , retrieved from the kegg  <cit>  ftp site. a php-based web application provides user-friendly data querying, browsing and visualization.

the web interface  includes java tree-views for easy object navigation as well as the possibility to highlight on-the-fly the enzymes in the pathway image files retrieved from the kegg ftp site.

functional annotation
in order to identify olea unigenes coding for proteins with a known function, we used a blastx-based annotation that provided  <dig>  tcs with significant similarities to proteins in the uniprotkb database; the remaining  <dig>   had no function assigned. a higher number of sests with no function was obtained , representing  <dig> % of the total.

when considering annotated tcs and sests with respect to the origin of the protein data source, the bulk of the identifications , concerned proteins of plant origin, as expected.

tcs and sests coding for enzymes with assigned ec number were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively  following the enzyme classification scheme . the majority of the enzyme-related unigenes encode for transferases , hydrolases  and oxidoreductases . of particular relevance for fruit metabolism are those tcs and sests involved in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites  and lipids  . most frequently, the same enzymatic function is redundantly encoded by several unigenes, this may be the result of different proteins referenced with the same ec number or the effect of different transcripts encoding specific enzyme subunits. given the limited sequence length typically provided by  <dig> pyrosequencing, it is also plausible that in some cases different tcs and sests cover non-matching fragments of the enzyme transcript coding frame.

changes in transcript abundance
in principle, the higher the number of ests assembled in a specific tc, the higher the number of mrna molecules encoding that particular gene in a given tissue sample. however, differences in transcript abundance may reflect sampling errors rather than genuine differences in gene expression. hence, in order to identify differentially expressed genes in the four sequenced fruit cdna collections, the statistical r test  <cit>  was applied, as a measure of the extent to which the observed differences in the gene transcription among samples reflect their actual heterogeneity. applying this test and further filtering criteria to select differentially expressed tcs among the four sets , we selected  <dig>  differentially expressed tcs,  <dig>  of them with a predicted annotation and  <dig>  with no similarity with other sequences in the public databases .

clustering of differentially expressed tcs distinguished gene transcripts differentially expressed during fruit development from those differentially expressed between genotypes, evidencing that the former were more numerous than the latter. c was the genotype showing the highest expression differences between the two stages . this result was confirmed by pca analysis, where transcripts from the second stage of c were significantly divergent from the remaining ones .

transcript differences affect several important physiological processes that promote fruit growth and development. transcripts identified as differentially expressed between  <dig> and  <dig> daf in both genotypes and between genotypes, grouped in  <dig> categories on the basis of their predicted annotations, showed that different biological processes are modulated at the molecular level by stringent genetic and developmental signals . transcripts involved in photosynthesis, in biosynthesis of structural proteins , in terpenoid and flavonoid biosynthesis, in cell wall metabolism, in cellular communication  and responses to biotic and abiotic stresses, were mainly expressed at  <dig> daf, whereas the majority of gene transcripts related to different primary metabolic pathways  as well as transcription factors and regulators and genes involved in vitamin biosynthesis, were more expressed at  <dig> daf .

a wide set of genotype-specific tcs, mainly related to hormone biosynthesis and signalling, responses to abiotic and biotic stresses, biosynthesis of terpenes and phenylpropanoids, were also observed .

furthermore, tcs encoding structural enzymes synthesizing terpenoids and terpenoid precursors  and isopentenyl diphosphate ) fluctuated between developmental stages . transcripts involved in the mevalonate  pathway for isoprenoid biosynthesis, occurring in the cytoplasm, were predominantly not regulated, while six out of seven genes coding for the main enzymes of the plastidial non-mevalonate  pathway, presented tcs more abundant at  <dig> daf.

finally, transcripts involved in flavonoid biosynthesis were also regulated between developmental stages and genotypes .

discussion
sequencing output
this is the first report of a large-scale and comparative est analysis from olive fruit. olive is one of the most important oil crops in the world. it belongs to the asterid clade of angiosperms, that includes thousands of economically important crops for which genomic information is still scarce. the massive est characterization described here can be considered an initial platform for the functional genomics of olea europaea and will be a starting point for the establishment of molecular tools for improving the major quality traits in olea species. massively parallel est sequencing provided more than  <dig>  unigenes consisting in  <dig>  tcs and  <dig>  singletons from four fruit libraries. considering  <dig> available data on expressed genes of other plant species, such as arabidopsis  <cit> , it is possible that the reported unigene set of olea is an over estimate of the actual number of transcripts expressed in the fruit. this could in part be the result of unassembled segments of tcs and sests pertaining to the same transcript unit. a certain amount of incomplete est assembly is expected as a result of the short reads provided by the  <dig> pyrosequencing technology.

despite the fact that cdna samples were prepared without any normalization process, we only found a moderate degree of redundancy. clustering of ests has indeed reduced the number of sequences by 61% from  <dig>  quality passed reads to  <dig>  tcs plus  <dig>  sests. repbase masking analysis has revealed a surprising amount of short repeats and transposable elements , which could represent a valuable resource to develop te-derived molecular markers  <cit>  and to investigate on olea genome size evolution. also, the gc-content of  <dig> %, ranging from less than 16% to more than 63%, can provide a contribution to the evolution studies and gene transfer dynamics within the oleaceae taxon.

functional annotation
the percentage of tcs and singletons with no putative function assigned was considerably elevated, possibly as a result of gene functions specifically evolved in olea europaea and quite divergent from those of other plant species. the olea fruit, indeed, presents a number of exclusive traits, like, above all, oil and biophenol accumulation. these traits are encoded at genomic level. on the other hand, the high incidence of unigenes with no assigned function , could be due to the poor annotation that still affects protein databases. also, it is possible that many tcs and sests could not be reliably annotated because they did not cover the entire length of the transcript or because they represent untranslated regions . this could be particularly the case of our dataset given that the  <dig> sequencing technology typically provides short sequence reads.

the identification in the olea genome of transcribed sequences similar to a wide range of phylogenetically distant organisms raises intriguing questions about the evolution of their physiological roles and about whether or not these sequences and the related functions are the result of recent gene transfer or the relic of an ancient past.

it is important to note that about 25% of the annotated enzyme-coding transcripts are involved in biosynthesis of lipids and fruit metabolites. the availability of the genetic information related to these enzyme functions represents, in our view, a fundamental tool for understanding the molecular basis of the expression of traits related to fruit phenotype and for establishing new strategies of metabolic engineering to improve the overall quality of olive fruit.

changes in transcript abundances
large scale random sequencing of different fruit cdna collections has provided information on relative large scale variation of gene expression. however, it should be noted that no further experimental validation has been performed on differentially expressed tcs passing the r test  <cit> .

analysis of differentially expressed gene transcripts evidenced large differences in key genes involved in a number of metabolic pathways that can potentially alter most quality traits in olive fruits. in some cases, different tcs with identical predicted annotation showed a contrasting accumulation pattern between developing stages or between genotypes; this implies that similar, although not identical, proteins and enzymes may undergo different expression patterns, determining a fine regulation of metabolic pathways and the accumulation of alternative metabolites.

it is interesting to note that the c cultivar underwent a larger degree of transcriptional modulation during fruit development. it is possible that this is related to the very high content in phenolic compounds at the beginning of fruit development in this cultivar.

comparison between fruit developmental stages
expression differences were found for transcripts involved in several physiological processes that promote fruit growth and development. plant cells require sugars to synthesize lipids and acetyl-coa is the precursor of carbon chain elongation in all fatty acids. photosynthesis is an important source of sugars for mesocarp development and olive oil biogenesis. photoassimilates translocated from leaves to fruit mesocarp by phloem are another indispensable source of sugars in developing fruits  <cit> . at the end of the ripening process, concurrently to the decrease of chlorophyll content in fruit mesocarp and to the gradual color change, the intense mitochondrial respiration of photoassimilates translocated from leaves to fruits through the phloem, becomes the main energy source sustaining fruit ripening  <cit> . consistent with this fact, tcs with predicted functions related to photosynthesis  were more represented at  <dig> daf, while transcripts associated with carbohydrate metabolism  were more represented at  <dig> daf.

generally, transcript fluctuations were consistent with the physiological status of the fruit. the higher expression of transcripts related to the biosynthesis of structural proteins at  <dig> daf may be correlated with the intense and rapid cell divisions during fruit growth, while the higher expression of transcripts putatively associated with fatty acid biosynthesis and with the assembly of storage triacylglycerols  at  <dig> daf, is in agreement with fatty acid accumulation pattern in olive fruits, starting at about  <dig> daf until the end of fruit maturation  <cit> .

this work has allowed the identification of most tcs related to secoiridoid conjugate  biosynthesis, deriving from the conjugation of an esterified phenolic moiety  and an oleoside moiety   <cit> . tcs related to the mevalonate pathway were not significantly regulated with the exception of mvapp decarboxylase, leading to the biosynthesis of ipp, a common precursor for all secoiridoid oleosides. surprisingly, this tc was up-regulated in both cultivars at fruit veraison, when the secoiridoid content is decreasing. the non-mva pathway, recently discovered in plant chloroplasts, produces various classes of terpenoids, mostly hemiterpenes, monoterpenes, diterpenes and carotenoids  <cit> . in higher plants, both pathways operate simultaneously and their physical compartmentalization does not preclude exchanges of metabolic intermediates, although the nature of this crosstalk remains to be elucidated  <cit> . it is likely that the specialization of each pathway can play a key role in regulating the biosynthesis of specific end products during olive fruit development.

given the very high accumulation of secoiridoids  in developing fruits, the terpenoid metabolic pathway must be strongly oriented toward the secoiridoid biosynthesis branch. unfortunately, the main enzymes and related genes involved in oleuropein biosynthesis are still unknown, hence the information provided by our comparative genomics survey cannot provide direct insight into the molecular basis of secoiridoids accumulation. since c and t show extremely different oleuropein accumulation patterns, it is likely that transcripts encoding key enzymes for oleuropein biosynthesis show specific differences in their accumulation patterns in these two cultivars. in this respect, mining of tcs differentially expressed in t vs. c, with functional annotations compatible with enzymes for oleuropein biosynthesis, or with no functional annotation, is under way to address this point.

other classes of phenolic compounds are known to be less represented in olive fruits. nonetheless, specific alteration of gene transcripts encoding a number of structural enzymes suggests that even metabolites synthesized from secondary branches can show differential expression following developmental and genetic cues.

the common precursor of both secoiridoids and indole alkaloids, is deoxyloganic acid. also loganin and secologanin, leading to indole alkaloid synthesis, could possibly be involved in biosynthesis of secoiridoids  <cit> . the fact that three tcs putatively encoding secologanine synthase  are more represented at  <dig> daf, while  <dig> tcs are instead more represented at  <dig> daf, deserves further investigation to verify to which extent fine regulation of different secologanine synthases can affect the actual accumulation of specific secoiridoid/indole alkaloid products. alternate regulation of distinct tcs sharing identical annotations has proven to be a quite common condition in the olea transcriptome , suggesting that the well known plasticity of metabolite accumulation in olive fruits could be the result of the fine modulation of genes encoding different enzyme isoforms.

although the flavonoid content of olive fruits is relatively low compared to other phenolic classes and the pattern of their accumulation during fruit development is still unknown, transcriptional differences observed between  <dig> daf and  <dig> daf are in general agreement with data available from other fruit species  <cit> .

comparison between c and t genotypes
the est database also contains comparative information between fruits of the c and t genotypes. this can be particularly informative, considering that, as previously reported, the two genotypes have extremely differentiated fruit phenolic content. on the other hand, the lack of genetic information on the biosynthesis of secoiridoids in plants makes it impossible to find orthologs in protein databases, thus precluding the possibility to identify ests directly correlated to their accumulation in the olive fruit.

among genotype-specific transcripts, several tcs putatively involved in the biosynthesis of steroids with nutritional and health benefits, were reported exclusively in c. two tcs, specific to c, encode r-limonene synthase  <dig>  and  <dig> -cineole synthase , which are related to the biosynthesis of important flavour compounds, such as -r-limonene, one of the most abundant monocyclic monoterpenes in nature  <cit>  and  <dig> -cineole, also known as eucalyptol, a monoterpenic oxide present in many plant essential oils.

a number of other genotype-specific tcs could account for biologically relevant differences between c and t and provide a useful hint for focused biochemical analyses. in general, genotype-specific tcs were prevalent in c, supporting the hypothesis that c fruits may synthesize a wider array of secondary metabolites. the olea est database will be a useful tool for unravelling the biochemical diversity of olive fruits.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we describe the first large est collection of olea europaea l. it represents a valuable resource to assist a preliminary evaluation of features from the olea europaea genome . the est database can be consulted through a user friendly web interface that provides useful tools for data querying, blast services, browsing and visualization.

comparative sequencing of four fruit cdna collections has provided information on variation of gene expression during fruit development and between two genotypes with contrasting phenolic accumulation in fruits.

analysis of differentially expressed gene transcripts evidenced large differences in key genes involved in a number of metabolic pathways that can potentially control most quality traits in olive fruits.

