BACKGROUND
wolbachia pipientis is a maternally inherited intracellular bacterium that infects a very large number of arthropod and nematode species  <cit>  and can induce a variety of reproductive manipulations in arthropods to confer a selective advantage on infected females, thus promoting population invasion  <cit> . the most common manipulation is known as cytoplasmic incompatibility   <cit> . in the simplest form of unidirectional ci, uninfected females produce inviable offspring when mated with wolbachia-infected males, while wolbachia-infected females produce viable offspring when mated with both infected and uninfected males. bidirectional ci can also occur, in which wolbachia-infected females are incompatible with males infected with a different wolbachia strain. at present little is known about the molecular mechanisms of ci, and this represents a critical roadblock in our understanding of wolbachia biology. identification of ci genes would also be beneficial for disease control applications using wolbachia. some wolbachia strains have been found to block or reduce transmission of human viruses  and parasites such as filarial nematodes and plasmodium
; use of inhibitory wolbachia for population replacement has shown considerable promise in field trials  <cit> .

one approach to identifying genes involved in ci is genomic analysis of wolbachia, comparing closely related incompatible strains with each other, or comparing ci-inducing strains with related strains that do not induce ci. in d. simulans the wolbachia variant wau expresses neither sperm modification in males, nor rescue of ci in females ; in other words wau is ‘mod- resc-’, while ci-inducing strains are designated mod + resc +  <cit> . the wau strain has, however, been shown to provide its drosophila host with a degree of protection against the effects of pathogenic viruses  <cit> . the wmel strain, from d. melanogaster, is most closely related to wau and does induce ci; thus genes differing between these strains are candidates for involvement in ci  <cit> . the genome sequence of wmel has already been reported  <cit> , so here we undertook wau genome sequencing in order to enable a comparative analysis.

although the genomes of several wolbachia strains have been published , acquisition of sequence data has been limited by the difficulty in obtaining a sufficient quantity and purity of wolbachia genomic dna . wolbachia are obligate endosymbionts that cannot be cultured outside of their hosts, and are often present in relatively low abundance. obtaining enough gdna has thus required time-consuming amplification and purification protocols to minimize contamination with host gdna. in addition, assembly has been complicated by numerous repeated sequences. here we utilised the pacific biosciences  rs ii platform for sequencing; the long reads generated by this technology facilitate assembly through genomic repeats.

previous comparative analysis of the genomes of mutual incompatibility-generating wolbachia wpip sub-strains infecting culex pipiens mosquitoes  <cit>  revealed highly similar genomes with a small number of whole gene differences. most notably this included a transcriptional regulator gene designated wtrm identified in wpip from cx. molestus  but absent in wpip from cx. quinquefasciatus pel and jhb , which are bidirectionally incompatible with cx. molestus
 <cit> . transfection of cx. quinquefasciatus females with wtrm resulted in significant upregulation of cpij <dig>  a host gene implicated in ci based on knockdown studies  <cit> . eight paralogous putative transcriptional regulator genes are present in wmel . a specific comparison of these transcriptional regulator genes in wmel and their homologs in wau was therefore conducted to further investigate the hypothesis that disruptions to these genes could be responsible for the different ci phenotypes of these strains.

RESULTS
genomic dna purity assessment
approximate calculations based on quantitative pcr  c values for wau and host genes were performed to estimate the degree of contamination with host gdna in wau gdna samples extracted from cultured cells and whole adult flies. the estimated purity of wau gdna was ~60% for the extract from cultured cells, and >90% for the extract from whole adult flies. the latter is comparable to the figure of up to 97% reported previously  <cit>  using the same extraction method. there is no previous data on wolbachia gdna extraction from cultured cells. one explanation for the lower purity could be that wolbachia densities may be lower within cultured cells than in vivo.

genome sequencing and assembly
wau genome sequencing was initially performed using the illumina platform on gdna extracted from whole adult files. however, the resulting assembly was fragmented in the regions of most interest, with scaffold positions uncertain. a second round of sequencing was therefore performed using the pacbio rs ii system to obtain longer reads in an attempt to improve the assembly, using gdna extracted from cultured cells rather whole adult files. the illumina data was used to correct errors in the pacbio reads, which assembled into a single contig.

the achievement of a single contig assembly shows that pacbio represents an extremely useful new sequencing platform for rapid generation of finished bacterial genome assemblies. furthermore, the generation of this single contig from a very small amount of dna , containing a substantial amount of host dna contamination , suggests that pacbio is well suited to use in cases where it is hard to obtain a large amount of gdna, including obligate endosymbionts, like wolbachia, that cannot be cultured outside of host cells. the sequence generated was largely consistent with data produced using the illumina platform, with only one single nucleotide polymorphism  between the two datasets. there were  <dig> indels relative to illumina data; these were mostly single nucleotide insertions in the pacbio sequence, and were located in homopolymeric tracts, regions that are known to be prone to insertion errors in pacbio sequencing  <cit> . these were corrected after mapping the illumina reads to the pacbio assembly. combining the pacbio reads with the shorter but more accurate illumina reads was found to be a very useful approach, consistent with other findings  <cit> .

the use of cultured insect cell lines to obtain gdna for genome sequencing represents a methodological departure from previous studies. all previous wolbachia genomes have been sequenced using gdna extracted directly from their native hosts. it is a time-consuming and often laborious process to rear sufficient numbers of the host insects for wolbachia gdna extraction, particularly for species with demanding rearing requirements. transinfection of cells with wolbachia is fairly easy to achieve, and amplification of cells to a suitable number is easier, quicker, and requires less space than whole organisms; this study used  <dig> flasks of cells, which were generated from a single flask in a few weeks. concerns that the sequence of the wau from cultured cells might have accumulated differences compared to the wau genome found in flies, due to a relaxation in cell lines of the selective pressures that apply in its native host, were alleviated by the observation of only one snp between the sequence obtained using wau from cultured cells and that using wau from its native host. it is possible that after a longer period of time more differences from wolbachia in vivo would accumulate, so use of recently generated wolbachia-infected cell lines, as employed here, is advisable.

wau genome features
the wau genome is a single circular chromosome of  <dig> ,461 bp. it has  <dig> predicted genes, corresponding to a coding content of 84%. the major features of the genome, along with those of the wmel genome, are shown in table  <dig>  overall, the wau and wmel genomes are similar, but with a significant amount of rearrangement .table  <dig> 
general features of
w
au and
w
mel genomes



genome size 

g + c content 

predicted cdss

coding density 

average gene size 

transfer rnas

ribosomal rnas

prophage regionssimilarity between
w
au and
w
mel genomes. a dot plot illustrating the similarity between wau and wmel genomes. axes show position in the genome . lines indicate regions of similarity. lines on the diagonal from top left to bottom right indicate regions with the same location and arrangement in both genomes. lines in the same orientation as this diagonal but located elsewhere indicate regions that are translocated in one genome relative to the other. lines at right angles to the diagonal indicate regions that are inverted in one genome relative to the other. parallel lines indicate repeated or similar regions.



like wmel, there is a large amount of dna corresponding to mobile genetic elements in the wau genome, including numerous insertion sequence  elements. for example,  <dig> putative is <dig> elements were identified, although most are likely to be inactive due to mutations or frameshifts. some elements appear to have been active since the divergence of wmel and wau, as their locations in the genome differ between the two strains. in some cases their movement has resulted in disruption of genes in one strain. in many cases where there are structural differences between the genomes of the strains, it seems that mobile elements have provided a mechanism for the rearrangement.

comparison of prophage regions
there are three prophage regions in the wau genome, as for wmel, although the location and structure of these regions differs between the two strains . the prophage region designated wo-a  in wmel  is inverted in wau relative to wmel, and is further from the origin of replication . several genes in this region differ in one strain relative to the other beyond snps . four genes are disrupted in wau relative to wmel, due to truncation , frameshift, nonsense mutation, or start codon mutation, two are disrupted in wmel relative to wau, and two contain small in frame indels.figure  <dig> 
comparison of wo-a in
w
au and
w
mel. alignment of the wo-a prophage region between wau and wmel. matching sequences corresponding to predicted cdss, identified using act and geneious alignments, are connected by grey blocks. genes whose sequences differ between strains such that a cds is not predicted in one strain are not represented in the strain lacking the predicted cds, but their corresponding sequences are still connected to the cdss in the other strain by grey blocks. the double-headed black arrow indicate regions that have been drawn inverted relative to their orientation in the genome, for clarity of alignment visualisation. asterisks indicate genes with differences other than snps between wau and wmel. internal indels less than  <dig> bp in size are not shown. predicted cdss are colour coded as follows: green, phage structural or replication genes; yellow, conserved hypotheticals; red, hypotheticals; blue, ankyrin repeat genes; magenta, transposases or reverse transcriptases. white arrows indicate sequences that are not annotated in one of the two strains and are probable pseudogenes or mis-annotations. predicted cdss that result from interruptions, frameshifts or nonsense mutations, which are combined into a single cds in the other strain, are coloured the same as the cds from which they are derived, even though they may also be pseudogenes.
comparison of wo-b in
w
au and
w
mel. alignment of the wo-b prophage region between wau and wmel, constructed and presented as for figure  <dig>  with the same cds colour coding, namely: green, phage structural or replication genes; yellow, conserved hypotheticals; red, hypotheticals; blue, ankyrin repeat genes; magenta, transposases or reverse transcriptases.
comparison of genes inserted within
w
mel wo-b in
w
au and
w
mel. alignment of genes inserted within wmel wo-b between wau and wmel, constructed and presented as for figure  <dig>  with the cds colour coding: green, phage structural or replication genes; yellow, conserved hypotheticals; red, hypotheticals; blue, ankyrin repeat genes; magenta, transposases or reverse transcriptases; orange, enzyme genes; brown, membrane protein genes; purple, radc; black, transcriptional regulator genes; grey, others.
comparison of pyocin-like element in
w
au and
w
mel. alignment of the pyocin-like prophage region between wau and wmel, constructed and presented as for figure  <dig>  with the cds colour coding: green, phage structural or replication genes; yellow, conserved hypotheticals; red, hypotheticals; blue, ankyrin repeat genes, grey, others.



the region designated wo-b  in wmel  is closer to the origin of replication in wau . this region contains two segments, one closely related to p <dig> phage and the other to lambdoid phage  <cit> . in wau the p2-like segment is inverted relative to its orientation in wmel. in addition, in wmel there are intervening genes between the lambdoid-like block and p2-like block, whereas in wau the two blocks are contiguous. these differences mean that unlike wmel wo-b, the gene order of wau wo-b is highly conserved with that of wo phage in wkue  <cit> , from which wo-a and wo-b were named  <cit> . as in wo-a, a high proportion of the genes in wo-b are disrupted in one of the two strains. five genes are disrupted in wau relative to wmel, due to truncation or frameshift; another five are disrupted in wmel relative to wau, due to frameshift, is element insertion or start codon mutation. several of the genes between the lambdoid-like and p2-like blocks in wmel, which include three of the transcriptional regulator genes discussed below, also differ significantly between wmel and wau . in addition to a higher than average frequency of snps between the two strains, five genes are disrupted in wau relative to wmel, due to truncation, frameshift or nonsense mutation, while two are disrupted in wmel relative to wau. two genes contain small indels, and two more  are absent in wau, discussed further below.

the third prophage region, a small pyocin-like element comprising wd <dig> – wd <dig> in wmel , is closer to the origin of replication in wau . one gene is disrupted in wau relative to wmel, by a nonsense mutation, and four genes are disrupted in wmel relative to wau, by frameshift, nonsense mutation or truncation. in addition, there is an insertion after the first gene in wau relative to wmel, in which two additional genes are annotated. overall the level of difference between wmel and wau in these three prophage regions is much higher than elsewhere in the genome.

genes potentially inactive in wau
various other wmel genes were also identified with large differences potentially causing inactivation in wau, or which are absent from wau entirely, as listed in table  <dig>  it is likely that ci is a complex process involving many genes, with the host genetic background also playing a role . any genes with differences between ci and non-ci inducing strains are possible candidates for involvement in the process, but it seems reasonable to focus more attention on genes that are entirely absent or potentially inactivated. as has previously been reported  <cit> , a region corresponding to genes wd <dig> to wd <dig> is absent in wau; no other indel of comparable size to the wd <dig> to wd <dig> segment was found to be absent in the wau genome. however, of note was the absence in wau of two genes, wd <dig> and wd <dig>  that have recently been identified as ci candidates due to the detection in cx. pipiens spermathecae of a protein corresponding to the wd <dig> ortholog in the wpip strain  <cit> ; the wd <dig> and wd <dig> orthologs are transcribed as an operon  <cit> . various other genes are potentially inactivated in wau relative to wmel, by truncation, frameshift, mobile element insertion, nonsense mutation or start codon mutation, as shown in table  <dig>  whether and how these differences contribute to ci is worthy of further investigation.table  <dig> 
w
mel genes potentially inactive in
w
au




wd0092
wpwau0139/wpwau0140

wd0139
wpwau0095

wd0196

wd0254
wpwau0256/wpwau0257/wpwau0686/wpwau0687

wd0274
wpwau0651

wd0284
wpwau0640/wpwau0641

wd0288
wpwau0636

wd0294
wpwau0631

wd0295
wpwau0322/wpwau0323

wd0382
wpwau0417/wpwau0418/wpwau0419

wd0383
wpwau0420/wpwau0421

wd0385
wpwau0423/wpwau0426/wpwau0427

wd0446

wpwau0482

wd0462

wpwau0495

wd0463
wpwau0496

wd0472

wpwau0508

wd0507

wd0508

wd0509

wd0511

wd0512

wd0513

wd0514

wd0548
wpwau0565

wd0572
wpwau0271

wd0582


wpwau0284

wd0591
wpwau0289

wd0594

wpwau0292

wd0609

wpwau0670

wd0610

wpwau0672

wd0619
wpwau0681

wd0622



wpwau0687

wd0630
wpwau0249

wd0631

wd0632

wd0636

wpwau0315

wd0638

wpwau0312

wd0682
wpwau0607

wd0686


wpwau0618

wd0696
wpwau0698

wd0766
wpwau0768

wd1041


wpwau1094

wd1111

wpwau0888

wd1180
wpwau1182

wd1187
wpwau1187

wd1320
wpwau1315
truncation refers to shortening of the gene sequence due to partial deletion or genome rearrangement. small hypothetical genes with multiple matches are not included, as these are likely to be remnants of mobile elements. genes annotated as truncations in wmel are not included, as these are likely to be inactive in wmel.



comparison of transcriptional regulator genes
following a prior comparative genomic study of sub-strains of wpip wolbachia from cx. pipiens mosquitoes  <cit> , which implicated a transcriptional regular gene designated wtrm in ci, a comparison of the family of transcriptional regulator genes between wau and wmel constituted a focus of this study. these transcriptional regulator genes were found to differ in both organisation in the genome and sequence. figure  <dig> illustrates the homology between wau and wmel transcriptional regulator genes; also shown is a comparison between wmel and wri, a ci-inducing strain found in d. simulans. figure  <dig> illustrates the differences between proteins that would be produced from the wmel transcriptional regulator genes and their corresponding sequences in wau. of particular note is that the ortholog of wd <dig> is highly disrupted by a frameshift in wau. the two identical sequences corresponding to wd <dig>  have a 1 bp insertion in wau relative to wmel, after bp  <dig>  which causes a frameshift that would lead to premature termination of translation after  <dig> amino acids. genes corresponding to the last  <dig> amino acids of wd <dig>  are also predicted since a substitution has produced a new start codon, although these may be mis-predictions, as numerous snps and deletions have accumulated relative to wd <dig>  none of these genes include the dna binding domains present in wd <dig>  suggesting that even if they are functional their activity is likely to differ significantly from that of their counterpart in wmel. furthermore, there are is <dig> elements inserted immediately downstream of the wau genes corresponding to wd <dig>  so it may be that the regulation of the genes differs between the two strains. genes such as this, which are conserved between multiple ci-inducing strains  but disrupted in a non-ci strain, are prime candidates for involvement in ci.figure  <dig> 
homology between transcriptional regulator genes. an illustration of the wmel transcriptional regulator genes and their homologs in wau  and wri , identified using act and geneious alignments. genes depicted in the same colour are thought to be paralogous within an individual strain, and either orthologous or paralogous between strains. numbers indicate the percentage amino acid similarity between any proteins produced from these genes.
differences in proteins from transcriptional regulator genes between
w
au and
w
mel. an illustration of the differences between proteins that would be produced from the wmel transcriptional regulator genes and their corresponding sequences in wau. proteins predicted from the wau sequences are shown. green indicates identity with the wmel translated sequence. blue indicates substitution with a similar amino acid. red indicates substitution with a dissimilar amino acid. yellow indicates inserted amino acids that are present in the wau protein but not the wmel protein. white indicates deleted amino acids that are present in the wmel protein but not the wau protein. the locations of dna binding domains predicted from the translated wmel sequences are shown. substitutions involving proline residues are indicated with arrows. – p: loss of a proline residue; + p: gain of a proline residue.



in the wmel genome, wd <dig>  wd <dig>  wd <dig>  wd <dig> and wd <dig> are in two regions that appear to be paralogous; wd <dig> is a truncated paralog of wd <dig>  and wd <dig> a paralog of wd <dig>  in the wau genome, there also appear to be two genome segments containing paralogous sequences at approximately the same genomic positions as in wmel. however, the segment at a similar position to wd <dig> and wd <dig> is inverted relative to its orientation in wmel and is adjacent to genes that match wd0628-wd <dig> in wmel, suggesting that one or more translocations have occurred, encompassing wd <dig> to wd0630; flanking is elements provide a putative mechanism for its translocation and inversion. unlike in wmel, in which there are sequence differences between the paralogs in the two paralogous transcriptional regulator regions, in wau wpwau <dig>  wpwau <dig> and wpwau <dig> are identical to wpwau <dig>  wpwau <dig> and wpwau <dig> respectively, while wpwau <dig> is identical to wpwau <dig> after the first 84 bp; this suggests that replacement by intragenomic recombination has occurred. wd <dig> appears to have an ortholog in wau, wpwau <dig>  in a similar genomic position, while there is no ortholog of wd <dig> present in wau, consistent with a previous study that found that the region spanning wd <dig> to wd <dig> in wmel is absent from wau  <cit> . this gene is also absent in several other ci-inducing wolbachia strains  <cit> .

analysis of the other transcriptional regulator gene sequences indicates that protein products from these genes would be different between wau and wmel , particularly wd <dig> and wd <dig>  the two identical wau genes corresponding to wd <dig>  both have three small insertions in the putative dna binding domains that result in an extra four amino acids and one amino acid substitution; there are  <dig> further amino acid substitutions,  <dig> of which are located in the putative dna binding domains. there are substitutions involving proline residues; due to the unique conformational rigidity of the proline side chain, this could have a large impact on the secondary structure of any protein produced, and thus probably also its function. there are also snps and a 6 bp insertion in 5′ upstream regions where promoter elements have been shown to occur in prokaryotes, centred at − <dig> and − <dig>  <cit> . in the wau homolog of wd <dig>  wpwau <dig>  two small insertions in the putative dna binding domains would result in an extra three amino acids and one amino acid substitution. in addition there are  <dig> amino acid substitutions,  <dig> of which are located in the putative dna binding domains. there are also snps and a 16 bp deletion in the 5′ upstream region spanning the − <dig> and − <dig> positions. another factor that may affect expression is their different genomic location; in wmel, wd <dig>  wd <dig> and wd <dig> are located within a prophage region, whereas in wau this is not the case. the precise impact of all these differences described on protein function is hard to predict, but given in particular the changes in dna binding domains it seems highly likely that their activity will be affected.

the total snp density and the density of non-synonymous snps  for wd <dig> and wd <dig> relative to their wau orthologs are at the extreme end of the distributions of these measures over the genome . comparing these measures between gene categories shows that the transcriptional regulator genes as a whole have a much higher density of total snps and non-synonymous snps than all other categories, as well as a higher density of synonymous snps  . a kruskal-wallis test shows a statistically significant difference between groups for total snp density, dn and ds , and post-hoc pairwise wilcoxon tests with benjamini-hochberg correction show a statistically significant difference in total snp density and dn between the transcriptional regulator genes and all other categories except genes for ankyrin repeat proteins . ds was not significantly different between transcriptional regulator genes and other groups, except the structural protein and hypothetical protein groups. these findings suggest that the transcriptional regulator genes may be under positive selection.figure  <dig> 
frequency distribution of snp density and dn. graph showing the number of protein-coding genes in the wmel genome within each snp density  and dn  category. the frequency axis is drawn on a log scale. the bins containing the transcriptional regulator genes included in the analysis are indicated. pseudogenes, genes that are potentially inactivated in wau, is elements and other genes with multiple ambiguous matches are excluded. the transcriptional regulator gene wd <dig> is excluded as its closest wau sequence contains a frameshift and is more similar to wd <dig>  dn – number of non-synonymous snps per potential site.
mean snp density, dn and ds by gene category. graph showing the mean snp density, dn, and ds for different categories of protein-coding gene in the wmel genome. error bars represent the standard error of the mean. pseudogenes, genes that are potentially inactivated in wau, is elements and other genes with multiple ambiguous matches are excluded. the transcriptional regulator gene wd <dig> is excluded as its closest wau sequence contains a frameshift and is more similar to wd <dig>  dn – number of non-synonymous snps per potential site. ds – number of synonymous snps per potential site.



to confirm whether any of these transcriptional regulator genes are involved in ci, functional studies are required, although these are currently difficult to undertake in the absence of an effective wolbachia transformation methodology. expression vectors have been used for transfection and shown to change transcription levels of a host cell cycle regulator, but their tissue distribution is uneven, limiting their use for examining whether a ci-like phenotype can be induced  <cit> . the best approach may be to transform hosts with target wolbachia genes and assess whether a ci phenotype can be induced, as has been performed for ankyrin repeat-encoding genes previously  <cit> , although if multiple interacting wolbachia genes are required to produce the ci phenotype the use of individual genes in this way may not clearly reveal their role. as more wolbachia genomes are sequenced, further comparison of these genes between different strains will also be useful.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, a methodology for conveniently extracting wolbachia gdna for genome sequencing using an infected cell line has been successfully employed, and the pacbio rs ii sequencing platform has proved a very useful tool for achieving a complete bacterial assembly, particularly when combined with illumina sequencing. using this approach, a single contig assembly has been generated for the genome of the wau strain, which does not induce ci. comparison of this genome to that of wmel, which does induce ci, revealed significant structural differences in the prophage regions and loss or potential inactivation of a number of genes. transcriptional regulator genes in particular displayed considerable differences between wau and wmel, both in terms of genomic location and sequence; of these the wmel gene wd <dig> may be the most promising to examine as a ci candidate. given that a transcriptional regulator gene has previously been implicated in ci, these represent important targets for further functional studies on the mechanism of ci. the wmel genome region containing the transcriptional regulator genes wd <dig>  wd <dig>  wd <dig> and wd <dig> is also of particular interest with respect to ci given the proximity of wd0631- <dig>  absent in wau, because a wd <dig> ortholog protein was recently identified in mosquito spermathecae. the current study thus contributes to the important basic aim of gaining a better understanding of the molecular basis of ci.

