BACKGROUND
large bone defects are hard to treat and cause pain, disability and high cost. autologous bone grafting is the clinical gold standard for the regeneration of large defects in patients. however, the limited amount of bone tissue available for autografting and donor site morbidity represent significant drawbacks of this method
 <cit> . bone morphogenetic proteins are clinically used for the treatment of long-bone fractures and for enhanced spinal fusion
 <cit>  but their delivery needs improvement due to their short biological half-lives
 <cit> . gene transfer is an improved way of delivering such growth factors as it is possible to achieve high concentrations locally for an extended period of time
 <cit> . a suitable vector for the purpose of inducing bone growth in a lesion is adenovirus as it is a non-integrating vector with high transduction efficiency. additionally, in vivo expression stops after about six weeks which may just provide enough stimulus for bone repair avoiding the risk of excessive ectopic overgrowth of bone. in previous studies, we evaluated the effects of direct in vivo gene delivery to bone defects in a rat model
 <cit>  and generated encouraging data. however, to further improve bone repair by gene therapy, we believe that it is necessary to supply not only an osteogenic gene, but also stem cells and a scaffold. most ex vivo gene therapy approaches utilize these three ingredients. the combination of growth factor over-expressing bone marrow derived cells
 <cit> , fat derived cells
 <cit>  and skin cells
 <cit>  together with a matrix has successfully induced bone formation in vivo. it has also been demonstrated that muscle derived stem cells have the potential to differentiate towards the osteogenic lineage and effectively regenerate bone defects in pre-clinical animal models
 <cit> . although ex vivo gene therapy has been very successful in pre-clinical bone repair models, the method is time-consuming and expensive as it requires the isolation and expansion of autologous progenitor cells. for this reason, we developed an expedited ex vivo gene therapy approach which is characterized by the direct transfer of bmp- <dig> cdna to muscle tissue fragments without extracting cells from this tissue. in a recent study, we demonstrated that such expedited gene activated muscle grafts successfully induce repair of large segmental bone defects in rats
 <cit> . the harvest of muscle tissue is a frequently used procedure in reconstructive surgery and only minor donor site morbidity was reported after harvesting the vastus lateralis muscle or the gracilis muscle
 <cit> . muscle tissue could therefore be a practicable source for the augmentation of bone defects after bmp- <dig> gene activation. since autologous bone grafting is the clinical gold standard for the repair of osseous defects in patients we compared our novel expedited ex vivo gene therapy approach to this gold standard evaluating repair of critical-sized femoral bone defects in rats.

RESULTS
six femora of the group treated with ad.bmp- <dig> gene activated muscle grafts and six of the bone grafting group were evaluated by radiographs, micro-computed tomography  and biomechanical torsional testing. intra- and postoperatively, there were no complications and we did not see wound infections or delayed wound healing. the rats were able to bear their full weight on the operated limbs from the day of surgery until they were euthanized. gene activated muscle grafts were well tolerated and produced no obvious adverse effects during the eight weeks of the experiment. all animals showed a normal eating pattern and no weight loss was recorded.

measurement of bmp- <dig> up-regulation by elisa
on day six after transduction bmp- <dig> up-regulation was confirmed by elisa. bmp- <dig> transduced muscle discs produced  <dig> ± 3158 pg/ml bmp- <dig>  bmp- <dig> concentration in supernatants of controls was  <dig> ± 52 pg/ml .

radiographic evaluation
100%  of the animals treated with ad.bmp- <dig> gene activated muscle grafts showed united bones at eight weeks after treatment , and 100%  of the femora treated with bone grafts appeared united radiographically .

micro-computed tomography 
images: all six femora receiving ad.bmp- <dig> gene activated muscle grafts displayed bridging of the 5 mm defects at eight weeks . in the bone grafting group, μct-imaging, in contrast to the conventional radiographic evaluation , reveals incomplete bridging of some defects .

bone volume
the bone volume of femora treated with bmp- <dig> gene activated muscle tissue  was statistically indistinguishable from that of femora treated with bone grafts   .

biomechanical testing
the mechanical properties of the femora treated with bmp- <dig> activated muscle grafts were evaluated by torsional testing and compared to properties of femora treated with bone grafts. femora treated with bmp- <dig> activated muscle grafts showed a torque to failure  and a torsional stiffness  that were in the range of the femora treated with bone grafts  respectively  with no statistically significant difference  .

discussion
the rare disease fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva  taught us that constitutive activation of a bmp type i receptor causes bone growth in muscle tissue
 <cit> . the fact that bmp signaling leads to bone formation in muscle was exploited in our experiment and enabled us to develop a novel abbreviated ex vivo gene transfer approach to bone healing. in this study, bone formation was reliably induced after implantation of bmp- <dig> activated muscle tissue and all defects of this group were bridged at eight weeks. bone volumes measured in former defect areas were similar after treatment with gene activated muscle compared to autologous bone grafting. biomechanical stability was statistically indistinguishable. we repeatedly report successful bone defect repair using the gene activated muscle graft technology. in addition to our previous study where we evaluated healing in the same animal model
 <cit> , we were now able to demonstrate that bmp- <dig> activated muscle repairs large bone defects as effectively as bone grafting. the reason for this success might be that we not only delivered bmp- <dig> in a sustained fashion but also provided a natural degradable scaffold and stem cells by implanting muscle tissue. to our knowledge, this is the first comparison between a cell-based bone repair technology and autologous bone grafting in a pre-clinical large segmental bone defect model. many researchers may eschew this comparison but we believe that, right from the beginning in a small animal model, a novel approach must demonstrate at least equal effectiveness as compared to the clinical gold standard. the fact that we see similar effectiveness encourages us to further develop and improve the technology in order to exceed the efficacy of autologous bone grafting. compared to bone autograft muscle tissue can be harvested in larger quantities causing only low donor site morbidity
 <cit>  and, once gene transfer to muscle grafts has been optimized, it might be a more potent graft material showing higher osteoinductivity leading to faster and more robust bone defect healing.

soft tissue defects require the use of muscle flaps frequently. it was shown, that the harvest of the vastus lateralis or the gracilis muscle only leads to minimal donor site morbidity and even the complete absence of these muscles rarely caused lower extremity weakness
 <cit> . the harvest of either of those muscles in humans should enable us to fill even large, critical size bone defects. upscaling to a large animal model using autograft muscle tissue is the focus of our current research activity.

conventional ex vivo approaches for bone regeneration have been successful in pre-clinical experiments but could not enter widespread clinical use due to complexity and high cost. the most expensive steps are cell isolation and expansion of autologous progenitor cells performed over several weeks under gmp conditions. instead, if production of a cell-based implant took only 1–2 days chances for translation into a clinical setting rose. another expedited gene transfer strategy is the direct percutaneous injection of viral vector into a bone lesion. this approach was investigated in our former studies and led to bone formation in the same femoral defect rat model. however, bone healing was not as robust and reliable as seen with the here presented muscle graft method. also, the direct in vivo gene transfer led to ectopic bone formation due to leakage of the viral vector.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the here presented gene activated muscle graft technology can be considered as an expedited approach combining safety features of ex vivo gene therapy with the simplicity of a direct in vivo approach, especially when applied during a single surgical step. this novel abbreviated gene-enhanced bone repair method should have the potential to be performed during a single surgery as genetically manipulation by adenovirus can be completed within  <dig> to 2 hours. to demonstrate this, in one of our next studies we will take muscle tissue from a rat, genetically modify the tissue fragments intra-operatively and re-implant the gene activated tissue into a bone defect of the same rat. expedited, cost-effective bone regeneration strategies are of great interest as economic burdens impede translation of most common cell-based therapies. in this rat study we were able to show that bmp- <dig> over-expressing autologous muscle grafts repair large segmental bone defects as effectively as autologous bone grafts.

