BACKGROUND
the discovery of micrornas in  <dig>  <cit>  introduced a totally new dimension in our understanding of how gene expression is regulated. animal and plant genomes contain hundreds of microrna genes  <cit>  that control fundamental cellular processes and are implicated in severe diseases. incorporated into a protein complex named risc, micrornas perform posttranscriptional gene regulation either through perfect binding to a cis-regulatory target site in the 3'utr that is subsequently cleaved, leading to mrna degradation, or by imprecise binding preferably of the microrna 5' end to a target site, leading to possibly reversible repression of protein production. while posttranscriptional cleavage is prevalent in plants, translational repression is the predominant type of regulation in animals. our current knowledge about the function of specific micrornas, their targeted messenger rnas, and the exact location of binding sites is limited.

experimental detection of microrna target sites is a costly and time-consuming process. while recent estimates suggest that more than 50% of human protein-coding genes may be regulated by micrornas and that each microrna may bind to 300- <dig> target genes, the latest release of the tarbase database contains information on only  <dig> human in vivo microrna-gene interactions involving  <dig> distinct micrornas and  <dig> distinct genes, a far cry from the actual extent of microrna targeting  <cit> . computational prediction of microrna/gene interactions is a valuable tool for guiding wet-lab experiments, and it remains the only option for systematic genome-wide reconstruction of the complex combinatorial picture of microrna-mediated target binding. it is also a challenging task because of the daunting difficulty of distinguishing true microrna-mrna hybrids against the noisy background of millions of possible microrna-gene combinations and, more generally, because the basic mechanisms of microrna target recognition remain largely unknown. over the recent years many target prediction algorithms have been developed based on different principles . however, the two recurring parameters used by the available methods are i) the existence of a seed match , and ii) evolutionary conservation of the target site across multiple species. utilization of these powerful constraints in prediction algorithms leads to more reliable detection of those functional duplexes containing them, but at the same time limits our ability to identify biologically relevant microrna target sites that do not fulfill these requirements. by definition, organism-specific or simply poorly conserved sites cannot be predicted at all if a conservation filter is applied. it has also been suggested that the seed match requirement may be too stringent, and that at least a second "type" of target sites - the so called 3' compensatory target sites - exists that cannot be detected by the seed match based methods. on the other hand, many potential microrna-target interactions that do involve conserved seed regions may be non-functional in a physiological context  <cit> . furthermore, new biological insights into the mechanisms of target binding have been obtained which could be used for predicting target sites. for example, target site accessibility to the risc complex has been suggested as an important determinant of functional interactions.

we sought to develop a computational technique free from both the seed requirement and the conservation filter and thus capable of predicting species-specific and 3' compensatory target sites. our method, targetspy, incorporates current biological knowledge in form of multiple sequence and structure features evaluated in the framework of the objective machine-learning prediction scheme multiboost with decision stumps as base learner. however, since the  seed match is a strong determinant of target site detection, even though not the only one, we additionally generate predictions for sites with conserved and unconserved seed matches by post-filtering targetspy results. we carried out extensive benchmark tests of the targetspy performance in human and drosophila melanogaster. our results suggest that targetspy, although trained on mouse, achieves the same performance as the best state-of-the-art methods in d.melanogaster, implying that the method can be applied to a broad taxonomic range of species for which no experimentally validated target sites are known. furthermore, on the recently published experimental human dataset, describing changes in protein synthesis mediated by micrornas, our method shows the highest accuracy among all tested prediction algorithms.

RESULTS
classification of prediction approaches
current tools for predicting microrna target sites can be grouped into three distinct classes . class i is constituted by those approaches that make use of neither the seed match requirement nor conservation. class ii contains all approaches that do require a seed match, but make no use of conservation. finally, class iii is for those predictions that both require a seed match and rely on conservation.

targetscans non-conserved
mirbase targets  <cit> 
miranda  <cit> 
pictar  <cit> 
diana-microt  <cit> 
targetscans  <cit> 
pita top  <cit> 
mirtarget <dig>  <cit> 
targetrank  <cit> 
pictar  <cit> 
mirbase targets  <cit> 
targetspy cons. seed
some methods cannot be perfectly fitted into this scheme. for example, while miranda  <cit>  does not require a perfect seed match it weights the seed region so high that on average just around 7% of all predicted target sites show mismatches to the 7-mer seeds . mirbase targets  <cit>  uses miranda for candidate generation, and permits a single mismatch to the seed region. since both approaches additionally require the target site to be conserved, we consider them as members of class iii.

note also that targetspy generally belongs to class i, since our model does not impose a strict seed match requirement and does not consider conservation of target sites. however, we can easily build subsets of our predictions that satisfy the criteria of class ii and iii. throughout this work we refer to the subset of targetspy predictions containing a perfect 7-mer seed match as targetspy seed. likewise, targetspy conserved seed denotes a set of predicted target sites containing a conserved seed match .

computational pipeline for predicting microrna target sites
our intention here is to build a pipeline for predicting microrna target sites based on the multiple features described in the methods section. at run time targetspy takes two multiple fasta files as input; one with the 3' utr sequences and the other one with the mature microrna sequences. note that no other extrinsic information, such as evolutionary conservation needs to be provided.

for each input microrna targetspy identifies candidate zones  in all 3'utr sequences. it calculates the score for the representative of each candidate zone, merges overlapping candidate zones, and ranks the predictions according to their scores . using this protocol target sites were predicted for homo sapiens, mus musculus, rattus norvegicus, gallus gallus and drosophila melanogaster .

target site candidates
a usual starting point of a prediction workflow is the search for perfect seed matches in the 3'utr of transcripts of interest. since our goal is to develop a model that does not rely on the presence of a seed match we had to redefine the rules for selecting initial candidate target sites. following the reasoning that a functional site is more attracted by the loaded risc complex than its surrounding area, we identify candidates by searching for areas in the target sequence where the predicted gibbs free energy of the microrna-target duplex is below a certain microrna-specific energy threshold . to ensure a high coverage of functional binding sites we have chosen a conservative cut-off. with this candidate definition at hand, we identified about  <dig> million target site candidates for all micrornas in human.

selection of informative features and classifier evaluation
as described in the methods section we evaluated a wide range of target site features by applying the relieff  <cit>  technique . some features generally considered to be highly relevant for target site recognition by microrna, such as the number of baseparings to the microrna seed, performed very well. on the other hand, the feature accessibility with  <dig> nt upstream and  <dig> nt downstream flankings, reported in  <cit>  to be strongly discriminative, was evaluated as poorly performing. to analyze whether this is due to the chosen flanking sequences, we tested other flanking settings and found  <dig> nt upstream and  <dig> nt downstream to perform slightly better than the 3/ <dig> setting; however the improvement was marginal . interestingly, the feature compactness , introduced in this work performs among the best.

subsequently we evaluated the performance of the classifier with respect to the features used for training. we started with the single best feature and incrementally added features from table  <dig> one by one, according to the ranking. each classifier was evaluated on the training set by a standard 10-fold cross-validation procedure, as implemented in weka  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the number of features used for building the classifier and the corresponding area under the curve  values. apparently, the auc value increases up to the 14th added feature. upon adding further features the performance begins to oscillate around the auc value  <dig>  and does not improve further. since relieff only considers one feature at a time and does not take into account the correlation between features, we additionally applied the correlation-based feature selection   <cit>  for identifying the best feature subset. this approach returned an auc value of  <dig>   with a set of only seven features, namely compactness, g+c content ratio between microrna and target site, length of the longest stretch of consecutive base-pairings anywhere in the hybrid, binding asymmetry, g+c content of the target site, number of base-pairings to the microrna 8-mer seed, and the position of the target site in the 3'utr. the first four features are used here for the first time, while the latter three have been proposed before  <cit> . interestingly, several of these features evaluated individually are classified merely as weak performers, while in combination the classifier exploits synergetic effects between features, making it the smallest set of all with a comparable performance. following the common practice of selecting from all competing models of equal performance the simpler one, we chose the feature set generated by cfs for our machine learning technique.

since targetspy tries in the first step to identify as many potential target sites as possible and subsequently ranks those according the classifier score, enormous amounts of target sites are produced from which only a fraction, the top predictions, are of interest. in order to make application and benchmarking of targetspy more transparent, we created a subset of predictions with high sensitivity and high specificity. the recognition thresholds were set in a way that the target sites with a false-positive rate lower than 5%  were assigned to the sensitive subset and those with a false-positive rate of 1% or less to the specific set .

evaluation on experimentally verified data
we next set out to evaluate the quality of the learning scheme implemented in targetspy on experimentally verified data and to benchmark targetspy against commonly used methods. this task is challenging as published methods are based on different principles, which makes it hard to compare them in a fair fashion. our current knowledge about microrna target sites is almost exclusively drawn from a handful of experiments exploring the targeting of a minority of the most highly expressed micrornas  <cit> . these experiments may have a strong selection bias in that they usually analyze the impact of microrna overexpression or depletion on conserved molecular mechanisms. in addition, experimentally identified targets are often biased towards computational prediction approaches used to identify the initial pool of candidates  <cit> .

recently the impact of microrna overexpression and knockdown was analyzed in large-scale proteomic studies  <cit>  not suffering from the selection bias discussed above. a further advantage is that none of the prediction approaches were trained on these data. beside the low number of measured micrornas  and the fact that the precise location of the target site in the respective transcript is not determined in psilac, until high quality deep sequencing data such as the hits-clip from  <cit>  become available in large amounts, these data constitute the current gold standard. hence we use the fly dataset  <cit>  and the human psilac dataset  <cit>  for evaluation.

performance comparison in drosophila melanogaster
in  <dig> stark et al.  <cit>  conducted a broad comparison of widely used target prediction approaches. a set of  <dig> experimentally tested functional and non-functional microrna-gene interactions was compiled, from which  <dig>  were used for the actual comparison  <cit> . this dataset served as the standard of truth to evaluate the evolutionary approach to microrna target prediction published by gaidatzis et al.  <cit>  and was later extended to  <dig> interactions by kertesz et al.  <cit> . note that this latter set also includes the  <dig> interactions that were excluded by stark and colleagues since their respective 3'utrs were not annotated. to assess the predictive power of our method and compare it with other methods, we applied it first to the original set and then to the extended set of targets. since we assign each candidate zone a score, we are able to quantify the performance by a receiver operating characteristic  curve, making the comparison to other approaches more transparent.

when comparing the performance of methods on the original dataset of stark et al.   eimmo  <cit>  achieves the best results, showing a high true-positive rate coupled with a low false-positive rate. then follow pictar  <cit> , targetspy seed, pita all 3/ <dig>  <cit> , targetscans  <cit>  and targetspy conserved seed in the order of decreasing auc values. the next best approach is targetspy no-seed, followed, with significant distance, by miranda  <cit>  and finally rna <dig>  <cit> , that is performing marginally better than random.

despite the benefit of being able to compare all methods by just one value, looking at the roc curve progression is even more enlightening, especially for those methods that are clustered closely together by the auc value. particularly interesting is the characteristic of the curves at low false-positive rates as for many experiments the amount of samples may be strongly limited. targetspy conserved seed shows the lowest false-positive rate  in the test up to a true-positive rate  of 48%. targetspy seed shows the second lowest fpr, but offers slightly better tpr, comparable to that of pictar. note that targetspy no-seed shows a performance that is close to class ii and iii methods, especially for its top predictions that cover more than 50% in tpr.

benchmarking on the extended set of  <dig> experimentally verified microrna-target interactions  produces several interesting observations . first, the auc values are generally lower compared to the original set. second, pita, specifically fitted to this set, is far ahead of all other approaches. third, the ranking of the other approaches has not changed except that i) targetspy seed performs ahead of pictar and eimmo, targetspy conserved seed outperforms targetscans and mirbase targets  <cit>  performs better than pita top 3/ <dig> and ii) the relative distance between targetspy no-seed and targetscans is reduced. finally, the specificity in particular that of eimmo and targetscans, suffered strongly especially for their top predictions.

in summary, the evaluation on experimental fly data suggests that targetspy, which was trained on mouse data, performs as good as current state-of-the-art algorithms when enforcing the seed match criterion. furthermore, the no-seed prediction is notably better than rna <dig>  the other tested algorithm that does not require a perfect seed match.

evaluation on psilac data
selbach et al.  <cit>  performed a comparison of the most widely used approaches by measuring the fraction of predicted target sites associated with proteins that are more strongly down-regulated than - <dig>  log <dig> fold change. they generated two background  sets: i) a set where all mrnas present are considered as targets, and ii) a set of all mrnas that have a 6-mer seed match in their sequence, further referred to as the selbach background. we further generated a 7-mer seed background for class ii as pictar and targetspy require perfect 7-mer seed matches. in order to compare class iii predictors to the random expectation, we additionally introduced a background dataset for conserved 7-mer seed matches as proposed by  <cit> . specifically, we searched for 6-mer  seed matches that are perfectly conserved in human, chimp, mouse rat and dog that show additionally a match to either base  <dig> or  <dig>  <cit> . this way we have background sets produced by trivial prediction strategies for each of the three classes of prediction tools.

as seen in figure  <dig> for the first class  a completely random selection of target sites would yield a ~27% intersection  with down-regulated proteins in psilac. both rna <dig> and targetspy no-seed perform better than random. targetspy no-seed attains the accuracy of  <dig> %, a significant improvement compared to random predictions. rna <dig> shows  <dig> % accuracy, however at a sensitivity that is more than  <dig>  times lower than targetspy no-seed sens. in the specific setting targetspy no-seed contains still more than  <dig>  times as many target sites as rna <dig>  but achieves an accuracy of  <dig> % and is thus on the same level as the 6-mer seed background of class ii.

the background accuracy for class ii is at  <dig> % when using 6-mer seeds . as pita covers all target site candidates with seed matches beginning at the size of  <dig> nt and subsequently ranks them according to their accessibility, it is necessary to consider only its top ranking predictions. following selbach et al.  <dig>  <cit>  we took the top  <dig> predictions per microrna and found a  <dig> % overlap with down-regulated proteins demonstrating an accuracy below the background level. targetscans, predicting non-conserved target sites with at least a 6-mer seed match, shows a higher accuracy  than pita and noticeably out-performs the 6-mer seed background, although it does not pass the accuracy of the 7-mer seed background. for 7-mer seeds, which are used by pictar and targetspy seed, the corresponding background accuracy was  <dig> %. both targetspy seed sens and targetspy seed spec perform clearly better than this trivial prediction, showing accuracies of  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, and thus perform best in class ii.

the final class of target prediction approaches  shows an overlap of  <dig> % with random predictions. both miranda and mirbase targets predictions include a small fraction of conserved target sites with imperfect seed regions, and the corresponding accuracies  are below the background and close to that of the trivial seed predictor of class ii. pictar 4-way  reaches an accuracy of  <dig> %, which is also below the background. interestingly the more stringent pictar 5-way that additionally requires conservation in chicken, performs worse that pictar 4-way. also diana-microt, targetscans, pita top, an official subset of pita with conserved 8-mer seed matches required, and eimmo with the high confidence setting  are performing slightly below background. the first approach performing above the trivial predictor of class iii is targetrank  <cit>  , followed by mirtarget <dig>  <cit>   and the sensitive subset of targetspy conserved seed . finally, targetspy conserved seed spec achieves the highest accuracy of all methods . it should be noted, however, that although targetspy achieves superior performance in terms of accuracy and sensitivity in classes i and ii, the sensitivity of targetspy in class iii is lower compared to other approaches. the higher sensitivity of some approaches might be attributed to the choice of seed match that is enforced. eimmo, for example, integrates several different seed match definitions  and shows a sensitivity that is  <dig>  times higher than our approach at the sensitive threshold and more than  <dig> times higher when compared to our specific setting.

to exclude the possibility that the performed evaluation is only valid for the chosen threshold of - <dig>  log <dig> fold change, we also investigated the cumulative fraction of predicted target sites as a function of the protein log <dig> fold change. figure  <dig> shows the distributions for each of the three classes. it becomes apparent that the relative performance of computational approaches remains practically unchanged for each fold change value in each class. however, as seen in figure 5c, the advance of targetspy conserved seed spec  is particularly pronounced for low log <dig> fold change values. since low fold change values correspond to stronger protein down-regulation this may imply that our approach performs even better for highly efficient target sites.

in general our results on the psilac data suggest that targetspy performs best in each class, showing furthermore a constant gain in accuracy from the sensitive to the specific threshold. this finding implies that the prediction quality increases with the score and therefore the ranking of target sites imposed by the score of our model seems to have biological relevance. under the assumption that all psilac interactions that are not down-regulated are true negatives, roc plots  confirm the performance evaluations based on accuracy.

finally, we determined the number of functional target sites  not possessing seed regions, which have been correctly predicted solely by targetspy but not by any other algorithm. to avoid putatively spurious seedless target sites, we excluded from consideration those gene-microrna interactions that showed at least one perfect seed match. after removing such gene-microrna interactions we obtained  <dig> unique target sites without seed region in the sensitive set and  <dig> in the specific set. this means that targetspy reports on average between  <dig>  and  <dig>  functional target sites showing no seed match per microrna that could not be detected by any other tool.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have developed a novel computational approach for predicting microrna target sites that neither implies the existence of a seed nor utilizes phylogenetic footprinting. instead of using rigid rules and/or arbitrarily selected target site features, we objectively derived a set of discriminative features to be used for machine learning. due to these important advantages targetspy i) is able to predict species specific  target sites, ii) is suitable for processing poorly conserved/low quality genomic sequences for which methods that rely on conservation and species specific information will not work, and iii) allows analyzing differences in microrna targets between various species.

we grouped computational prediction approaches into three classes, depending on their usage of a seed match criterion in order to provide a comparison of their performance among each other and against the background level. on an experimentally derived microrna-target interaction set in drosophila, our method is on par with the best available approaches. in a further benchmark on human microrna-target data generated by the psilac technology, targetspy not only reported the highest accuracies in class i, but also in the other two classes for which our predictions where post filtered according to the class definition. given that targetspy, trained on experimentally derived ago binding sites in the 3'utr of mouse transcripts, showed very good performance when evaluated in fly and human, we suggest that our algorithm can be applied to a broad taxonomic range of organisms.

finally, we have shown that even on a small, high-quality data set of microrna binding sites, derived by a deep sequencing experiment  <cit> , machine learning techniques show high potential in the prediction of microrna target sites. we assume that advances in this direction will become even more pronounced as more data of this kind become available.

