BACKGROUND
the presence of premature stop codons  in tumorsupressor and mismatch repair genes are a very frequent cause of hereditary cancer that account for 50%-90% of the reported pathogenic mutations  <cit> . pscs are observed in the apc gene related to familial adenomatous polyposis   <cit> , the brca <dig> and  <dig> genes related to familial breast cancer  <cit>  and the mismatch repair genes related to hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer   <cit> . pscs are produced by nonsense or frameshift mutations resulting in the premature termination of proteins  <cit> . these truncated proteins can either loose completely their function producing haploinsufficiency in the cell or acquire a dominant negative effect on the full-length protein produced by the wild type allele  <cit> . in most cases, both consequences are pathologic. the mentioned genes related to hereditary cancers show an extremely heterogeneous mutation spectrum, but although the alterations are scattered throughout the complete coding sequence, most of the identified mutations produce premature termination of protein translation  <cit> .

the detection of mutations in genomic dna is one of the most common diagnosis methods used for these diseases – e.g. sscp, dgge, ha –  <cit> . these techniques have the advantage of using only dna -an easy to handle molecule- and have widely proved their usefulness. still, they have their limitations. they reveal all sequence changes, including silent mutations and polymorphisms without pinpointing the type of mutation. therefore, subsequent analyses are sometimes needed to distinguish between pathologic mutations and polymorphisms  <cit> .

the other major diagnosis methods are based on the detection of the protein product, and they have the advantage of detecting exclusively pathologic mutations. the translation machinery is exquisitely sensitive to pscs that terminate the process of protein elongation. the analysis of the truncated proteins can be done in vitro – e.g. protein truncation test  – by starting from either genomic dna or rna, amplifying the sequence to be analyzed, and using these products as templates for in vitro transcription and translation  <cit> . the shorter products of the mutated alleles are then distinguished from the full-length protein products of normal alleles. a disadvantage of the conventional ptt is the involvement of sds-page followed by autoradiography or western blotting. as it relies on visual inspection to detect the mobility of shifted bands, it may also be subject to evaluator error. another limitation of the method is the lack of sensitivity to diagnose mutations near the translation end that produce too small mobility shifts to be detected  <cit> .

the ptt test is based on cell-free transcription and translation. however, the same machinery is present and functional in living cells. therefore, in principle, it would be possible to carry out the diagnosis by using the translation machinery of cells. several models have been developed in the past that use living-system strategies. for these methods, pcr amplifications of consecutive fragments of the gene are introduced in a reporter-plasmid, which is then transformed into yeast or bacteria  <cit> . the dna to be tested is ligated upstream an easily detectable protein. the presence of a psc in the sequence will stop translation prematurely and prevent the expression of the reporter protein.

the so called "yeast-based stop codon assay" has been reported for the detection of chain-terminating mutations in some specific genes. the pcr-amplified coding sequence is inserted by homologous recombination into a yeast expression vector system, and transformants are assayed for growing in a nutrition-deficient medium. to allow the insertion of the dna sequence by homologous recombination, a gap-vector must be previously generated to introduce homologous flanking sequences for the posterior recombination insertion step. therefore, this method requires the construction of an expression vector that is specific for each tested sequence , and hence is not applicable to a new candidate gene. a modification made by kataoka et al  <cit> , consists of the development of a universal gap-vector to permit the automatic integration of any gene fragment. each primer used to amplify the sequence of interest carries a 24bp recombination tail. however, this method requires performing a nested pcr to reduce nonspecific amplification products; hence, it has many steps for a routine diagnosis.

bacteria have the advantage of being easier to manipulate than yeast. however, even though some authors have reported the development of bacterial systems based on the cloning of relevant segments in-frame with a colorimetric marker gene  <cit> , no data was found reporting their application in routine diagnosis. a problem with this strategy is the capability of bacteria to re-initiate translation downstream of the stop, causing expression of the reporter even in the presence of a psc   <cit> .

the aim of this work was to develop an alternative methodology to detect pscs in human genes using the transcription and translation machinery of bacteria while avoiding the translation re-initiation interference. the strategy was to introduce the dna to be tested in a linker between the two fragments of the catalytic domain of adenylate cyclase  of bordetella pertussis, used for the bacterial two-hybrid system developed by karimova et al  <cit> . re-initiation events will render two separate cya domains catalytically inactive. our results show that the plasmid is a sensitive, specific, efficient and low-cost tool for the detection of pscs and that it is insensitive to re-initiation artifacts.

RESULTS
development of the recombinant preal plasmid
our aim was to develop an alternative methodology to detect pscs in a human gene based on its fusion with a reporter gene and on bacterial phenotype screening. previous developments in this field produced false-negative results, probably due to translation re-initiation events, so we designed a recombinant plasmid in order to avoid this artifact. the strategy was based on the bacterial two-hybrid system developed by karimova et al  <cit>  to identify interacting proteins. in essence, when the catalytic domain of bordetella pertussis adenylate cyclase  is expressed in e. coli, it exhibits a strong unregulated basal activity that results in camp synthesis which, in turn, can trigger the expression of lacz-regulated genes  <cit>  . interestingly, the catalytic domain is composed of two independent fragments  that are not able to re-associate and interact . however, when both fragments are genetically fused to two proteins of interest, each on different plasmids, the interaction between the two proteins results in functional complementation between the two adenylate cyclase fragments leading to camp synthesis . functional analysis of bordetella pertussis adenylate cyclase activity can be easily monitored in an e. coli strain deficient in endogenous adenylate cylcase  on indicator plates .

we reasoned that if we constructed a unique plasmid containing both complementary fragments of the reporter enzyme linked by a subcloned human gene of interest, the adenylate cyclase would be functional only in absence of any psc in the subcloned dna fragment. in the absence of psc in the linker, the two domains would be synthesized as a single polypeptide with adenylate cyclase activity . a psc in the dna fragment would stop translation and the second domain required for adenylate cyclase activity would not be present. any possible translation re-initiation event downstream the pscs would yield physically unattached fragments that should not be able to re-associate, and hence would not result in a false negative result .

the two cya domains expressed as a single polypeptide are catalytically active
to test the hypothesis that the linked domains of the two-hybrid system translated from a single plasmid would have adenylate cyclase activity, we amplified fragment t <dig>  from plasmid pkt <dig> of the bacterial two-hybrid system, and inserted it upstream and in frame with fragment t <dig>  in plasmid put <dig> to obtain preal. part of the existing mcs present in this plasmid was preserved to facilitate the insertion of human gene fragments . we transformed an e. coli strain , deficient in adenylate cyclase, with preal and plated the transformants on macconkey medium. we used as control bth <dig> transformed with put <dig>  the results revealed that the bth <dig> transformed with the preal expressed adenylate cyclase activity . in contrast, control plates, transformed with put <dig> that expressed only the c-terminal domain of cya, showed 100% white colonies . this result confirmed the correct in-frame insertion of t <dig> upstream t <dig> and the functional catalytic activity of both domains attached by a short fragment of  <dig> amino acids.

the system can accurately detect psc in human dna fragments
to test whether preal could be used to detect pscs in human genes, three different fragments of exon  <dig> of the brca <dig> gene were amplified from a healthy donor. reported pathogenic stop mutations related to breast and ovarian cancer were introduced by a mutagenic pcr strategy using the wild type dna as template  <cit> . a nonsense  and a frameshift  mutation were generated introducing the alterations with two different forward primers. a wild type  version was used as control. all forward primers had bamhi site overhangs and the reverse primer had a 5' ecori site to facilitate insertion in the mcs of preal. the annealing site of the reverse primer was carefully selected to include atg and gtg codons post psc and in-frame with t <dig>  in order to detect translation re-initiation events.

after inserting the different pcr products in preal, the bth <dig> cells were transformed and plated on lb-x-gal medium. as expected, all bacteria carrying the wild-type insert showed a blue phenotype  whereas the bacteria carrying the inserts with psc  showed a white phenotype . the experiments showed consistent results either on macconkey  or on lb-xgal media, confirming that the insertion of a 377– <dig> bp human sequence allows the functional interaction of fragment t <dig> with fragment t <dig>  the results also show that any psc in the dna linker  inhibits the catalytic activity of adenylate cyclase.

most of the psc mutations in tumor suppressor and mismatch repair genes causing hereditary diseases are present in a single allele. therefore, any diagnosis system should be able to detect these mutations in heterozygous patients. to mimic a heterozygous pcr product, we mixed in a 1: <dig> proportion preal/wildtype and preal/nonsense and transformed the bth <dig> with this mix. when plated on macconkey, the phenotypes showed an equal proportion of white  and red  , whereas the control plates of bth <dig> transformed with preal/wildtype showed 100% red colonies .

to confirm that the inserts of the white colonies had different sequences from those of the red colonies, we amplified dna directly from the colonies  touching with a single pipette tip a red and a white colony. the resulting mixed pcr product was heat denatured, and allowed to re-hybridize at low temperature. finally, the mixed dna product was ran in a non-denaturing page. we expected the formation of homoduplexes  in case of a mix with identical sequences, and the detection of heteroduplexes  in case of a mix with different sequences. the heteroduplexes are easily detectable by their delayed mobility on an electrophoresis assay. the page showed the formation of heteroduplexes only in the mixed product, confirming that it contained different sequences . in conclusion, these experiments indicate that insertion of a psc-containing dna in preal is easily detected by bacterial colony phenotype and that the assay is suitable for analyzing heterozygous samples.

pscs were accurately detected even in the presence of re-initiation events
we speculated that the developed diagnosis system would be resistant to translation re-initiation, a common event in bacteria. to detect whether translation re-initiation events were occurring in our system, we used a murine anti-adenylate cyclase monoclonal antibody that binds to the distal portion – amino acids 373– <dig> – of fragment t <dig> . our hypothesis was that, in the absence of psc, a large product  would be detected by the antibody, whereas in the presence of psc, if translation re-initiations occurred, smaller products recognized by the antibody should appear.

western blot assays were performed on extracts from bth <dig> transfected with empty preal, preal/wt, preal/fs and preal/ns. the results in figure  <dig> show that small fragments recognized by the antibody were present in all samples, indicating that translation initiation downstream the stop codon was frequent and that it occurred even in the dna fragment lacking psc. a careful analysis of the sizes showed that they were consistent with the atg and gtg codons present in the linker. however, it is worth noting that the full-length product was only present in the adenylate cyclase positive  bacteria. the results show that translation re-initiation is a frequent event under the conditions of the assay and that a reporter gene located downstream the inserted dna would not be a good method to detect pscs. this observation stresses the importance of the preal two-domain strategy developed to detect stop codons in the inserted dna.

the system correctly detects a truncating mutation in a hnpcc patient
the preal plasmid has proved to be very efficient to detect stop codons introduced in exon  <dig> of the brca <dig> gene of a wild type dna, even in heterozygous samples. we wanted to test the system with another gene and in a more realistic situation. for this propose, exon  <dig> of the msh <dig> gene was amplified from dna obtained from peripheral blood of a patient from a hnpcc family. this family presents a mutation  on codon  <dig> of this gene. the pcr product was inserted in frame in the mcs of preal. note that the patient was heterozygous; hence, the pcr product contained both, the mutated and the wild type alleles. dna of an unaffected member of the hnpcc family was used as control.

in this instance, transformation of bth <dig> was performed directly with the ligation product avoiding a previous miniprep purification step in order to simplify the method. to improve the amount of transformants, the culture expansion time was increased to  <dig> h. after  <dig> h of incubation on macconkey at 37°c, the transformants with the dna from an unaffected individual showed  <dig>  colonies/cm2; all of them with a red phenotype . in contrast, transformants from the heterozygous patient showed  <dig>  white colonies/cm <dig>  and  <dig>  red colonies/cm <dig>  . the results clearly indicate that the method accurately identifies a psc-containing dna segment even in the presence of a non-mutated allele. to confirm the genotype of the different colonies, a pcr from red and white colonies and subsequent restriction enzyme incubation was performed. the results shown in figure 6b confirm the presence of the wild type insert in red colonies  and the mutated allele in white colonies .

in the assay with the brca <dig> exon, the reverse primer was designed in order to include atg and gtg sequences on purpose to test the robustness of the method to translation re-initiation problems. we assessed the occurrence of re-initiation in this more realistic assay with the dna amplified from a patient. western blot assays revealed the presence of re-initiation events in red and white colonies , proving that a simpler plasmid, based on the expression of a single reporter would have strong limitations due to re-initiation events. notice that, as expected, white colonies do not express the full-length  adenylate cyclase . these observations show that the preal strategy can be used in a relatively simple diagnostic scheme: pcr amplification from genomic dna from patients, ligation into preal, transformation with the ligation product into bth <dig>  and bacterial phenotype screening in macconkey or lb-xgal media.

discussion
the diagnosis of hereditary diseases by molecular biology methods has proved to be a powerful tool for the managing of affected families and, in many cases, for the treatment of affected members. with a growing number of genes identified as related to specific syndromes, these methods are of great interest to the medical community. although feasible, the complete sequencing of the suspected gene is still not efficient. moreover, many mutations may be normal polymorphisms without pathological significance. morbid mutations are frequently related to inactivation of the gene product by the conversion of wild type triplets to stop codons, or changes in the reading frame that usually introduce stop codons. therefore, the detection of pscs in disease-related genes is usually of great importance for the diagnosis of hereditary diseases.

we describe here a bacterial system that allows the detection of pscs in human genes by a simple colony phenotype screening. the idea was originated in the two-hybrid system based on a reconstituted signal transduction pathway in bacteria, developed by karimova et al  <cit>  in the pasteur institute. in our design, the in vivo translation of bordetella pertussis adenylate cyclase fragments linked by a psc-free inserted dna triggers the expression of camp-dependent genes. we took advantage of the fact that the t <dig> and t <dig> fragments are unable to recognize each other and cannot reconstitute a functional enzyme when expressed as separate entities. however, if they are attached by a polypeptide chain, the protein is active and camp is synthesized. ultimately, camp, upon binding to cap, activates the transcription of catabolic operons, allowing the bacteria to ferment carbohydrates such as maltose or lactose. we show here that any psc in the dna inserted between the adenylate cyclase fragments inhibits the activity of the translation product. we also show that translation re-initiation events do occur and that the preal system is resistant to this source of false negative results. indeed, re-initiation was a very common event observed even in sequences lacking pscs. we showed by western blot that most of the possible initiation codons in the inserted fragment were used and generated a detectable polypeptide in the assay.

patients with hereditary mutations in tumor suppressor genes are always heterozygous, because homozygous individuals are unviable. hence, a mixed pcr product is obtained when dna from these patients is amplified. however, a single pcr product is inserted per copy of the preal plasmid; in turn, only one preal copy transforms a cya- bacterium that expands in a clone on the plate. therefore, each colony represents one allele. in conclusion, this method allows the analysis of separated alleles of heterozygous patients, avoiding possible allele-interfering events affecting other mutation detection systems  <cit> .

for the application of the preal plasmid, we propose a diagnosis algorithm starting from genomic dna extracted from peripheral blood of index patients suspected of fap, hnpcc, familial breast cancer, or any other disease related to pscs. each exon should be amplified with specific primers carrying endonuclease cleavage sequences. the amplification products should be subsequently inserted into preal, and bth <dig> cells transformed directly with the ligation product. after plating on macconkey for  <dig> hours, heterozygous exons with a psc in one allele would be detected by a 50/ <dig> red/white phenotype. to test the rest of the family members, only the affected exon should be amplified and inserted into preal to detect the presence or absence of the psc.

the more complex step in this algorithm is the ligation of the pcr product into preal because it involves incubation with restriction enzymes and purification of the cleaved insert. some strategies for directional in frame ligation have been developed by commercial companies . in addition, mrna could be used as template, allowing the amplification by rt-pcr of consecutive exons and therefore reducing the cleavage/ligation steps. however, one of the disadvantages of the rna-based approaches is the requirement for abundantly expressed and stable transcripts. in particular, mrnas carrying pscs are degraded by a specific mechanism  that prevents the translation of truncated proteins  <cit> . hence, the amount of mrna carrying pscs is highly reduced. therefore, mrna might not be a recommendable starting material for routine diagnosis.

another predicted problem with the preal strategy is the possibility that the three-dimensional structure of the polypeptide chain linking the adenylate cyclase fragments may interfere with the functional interaction between the domains yielding an inactive enzyme. this false positive result would be easily detected because white colonies will be observed with control wild type inserts. if this problem is detected for an exon of a gene, western blot analysis should be required to test the presence of full-length protein in the colonies. alternatively, a different mutation detection system should be used for this exon. all in all, adenylate cyclase activity was detected with the three different linkers tested in the present report . in conclusion, before using for clinical diagnosis, this method should be tested for each exon of the gene of interest in control and ptc containing samples. moreover, the accuracy and efficiency of the system to detect ptcs should be confirmed by future prospective studies.

CONCLUSIONS
the preal plasmid is applicable for the detection of pscs in human genes related to different diseases and is resistant to translation re-initiation events. the diagnosis steps are easy and have a low cost. they require only a laboratory equipped for dna extraction, pcr amplification, ligation, and bacterial culture. the most relevant biological advantages of the method are the detection of only pathologic mutations, thus avoiding subsequent analysis for possible polymorphisms, and the analysis of separated alleles in heterozygous patients.

for human genes with a high frequency of pscs, this tool can be applied as a first screening method in an exon by exon strategy. in developing countries, where present methods of molecular diagnoses of hereditary cancers are still expensive and unaffordable for many families, this mutation detection system may become a useful and applicable tool.

