BACKGROUND
only within the last decade has it become apparent that afrotheria, consisting of elephants , sea cows , hyraxes , aardvarks , sengis , tenrecs  and golden moles , comprises a natural assemblage of mammals descended from a single common ancestor  <cit> . morphological features shared by these animals, particularly between the insectivoran- and ungulate-grade afrotherians, have been difficult to identify. however, several interesting similarities have recently become apparent, including non-descent of the male gonads  <cit> , morphology of the placenta  <cit> , variable vertebral count  <cit> , a concave cotylar facet of the astragalus  <cit> , calcaneo-navicular contact and possibly other features that are dependent on topology and assumptions of character optimization  <cit> . although it was not recognized as such at the time, wilhelm leche  <cit>  observed an additional similarity in 1907:

"the centetidae  and chrysochloridae contrast with nearly all other insectivorans, and from the large majority of other extant mammals, in that eruption of the permanent dentition occurs in a very late period of life, that is, after the individual is fully grown and sexually mature" .

leche could not have known about the genetic evidence in favor of afrotheria. he interpreted this feature in tenrecs and golden moles as primitive for therian mammals, and used it as a basis to develop his theory that the deciduous dentition is morphologically more indicative of evolutionary relationships than the permanent dentition. while his observations regarding deciduous teeth seem not to have had great resonance since  <dig> , delayed dental eruption in african insectivorans may be very significant. eruption of permanent teeth well past sexual maturity is not common among mammals, except in elephants  <cit> , sea cows  <cit>  and hyraxes  <cit> . the remaining afrotherian clade, tubulidentata, does not erupt a functional, deciduous dentition. aardvarks are ontogenetically not well documented, with the last moderately comprehensive study of their dental development having taken place in  <dig> . we briefly discuss this taxon below, but defer a fuller treatment to a separate analysis , submitted).

considerable variation occurs across mammals in the number and extent of replacement among incisors, canines, premolars and in the number of permanent molars  <cit> . less variable is the number of teeth throughout any single mammalian lifetime and the age by which the permanent dentition is fully erupted. nearly all mammals have only one or two generations, both limited in number of teeth. only trichechus  and petrogale concinna  continually erupt supernumerary molars throughout their lifetime  <cit> . complete eruption of the permanent dentition in most mammals occurs by sexual maturity  <cit> . slight delays are known in primates and ungulate-grade mammals  <cit> . however, afrotherians such as elephants, sea cows and hyraxes may spend well over half of their lifespan without a completely erupted permanent dentition  <cit> .

in this paper, we suggest that this pattern also characterizes small afrotherians  and that delayed dental eruption comprises a shared feature of afrotheria. as data on dental ontogeny are still lacking for small afrotherians, we evaluate metrics of size and tooth ontogeny designed to test leche's still-unquantified observation that these taxa exhibit late eruption of the permanent dentition.

in addition, we note a fascinating similarity between the pattern of dental ontogeny in afrotherians and one of the most characteristic symptoms of a human genetic pathology: cleidocranial dysplasia   <cit> . ccd is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from mutations to the transcription factor runx <dig>  <cit>  which contributes to regulation of the development of bone and teeth  <cit> . humans with ccd may exhibit not only delayed eruption of permanent teeth, but also supernumerary teeth, hemivertebrae, non-descended testes  <cit> , incompletely ossified clavicles and cranial dermal bones, among other anomalies  <cit> . while the extent and form of these pathologies vary considerably across individuals, mundlos  <cit>  noted that delayed eruption of permanent teeth "is a relatively constant finding. dental disability begins in late youth with the progressive morbidity and loss of the deciduous dentition. many patients remember living 'without teeth' for some years until the permanent teeth eventually erupted" . other pathologies resulting in delayed dental eruption relate to nutritional defects, thyroid insufficiency, irradiation or trauma  <cit> . however, to the best of our knowledge, other genetic conditions do not consistently result in this phenotype.

ccd-like characters are known to occur across a number of mammalian clades, not only afrotherians. in addition to investigating the extent of delayed eruption in afrotherians, we also present a preliminary test of the hypothesis that delayed eruption, vertebral anomalies, reduced clavicles, incomplete suture of cranial bones and testicondy covary across mammals, as would be expected if they were the result of a conserved genetic and/or developmental program.

RESULTS
dental eruption relative to skull size
absolute age data for dental eruption in tenrecs, golden moles and sengis are not yet available in the literature. as an alternative, we compared the proportion of erupted permanent cheek teeth with metrics of skull size. we expect that if these taxa show delayed eruption of the permanent dentition, then some or all of their permanent teeth should finish erupting after the completion of growth, leading to specimens at or near adult size without a full complement of permanent teeth. anecdotal observations of this nature  are in part what led leche  <cit>  to draw the conclusion that tenrecs and golden moles show delayed eruption.

this previously unquantified observation is consistent with the data collected here. in general, afrotherians without a full complement of permanent teeth are significantly larger  than non-afrotherians  at a comparable stage . among the  <dig> genera sampled in this study , all of the afrotherian genera exhibited specimens with 95% median adult jaw length that had less than 60% of their permanent, occluding premolars and molars erupted . stated differently, adult size among afrotherians is frequently reached prior to the eruption of many permanent teeth. non-afrotherians showing less than 60% erupted cheek teeth were typically well under 90% median adult jaw length, except for one specimen of eulemur fulvus  which reached 95% . two afrotherian groups  had specimens that reached, or exceeded, median adult jaw length with less than 40% of their permanent cheek teeth erupted . another index of skull size, condylobasal length, also shows that most afrotherians reach adult-proportions with fewer permanent cheek teeth erupted. however, because jaws are better represented in museum collections , we focus on the latter measurement in this paper.

while some specimens of tenrec ecaudatus follow this pattern, exceeding 95% median adult jaw length despite having incompletely erupted cheek teeth , this taxon shows a wide range of sizes throughout each eruption stage . overall, t. ecaudatus does not reach a significantly larger proportion of median adult jaw length  than comparable stages of non-afrotherians. this results in part from the considerable variability in size within adult t. ecaudatus. with a coefficient of variation  for jaw length over  <dig> across all adults , tenrec is nearly double that of the next-closest afrotherian . even controlling for sex, cv for adult jaw length in tenrec still exceeds all others recorded in this study . its tendency for indeterminate growth with increasing age has been noted  <cit>  and may actually comprise another possible similarity with otherwise morphologically disparate afrotherians, such as elephants  <cit> . while such large size in tenrec is particularly noteworthy in zoo specimens, wild-caught individuals may also reach considerable size. for example, bmnh  <dig> . <dig>   has a jaw measuring  <dig>  mm from condyle to symphysis, a value about 20% longer than the median adult jaw length , and up to 33% longer than other specimens that show heavily worn teeth . hence, the small ratios of juvenile to adult jaw length of some tenrec specimens result in part from the influence of unusually large individuals on median adult jaw length, increasing the size of the denominator and decreasing the value of tenrec ratios. a similar effect is evident in didelphis, which also shows intra-specific dimorphism and has a large cv of adult jaw length . importantly, however, no specimen of didelphis comes within 90% of median adult jaw length without at least two-thirds of its cheek teeth erupted. in contrast, some tenrec specimens approximate adult jaw length with under half of their permanent cheek teeth .

 <dig>  
despite these qualifications for t. ecaudatus, the afrotherians measured here with incompletely erupted permanent teeth, particularly sengis and golden moles, show adult proportions more frequently than non-afrotherians at a comparable stage of eruption . non-afrotherians with unerupted cheek teeth are generally smaller than conspecifics with full, permanent dentitions. we interpret this to indicate that unlike afrotherians, most other mammals erupt the permanent dentition early enough in ontogeny so as to overlap extensively with growth.

absolute age at eruption of permanent cheek teeth
for hyraxes, elephants, sea cows and many other mammals, absolute age at eruption of the complete, permanent dentition is already known. figure  <dig> summarizes these data, standardized by age at female sexual maturity across mammals. both sexual maturity and alternative scaling factors such as longevity may be skewed by outliers, such as unusually long-lived zoo specimens. because data on sexual maturity are more widely available for wild populations than data on longevity, the former are used here.

shigehara  <cit>  noted that the eruption of the full permanent dentition may postdate sexual maturity in some mammals, including most old world primates, didelphis, bos, sus, equus, felis and canis familiaris . among the taxa he studied, only perissodactyls showed completion of dental eruption after both sexual maturity and fusion of longbone epiphyses. however, some terrestrial artiodactyls show considerably later eruption of permanent cheek teeth than perissodactyls. in particular, hippopotamus does not fully erupt all of its permanent cheek teeth until approximately  <dig> years of age  <cit> . the white rhinoceros shows the latest appearance of the complete permanent dentition among the perissodactyls sampled here, erupting all cheek teeth at around  <dig> years  <cit> . some marsupials tend to show complete eruption of cheek teeth shortly after sexual maturity, a pattern greatly exaggerated in the dentally manatee-like wallaby petrogale concinna, in which the seemingly endless eruption of supernumerary molars continues throughout life  <cit> . hence, some artiodactyls, perissodactyls, carnivorans, anthropoid primates and marsupials show complete eruption of permanent cheek teeth at or near adulthood, ranging from slightly after to twice the age of female sexual maturity. other non-afrotherian mammals show complete eruption prior to female sexual maturity .

the three afrotherians for which dental ontogeny is best known, loxodonta, procavia and trichechus, show ages at complete cheek-tooth eruption that are, respectively,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and more than  <dig> times the age of female sexual maturity. as mentioned above, trichechus erupts an apparently unlimited number of cheek teeth throughout life  <cit> . in contrast, the highly-derived, peg-like cheek teeth of the sirenian dugong dugon erupt between  <dig> and  <dig> years, at or shortly before sexual maturity at around  <dig> years; the prominent tusks of the dugong erupt later at around  <dig> years  <cit> . compared with other major clades of mammals, and except for the cheek teeth of the dugong , paenungulate afrotherians show late eruption of permanent teeth, postdating sexual maturity by a wide margin .

ccd-like characters across mammals
in addition to humans, runx <dig> sequence variation has also been documented in mice  <cit>  and domestic dogs  <cit> . homozygous mouse mutants lacking runx <dig> fail to ossify membrane or endochondral bones  <cit> . these mutants exhibit initiation of tooth morphogenesis, but further development is incomplete  <cit> . owing to an overall lack of bone development, they asphyxiate at birth from an unossified ribcage. heterozygous mutant mice survive birth and show many of the same skeletodental anomalies as humans with ccd, including poor ossification of membrane bones such as the clavicle and elements of the braincase  <cit> . however, they develop relatively normal molars  <cit>  possibly because mice have just a single dental generation, not two as in most other mammals; and in human ccd it is only the second generation of teeth that is affected  <cit> . molars in mice and other mammals are commonly regarded among paleontologists as part of the same generation as permanent premolars, since both form the permanent dentition and partly overlap in terms of eruption. however, molars share a developmental origin from the primary dental lamina with 'first-generation' deciduous teeth, distal to the site of origin of the latter and buccal to the embryonic 'lingual successional lamina'  which gives rise to permanent antemolars. wang et al  <cit>  observed that successionary cheek tooth buds, normally absent or very small in wild-type mice, were much more commonly observed in runx <dig> mutant mice, further indicating that this locus may contribute to the morphogenetic pathway of the post-primary generation of teeth. they also noted greater expression of runx <dig> protein in the lower than in the upper dentition. our observations do not indicate different timing of eruption of the upper and lower teeth. indeed, such a pattern would be problematic for mammals with functional occlusion. however, eruption of some lower tooth loci  prior to their upper counterparts is not uncommon among mammals  <cit> .

sequences of afrotherian runx <dig> available on public databases are limited, and at the time of writing include only partial sequences derived from ongoing genomes of loxodonta and echinops  <cit> . only the former samples the dna binding region, mutations to which may be linked to expression of ccd in humans  <cit> . sequences of runx <dig> from loxodonta and other mammals such as pan, macaca, rattus, mus, equus and canis are easily alignable to human runx <dig> for at least part of their length. these non-human mammals generally showed the conserved nucleotides present in the human wild type, not the mutations to runx <dig> concentrated in the dna binding domain among human ccd patients , except for a sequence of canis. this specimen   <cit>  exhibits many changes to its runx <dig> sequence, including a mutation commonly present among genetically documented human patients with ccd  <cit> : instead of the 'cgg' codon for arginine  at codon  <dig>  they exhibit a 'cag' codon for glutamine . while hypodontia among domestic dogs  is known, they do not regularly show delayed eruption of the adult dentition .

at first glance the distribution of ccd-like characteristics across mammals, including delayed dental eruption, vertebral anomalies, clavicle reduction and testicondy , appears to show some co-occurrence. in particular, members of afrotheria, perissodactyla and terrestrial cetartiodactyla lack clavicles and show some delay in the eruption of permanent teeth; and afrotheres and perissodactyls exhibit an increased number of thoracolumbar vertebrae. examined quantitatively, however, and including other characters observed among ccd patients, this covariation is not significant . the distribution of these characters on a plot of the three principal coordinates that explain just over half of the variation does not place them in close proximity , as would be expected if these features consistently occurred together . nor is there a significant correlation between vertebral number and delay in eruption . whether or not this signal changes with consideration of a more complete morphological dataset, including ontogenetic data for small afrotheres as well as their other recently identified synapomorphies  <cit> , remains to be seen.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
ontogeny of dental eruption
based on these observations, we conclude that leche was correct in his assessment that like large afrotherians in which dental ontogeny is well documented, sengis, tenrecs and golden moles also show relatively late eruption of the permanent dentition. compared to non-afrotherians, permanent cheek teeth finish erupting only after these taxa have reached adult body size. considered in isolation, this could mean that growth occurs faster and earlier in these afrotherians than other mammals, rather than the converse of late-erupting permanent teeth. however, although some afrotherians have relatively and/or absolutely long gestation times , which could be interpreted to support the hypothesis that growth takes place early, this is not true of afrotheria as a whole. tenrec, for example, has a shorter gestation time than cavia  and saimiri , although it can reach a larger body size than either taxon . the sengi rhynchocyon  compares well with the rodent sciurus .

notably, and in contrast to other afrotherians, the shrew-like tenrecid microgale appears to erupt its molars  relatively early during its development. few museum collections have specimens of microgale that exhibit fewer than three fully erupted molars  <cit> . in fact, the difficulty in distinguishing deciduous from permanent premolars in 'adult'-sized specimens of this taxon  <cit>  has contributed to an unusually high level of species-level synonymy within this genus throughout much of the 20th century  <cit> . we assume that the frequent confusion of deciduous and permanent premolars in the literature results from the frequent retention of the former and late eruption of the latter, as in other small afrotherians examined here. in order to test this assumption, and include this taxon in our sample, we would need more sophisticated techniques to determine the deciduous versus permanent identity of premolars e.g., by using radiographs or computed tomography images, a sampling strategy that will be employed in a future study.

a further caveat is the dentition of the highly derived aardvark. growth in this taxon is poorly known, and the last comprehensive summary of its dental development was published in  <dig> . from this we know that orycteropus appears to lack functional deciduous teeth, although some may persist as rudiments in the gums well into adulthood. a summary in preparation  enables us to tentatively conclude that its permanent cheek teeth are erupted at a relatively early age, a result that is not surprising given its lack of functional deciduous teeth. hence, as with the molar teeth of microgale and dugong, this too qualifies as an exception to what we believe otherwise to be a rule among afrotherians: that their permanent dentition finishes erupting relatively late during ontogeny, after sexual maturity and the occurrence of most growth.

ccd character covariation
the apparent lack of character covariation  results in part from the fact that wild-type mammals represent ecologically viable populations, capable of successfully perpetuating their lineage, and should not be expected to mirror pathologies in a different species  with which they may share a developmental program. regarding the genetic control of tooth succession, there is a complex interplay among genes expressing a number of morphogenic proteins, including shh, bmp and fgf, which are mediated at least in part by runx <dig>  <cit>  and that relate to the development of teeth  <cit>  and bone  <cit> . the pathologies of ccd-afflicted humans are a result of the decreased functionality of the dna binding region in the regulatory locus runx <dig>  <cit> . depending on the extent of this decreased functionality, ccd humans show a mix of phenotypes, often  including features exhibited in afrotherians. imperfect covariation among these characters among human ccd patients does not negate their relatively well-established link to runx <dig>  <cit> . similarly, imperfect correlation of ccd-like characters among mammals does not in itself negate the potential influence of runx <dig> in their development.

hence, a better understanding of runx <dig> variation among afrotherians may yet provide insight into the mechanisms behind delayed eruption of the permanent teeth. we propose that this feature comprises an additional, shared characteristic of the newly recognized afrotherian clade.

