BACKGROUND
the understanding of living cells at a systemic level is being recognized more and more as an important component of biology and medicine research  <cit> . biological pathways and networks of protein interactions are key paradigms to link molecules to biological functions and by so doing bridging the genotype-to-phenotype gap as well as understanding properties of the organization of biological matter  <cit> . in this work we aim at answering three simple but fundamental questions: i) what is the complement of human proteins expressed ubiquitously and abundantly in different cell types? ii) does this central proteome   <cit>  display properties that are distinct from the rest? iii) can one identify global features of this central proteome?

gene expression microarrays allow analyzing a large variety of transcriptomes  <cit>  and several studies using mrna detection or abundance as a proxy for protein expression or concentration have revealed important properties of gene sets related to tissue specificity  <cit> . recently, bossi and lehner  <cit>  showed that tissue-specific proteins are less interacting but bind to core cellular components and common proteins. domains enriched in tissue-specific genes tend to be metazoan-specific and are non-essential  <cit> . it is also known that widely expressed genes encode protein domains involved in protein degradation, cytoskeleton or rna-binding  <cit> .

it is well known that correlation between transcripts and protein abundance is variable  <cit>  and, as a general rule of thumb, a good correlation is observed in one third of the observed entities only. subsequent mechanisms of regulation can significantly decouple protein and transcript abundance  <cit> . for this reason, we believe that it is important to study the central proteome from proteomics data directly. as our data show, mass spectrometry sensitivity has achieved a level that permits such direct approaches. similar work was conducted by schirle, et al.  <cit> , who first coined the term central proteome and used human cell lines as we did, though they limited their analysis to technical aspects related to the proteomics technology. kislinger, et al.  <cit>  profiled protein expression in six mouse organs. another related project is the human protein atlas  <cit>  that maps protein expression in human tissues through a selected set of antibodies.

the focus of our work is different compared to the aforementioned transcriptomics and proteomics studies. after a brief and classical analysis of the functions of the proteins present in the central proteome, which matches gene microarray results, we reveal important new findings regarding the gene structures of genes coding the central proteome, location on pathways in relation with drug targets, and global properties of the interaction network connecting the central proteome. furthermore, we show how several characteristics of common proteins vary with protein abundance.

the large amount of data generated for this research constitutes a unique and homogeneous dataset that should interest other investigators. data are made available as supplementary material and are accessible from the proteomecommons.org tranche public repository.

RESULTS
cell lines, proteomics and protein identifications
we measured the proteomes of seven cell lines from the three germ layers  with 1d sds-page followed by lc-ms/ms. the proteomes contained between  <dig> and  <dig> proteins each . protein identification was accomplished by a bioinformatics platform combining two database search engines, mascot  <cit>  and phenyx  <cit> , and an innovative and very stringent validation strategy enforcing a maximum false discovery rate  of  <dig> % on protein groups  <cit> . in addition, protein groups that were not made of alternative splice variants exclusively  were discarded. specific peptides allowed us to ascertain the presence of some variants.

 number of protein group reporters in case alternative splice variants are counted as well because they have all the peptides of the protein group, although they do not necessarily have a specific peptide detected.  isoforms supported by a specific peptide.

each cell line was analyzed twice in technical replicates  and modest variability in the identified proteins was observed .

the central proteome
a large number of proteins were identified in each cell line . we constructed the central proteome  by selecting proteins found in all the  <dig> cell lines, i.e.  <dig> proteins. hek <dig> cell line yielded notably more protein identifications, which was observed by others already  <cit> . in addition, as mentioned above, technical replicates of all the cell lines were highly reproducible. hek <dig> higher number of proteins is hence unlikely to have been caused by experimental bias. in fact, hek <dig> cells provide a convenient system for expressing many proteins, notably in affinity purification ms experiments  <cit> .

we compared the proteins identified in the  <dig> cell lines and c.prot with all the human proteins listed in uniprotkb/swiss-prot  <cit>  to determine possible experimental biases in molecular weight, isoelectric point, hydrophobicity, and aliphatic index  <cit> ; see additional file 1: suppl. figure  <dig>  we observed very modest shifts towards larger  and more acidic proteins  in c.prot. these slight biases are consequences of the analytical technologies used and we do not believe they have any significant impact on what follows.

overlap between c.prot and the human protein altlas  was of less than 40%, depending on hpa detection strength. namely, hpa contains all our cell lines but namalwa and we considered the intersection of the  <dig> shared cell lines in hpa. we found  <dig> proteins strongly expressed  and  <dig> at least weakly expressed . we also considered all  the proteins expressed in all the  <dig> hpa cell lines, weakly or better, and we found  <dig> proteins .

accession codes, ids, description, and gene names of the  <dig> proteins found in the central proteome are provided as additional file  <dig> 

main functions represented in the central proteome
we classified the main categories of proteins present in c.prot by using a slimmed gene ontology   <cit>  and kegg  <cit> . go term statistics were obtained via topgo  <cit>  with a 5% cutoff on the p-values .

c.prot was mainly enriched for vital processes of the cell, see table  <dig> and suppl. figure  <dig>  the go categories broadly ranged from proteostasis, such as translation and protein transport, over metabolic processes to cell cycle and death. the metabolic processes mainly consisted of primary metabolism, which is vital for maintenance and proliferation. major catabolic kegg pathways covered by c.prot were proteasome, citrate cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, phosphate pentose pathway, fatty acid degradation and few amino acid degradation pathways. on the biosynthetic side we found translation, most aminoacyl-trna biosynthesis enzymes and pyrimidine metabolism. the go category "cellular component organization and biogenesis" contained important complexes such as signal recognition particle, coatomer protein complex and the splicosome. finally, the cell cycle together with dna metabolism and cell death, which are vital functions of living in a cellular population, were also enriched. the same broad coverage could be observed for the molecular functions and the cellular localizations in c.prot, except for the plasma membrane and the extracellular space due to proteomics technical limitations and use of cell lines, see suppl. figures  <dig> and  <dig> 

acoverage indicates the proportion of proteins annotated in swiss-prot with the term that are found in c.prot.

it is worth noting that advanced go analysis supported by the topgo r package, where detailed go annotations are reported to ancestor terms if they do not yield significant results only, combined with generic go slim helped considerably dealing with a large dataset such as c.prot. classical enrichment analysis methods overvalued very general categories and/or returned numerous very detailed hits. we found the "weight.ratio" method of topgo too stringent and the "classic" one too "verbose".

a well conserved set of proteins coded by exon rich genes
the presence of a protein in many species is an indicator of high conservation and fundamental functional role. therefore, we queried all orthologs of the human genome from ensembl and we measured conservation by counting, for each human protein, the number of species that had one ortholog. we found that, on average, c.prot proteins had  <dig>  orthologs more than human proteins taken from swissprot , that is they were present in more species thereby indicating their higher degree of conservation.

to contrast our results we wanted to compare with cell specific proteins. due to the limited number of cell lines available it was not feasible to define such specific proteins. we hence used tissue specific genes as a proxy  <cit> . in the su et al. dataset, testis genes contributed for almost one third and hence we defined a specific transcriptome  ignoring testis specific. as a matter of fact, such diversity in testis gene expression would hide gene specificity in many other tissues otherwise. without testis genes, spe.trans contained  <dig> genes that, on average, had - <dig>  orthologs  compared to the reference swiss-prot database.

an important feature of eukaryote proteins is that they have the possibility to exist in different splice variants. the total count of exons indicates combination diversity. remarkably, in c.prot, the exon count was significantly shifted towards higher values with an average shift as large as + <dig>  . conversely, spe.trans had - <dig>  exons on average . to prevent a potential bias in exon counts through a slight bias in protein sequence lengths in our data, we compared exon counts in c.prot with swiss-prot applying a bootstrap procedure to draw appropriate sequence length distributions from swiss-prot.

a well connected and central central proteome
using an integrated interaction database, we extracted a human interactome comprising  <dig>  proteins and  <dig>  interactions. we computed  <dig> commonly used connectivity measures  to reflect various local and global aspects of the interactome topology at the positions occupied by c.prot. all  <dig> measures indicated significant positive biases, i.e. more centrality, higher connectivity, and more frequent participation in protein complexes. remarkably, a further significant increase for abundant c.prot proteins was observed. node degree and eigenvector centrality statistics appear in figures 1a and 1b as examples.

there was a significant association of c.prot with drug targets as listed in drugbank  <cit>  . in the human interactome, we observed that drug targets were more central and more connected nodes as reported previously by others  <cit> . we did not see a consistent increase of this trend with targets restricted to c.prot. on the contrary, considering relative positions in pathways , drug targets in c.prot displayed a significantly different profile compared to targets in general. targets not restricted to c.prot appeared to be preferentially at the beginning of pathways as opposed to more central positions . when restricted to c.prot, this trend was much augmented . nci-pid  <cit> , the pathway database we used, included  <dig> drugbank targets ,  <dig> of which were in c.prot .

a central interactome
it was natural to define the central interactome as the network made of direct interactions between c.prot proteins; this network is likely to exist in all the human cells. shortest path distance distributions were computed . we also found both the central and whole interactome to be scale-free  <cit> , with the central interactome comprising more highly-connected regions , see figure 2b. the central interactome contained several essential protein complexes, see figure 2c. the central interactome can be regarded as platform used by biological processes to exchange information through protein interactions. therefore, we introduced a notion of flux between biological processes. as explained in methods, fluxes between biological processes  mediated by protein-protein interactions  can be scored and we compared fluxes over the central interactome with fluxes outside the central interactome and fluxes between c.prot and non c.prot proteins. in each case, we generated random interaction networks and go annotations to determine which fluxes were significantly more intense than what would be expected by chance from the network topology and go terms frequencies. at the 1% significance level, the random networks simulation yielded  <dig> significant go bp fluxes within the central interactome,  <dig> between c.prot and proteins of the human interactome not in more than  <dig> cell lines, and  <dig> outside the central interactome. in every case, the expected number was  <dig> . see figure  <dig> 

discussion
the central proteome dataset
we present results characterizing the human central proteome , i.e. the set of proteins commonly expressed by human cells. although previous related studies have been conducted successfully on the basis of transcriptomics data, we based our work on proteomics data. proteomics is likely to yield additional insight because it directly measures the entities of interest, provided it reaches sufficient sensitivity and does not introduce excessive experimental biases. moreover, our results comprise several important new findings never covered by transcriptomics studies.

we defined c.prot to be the proteins shared by  <dig> cell lines whose total cell lysates were analyzed by state of the art proteomics and followed by very stringent protein bioinformatic identifications; it contains  <dig> proteins. clearly, the intersection of a much larger number of cell lines would be too stringent a criterion but we found it appropriate with  <dig> cell lines. experimental biases were modest in our data .

we could not find comparable human datasets from public repositories  <cit>  to complement our data and cover more cell lines or tissues. the dataset of schirle, et al.  <cit>  is much smaller after mapping to swiss-prot  and covered by our data essentially . the modest 8% that is not covered can certainly been explained by ms detection and sample preparation variability. also, the few false positives contained in both datasets reduce the overlap further.

data from the human protein atlas  <cit>   are not appropriate for completing ours as they derive from a biased a priori selection of proteins and antibody availability. antibody-based assays can also be very variable in their sensitivity, thus making expression profiles of different proteins difficult to compare. nonetheless, hpa is a very valuable resource and comparison with our data showed that strong hpa common detections in  <dig> out of the  <dig> cell lines of our study available in hpa have similar sizes , whereas including weak detections increased this number dramatically to  <dig>  the overlap with c.prot is modest in both cases:  <dig> and  <dig> proteins respectively . this shows higher sensitivity detection of targeted antibody-based assays compared to broad unbiased ms analysis, which is no surprise. this also shows that hpa is not covering so far an important proportion of c.prot.

hpa data can reveal an important characteristic of our data: if we consider all the proteins expressed in all the  <dig> hpa cell lines weakly or stronger, we find  <dig> proteins , which is a very small improvement compared to  <dig> above although hpa detections rose from  <dig> to  <dig>  this indicates that, within the limitation of current ms detectability, we already identify with  <dig> cell lines only a significant part of the ms measurable central proteome. to improve coverage of the central proteome it is more important to improve ms sensitivity than to increase the number of cell lines.

we compared c.prot with the most abundant proteins detected in any of the  <dig> cell lines that were not in c.prot . go annotations were very different for the two datasets . in fact, the non central abundant proteins had no strong functional association, which indicates that the sole abundance is not sufficient to associate with a function and is no longer a dominating factor for inclusion in the central proteome.

from su et al.  <cit>  microarray data we assembled a central transcriptome  for comparison taking the intersection of genes expressed in each tissue , which resulted in a list of  <dig> genes. c.trans only covered  <dig> proteins of c.prot. su et al. chip contained  <dig> out of the  <dig> proteins of c.prot, meaning that 45% of the proteins we detected would be missed by a transcriptomics approach. releasing the criterion for central transcriptome inclusion by requiring genes in all but  <dig> samples , we increased its size to  <dig> genes and cover  <dig> proteins, i.e. a missing part representing 26%. such losses were most likely due to low degradation rate proteins that do not require permanent expression of their coding genes.

analysis
functional analyses revealed prevalence for proteins involved in proteostasis, rna-binding, primary metabolism, cell cycle and cell death . the transcriptomics data set of specific genes   <cit>  was associated with different biological processes related to signaling and multicellular organization, whereas vital biological processes were much less prevalent . spe.trans thus seems to play an important role in the establishment of distinct anatomies via cell-cell signaling, whereas c.prot covers the more "archaic" needs, what is supported by the higher degree of conservation of its members. these observations corroborate results found from transcriptomics data previously  <cit> . proteins expressed across many cell types require augmented gene expression flexibility to adapt to local conditions. our finding that c.prot proteins have on average almost  <dig> additional exons compared to all human proteins shows that evolution preferred this economic way of gaining flexibility in common parts instead of augmenting their number through duplication events. spe.trans reduced exon count contrasts nicely.

kislinger, et al.  <cit>  did not extract a central proteome from their data. taking the intersection of their  <dig> organ datasets and mapping the mouse proteins to their human orthologs, we obtained  <dig> swiss-prot entries, which are also biased towards high exon counts .

implication in central processes of the cell's life is naturally reflected by augmented ppis and participation in complexes formation as well as central positions in interaction networks. common proteins are more connected and central in the human interactome than on average as shown by the  <dig> different global and local network topology measures we computed. this trend is reversed for tissue specific genes and, in addition, we observed a significant dependence with protein abundance: the more abundant a protein the stronger the connectivity/centrality and vice versa, see figures 1a and 1b. such observations might be thought to be artifactual since common proteins are likely to be over-represented in interaction databases and abundantly expressed proteins might be more successful in ppi experiments. to exclude this potential confounding effect we mapped c.prot down to yeast where large-scale unbiased data are available. using our integrated database we obtained a yeast interactome comprising datasets published with at least  <dig> physical interactions only and confirmed that c.prot increased connectivity/centrality is still valid in yeast .

because human interactome data have been gathered in many cell types and conditions, we do not believe that higher connectivity necessarily implies that c.prot entities are permanently connected to more partners. we rather consider it as a strong indication that these proteins have gained, during evolution, the capability to bind to more partners when needed; another way to augment adaptability to various environments. this is corroborated by the top over-representation of the go molecular function "protein binding", see suppl. figure  <dig> 

to investigate robustness of our findings with respect to a less stringent definition of the central proteome, we checked the exon count and network statistics biases either using the intersection of any six cell lines or taking proteins found in  <dig> out of  <dig> cell lines. in every case, the results were almost unchanged.

after considering ppis, it is natural to move to a higher degree of organization of the living matter, i.e. biological pathways. we define an intuitive notion of relative position along a pathway  and we observe that c.prot positions just follow the typical distributions of human proteins . this is no longer true for the most abundant common proteins, which tend to occupy central positions. this indicates that abundant proteins are more likely at non-rate limiting central positions while the key steps are under tighter expressional control  <cit> . this is also supported by more uniform presence of spe.trans genes and low abundant common proteins along pathways .

where do drugs hit the central proteome? the size of the overlap between drug targets and c.prot is significantly large . generally, drug targets are mainly designed against catalytic proteins, transporters and receptors, see suppl. figures  <dig> and  <dig>  drug targets in c.prot are mainly enzymes , which play a pivotal role in primary metabolic processes . the biological processes of amino acid metabolism, precursor generation and carbohydrate metabolism are strongly targeted. a preference against nucleotide binding proteins, e.g.  <dig> atp binders, and electron carrier activity processes is observed. pathway position analysis showed that drug targets are clearly shifted towards sources of pathways, see figure 1d. this trend was strongly reinforced considering c.prot drug targets. figure  <dig> features go analysis localized along pathway positions and shows that less central positions are targeted in all the biological processes. we believe that the reason for an additional shift towards initial pathway positions is that c.prot targets contain metabolic proteins mostly. as a matter of fact, drugs targeting metabolic pathways are frequently designed against rate limiting enzymes, e.g. atp- or nad-binding proteins, which are found at the beginning of pathways.

within the human interactome, c.prot entities tend to be both closer - in terms of shortest path distance - to themselves and to the non c.prot proteins than on average in the whole human interactome, figure 2a. this bias is increased within abundant c.prot entities. it indicates that c.prot is embedded in the interactome rather uniformly and does not constitute an isolated island, which certainly increases the robustness of the communications between c.prot and the rest of the proteome through ppis.

to better understand internal and external communication within and with c.prot, we have introduced the central interactome and measured how it synchronizes certain biological processes  preferentially. obviously, all the  ppis are biologically relevant but our analysis aimed at identifying the main streams of communication. high-scoring exchanges  between bps provide a summary of the communications for which the interaction network is the most efficient. from figure 3a we see that most exchanges in the central interactome are used to synchronize bps with translation. bp communication between c.prot and non c.prot and outside the central interactome is no longer specialized and translation has a marginal role.

how well do we know these essential components found in c.prot? surprisingly, c.prot contains  <dig> proteins lacking any information in pubmed , searching abstracts with gene symbols and their synonyms;  <dig> proteins appear in no more than  <dig> abstracts and  <dig> in no more than  <dig>  see suppl. figure  <dig> and suppl. table  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
we have determined experimentally an approximation of the central human proteome that is suitable for analyzing its global properties. it is made of rather well conserved proteins which have gained additional expression flexibility through the acquisition of additional exons. these proteins are mainly involved in proteostasis, primary metabolism, cell cycle and death. they tend to be well connected with other proteins via ppis. random network simulations show that the central interactome was made very efficient, through evolution, to coordinate translation with other biological processes, or the latter ones via translation indirectly. more abundant proteins tend to be located at biological pathway central positions. such central positions are generally devoid of drug targets, especially when they are part of the central proteome, which underline the fundamental role of these proteins whose activity should not be altered. surprisingly, 10% of these common proteins are essentially uncharacterized. our data can help other researchers to prioritize protein characterization or serve as background when analyzing focused datasets. they are made publicly available through the journal web site  and a public repository: the complete lists of protein/peptide identifications in each cell line with spectra have been deposited in proteomecommons.org tranche ; a more compact version of all the identifications found in each cell line in tabular format and without the spectra has also been deposited in tranche .

