BACKGROUND
novel therapeutic options have been made possible with production of animal cell culture-derived biopharmaceuticals. an enormous amount of insight has been published on production of recombinant proteins  since the first products have been licensed for application in humans  <dig> and  <dig>  cho cells are the main substrate for recombinant proteins and therefore most metabolic studies describe these cells  <cit> . regarding vaccine manufacturing, literature on properties and metabolism of host cells during growth and virus replication as well as process design and optimization is less abundant and not as focused. one reason is that safety considerations and execution of pre-clinical and clinical trials are paramount for vaccines because this medication usually is administered to healthy recipients. another reason is the multitude of process options and host cell systems used for propagation of pathogens. for historic reasons, primary cultures , diploid cell strains , and few continuous cell lines  are associated with the lowest possible risks to the vaccine recipients. production with such cellular substrates often is performed in the presence of calf serum and adherent culture with little room for optimization. furthermore, standardization of experiments is difficult with primary chicken material.

several virus strains and viral vectors, e.g. modified vaccinia virus ankara , only replicate efficiently in avian cells  <cit> . accordingly, primary chicken fibroblasts are still a commonly accepted production substrate. as vectored vaccines are gaining increasing importance  <cit> , the potential of continuous suspension cells that proliferate in chemically-defined media are attracting more and more attention. therefore, continuous avian cell lines are being investigated as a viable option to replace primary material. one possible new cell candidate that meets these criteria is the avian designer cell line age <dig> cr.pix  that proliferates in fully scalable suspension culture and is adapted to growth in a chemically-defined medium  <cit> . the latter property is an advantage for metabolic flux analysis as no unknown or complex components such as animal sera or hydrolysates that complicate carbon and nitrogen balance closure are present.

metabolic models have been developed for a variety of cell lines to study physiological states or changes in metabolism as a response to different cultivation strategies, medium composition or stimuli like virus infection or accumulation of toxins. for example, the human cell lines hek <dig>  <cit>  and age <dig> hn  <cit> , other mammalian cells like cho  <cit> , bhk  <cit> , mdck  <cit>  and hybridoma cells  <cit>  or insect cell lines like sf <dig>  <cit>  have been studied because of their relevance for the production of biopharmaceuticals. for all these cell lines, the two main pathways for energy generation and precursor supply were found to be glucose catabolism via glycolysis and glutamine catabolism via the tca cycle, referred to as glutaminolysis  <cit> . therefore, cell culture media usually contain substantial amounts of both substrates. associated with an overflow metabolism based on glucose and a high glutaminolysis activity is the accumulation of lactate and ammonia in the cultivation broth with a negative impact on cell growth and product formation  <cit> .

to describe cell metabolism, various mathematical methods have been developed and comprehensive reviews on applied approaches and their benefits for mammalian cell culture research are available  <cit> . mass balancing techniques like metabolic flux analysis  can be performed for analysis of cellular growth, requiring only a comparatively small set of experimental data. during the exponential growth phase of batch cultivations or continuous cultivations this method can be used to evaluate possible intracellular flux distributions based on measurements of exchange fluxes. however, if the system is underdetermined, no unique flux distribution can be calculated. one approach to circumvent this limitation is to perform 13c labelling experiments. the higher experimental effort of such studies comes with the advantage of an increased number of constraints and uniquely resolvable flux distributions  <cit> . another possibility is to apply flux variability analysis , a method related to mfa that calculates a flux range instead of a distinct flux value  <cit> . the advantage of this method is that it is experimentally less demanding as it requires  only extracellular metabolite and cell concentrations as well as the biomass composition. intracellular flux ranges from measured extracellular rates  can then be computed with the help of software tools such as the cellnetanalyzer toolbox  <cit> .as a starting point for studying metabolism of avian cr.pix cells during growth, we developed a network model for the central metabolism oriented in size and scope on other published models of the central metabolism of mammalian and insect cell lines . pathways were selected based on entries from avian species in the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  database. as it was not known whether biomass composition of avian cells is comparable to other examined cells, we first determined relative proportions of biomass components experimentally. fva and mfa were then applied to assess the metabolic behaviour of cr.pix cells during exponential growth in a 1 l stirred tank reactor . finally, to verify emerging hypotheses regarding metabolic pathways, especially glutaminolysis, enzyme activity measurements and additional growth experiments were performed.

RESULTS
biomass composition
to allow metabolic flux analysis, some cell characteristics need to be known, i.e. specific dry cell weight and biomass composition. as it was not known whether similar results to other eukaryotic cells could be expected for an avian cell, most characteristics were determined experimentally rather than presumed.

the specific cell dry weight of cr.pix cells was measured with 314 pg/cell. amounts of dna  and rna  per cr.pix cell were comparable to published values obtained for other eukaryotic cells. the protein content  was lower in cr.pix cells than the typical range of 70–75% determined for other cells  <cit> . however, there are reports supporting a low protein content such as zupke et al. who found 60% protein in mouse hybridoma cells and carnicer et al. who measured a protein content of only 37% for yeast cells  <cit> . the relative amounts of amino acids of whole cell protein determined from cr.pix cells are in general similar to published data on yeast  <cit> , mammalian cells  <cit>  and insect cell lines  <cit>  . the remaining fraction of biomass was assigned to lipids and carbohydrates in a ratio of 1: <dig>  the estimated lipid content  agrees with previous reports that vary between  <dig> and 20%, whereas the assumed carbohydrate content  is at the upper limit of the wide range of  <dig> – <dig> % reported in literature  <cit> . however, a sensitivity analysis showed that absolute fractions of lipids and carbohydrates have only a minor impact on rate values of the calculated flux distributions .

growth phases of cr.pix cells in str
the growth of cr.pix cells can be divided into distinct phases. first, an initial lag phase was observed lasting for about 24 h with only slightly increasing viable cell concentrations. thereafter, cells grew exponentially until 172 h. following the exponential growth phase, a reduced growth was observed until 230 h, but viability was still above 90% in this intermediate growth phase . after having reached the maximum viable cell concentration of  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells/ml, cell death started.

the region chosen for mfa and fva was 24–97 h, where a growth rate of  <dig>  h- <dig> was observed. in the following, only this time frame is considered when describing and discussing extracellular rates and intracellular flux distributions as it is very likely that the quasi steady state assumption holds. furthermore, it is also the typical time frame in which cells are grown before infection in virus production processes   <cit> . studies in this time frame are therefore most relevant in terms of vaccine manufacturing using cr.pix cells.

exchange rates from measured extracellular metabolites
determined exchange rates of cr.pix were compared to rates given in other publications for mammalian cell lines . we chose  <dig> data sets where equal units were given or could be calculated for comparison, thereof three publications on the metabolism of human age <dig> hn cells  <cit> , one publication on hek <dig> cells  <cit> , and one on mdck cells  <cit> . the majority of concentration profiles of cr.pix cultivations are similar to concentration profiles obtained for other transformed cell lines studied in the past. for most of the metabolites, the measured exchange rates during cr.pix cultivation have the same direction  and are in the same range compared to those found for other cell lines. most notably, as observed for other cell lines, almost all of the consumed glucose is converted to lactate and excreted in the medium . key differences in the rates of cr.pix cell cultivations were observed for the following metabolites:

a
b
c
d,f
e,f
all rates are given in μmol/gdw/h.

afrom  <cit> ; bfrom  <cit> ; cfrom  <cit> ; dfrom  <cit> ; efrom  <cit> .

fthese fluxes were re-calculated to  with the given fluxes and cell dry weights.

gstandard deviation from monte-carlo sampling using validated standard deviations of the methods as boundaries.

first, glutamine uptake is zero with cr.pix cells  as the observed glutamine concentration decrease is solely due to glutamine hydrolysis. associated with this, only low amounts of ammonia accumulated in the medium . for production of cell culture-derived products this is a beneficial characteristic as higher ammonia concentrations are known to be toxic with negative impact on cell growth and product formation  <cit> . the observed ammonia concentration is at the lower limit compared to other cells, where concentrations between  <dig> and 8 mm were reported to lead to impaired growth  <cit> .

the second difference is observable for glycine which is taken up by cr.pix cells, but released by other cell lines. this observation can be explained by the fact that glycine is reported to be an essential amino acid for birds and therefore needs to be provided for cr.pix cells by the medium  <cit> . the third finding is that aspartate and asparagine are consumed by cr.pix cells in higher amounts or at least at higher rates compared to other cell lines. both amino acids can be converted to oxaloacetate and thus channeled into the tca cycle. one could hypothesize that cr.pix cells compensate in that way for the negligible glutamine uptake to fill the tca cycle intermediate pools. we also observed that the measured uptake rates for the essential amino acids histidine, lysine and tryptophan were slightly below their minimal requirements for biomass formation with the determined growth rate. for the following analyses we therefore adjusted their upper boundaries slightly to fit the minimal stoichiometric demands for the measured specific growth rate.

intracellular flux distribution
using a metabolic network model of the central metabolism of avian cells that we developed according to literature data and database entries, the metabolism of cr.pix cells during cultivation in 1 l str was studied using fva . the time span of 24 h and 97 h was chosen for analysis, as within this time interval during exponential growth, the quasi steady state assumption holds. fva uses as few constraints for the metabolic network as possible in order to get an unbiased look at the metabolism. this generated a distribution of flux ranges that is named scenario  <dig> in this manuscript. however, flux ranges are sometimes difficult to interpret. therefore, after having performed fva, we set few reasonable constraints, e.g. uptake and excretion rates were set as fixed and the pyruvate carboxylase activity was assumed to be inactive. with these constraints a unique flux distribution could be calculated which is discussed as scenario  <dig> in the following.

all calculated flux ranges  and fluxes  are given in the additional file . together with the network, main fluxes are also depicted in figure  <dig>  although only flux ranges can be calculated with the constraints of scenario  <dig> , some conclusions can already be drawn from them as we will discuss below. however, most of the following discussion will refer to the unique flux distribution calculated for scenario  <dig> . with the applied constraints, the linear equation system had two degrees of redundancy. therefore, the sum of the variance weighted squared residuals  need to be below  <dig>  to exclude significant measurement errors . since we obtained an h-value of  <dig>  we concluded that the model fitted the data sufficiently well.

glycolysis and cytosolic pyruvate metabolism
glucose is taken up with a high rate  and then processed via glycolytic reactions to pyruvate. only 1% of the glucose is fed into the pentose phosphate pathway for nucleotide synthesis. such low pentose phosphate influxes were also observed in other studies with transformed cells, e.g.  <dig> % and  <dig> % in human age <dig> hn cells  <cit> . the calculated ranges for the rates of glycolysis are relatively narrow as they mainly depend on the glucose uptake rate that was given by the measurement of extracellular glucose. cytosolic pyruvate is mainly derived from glycolysis ; the rest of the cytoplasmic pyruvate is taken up by the cells and in small parts obtained from cysteine degradation and the malic enzyme reaction . similar to other transformed cells, cytosolic pyruvate is mainly converted to lactate  or alanine . only a small fraction  is transported to the mitochondria where it is converted to acetyl-coa and further oxidized. however, if a complete pentose phosphate pathway  is included in the model, the exact ratio between glycolysis and ppp is unresolvable and the corresponding flux ranges would be notably wider. since co <dig> is produced via the ppp, a high ppp flux would reduce the amount of carbon that re-enters the lower part of glycolysis, and therefore even less pyruvate would enter the tca cycle.

in general, the flux distribution at the cytosolic pyruvate node shows that the majority of the glucose-associated metabolism of cr.pix cells is used to generate atp and reducing equivalents via glycolysis. the known warburg effect of enhanced aerobic glycolysis, leading mostly to lactate, can thus also be observed in transformed cells from avian origin. furthermore, there seems to be a weak coupling to the mitochondrial tca cycle as only a minority of the cytosolic pyruvate is channeled into the mitochondria. other studies have shown that several transformed cell lines show low activities of the three pyruvate dependent enzymes pyruvate dehydrogenase , pyruvate decarboxylase  and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase  that can serve as connectors between glycolysis and tca cycle  <cit> . for our cells, we calculated that the pdh  must carry some flux , but the non-resolvable pc reaction  is not obligatory as its flux range also includes zero. measurements on activities of anaplerotic enzymes will be discussed in a later subsection.

mitochondrial pyruvate metabolism and tca cycle
the mitochondrial pyruvate pool is fed from the cytosolic pyruvate pool  and the anaplerotic malate conversion . 100% of the efflux is catalyzed by the pyruvate dehydrogenase thereby generating 88% of the mitochondrial acetyl-coa. other influxes towards this tca precursor come from amino acids, namely isoleucine  and leucine , tryptophan, and lysine . the subsequent reactions of the tca cycle are fed from other catabolic reactions: α-ketoglutarate from cytosolic influx and succinyl-coa from isoleucine, valine, serine and methionine degradation. this shows the dependency of the tca cycle activity on relatively high amino acid uptake and catabolic rates in cr.pix cells.

oxidative phosphorylation & atp balance
we calculated high fluxes for the oxidation of nadh  and fadh <dig> . since a transport reaction for nadh between the cytosol and mitochondria was included in the model, the pools of reducing equivalents for both compartments are balanced simultaneously. a minor flux for the corresponding transport reaction shifting reducing equivalents from the mitochondria to the cytosol was calculated with 30 μmol/gdw/h. by setting this transport reaction to zero, cytosolic and mitochondrial reducing equivalents have to be balanced separately. besides an increased oxygen uptake and atp synthesis rate, this leads to no significant differences in the flux distributions .

atp generation via the tca cycle and the electron transport chain makes up to 74% of the total atp generated. a smaller fraction  is derived from glycolysis. this is similar to results from studies on mouse hybridoma and cho cells  <cit>  where values of 60–80% of atp production via the tca cycle have been reported. although considerable atp amounts are needed for lipid synthesis, amino acid transporters, upper glycolysis and biomass, the high  atp consumption through reaction r <dig>  indicates that there seems to be an overload with atp which is either used for certain maintenance processes or passed through futile cycles.

amino acid and nitrogen metabolism
degradation rates of some amino acids, e.g. tryptophan and histidine, are low, indicating that these amino acids are taken up to match the anabolic demand for synthesizing biomass rather than to further metabolize them via catabolic routes. the calculated rate ranges for most fluxes of the amino acid catabolism are constrained to relatively small intervals . there is no uric acid synthesis  as no uric acid could be measured experimentally. although this reaction is known to take place in avian cells, this is not a fully unexpected finding. uric acid was detected in livers and kidneys of chicken and turkey, but not in all bird tissues  <cit> . cr.pix cells, as other transformed cells, use ammonia as a sink and release the excess cytosolic ammonia  into the medium where it accumulates. however, due to low glutamine exploitation, the ammonium concentration stays at a low level so that toxic concentrations are not reached.

interestingly, the fluxes through the glutamine synthetase   are negative as glutamine uptake was not sufficient for biomass synthesis and glutamine therefore has to be synthesized from the glutamate pool. glutamate itself is likely to be mainly derived from degradation reactions of isoleucine, valine and aspartate. especially aspartate is taken up in large parts  and can be converted to glutamate. other amino acids that could compensate for glutamine conversion to glutamate are arginine, histidine and proline. however, only arginine is taken up in considerable amounts by the cells so that one could speculate that the path from glutamate to α-ketoglutarate is generally not used extensively by the cr.pix cells and thus, the classical dependency on glutamine is not given for cr.pix cells. to elucidate unambiguously the source of carbon for glutamate synthesis, 13c labelling experiments would be required, which are beyond the scope of the current contribution.

in vitro enzyme activities
to validate the two hypotheses from the previous section that i) glycolysis is only weakly connected to the tca, and that ii) glutaminolysis plays a minor role in energy supply and precursor generation, we measured the maximum in vitro enzyme activities of the related enzymes.

for the first hypothesis, we measured maximum activities of pc and pdh. for both reactions, low enzyme activities of  <dig>  nmol/106cells/min  were measured as for mdck cells  <cit> . these values supported the applied constraint of a missing carboxylating anaplerotic reaction from pyruvate towards oxaloacetate. however, the measured low pdh activity seems to contradict the calculated flux of 102 μmol/gdw/h. one possible explanation is given by the significantly smaller calculated lower boundary of this flux when applying fewer and less stringent assumptions with scenario  <dig>  however, at least a basal activity is required as the lower boundary is strictly positive .

the second hypothesis, stating that glutaminolysis is inversed, was validated via measurements of glutaminase  and glutamine synthetase . glutaminase showed a maximal activity of  <dig>  nmol/106cells/min , which is an even lower value than the measured  <dig> – <dig>  nmol/106cells/min for mdck cells  <cit> . the flux from glutamate to glutamine was predicted by flux analysis to be active towards glutamine in order to account for the unmet demand of glutamine for biomass formation. the measured enzyme activity of the catalyzing enzyme glutamine synthetase showed a maximal activity of  <dig>  nmol/106cells/min . this value is on the one hand significantly higher than the value for the reverse reaction and on the other hand at the upper limit of reported values for mdck cells . thus, although values from in vitro enzyme activity measurement and flux analysis are not directly convertible, the measured enzyme activities support the calculated flux distribution towards glutamine and the low level of glutamine usage.

growth in glutamine-free medium
since the uptake flux for glutamine was calculated as zero and the enzyme measurements supported the low glutaminolytic activity, we speculated whether glutamine is even dispensable for growth of cr.pix cells. to validate this hypothesis, we performed shaker flask cultivations of cr.pix cells in cd-u <dig> medium with 2 mm glutamine and in cd-u <dig> medium without glutamine addition. as no serum is present in the medium, other glutamine sources can be excluded. cultures with or without glutamine were run in parallel over  <dig> passages. for passage  <dig>  a growth curve was recorded. figure  <dig> shows that cells without glutamine did not grow as well as in the presence of glutamine during the first three passages . viability also dropped below 90% in these cultures . after passage  <dig>  cell growth performance in glutamine-free medium increased significantly. finally, cells in the 5th passage in glutamine-free medium did grow comparably fast as in the presence of glutamine. maximal viable cell concentrations of  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells/ml were achieved with viabilities above 90%. this experiment demonstrated that cr.pix cells are capable of glutamine-independent growth. with cho cells, this was achieved after several selection rounds  <cit> , but could not be achieved with other cells  <cit> . considering that we did not measure glutamine uptake fluxes, we were surprised at the intermittent decrease in proliferation rates and viabilities of cr.pix cultures after glutamine removal. however, extracellular and intracellular glutamine mediate also non-nutritional effects that can impact apoptosis and heat shock responses  <cit> . we hypothesize that the short adaptation period after glutamine removal may be due to shifts in glutamine-responsive signaling pathways. infection experiments with poxvirus mva showed that productivity of cr.pix cells is not negatively affected by glutamine absence . the feature of glutamine-free growth of cr.pix cells may be advantageous in particular for high cell density cultivations were ammonia accumulates to very high concentrations in the culture supernatant and prevents further increases in cell numbers and productivity  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
avian cells are important substrates for producing a number of licensed vaccines and various viral vector-based processes under development. the only avian substrates that are currently approved for production are embryonated chicken eggs or primary chicken embryo fibroblasts. because processes using primary cultures are difficult to optimize and standardize, access to well characterized continuous avian cell lines, such as the cr.pix cell line derived from a muscovy duck embryo, would be a significant step forward.

here, we determined metabolic properties of the cr.pix cell line to complement previous developments on scalable vaccine production processes in chemically defined media. the current study comprised three parts: i) analysis of biomass composition and measurements of cell and extracellular metabolite concentrations, ii) construction of a stoichiometric network for the central metabolism of avian cells and subsequent analysis with flux variability and metabolic flux analysis, and iii) experiments and analytics to validate hypotheses derived from the stoichiometric analysis.

the first part expands the available data base on the metabolism of immortalized cell lines. results on biomass composition and growth properties of the avian cr.pix cell line agree with data determined for other transformed mammalian and insect cell lines used in biopharmaceutical production.

flux variability and metabolic flux analyses in the second part reveal an overflow metabolism similar to mammalian cells with high uptake of glucose followed by conversion to and release of lactate and alanine. the tca cycle was only weakly connected to glycolysis and appeared to depend on the influx of amino acids, mainly isoleucine, valine and aspartate. finally, our measurements together with flux  analysis indicated that glutamine supplementation is not an essential requirement for cr.pix cell proliferation.

the derived hypothesis on low glutaminolysis activity could be confirmed by enzyme activity measurements. however, the hypothesis of a weak connection between the cytosolic and mitochondrial pyruvate pools could not be confirmed entirely. to elucidate whether cytosolic pyruvate is transported in significant amounts from the cytosol to the mitochondria, e.g. 13c labelling experiments could be helpful, which was beyond the scope of the current contribution. low dependence on glutamine was confirmed by passaging cells in glutamine-free medium and agrees well with the observation that ammonia is accumulating to very low concentrations in the medium. this is a very beneficial property of cr.pix cells especially for fed-batch cultivation strategies where ammonia often accumulates to toxic levels.

overall, the present study provides a basis for a more focused metabolic analysis of avian cell lines and thus helps to further optimize medium and feed requirements. acute infection and associated take-over of the metabolism by a virus may shift the requirements for certain nutrients. the derived model may therefore also provide a context for future studies on the metabolism of cr.pix cells during the virus replication phase.

