BACKGROUND
brucellosis remains one of the world's major zoonotic disease problems and can lead to reproductive problems in a number of large livestock and other animals. in humans, brucellosis is associated with a broad spectrum of symptoms and can occasionally be fatal  <cit> . whilst brucellosis is the global term for infection by organisms in the gram-negative genus brucella, there are actually a number of causative agents. differentiation to species level within the genus is based on both different phenotypic characteristics and the host from which it was initially isolated  <cit> . these divisions are also supported by pulse field gel electrophoresis -based physical mapping, showing that each species has a specific physical organisation  <cit> , and techniques such as multilocus sequencing  <cit>  and variable number tandem repeat  based typing  <cit> . bovine infection is generally caused by b. abortus, b. melitensis infects predominantly sheep and goats, b. suis infects pigs, hares and reindeer, b. ovis infects sheep only, b. canis infects dogs, whilst b. neotomae has only been isolated from the desert wood rat. in addition to the six classically described species novel members of the genus have more recently been isolated from marine mammals, predominantly dolphins, porpoises and seals. these have very recently been classified as two additional species, b. ceti  and b. pinnipedialis   <cit> . in addition, a novel species of brucella , associated with voles, has recently been reported  <cit> . some brucella species are further sub-divided into groups known as biovars. whilst these are of epidemiological interest in b. abortus and b. melitensis, the five biovars that are found in b. suis appear to relate to host preference. in humans, four of the classical species  have been shown to cause disease  <cit> . there is also evidence to suggest that humans can be infected by marine mammal brucella further highlighting the importance of this group of organisms to human health  <cit> .

identification to species level is traditionally based on biotyping that examines antigenic, phenotypic and phage susceptibility profiles. while the approach has been useful for many years, it has a number of recognised drawbacks. being culture based, biotyping requires specialist handling facilities for the initial isolation of a pure culture and then needs additional culture time for phenotype and phage susceptibility determination. in addition, some of the differentiating characteristics can be very subtle meaning that biotyping should only be carried out by highly experienced individuals. however, even with this caveat, interpretation of this method is acknowledged to be rather subjective. furthermore there are frequent reports of atypical organisms that do not conform to the expected characteristics of particular species.

molecular biology provides tools that can circumvent such problems associated with classical microbiology by using suitably validated genetic markers for objective and unambiguous identification of groups. as dna is the target of this testing, culturing can be reduced or potentially bypassed, both removing the necessity for specialist handling facilities, and shortening time from sampling to identification. with the explosion of molecular sequence data and an expanding array of technological platforms the use of assays based on single nucleotide polymorphisms  in microbial genotyping is becoming increasingly common. for example, point mutations in rpob and katg have been used as markers for resistance to rifampicin and isoniazid in mycobacterium tuberculosis  <cit>  while snps have also been used to differentiate vaccine and field strains of canine parvovirus  <cit> . in terms of microbial diagnostics snp-based genotyping has been applied to a number of organisms including members of the mycobacterium tuberculosis complex  <cit> , bacillus anthracis  <cit>  and burkholderia species.  <cit> .

we have recently undertaken extensive phylogenetic analysis of the brucella group involving the sequencing of some  <dig> distinct gene fragments, from over  <dig> strains of brucella, representing the known genetic diversity of the group . while this extensive analysis confirmed the long-standing view that the genus is highly homogeneous  <cit>  it has nevertheless allowed us to confidently identify snps that we believe define each of the classically accepted brucella species. furthermore snps are particularly powerful markers in such a conserved group as they are highly unlikely to have occurred twice independently  and equally, having occurred, are unlikely to mutate again back to their ancestral state  <cit> . in addition, these studies revealed strong linkage disequilibrium in the distribution of alleles between brucella species  <cit>  implying that recombination is rare and giving increased confidence in the robustness and stability of species-specific snps selected as markers.

we have thus selected seven snps that we have worked into a multiple outcome assay to identify brucella isolates at the species level. an assay based on these markers should deliver unambiguous results without the subjectivity associated with biotyping or problems associated with strains that are phenotypically aberrant. we recently described the development of a snp-based assay identifying brucella to the species level on a primer extension platform  <cit> . here, we describe the development of an equivalent tool for the real-time pcr platform that has certain advantages in terms of speed, technical simplicity and potentially wider applicability being based on a cheaper, and more widely available, technological platform. we describe the use of a panel of short taqman 5' labelled, 3' minor groove binding , probes to interrogate species defining snps. use of the mgb protein raises the melting temperature of probes meaning that a single base mismatch causes more destabilisation than would be the case with a longer probe  <cit> . this facilitates accurate snp detection allowing us to use this approach in an assay to identify brucella to the species level.

RESULTS
assay design
previous multilocus sequence analysis  studies, performed by us, identified a number of snps that are specific for known brucella spp. these form the basis of the assay described here . point changes specific for b. melitensis, b. ovis, b. canis and the marine mammal brucella were described previously  <cit>  based on multi-locus sequence analysis of  <dig> strains. the snps specific for b. abortus, b. suis, and b. neotomae used in this assay, were identified by extension of this work to examine a total of  <dig> gene fragments from over  <dig> strains . in the case of b. suis it was not possible to identify a single snp specific to the classical taxonomic group. this reflects the fact that b. suis biovar   <dig> is genetically distinct from the remaining b. suis biovars  <cit> . the snp used in the assay described here therefore identifies only b. suis bvs 1– <dig>  there are snps specific to b. suis bv  <dig>  <cit>  that could be used in an assay to discriminate this biovar, although in practical terms it has only rarely been isolated from rodents and is of no diagnostic significance. the b. suis bvs 1– <dig> snp in prpe is shared with b. canis reflecting the fact that b. canis is embedded within the b. suis phylogenetic cluster. however the presence of a snp confined to b. canis in omp <dig> allows unambiguous separation of these two species  <cit> . in previous work, where we used primer extension to determine species, we had not incorporated a target to positively identify b. suis but rather used a process of elimination to identify members of this species. however, with the isolation of novel species such as b. microti, it became necessary to redress this problem. brucellae isolated from marine mammals have recently been formally designated as two distinct species, b. pinnipedialis and b. ceti  <cit> . however, this designation is proving controversial as it is inconsistent with apparent genetic divisions within the marine mammal group  <cit> . reflecting this, it has not been possible to identify snps that specifically identify these two species. thus the snp chosen for use in this assay, in trpe, is universal to all marine mammal isolates  <cit> .

gene targets, primers and allele-specific probes used in this study.  brucella species-specific snps and non-specific snps   are shown within the relevant probes. gene target locations are given  relative to the sequenced b. abortus 9- <dig> strain.

individual assays for each snp are based on the use of two alternative probes, one that preferentially binds to the species-specific polymorphism, while the other binds to the alternative allele state present in members of all other species. in each case the species-specific probe is labelled with vic while the alternative state probe is labelled with fam . by following a strategy of optimising each snp discrimination assay to identical cycling conditions all seven species-defining assays can be analysed concurrently in a multiple outcome assay.

optimisation
the single-tube assay, as provided by applied biosystems, is provided with a standard probe and primer concentration. however upon initial testing, certain assays displayed background with some probes not predicted to react in a particular sample, giving fluorescence values above those expected. to overcome this we obtained individual assay components and optimised primer and probe concentrations to maximise discrimination . details of final probe and primer concentrations selected based on this work are presented in table  <dig> 

primer and probe concentrations were optimised to give the greatest amount of discrimination with the least background using the minimum amounts of the various components.

assay performance
the optimised assay was run as shown in figure  <dig> with each individual snp discrimination assay running in rows . this enables typing of twelve isolates on a single 96-well plate. reaction plots with the species-specific vic labelled probes are in green, with the alternative fam labelled probe in blue. in most cases each sample should generate a strong curve with the vic labelled probe in only one well, and should react preferentially with the fam-labelled probe in the remaining six wells. in this manner the sample in column one is identified as b. abortus, that in column  <dig> as b. melitensis and so on. reflecting their phylogenetic position described above, b. canis isolates react with the vic probes for both b. suis and b. canis . the isolate in column  <dig> is b. suis bv  <dig> which as described above lacks any of the species defining snps and thus reacts only with all seven fam-labelled alternative state probes. this is also the reaction outcome expected with any novel isolates that are not members of classically recognised species or the marine mammal brucella groups.

assay validation
assay validation was performed using  <dig> brucella isolates encompassing all species and biovar reference strains and a collection of geographically and temporally distinct field isolates comprising members of all known species . alongside representatives of all species and biovars, the vaccine strains b. abortus s <dig> and rb <dig> as well as b. melitensis rev <dig> were also included. in addition, strains that had both genotypes and phenotypes that did not correspond to any of the known classical brucella species but were shown to be brucella by 16s rrna typing were also tested. when all seven individual assays were compared the predicted species identity of the  <dig> strains was consistent with identification based on other molecular and phenotypic methods. based on this analysis allele discrimination plots were generated for each snp assay . each data-point represents the normalised end-point fluorescence reading for both vic and fam labelled probes plotted on the x-axis and y-axis respectively. each plot shows that there is unambiguous discrimination between genotypes with two distinct populations. one population clusters around the x-axis and consists of isolates that would be classified as a member of the species targeted by this one specific snp. the second population clustering around the y-axis represents members of the remaining species. no template controls cluster around the plot origin with negligible reaction with either probe. the spread of data-points in the scatter plot reflects the fact that dna concentrations applied to the assay were not normalised.

a number of isolates that represent likely new brucella groups, based on 16s rrna sequencing and other extensive analysis, were tested in the assay including recently described b. microti  <cit>  and an atypical isolate from a human infection  <cit> . as with b. suis bv  <dig>  seven non-specific curves were generated showing that this assay would identify isolates such as these as brucella, but recognise that they did not belong to any of the currently described species. within the  <dig> isolates tested were three reference strains  each cultured in vitro through up to  <dig> passages. testing of these isolates showed that the target snps were stable even on extensive in vitro culture.

limits of detection of genotyping assay
the analytical sensitivity of each mgb dual probe assay was firstly tested at least four times for each serial dilution from  <dig> ng  to  <dig>  fg  of its target species/type. a representative example is shown in figure 3a. each individual assay could reliably detect dna down to  <dig> fg, or approximately  <dig> cells from all the assays. samples containing  <dig> fg could only be detected sporadically. analytical sensitivity was in line with work done on bacillus anthracis, where the lowest detection levels were  <dig> fg or  <dig> cells  <cit> . allelic discrimination plots for each individual snp assay comparing serial dilutions of target and non-target species illustrated that there was still clear discrimination even at  <dig> fg of dna .

specificity
initial optimisation work was carried out using the taqman universal mix which was effective for all seven assays although fluorescence levels were lower for the b. abortus probe pair. this led to lower sensitivity at  <dig> cycles for this probe pair, although allelic discrimination was unaffected. in order to check specificity of the assay five type strains of ochrobactrum, the closest phylogenetic neighbour of brucella  <cit> , were tested in duplicate. they were shown not to give fluorescence readings greater than the background with all seven probe pairs, which is the very least we would see if these samples were brucella. however, to improve upon the low fluorescence and sensitivity associated with the b. abortus probes, we switched to an improved reaction mix  and then repeated the work. upon repetition of the ochrobactrum work with the new mix, it was noted that we were now seeing a seven probe profile for the five species that had not been seen previously. however, the kinetics of these reactions were clearly very different to those seen with comparable concentrations of brucella dna. reactions were weak with very low endpoint fluorescence values . when the targets of snp assay were compared against the published o. anthropi atcc <dig> genome sequence, it was found that there were polymorphisms in most of the primers and probes used in this assay that might account for these differences in kinetics . this assay was not designed as a diagnostic assay to distinguish brucella from other bacteria, and there are other real time pcr assays available that can do this. for example, the insertion sequence is <dig> is considered specific for organisms of the genus brucella. brucellae can be identified through amplification of this element as demonstrated by ouahrani-bettache et al.  <cit>  or in the widely used abortus-melitensis-ovis-suis pcr  assay  <cit> . in addition, there are genus specific real time pcr assays based around the conserved bcsp <dig> target that can fulfil this role  <cit> . however, in light of this observation, we sought to include additional markers that would differentiate brucella from its nearest phylogenetic neighbours. to do this, we looked at the 16s rrna sequence as the target most commonly used for identification of bacteria to the genus level  <cit> . alignments of 16s rrna sequences of brucella spp. with ochrobactrum spp. sequences deposited in genbank, as well as equivalent sequences for other related α-proteobacteriawere constructed. it should be noted at this point that there are a number of genbank entries annotated as brucella but which clearly represent ochrobactrum.

on this basis three snps were identified that when used in conjunction can distinguish brucella from other α-proteobacteria based on the sequences deposited in genbank currently  . the three snps correspond to positions  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  in the b. abortus 9– <dig> ribosomal rna sequence. mgb probes were designed to discriminate alleles at these three sites, one probing 16s rrna <dig> and 16s rrna <dig>  the other probing 16s rrna <dig> . these were tested against all brucella species and biovars as well as the five ochrobactrum type strains previously tested and two additional ochrobactrum anthropi strains . using this combination of three snps manages to distinguish brucella isolates from non-brucella isolates .

discussion
the aim of this work was to use the robust phylogenetic framework provided by existing mlsa studies to develop a rapid, unambiguous assay for the real-time pcr platform capable of identifying brucella isolates to species level. the approach is based on a series of discrimination assays interrogating snps that we have shown to be specific to a particular brucella species. as each individual snp assay will always give one of two results, species determination is straightforward and unambiguous. amplification profiles, representing binding of either the vic- or fam-labelled probe, are generated in all seven individual discrimination assays. one of the seven individual assays should give a positive reaction with the vic-labelled probe , with a reaction with the fam-labelled probe apparent in all the remaining assays. an assay which did not generate a positive pcr result from each of the seven individual probe pairs would be considered to have failed. this approach avoids any danger of 'false-negatives', where lack of a pcr product could be indicative of pcr inhibition rather than absence of target. furthermore, although any signals generated by non-brucella organisms in this study were weak, we sought to absolutely ensure the specificity of the assay by identifying three snps in 16s rrna that, when used in conjunction, differentiate brucella from closely related bacteria. allele discrimination assays based on these three markers were shown to clearly differentiate brucella from closely related α-proteobacteria examined.

as a snp based speciation assay the approach described here has a number of potential advantages, comparable to those of our primer extension based snp typing assay  <cit> , when compared to classical biotyping approaches. both methods overcome the subjectivity associated with biotyping with approaches that are relatively technically straightforward, unambiguous, and have substantial advantages in terms of simplicity and speed. in addition, both techniques reduce the potential exposure to live brucella. this is desirable given the ease of acquisition of brucella in the absence of stringent bio-containment facilities  <cit> .

both assays also have substantial advantages over currently used molecular assays. they can be carried out on crude bacterial lysates bypassing the need for lengthy dna extraction procedures as required by some molecular typing approaches  <cit>  and, as pcr based methods, both techniques should theoretically be applicable directly to field material obviating the need for any culture. in contrast to some extensively used existing assays such as amos-pcr  <cit>  these assays are all encompassing identifying all relevant biovars of all species. of the classically recognised brucella species and biovars only b. suis bv  <dig> will not be positively identified as a particular brucella species by the real-time pcr assay, reflecting its unique phylogenetic position within the group apparently distinct from other b. suis. however, like other potentially novel brucella groups, such isolates are positively identified as brucella displaying seven clear non species-specific fam signals. both techniques lend themselves to future expansion to include markers for such new groups. for example, after this manuscript was submitted a novel species, b. microti, was described. we have already described a snp specific to this species based on mlsa  <cit>  and probes interrogating this snp could readily be incorporated into this assay. this capacity for rapid inclusion of newly identified species is a potential advantage over some other molecular assays such as the multiplex pcr assay proposed by garcia-yoldi et al  <cit> . both the primer extension assay and the real-time pcr based assay described here have the advantage of potentially increased sensitivity associated with pcr based techniques. we have shown that the real-time pcr assay described here can detect and differentiate as little as  <dig> genome equivalents suggesting that it could possibly identify the organism in relevant field material such as foetal tissue or vaginal swabs.

there are, however, substantial advantages in the use of a real-time pcr platform, compared to the primer extension format that led us to investigate and report this alternative approach. the primer extension approach requires a dna sequencer, while the approach described in this manuscript requires only a real-time pcr machine. indeed, it could feasibly be undertaken in a simpler format with a conventional thermocycler and a basic fluorescence plate reader. thus, while the primer extension assay might be appropriate in larger reference laboratories, the technique described in this manuscript is likely to prove far more applicable in routine diagnostics. this is particularly so as real-time pcr machines become more widely available in areas of the world where brucellosis remains a major public and animal health issue. in contrast, the uptake of sequencing based technologies, requiring a substantially greater capital input, is likely to be much slower in these areas. furthermore, the real-time pcr approach is also technically simpler, faster and cheaper than the primer extension based approach. as amplification and detection is carried out concurrently the real-time assay described here can characterise isolates in around two hours. this compares to the day required for the primer extension based approach that also involves a much less straightforward experimental procedure. although both primer extension and real-time assays could be further expanded the number of markers that can be included in a single primer extension assay is limited by the need to space markers  between the  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp size standards. there is no such limitation with the real-time pcr described here where additional markers can be interrogated simply by the addition of an additional probe pair in another well of a  <dig> well plate. this will make the latter assay our approach of choice for incorporation of additional markers to type at the sub-species level. finally, the primer extension assay we described did not include a specific marker for b. suis, with this species being recognised by process of elimination . while this was appropriate at the time, the recent description of a novel species of brucella  indicates the added value of including a specific marker for each species. the inclusion of a marker for b. suis in the real-time assay ensures that all species are identified 'positively' by the recognition of a snp shown, by the extensive population genetic analysis that supports this work, to be specific for the b. suis/canis group.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described a simple and unambiguous multiple outcome snp assay based on a robust phylogenetic framework that can characterise brucella isolates to the species level. the approach is based on a sensitive and rapid real-time pcr platform that will be widely applicable in diagnostic laboratories and is readily expandable as knowledge of the genus increases. further work will focus on the expansion of the assay to include markers to discriminate live vaccine strains and to type at the sub-species level.

