BACKGROUND
elucidating the mechanisms underlying the expression of sexually selected traits  has been an important research topic in evolutionary biology since darwin’s theory of sexual selection was developed  <cit> . intrasexual selection  and intersexual selection  are the two principle mechanisms driving the evolution of animal sexual traits  <cit> . in most species, males tend to compete with each other for acquiring mates, and females tend to be choosy. thus, ssts typically evolved in male individuals . the best studied ssts are elaborate ornaments or weapons, such as the peacock’s tail  <cit> , horns of scarab beetles  <cit> , swords of the swordtail fish  <cit> , and antlers of the deer  <cit> . among ssts, weapons have evolved multiple times across the animal kingdom  <cit> . specific to male individuals, weapons are often used in physical combat between male rivals competing for mates by establishing dominance hierarchies or defending reproduction resources  <cit> . however, despite a wealth of information demonstrating the importance of weapons and their evolution by sexual selection, physiological and genetic mechanisms that regulate their development across animal taxa remain unknown  <cit> .

within species, characteristics of male ssts in general and the size of weapons in particular strongly depend on individual body size, physiological condition, nutritional condition and genetic quality . moreover, the expression of diverse male ssts varies with a populations’ breeding cycle . some male ssts, such as ornamental plumage of birds, are highly expressed during the breeding season  <cit> . other ssts, such as the nuptial pads of amphibians, nuptial coloration of fishes, or nuptial spines of leptobrachium anurans, only appear during the breeding season . seasonal changes in plasma sex steroid hormones, especially in testosterone, are important factors that regulate the growth of seasonally developed male sexual traits  <cit> . the increase in testosterone  in males could trigger the expression of such traits, whereas low levels of this hormone would be insufficient to trigger its activation  <cit> . recent studies have demonstrated that the insulin/insulin-like growth factor  pathway is a widely conserved physiological mechanism regulating the development of pronounced sexual traits across animal taxa  <cit> . in addition, igf can interact with sex steroid hormones to regulate the development of condition-sensitive sexual traits  <cit> . however, prior research on the mechanisms controlling the expression of sexual traits mostly used physiological experiments, such as histology and hormone implants experiments, or measured expression levels of a small number of genes, making the genetic basis of these mechanisms largely unknown  <cit> .

in amphibians, most ssts develop only during the breeding season  <cit> . in addition, hormonal-based modulatory mechanisms for the expression of some ssts, such as skin excrescences at the thumb pads and nuptial pads, have been well studied in numerous anurans  <cit> . among amphibians, defensive structures such as spines and tusks are developed by males of few anuran species  <cit> . they have been phenotypically described in diverse publications, but the physiological mechanisms regulating their development remain unexplored  <cit> . in leptobrachium boringii, during the breeding season, adult males develop  <dig> to  <dig> keratinized nuptial spines on the edge of their upper jaw that are used as weapons during combat with rivals for territory defense and acquiring mates, and these spines fall off once the breeding season ends   <cit> . therefore, l. boringii could be an excellent model to study the molecular basis underlying the seasonal development of sexually selected traits for seasonal breeding animals.fig.  <dig> different phenotypes of the keratinized nuptial spines in leptobrachium boringii during different breeding periods. male l. boringii grow  <dig> to  <dig> nuptial spines on the upper jaw during the breeding period , and the spines are sloughed at the post-breeding period 




high-throughput next-generation sequencing technologies allow for the accurate exploration of gene expression profiles of phenotypic traits for living organisms. differential gene expression analysis allows studying the genetic basis of context-specific tissue development without the need for a reference genome  <cit> . here, we sequenced and assembled the transcriptome of the brain, testis and the upper jaw skin of male l. boringii during the breeding and post-breeding periods using illumina sequencing technology. we then compared the differential gene expression profiles of the three tissues between these two time periods of the spine growth cycle. our objective was to identify candidate genes involved in the seasonal development of nuptial spines in leptobrachium anurans.

RESULTS
illumina sequencing and de novo assembly
due to the absence of a reference genome for l. boringii, we de novo assembled a transcriptome as a reference for read mapping and gene expression profiling in this species. the assembly generated  <dig> , <dig> raw reads for l. boringii. we obtained an average of  <dig> , <dig> clean reads for our  <dig> samples . in our assembly,  <dig>  transcripts with a total length of  <dig> ,318 bp were obtained, and they were assembled into  <dig>  unigenes, which totaled  <dig> ,717 bp. n <dig> lengths of the transcripts and unigenes were  <dig>  bp and  <dig>  bp, respectively , and q <dig> of all samples were greater than 96% . in addition, the mapping rates of clean reads to the assembled unigenes for all samples ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> % . taken together, our de novo assemblies revealed a high quality compared with previous studies  <cit> . this high quality of sequence reads and assembly was the foundation of all our subsequent analyses  <cit> .table  <dig> number and length of transcripts and unigenes in the leptobrachium boringii transcriptome




functional annotation and classification of unigenes
we used the databases nr, swiss-prot, pfam, kog, go, and kegg for unigene annotation. nr and swiss-prot databases resulted in reliable protein annotations for approximately 25% of unigenes. the number and percentage of annotated unigenes are presented in table  <dig>  among all annotated databases, the largest match of annotation hits  was obtained with the go database. kegg showed the smallest match . of  <dig>  unigenes assembled,  <dig>  genes  exhibited a positive match against at least one database. thus, many of the unigenes have not been functionally annotated. however, several reasons could explain this annotation failure. those unsuccessfully annotated unigenes could be partially or misassembled transcripts, sequences from utr protein regions, or meaningless protein genes. in addition, for non-model amphibians, published genomic data in general and especially genetic data on the expression of sexual traits are still lacking. all of these factors combined with the absence of genomic information for l. boringii would have caused the failure of functional annotation of a part of the identified unigenes. however, considering that previous studies successfully annotated approximately  <dig>  genes in other non-model amphibian species, such as odorrana margaretae, megophrys sangzhiensis and rhacophorus omeimontis  <cit> , our gene annotation results  from l. boringii’s transcriptome can be considered as high quality.table  <dig> summary of unigenes annotated in different databases


nr ncbi non-redundant protein sequences, nt ncbi non-redundant nucleotide sequences, pfam protein family, swiss-prot a manually annotated and reviewed protein sequence database, kog clusters of orthologous groups of proteins, go gene ontology, kegg kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes database, all, total number of unigenes that were successfully annotated in at least one database




in our study, a total of  <dig>  unigenes  were assigned to  <dig> sub-categories of go terms belonging to the following three main categories: cellular component , molecular function  and biological process . these main categories included  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> sub-categories, respectively . the most enriched go terms were related to cell and organelle parts for the category cc, binding and catalytic activity for mf, and cellular process and metabolic process for bp . the kog database mainly describes the phylogenetic classification of proteins encoded in complete genomes  <cit> . in our annotation, only a small proportion of assembled unigenes were mapped to the kog database, with  <dig>  genes classified functionally into  <dig> categories . the most enriched kog categories were general function prediction , signal transduction mechanisms , and posttranslational modification, protein turnover and chaperones . in addition, we further annotated all unigenes into pathways in kegg for understanding their high-level functions and utilities in the biological system of studied animals  <cit> . a total of  <dig>  unigenes were mapped to  <dig> signaling pathways in our annotation. signal transduction was the most enriched pathway, followed by pathways in the endocrine system and immune system . these annotations may provide a valuable resource for further understanding of specific functions and pathways in l. boringii studies.fig.  <dig> gene ontology  classification of the assembled unigenes in leptobrachium boringii



fig.  <dig> eukaryotic orthologous group  classification of the assembled unigenes in leptobrachium boringii



fig.  <dig> kegg classification of the assembled unigenes in leptobrachium boringii. a to e represent five categories of the kegg pathways: a cellular processes; b environmental information processing; c genetic information processing; d metabolism; e organismal systems




analysis of differentially expressed genes in the studied tissues
to explore genes controlling the seasonal development of nuptial spines in l. boringii, we compared the gene expression profiles in the brain, testis and upper jaw skin between the breeding and post-breeding periods and identified the significantly differentially expressed genes . the final set of degs in each tissue was revealed by the hierarchical clustering of expression patterns . the hierarchical clustering of degs revealed that sample groups were more divergent across tissues than between the studied time periods. each tissue had a relatively distinct gene clusters and expression pattern, so we performed the following differential expression analysis separately for each studied tissue.

overall, we finally identified  <dig>  degs in the three tissues, and  <dig> degs were shared by these tissues . for approximately 70%  of the degs that were functionally annotated, we were able to complete an overall comprehensive review of these degs. as shown in the venn diagram , more degs were found in the upper jaw skin compared with the brain and testis. this finding suggests that the upper jaw skin causes greater changes in gene expression than the sexual glands  and central nervous system  during different breeding periods in l. boringii, indicating that the upper jaw skin might play a relatively important role in the development of nuptial spines compared with the other two tissues. significant go enrichment and kegg enrichment  in each tissue could provide valuable information to understand the gene function of the degs involved in the development of nuptial spines .fig.  <dig> differential expression analysis of tissue comparisons between the breeding and post-breeding periods. volcano plot of differentially expressed genes in the brain , testis  and upper jaw skin  are separately presented. the x axis represents differential fold-change  of the differentially expressed genes , and the y axis represents the –log padj value of the degs. padj represents the adjusted p-value of the deg, and  <dig>  was set as the significance level. significantly up-regulated degs in the breeding period compared with the post-breeding period are presented in red, whereas significantly down-regulated degs are shown in green. non-significantly differentially expressed genes are presented in blue. d venn diagram showing co-differentially expressed genes among different tissue comparisons in leptobrachium boringii



 cytosolic part
 extracellular region part
 prefoldin complex
 chromosome
 chromatin
 cell cycle
 mcm complex
 chromatin binding
 actin crosslink formation
 cysteine-type peptidase activity
 protein-hormone receptor activity
the significantly enriched go terms in each tissue of leptobrachium boringii are presented above. for each go term, its id, the ontology of level  <dig> , count of the number of differentially expressed genes  and the number of all annotated genes are presented . the representative genes of each enriched go term are also provided here



the significantly enriched kegg pathways in each tissue of leptobrachium boringii are presented above. fdr represent the false discovery rate adjusted p-value. for each enriched kegg pathway, we counted the number of differentially expressed genes  and the number of all annotated genes . spine represents the upper jaw skin




to validate the differentially expression profiles obtained from rna-seq, we selected eight degs among the three tissues for qrt-pcr analysis. six of them closely matched the results detected by rna-seq, with a correlation coefficient of r =  <dig>  . although the other two genes  did not have a perfect match and exhibited approximately 4-fold differences in relative expression, they still exhibited the same expression pattern at the two time periods. the correlation coefficient for all eight genes was r =  <dig> . overall, the qrt-pcr results were consistent with the rna-sequencing data, indicating that our transcriptome data were credible.fig.  <dig> quantitative real-time pcr confirmation of differentially expressed genes identified by rna-seq. relative expression levels are fold-changes expressed as the ratio of gene expression at the breeding period to post-breeding period normalized with gadph gene




differentially expressed genes in the upper jaw skin
a total of  <dig>  degs were identified in the upper jaw skin between the breeding and post-breeding periods in l. boringii. among them,  <dig> genes  were down-regulated, and the remaining  <dig> genes  were up-regulated during the breeding period . a complete list of the degs in the upper jaw skin is provided . to better understand the biological processes of the degs in the skin during the two time periods of the development cycle for nuptial spines, we assigned all degs to go and kegg databases and analyzed the significant enrichments. however, despite the fact that so many degs were identified from the upper jaw skin, no significant enrichment of go terms was identified among all degs . in up-regulated degs in the upper jaw skin, ncrna metabolic process, trna metabolic process and ether hydrolase activity were found to be significantly enriched , indicating that the nuptial spines were actively transcribed during the growth period . the most enriched go terms among degs  in the skin were related to the cytosolic part, peptidase inhibitor activity, peptidase regulator activity and the extracellular region . this finding indicates that the seasonal development of the nuptial spines may be caused by changes in the cytosol cells and their extracellular matrix from the ‘dermis base’ of spines in upper jaw skin. the differential expression of peptidase inhibitor and regulator activities may be involved in the regulation of growth metabolism for the nuptial spines. the significantly enriched kegg pathway among all degs in the upper jaw skin was only glycolysis/gluconeogenesis . in addition, both the up-regulated and down-regulated genes were significantly enriched in the pathways related to the category of metabolism and genetic information processing. yet, different biological processes were enriched between up-regulated and down-regulated genes . during the breeding period, degs involved in translation and protein processing exhibited high expression levels, whereas during the post-breeding period, degs were mainly involved in the metabolism of cofactors and vitamins, amino acids and carbohydrates.

we identified the top  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated genes in the upper jaw skin by the order of fdr correction to obtain potential genes that may directly control the seasonal development of the nuptial spines. our results indicate that the most differentially expressed genes in the upper jaw skin were mainly expressed in the extracellular matrix and were involved in peptidase inhibitor activity, the regulation of transcription and metabolic processes including col28a <dig>  serpinb <dig>  ogn and cstb . the top three most down-regulated genes during the breeding period were all lysosomal alpha-gluacosidase-like genes . a previous study proposed that lysosome-mediated autophagy may participate in the regulation of cell death by degrading the extracellular matrix  <cit> . we thus considered that the epidermal cells of the upper jaw skin connected to the keratinized spines may undergo apoptosis when these spines are sloughed. newt-specific cysteine-rich growth regulator  is a growth factor that was first identified in the newt species notophthalmus viridescens and has an important role in the regeneration process of heart tissue  <cit> . in l. boringii, we observed a high expression level of nsccn in the upper jaw skin after the spines had sloughed. hence, we hypothesized that nsccn may play a crucial role in the regeneration of epidermal cells after spines separate from the skin. the surface of the nuptial spines is highly keratinized, and the deciduous part is mainly the keratinized region. interestingly, many of the keratin-related genes were up-regulated in the upper jaw skin when these spines developed. these genes were down-regulated when these weapons were sloughed . these findings support the involvement of keratin-related genes in the development of nuptial spines.table  <dig> top  <dig> most differentially expressed genes in the upper jaw skin

the gene id, fdr, log <dig> fc, and gene description of the top  <dig> down-regulated and  <dig> up-regulated significantly differentially expressed genes  are presented. expression means gene expression level at the breeding period compared with the expression level at the post-breeding period . we sorted the degs first by the smallest fdr and then by the largest absolute value of log <dig> fc. fdr, false discovery rate adjusted p-value. log <dig> fc, log <dig> transformed fold-change values




differentially expressed genes in the testis and brain
using the same method as for the upper jaw skin, we further analyzed degs in the testis and brain. in summary, fewer degs were identified in these two tissues compared with the upper jaw skin. a total of  <dig> and  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in the testis and brain, respectively. in the testis,  <dig> genes  were down-regulated and  <dig> genes  were up-regulated during the breeding period . in the brain, the corresponding data were  <dig> genes  and  <dig> genes , respectively .

among the three studied tissues, we found the greatest elevated number of enriched go terms in the testis with  <dig> terms significantly enriched among all degs and  <dig> go terms significantly enriched among down-regulated genes. the enriched go terms were predominantly related to chromosome, dna replication metabolism, cell division, cell cycle and spermatogenesis . consistent with the go term enrichment results, significant pathways enriched in kegg were mostly assigned to genetic information processing, cellular processes, and metabolism . cell cycle, dna replication, cell cycle-yeast, and meiosis-yeast were the most enriched pathways among all degs. the top most up-regulated and down-regulated genes identified in the testis were mainly related to the above function categories . overall, the enrichment results overwhelmingly highlighted the activity of genetic processing and cellular processes in the testis. generally, the seasonal expression of secondary sexual traits and sex accessory structures in most amphibians, especially the nuptial excrescences of anurans, are regulated by gonadal activity and gonadal steroid hormones  <cit> . however, we identified no significantly enriched terms related to steroid hormones in the testis. in l. boringii, time spent on parental care for offspring by reproducing males represents a significant proportion  of the breeding season  <cit> . such a parental behavior is often correlated with low androgen levels in vertebrate males  <cit> . hence, the steroid hormone-related genes were rarely differentially expressed in the testis during the breeding season of l. boringii. we still find some degs in the testis that might be indirectly involved in steroid hormone activity. the relaxin and progesterone receptor genes are good examples of such genes . therefore, we hypothesized that the gonadal activity may not directly participate in the regulation of the seasonal development of the nuptial spines through testosterone but though other factors such as estrogen-related genes.

probably due to the limited number of degs in the brain, no significant enrichment of go terms and kegg pathways was identified. among the enriched go terms , “aralkylamine n-acetyltransferase activity” was the most enriched term . aralkylamine n-acetyltransferase is involved in the production of melatonin; it functions in the modulation of circadian rhythm and is essential for seasonal reproduction of vertebrates  <cit> . the top degs in the brain were mainly related to signal transduction . among the top degs, kisspeptin precursor gene was the most down-regulated during the breeding period . kisspeptin is a g-protein coupled receptor ligand that can stimulate the secretion of aldosterone and the release of insulin  <cit> . furthermore, we found a consistent expression pattern of ncccn in the brain as well as in the upper jaw skin with ncccn exhibiting high expression levels during the post-breeding period. previous studies reported that the phenotypic variation of sexual traits would lead to alterations of gene expression in the brain  <cit> . thus, we proposed that the brain may indirectly modulate the seasonal expression of nuptial spines through the genes specified above but also through other still unidentified genes.

potential genes regulating the seasonal development of the nuptial spines
previous studies have proposed that the development and maintenance of male sexually selected traits in vertebrates often rely on the regulation of androgens, including testosterone  <cit> . in addition, the expression of ssts tends to be more sensitive to the body condition than to other phenotypic traits of the holders, and recent discoveries implicated the widely conserved insulin/insulin-like growth factor pathway as the common physiological mechanism regulating the growth of these sexual traits  <cit> . based on our results and results of previous studies, we further selected degs with functional categories related to insulin/insulin-like growth factor and sex steroid hormone-related genes from all degs between the two studied time periods to identify potential genes regulating the seasonal development of the nuptial spines.

insulin/insulin-like growth factor-related genes
as a result, we selected three significant degs between the two studied periods associated with insulin/insulin-like growth factor  in the upper jaw skin. consistent with previous studies, igfbp <dig> and igf2-b revealed up-regulated expression when the nuptial spines were developed . the insulin-like growth factors  are produced by most tissues of vertebrates and play roles in the regulation of proliferation and differentiation of cells in most tissues  <cit> . igf-binding proteins  alter the interaction of igfs with their cell surface receptors and modulate the function of the igfs in cell culture  <cit> . the up-regulated igf2-b and igfbp <dig> genes during the breeding period may increase the metabolism and growth of the cells of the upper jaw skin connected with the nuptial spines, allowing the growth of these weapons. however, the exact molecular pathway involved must be verified by further experiments. additionally, the up-regulated nsccn in the upper jaw skin and brain when nuptial spines are sloughed may play an important role given their vital role in the tissue regeneration process.table  <dig> significantly differentially expressed genes involved in the two candidate pathways in leptobrachium boringii


expression indicates gene expression level at the breeding period compared with the expression level at the post-breeding period . |log2fc|, the absolute value of log <dig> transformed fold-change. spine represents the upper jaw skin




the expression of striking sexual traits is always associated with the holder’s body condition, as their expression is commonly sensitive to the nutrition history  <cit> . however, prior studies on condition-dependent sexual traits rarely focused on amphibians, and such sexual traits are often tightly coupled with individual variation within a population  <cit> . in our study, for the first time, we found that the expression of a striking male sexual trait was likely associated with the changes in physiological condition during a reproductive cycle of an amphibian species. insulin-like growth factor  <dig>  may be the main peptide affecting the development of nuptial spines in l. boringii, and this is different from the regulation pattern for exaggerated traits in most vertebrates through igf <dig>  <cit> . in conclusion, the seasonal development of the nuptial spines in l. boringii may operate in a condition-dependent manner, and the igf <dig> gene may be involved in the regulation of this development.

sex steroid hormone-related genes
five significantly degs involved in sex steroid hormone-related pathways were identified in the upper jaw skin, and two related degs were identified in the testis . seasonally breeding amphibians often undergo dramatic changes in the concentration of sex hormones and in reproductive characteristics such as sexual morphological traits and reproductive behaviors triggered by those hormones at the onset and termination of each breeding cycle  <cit> . specifically, 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases  are a group of alcohol oxidoreductases that play a key role in the regulation of intracellular concentrations of steroid hormones, including androgens and estrogens  <cit> . cyp3a <dig> encodes a member of the cytochrome p <dig> enzyme superfamily catalyzing the metabolism of steroid hormone into less biologically active metabolites  <cit> . during the post-breeding period, the high expression of 17β-hsd genes  and cyp3a <dig> may increase the degradation and metabolism of steroid hormones and thus decrease the concentration of active androgen and estrogen in the upper jaw skin. generally, testosterone regulates the expression of male secondary sexual traits directly by stimulating intracellular androgen receptors in the target tissues or indirectly by aromatizing androgens into estrogen and binding to estrogen receptors  <cit> . interestingly, in the upper jaw skin, no androgen receptor but an estrogen receptor gene  was differentially expressed between the breeding and the post-breeding periods . once activated, nr3a <dig>  can translocate into the nucleus and regulate the activity of eukaryotic gene expression, cellular proliferation and differentiation in target tissues  <cit> . however, to date, only a few amphibian species have been reported to have α isoform of the estrogen receptor   <cit> . our study is the first to report the expression of erα in the skin of an amphibian species, indicating that the upper jaw skin where the spines develop may be a target tissue whose growth and replacement are regulated by estrogen.

commonly, the presence of male parental care behavior will decrease the expression of secondary sexual traits  <cit> . however, male l. boringii express and maintain nuptial spines, a secondary sexual trait, during the entire breeding season while simultaneously taking care of offspring for a relatively long time period   <cit> . together with the low androgen-dependent parental care behavior in l. boringii, the seasonal acquisition and maintenance of nuptial spines may be regulated by estrogen. moreover, the up-regulated 7β-hsd genes and erα would have an inhibitory effect on androgen output during the post-breeding period  <cit> . thus, estrogens may play an important role in the seasonal regulation of the nuptial spines in l. boringii. however, elucidating whether the seasonal development of the nuptial spines is regulated by androgen directly, by aromatization of androgen into estrogens exerting related effects, or by both still needs further investigation.

relaxin is a small peptide hormone that can enhance male sperm motility and fertilization capacity in vertebrates  <cit> . the expression of frlx was altered with the annual reproductive cycle of a frog species pelophylax esculentus and regulated by testosterone  <cit> . the up-regulated frlx in the testis of l. boringii during the breeding period may enhance male reproductive activity. the progesterone receptor  gene was also up-regulated in the testis during the breeding period. this gene is activated by progesterone and can inhibit androgen-dependent reproductive behaviors in males  <cit> . thus, we hypothesize that the high expression of pgr during the breeding season may increase the propensity of males for providing parental care at the expense of courtship and mating activities. finally, there may be other unknown important genes participating in the regulation of seasonal expression for this trait in l. boringii; thus, further study is needed.

taken together, candidate genes involved in insulin/insulin-like growth factor and sex steroid hormone pathways indicate that the nuptial spines in l. boringii exhibit high estrogen sensitivity and low insulin/insulin-like growth factor sensitivity during the post-breeding period when the spines are sloughed. thus, the seasonal development and maintenance of the nuptial spines in male l. boringii are likely modulated by the circulating sex steroid hormones and the nutritional status. candidate genes in the testis and brain may indirectly participate in this process by regulating the synthesis and metabolism activity of steroid hormones and insulin growth factor. further study should focus on these two candidate pathways and use testable experiments to validate the molecular mechanism.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we conducted a transcriptome analysis of an anuran species to explore the genetic basis of the seasonal growth of a sexual weapon trait. our overall transcriptome provided a rich list of unigenes expressed in adult males of l. boringii during the breeding and the post-breeding periods. degs between different growth periods of the keratinized nuptial spines in l. boringii were identified. in total,  <dig>  unigenes and  <dig>  degs were generated in our transcriptome. these genes greatly contribute to current genetic resources for the anuran species. the number of degs identified from the upper jaw skin was larger than the testis and the brain, indicating that the upper jaw skin might contribute more to the seasonal changes in the spine activity. candidate genes related to steroid hormone signaling pathways and the insulin/insulin-like growth factor pathway are likely involved in regulating the seasonal growth of the spines. the candidate genes and pathways are promising for future studies on the seasonal growth of the nuptial spines in leptobrachium species and may be helpful for other vertebrates.

