BACKGROUND
saliva-bacterial interactions influence the establishment and maintenance of the microflora of dental plaque  <cit> . amylase is the most abundant enzyme in human saliva and is a constituent of the complex glycoproteinacious acquired pellicle that immediately forms on cleaned teeth  <cit> . dental plaque forms on the pellicle and is responsible for the most common oral diseases, dental caries and periodontitis  <cit> . amylase specifically binds with high affinity to several oral commensal streptococcal species, including streptococcus gordonii, streptococcus mitis, streptococcus parasanguinis, streptococcus cristatus, and streptococcus salivarius, but not to streptococcus sanguinis or to cariogenic streptococci including streptococcus mutans and other mutans streptococci  <cit> . amylase-binding bacteria constitute a substantial proportion of the total cultivable flora on human teeth and only colonize the mouths of animals with salivary amylase activity  <cit> . this suggests that the ability to bind amylase is ecologically advantageous to these bacteria for colonization of oral surfaces.

s. gordonii produces two amylase binding proteins: amylase binding protein a   <cit>  and amylase binding protein b   <cit> . both proteins are expressed transiently on the cell surface before release into the extracellular milieu in soluble form. abpa is a  <dig> kda protein that acts as the major receptor for salivary amylase binding to the bacterial surface. mutants deficient in abpa adhere less well to amylase-coated hydroxyapatite and appear deficient in a dynamic model of biofilm formation in vitro  <cit> . paradoxically, however, abpa-deficient strains of s. gordonii colonize the mouths of conventional rats as well or better than do wild-type  strains  <cit> . in fact, oral colonization by abpa-deficient mutants appears augmented when the rats are fed dietary sucrose. furthermore, glucosyltransferase  activity, shown to be an important colonization factor for oral streptococci  <cit> , appears greater in abpa-deficient mutants  <cit> .

s. gordonii produces a single gtf   <cit> , while s. mutans produces three gtfs   <cit> . gtfs synthesize extracellular glucan from sucrose and are long known as determinants of bacterial colonization of the teeth  <cit> . gtf enzymatic action entails two steps: the hydrolysis of sucrose into fructose and glucose by its sucrase activity, and the transfer of glucosyl residues to form alpha-linked glucans by its transferase activity. gtfs consist of two relatively conserved structural domains, an n-terminal catalytic domain and a c-terminal glucan-binding domain  <cit> . although gtfs of s. gordonii and s. mutans have amino acid homologies within the conserved domains, the enzymes differ in their requirements for acceptor molecules and ability to produce glucans with varying proportions of α-1- <dig> and α-1- <dig> glucosidic linkages  <cit> .

it has been reported that the interaction between amylase and streptococcal gtf on saliva-coated hydroxyapatite surfaces results in reduction in gtf enzymatic activity and glucan formation  <cit> . thus, the interaction of these enzymes may modulate the adhesion and colonization of s. gordonii and other gtf-producing oral streptococci, e.g. s. mutans. indeed, proteins released from one organism  may interact with proteins released by another  within the oral biofilm milieu to modulate their function. the goal of this study therefore was to investigate the interaction of purified salivary amylase and rabpa, alone and in combination, with gtf of s. gordonii and s. mutans.

RESULTS
precipitation of gtf-g and abpa from s. gordonii supernatants by salivary amylase
our previous studies revealed that the addition of purified amylase to s. gordonii culture supernatant resulted in the precipitation of soluble amylase-binding proteins  <cit> . to further investigate this interaction, purified amylase was added to cell-free culture supernatants of wt and mutant strains of s. gordonii. while addition of amylase did not induce precipitation of proteins from the abpa- strain's culture supernatant, it did so from supernatants of both the abpb- and wt strains , indicating that abpa is essential for precipitation. sds-page analysis of the precipitate from wt culture supernatant showed the presence of several proteins, including abpa and abpb, as well as gtf-g . precipitation of gtf-g and other amylase-binding proteins by purified amylase was found to be dose-dependent; when amylase was added to  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> mg/ml, maximum precipitation appeared to occur at  <dig> mg/ml and greater. a sham experiment in which buffer containing bovine serum albumin  alone was added in place of amylase did not precipitate any proteins .

in contrast, sds-page analysis of 10-fold concentrated and dialyzed spent culture supernatant showed no protein bands above  <dig> kda on. further, while amylase induced protein precipitation from cell free culture supernatants, it did not do so from dialyzed culture supernatant . this observation suggested that ionic strength is also an important determinant for amylase – induced precipitation.

gtf-g activity assessment of precipitates from supernatants following addition of amylase revealed the essential lack of gtf-g activity from the abpa- strain . the presence and absence of abpa in the precipitate was verified by immuno-blotting using rabbit anti-abpa antibody . maldi-tof analysis of proteins eluted from the gel identified abpb and amylase in the precipitate obtained from wt culture supernatants. as shown in fig. 1a and 1b, while amylase did not precipitate gtf-g from the abpa- supernatant, it did so from supernatants of both the abpb- strain and the wt. the presence of gtf-g activity in the precipitates obtained from the supernatant of abpa positive strains , and the absence of gtf-g activity that could be harvested from the abpa- supernatant, indicated that amylase together with abpa interacted with and precipitated gtf-g. figure 1d shows an sds-page stained with sypro of alcohol precipitates from culture supernatants from each strain . these precipitates show many more bands than found in the amylase precipitates from each strain, suggesting selective precipitation of only a few bands by amylase.

inhibition of  α-amylase-bacterium interactions by rabpa
previous studies have shown that α-amylase binds non-covalently to the s. gordonii surface with high affinity, and that abpa acts as the major cell surface receptor for amylase binding  <cit> . to confirm the role of abpa as this receptor, rabpa was expressed and purified from e. coli as described in the experimental procedures section. far western blot analysis of purified rabpa using salivary amylase as a ligand confirmed the retention of its amylase binding activity. we further quantitatively measured binding of labeled amylase to the wt cell surface in the presence of purified rabpa. the dose-dependent inhibition of -amylase to the bacterial surface following preincubation with rabpa confirmed the amylase binding function of abpa on the bacterial surface .

amylase precipitates gtf-g in the presence of rabpa
because detectable levels of gtf-g were not precipitated by amylase from the culture supernatant of the abpa-  strain , and amylase-binding proteins are not produced by s. mutans  <cit> , we used cell-free culture supernatants of the abpa- strain of s. gordonii, and from s. mutans 10449s, for a gtf-amylase precipitation assay in the presence or absence of exogenous purified rabpa and/or amylase. amylase, when added in the presence of rabpa, precipitated gtf-g from the abpa- strain  supernatant  and rabpa augmented amylase precipitation of gtf-b, gtf-c, and gtf-d of s. mutans . however, amylase or rabpa, singly, precipitated a small amount of gtfg and gtf-c from the supernatants of these strains. as expected, the supernatant from a gtf- mutant of s. gordonii did not form any precipitate under any of these conditions . image scanning of sds-page activity gels using alphaimager software , showed that addition of both amylase and rabpa to the culture supernatant from the wt resulted in a  <dig> - to  <dig> -fold increase in the gtf-g and gtf-c activities by comparison with the single addition of amylase or rabpa. increased activities of gtf-b, gtf-c and gtf-d were also observed when both amylase and rabpa were added . further, sypro red staining of sds-page of amylase precipitates from supernatants showed that amylase in combination with rabpa precipitated the proteins than when compared with amylase or rabpa alone .

effects of amylase and rabpa on sucrase and transferase activities of gtf-b
sucrase activity of the gtf-b was increased 2- to  <dig> -fold , and transferase activity was elevated 4- to 6-fold , respectively, in the presence of purified amylase and/or rabpa . under identical assay conditions, there was no effect on gtf-b enzyme activity when bsa alone was added as a control . in addition, rabpa or amylase alone showed little transferase or sucrase activities . gtf-b transferase activity in the presence of rabpa and/or amylase was significantly greater when compared with gtf-b alone . gtf-b sucrase activity was also elevated in presence of rabpa or rabpa supplemented with amylase . however, no additive/synergistic effects on sucrase or transferase activities were noted when gtf-b was incubated together with both rabpa and amylase.

binding of rabpa and amylase with gtf-b
the above described results suggested that intermolecular interactions occur between gtf, abpa and amylase, and that either amylase or rabpa alone stimulated activity of gtf-b, suggesting that these molecules interact with each other. these interactions with gtf-b were verified using elisa to measure binding of soluble gtf-b to immobilized rabpa or amylase in a dose dependent manner . control experiments were also performed demonstrating that neither purified amylase nor rabpa were able to bind to bsa-coated wells . immobilized rabpa or amylase also interacted with gtf-b  in a manner directly proportional to the amount of immobilized proteins, supporting the interaction of rabpa and amylase with gtf-b.

biofilm production by s. gordonii wt and the abpa- mutant
in vitro experiments described above indicated that rabpa interacts with gtf and increases gtf enzymatic activity. they suggest a potential role for abpa as a modulator of s. gordonii and s. mutans colonization in the oral cavity. to further explore this, we performed in vitro biofilm experiments to compare the wild-type, abpa- and gtf-g negative mutants, in the presence and absence of sucrose and/or saliva . while the addition of sucrose did not result in differences in final growth between the wt and abpa- mutant strains as determined by measurement of optical density, sucrose did increase biofilm formation in the abpa- mutant when compared to the wt . surprisingly, biofilm formation by every strain was inhibited in the presence saliva . furthermore, the abpa mutant showed a tendency to produce more biofilm growth than the wt in the absence of sucrose.

discussion
the results of these studies demonstrate that salivary amylase complexes with gtf in the presence of abpa. addition of exogenous purified amylase to culture supernatants precipitates gtfs from both wild type and a abpb- mutant of s. gordonii, but not from a abpa- mutant of s. gordonii, or from s. mutans . both purified rabpa and amylase increased the level of gtf enzyme activity. previous studies reported that streptococcal gtfs interact with salivary amylase immobilized on the surface of hydroxyapatite beads, reducing gtf activity  <cit> . in the present study, s. mutans gtf-b in solution interacted with either soluble amylase or with rabpa with resultant increased enzyme activity. we chose to study gtf-b since it is strongly associated with cariogenicity of s. mutans, it was readily available in pure form, and could potentially interact with abpa within the multispecies dental plaque biofilm environment. because the presence of both abpa and amylase did not synergistically stimulate gtf activity, we surmise that abpa and salivary amylase may bind to the same  site on gtf to modulate its enzymatic activity. this is consistent with the known homology of amylase and the gtf active site regions as previously reported  <cit> .

the abpa-deficient mutant formed quantitatively greater biofilm mass than the wt when grown statically on polystyrene surfaces in both the presence and absence of sucrose, consistent with in vivo findings that the abpa-deficient mutant strain is a better colonizer of rodent teeth than is the wt strain  <cit> . the present findings contrast with our previous report that abpa-deficient strains of s. gordonii were less able to form in vitro biofilm than the wt strains  <cit> . these earlier studies, however, were performed using a flow biofilm model in the presence of 25% saliva, and in the absence of sucrose. it is also interesting to note that the inclusion of saliva in the present model inhibited biofilm formation by all of the bacterial strains tested. this is in contrast to previous studies that show that s. gordonii initial adhesion to hydroxyapatite is promoted by saliva  <cit> . the differences noted in results from the various in vitro models reinforces the limits of in vitro model systems, and the necessity for caution in their interpretation.

our previous study found that s. gordonii strains deficient in abpa colonized rats fed a sucrose-free starch diet better than their wild-types, and that this differential advantage in colonization was enhanced in rats fed a high sucrose diet  <cit> . we interpreted these results at that time by suggesting that abpa may interact with gtf to reduce its enzymatic activity, consistent with a previous report  <cit> . the present results demonstrate that purified abpa and amylase can interact with gtf to increase enzymatic activity. it is likely that present in vitro models of biofilm formation are at best a gross simplification of the diverse and complex events occurring in vivo. thus, a possible explanation for this paradoxical result is that the interaction of amylase and abpa with gtf may serve to alter the chemical nature of the resulting glucan products to modulate colonization. indeed, a previous study found that glucan synthesized by immobilized gtf-b in the presence of starch hydrolysates was less susceptible to hydrolysis by fungal mutanase than was glucan made by immobilized gtf-b in the absence of starch hydrolysates  <cit> . furthermore, glucan production by gtf-b associated with streptococci immobilized on saliva-coated hydroxyapatite was also enhanced in the presence of starch hydrolysates. some bacteria displayed higher adhesion activities for the glucan made in the presence of the hydrolysates. the present findings suggest that an amylase-abpa-gtf complex may alter the composition of resulting glucans to affect adhesion, biofilm formation and oral bacterial colonization. this possibility deserves further study.

of course, in vitro experiments performed with purified molecules may not reproduce the in vivo situation. it is possible that additional interactions that occur in vivo influence colonization. nevertheless, the present results suggest that a protein secreted by s. gordonii , along with a host protein , may together affect the function of s. mutans gtf to influence perhaps s. mutans' colonization. this could point to a potential mechanism by which non-mutans streptococci might influence s. mutans ecology.

stimulation of gtf activity, as seen in the present report, is likely the result of the physical interaction between amylase/rabpa, with subsequent conformational change in gtf structure. taken together, the present observations demonstrate intermolecular interactions between amylase, rabpa, and gtf, yielding modulation of gtf activity in the complex. studies are now proceeding to examine further the structural basis of the amylase-abpa-gtf interaction.

CONCLUSIONS
these studies demonstrate that salivary amylase complexes with gtf in the presence of abpa. addition of exogenous purified amylase to culture supernatants precipitates gtfs from both wild type and a abpb- mutant of s. gordonii, but not from a abpa- mutant of s. gordonii, or from s. mutans . both purified rabpa and amylase increased the level of gtf enzyme activity. the results suggest that an extracellular protein network of abpa-amylase-gtf may influence the ecology of oral biofilms, likely during initial phases of colonization.

