BACKGROUND
olfaction studies have experienced an upsurge with respect to chemical ecology and neuroethology of insects
 <cit> . this was made possible through the discovery of proteins related to olfaction
 <cit> . olfaction is achieved through two low-molecular weight  proteins, odorant binding proteins  and odorant receptors 
 <cit> . obps are the first proteins to recognize and bind to odor molecules in the long cascade of olfactory signal transduction
 <cit> . obps interact with odors that enter through tiny pores present on the insect’s antenna forming an obp-odor complex. the complex transports odor molecules to ors thereby starting the signal transduction cascade leading to behavioural outputs
 <cit> . although ors recognize odors even in the absence of obps
 <cit> , high concentration of obps in the sensillar lymph in insects elicit questions of their physiological role. it is suggested that obps are involved in olfactory response, concluding that the specificity resides in the obps rather than in the odor molecules
 <cit> . this contradicts the results obtained in studies using olfactory receptors expressed in heterologous systems
 <cit> . it seems logical for obps to have a role in insect olfaction, helping insect in perceiving specific odors in this malodorous world where insects forage, mate, oviposit and discriminate between species through specific odor molecules. from earlier studies it has become clear that obps of insects have relevance in olfaction, acting as a liaison between the external environment and behavioural output
 <cit> . postulating against the specificity of obps is their low diversity in species and their broad binding spectrum to molecules of different chemical structures
 <cit> . there are strong evidences that obps are involved in odorant discrimination, receptor sensitivity and specificity
 <cit> . with such fortified evidence on the involvement of obp in insect olfaction, it is reasonable for obps to serve as a molecular target in identifying potential behaviourally active compounds
 <cit> .

'reverse chemical ecology’
 <cit>  is a new concept for screening of attractants based on the binding ability of obps to test compounds rather than going through series of behavioural bioassays. this approach involves the study of the binding potential between a characterized obp  and an odor molecule  which can be simulated using computers. here we describe a “computational reverse chemical ecology” approach involving a high performance drug discovery method to predict behaviourally active compounds for b. dorsalis. the compounds were also subjected to tryptophan quenching  and behavioural assays to prove the efficiency of our approach. computational methods may accelerate the screening process, thus, limiting our focus to small number of potential compounds that may be used in pest management.

RESULTS
odorant-binding protein and 3d model prediction
sds-page proved that the obp was approximately  <dig> kda in size and the isolated obp was pure as evident by a single band in the gel  and demonstrated that the purified protein can be used for further investigation. the purified protein band was subjected to maldi-tof-ms and the partial sequence was blasted with submitted obps of b. dorsalis . the blast results showed 100% sequence match with a previously isolated and characterized obp of b. dorsalis . therefore, this previously sequenced protein was used for 3d model prediction. the profile 3d score of the selected model was  <dig>  and exceeded the minimum requirement value of  <dig> . the predicted model consists of  <dig> α-helices that are located between 47- <dig> , 72- <dig> , 96- <dig> , 105- <dig> , 126- <dig>  and 142- <dig> . there also existed  <dig> pair of disulphide bridges that may play a role in stabilizing the structure .

molecular docking, prediction and bioassay of behaviorally active compounds
a 3d structure of the isolated obp with the highest score was selected and used in docking studies. we used an online molecular docking tool “docking server”. the 3d structures of protein and selected semiochemicals were loaded to the server. the results were processed and arranged for prediction. thermodynamically, a ligand binds tightly to the active site of the protein when the free binding energy is low. therefore, compounds with lower free binding energy were predicted to be behaviourally active. to aid in our prediction process compounds showing free binding energy less than - <dig>  were considered behaviourally active and compounds with free binding energy more than - <dig>  were used for comparison. first, we conducted a tryptophan quenching assay to find the binding potential of the selected compounds. second, we conducted a behavioural assay to validate if the predicted compounds were behaviourally active or not. tryptophan quenching was carried out with the isolated obp and predicted compounds at concentrations ranging from  <dig> –  <dig> nm. kd value was estimated by fitting the fluorescence quenching data to an equation describing a single binding site present as a default in prism graph pad version  <dig>  for os x. percent quenching was determined and the graphs for all test compounds is shown in additional file
1: figure s <dig>  the predicted compounds showed high quenching as evident by the kd values. kd values ranged from  <dig> –  <dig> nm. the trp fluorescence quenching spectrums of obp with test compounds are shown in additional file
2: figure s <dig>  the results are interesting because the compounds we predicted behaviourally active had tighter binding as evident by quenching and lower kd values. computer simulations or in-vitro binding assay of obps may not be an exact measure of the behavioural activity of an insect; however it may be relevant to the functional characterization of an obp. therefore, behavioural assays are needed to ascertain the nature  of the predicted compounds.

behavioural assays were conducted to find the activity of predicted compounds. using the behavioural assay data, a unified estimator, attraction index  was calculated . from the data we found that methyl eugenol that was predicted as highly behaviourally active by its free binding energy showed the highest attraction  <dig> %  and the lowest attraction was exhibited by ethanol with  <dig> %  of flies attracted towards them .

statistical validation of computational and behavioural assays is crucial in such studies. as kd and free binding energy are dependent, considering both for validation of the method is not sensible. analysis carried out to standardize the dependable scoring functions for estimating the semiochemical efficiency showed significant correlation for both in silico kd  and free binding energy  to ai . regression analysis showed that the scoring function 'free binding energy’  to be the best variable to predict behaviourally active compounds. therefore, free binding energy was used as a dependable and robust scoring function. then, correlation between in silico kd and experimental kd was significantly positive with r2 =  <dig>   and demonstrated that in silico data could be used for further studies .
in silico 
k
d
.
d 
and in silico k
d
.

discussion
constant co-evolution between phytophagous insects and their host plants suggests that insects use chemical cues of their hosts to locate them. the tephritid fruit fly, b. dorsalis, uses a range of commercial fruit crops as hosts and cause huge losses to farmers in tropical and sub-tropical countries. the management option for this pest is mainly concentrated on males, thereby ignoring females that are otherwise highly the main cause of damage. identifying potential attractants will definitely help us in narrowing down our focus on few potential compounds that may be attractive to females.

recently, obps have shown to be required for the functioning of the olfactory system of insects
 <cit>  and has been used as a target protein in discovering attractants
 <cit> . general odorant binding proteins  have a rather broad ligand-binding ability, in contrast to specificity. therefore, using a consecutively produced general obp as a target protein to a plethora of host volatiles may help us discover behaviourally active compounds. although our method seems intriguing, it could not distinguish between repellents or attractants. therefore, the method has been concluded with behavioural assays to verify the nature of the predicted compounds. our method is a simple in silico approach for predicting and narrowing down to a set of behaviourally active compounds thereby reducing research cost and time.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of the present study shows that our methodology used in this study is able to predict behaviourally active compounds accurately. our unique approach helps us screen large number of compounds and predict their efficacy. it may be developed as a viable approach in discovering behaviourally active semiochemicals for integrated pest management strategies that otherwise is laborious and a costly affair. we anticipate that further improvements in the area of computational biology and proteomics may increase the efficiency of our method and short comes. further the predicted compounds are to be validated in the field in case they are to be used for pest control.

