BACKGROUND
molecular systematics has dramatically changed the ideas about the phylogenetic relationships of the lophophorate lineages, ectoproct bryozoans, brachiopods and phoronids. once considered the sister or paraphyletic stem-group of deuterostomia based on embryological and morphological characters  <cit> , molecular analyses almost unequivocally place them in lophotrochozoa, a group established to accommodate the lophophorate lineages along with trochozoans, annelida, mollusca and relatives  <cit> . these analyses rely on a spectrum of molecular data ranging from rdna sequences  <cit> , mitochondrial protein sequences  <cit> , single nuclear protein-encoding genes  <cit> , hox genes  <cit> , multiple nuclear protein-encoding sequences  <cit>  and phylogenomic approaches  <cit> .

however, the relationships of the lophophorate lineages within lophotrochozoa are still controversial, because analyses of different data sets resulted in conflicting topologies. whereas analyses of rdna data sets  <cit>  and phylogenomic data sets  <cit>  strongly support brachiozoa, a clade including brachiopoda and phoronida, phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial sequences most often indicated sister group relationships between brachiopoda and ectoprocta  <cit>  and between phoronida and entoprocta  <cit> . thus, these analyses also contradict the monophyly of bryozoa  including ectoprocta and entoprocta  as postulated based on morphological arguments by nielsen  <cit>  and found in some recent analyses of phylogenomic data sets  <cit>  and of rdna data sets  <cit> , albeit with poor nodal support.

there is evidence that the inference of the relationships of the lophophorate lineages in phylogenomic analyses might be affected by systematic errors resulting from compositional bias  <cit> . one possibility to check for systematic errors in phylogenetic analyses is the comparison of the results based on independent data sets. therefore, we analysed a mitochondrial data set in this study and compared the phylogenetic results with those of phylogenomic analyses, in which no or only few mitochondrial data have been considered. we sequenced an additional mitochondrial genome of the most species-rich lophophorate lineage, the ectoprocts. because there are large differences in the nucleotide composition of mitochondrial sequences of different lineages as well as in the amino acid composition of the encoded proteins  <cit> , we applied several approaches for reducing compositional bias in the phylogenetic analyses. we reduced the compositional heterogeneity by excluding third codon positions from the nucleotide data set, by excluding taxa with strongly deviating amino acid composition and by recoding amino acids in bins. as an alternative to reducing compositional heterogeneity in the data, we applied phylogenetic inference methods with nonstationary models of evolution. finally, we tried to mitigate saturation and long-branch-attraction problems by excluding fast evolving sites.

RESULTS
organization of the mitochondrial genome of the ectoproct flustra foliacea
the mitochondrial genome sequence of the ectoproct flustra foliacea  is  <dig>  bp long and consists of  <dig> protein-encoding genes  and two rrna genes for the small and large subunits , as is typical for animal mitochondrial genomes . in addition to the  <dig> usual trna genes , a second putative trna gene for tryptophan is found. all protein-encoding, rrna and trna genes are transcribed from the same strand, as is the case with the protein-encoding and rrna genes of the other cheilostomate ectoprocts with known mitochondrial genomes, bugula neritina  <cit>  and watersipora subtorquata  <cit> . there is a major non-coding region  with a high a+t content of  <dig> %, which might be the origin of replication. however, as in bugula, there are several additional long intergenic sequences  that sum up to  <dig> bp;  <dig> of them are longer than  <dig> bp, the maximum being  <dig> bp. such long intergenic sequences are missing in watersipora and the ctenostomate flustrellidra  <cit> . thus, they might be synapomorphies of the lineages leading to flustra and bugula. however, no conserved sequence motifs could be identified by blast searches with the noncoding regions of flustra against the noncoding regions of bugula.

transfer rna genes
a second putative trna gene for tryptophan as found here in flustra foliacea  has neither been found in the other known mitochondrial genomes of ectoprocts nor in most other animal mitochondrial genomes. there is no similarity between the sequence of this putative trna gene and any of the other trna genes in the mitochondrial genome of flustra. it is proximate to the major non-coding region. we cannot exclude the possibility that it is functionally part of the control region. nevertheless, its structure is very similar to a trna and it is likely that it is at least derived from a trna. the two leucine and one of the serine trnas lack a dhu arm. the dhu arm of the trna l is also missing in the cheilostomate bugula, but not in the cheilostomate watersipora and the ctenostomate flustrellidra, whereas the dhu arm of the trna l is also missing in flustrellidra, but not in bugula and watersipora. given the relations of these taxa, the loss of the dhu arm of the trna l might be a synapomorphy of the lineages leading to flustra and bugula, whereas the loss of the dhu arm of the trna l occurred most likely independently in flustra and flustrellidra. the dhu arm of the trna s is also missing in bugula, but not in watersipora and might be another synapomorphy of the lineages leading to flustra and bugula. this trna has not been found in flustrellidra.

the inferred anticodons of  <dig> trnas of flustra foliacea  are the same as those in bugula neritina. only the anticodon of the tyrosine trna differs between flustra and bugula. the anticodon of tyrosine trna is gua in flustra, but aua in bugula. because the anticodon of the watersipora and flustrellidra tyrosine trnas is also gua, the change to aua is probably an autapomorphy of the lineage leading to bugula. the anticodon of the trna l of flustra and bugula is gag. this has not been found in any other metazoan so far. in watersipora and flustrellidra the anticodon of the trna l is uag. thus, the sequence gag may represent a unique synapomorphy of the lineages leading to bugula and flustra.

the most conserved region of all trnas is the anticodon stem and loop region . all other trna regions have a high level of variation within ectoprocta. especially the tΨc arm is highly variable. the trnas with the highest nucleotide conservation across the four ectoprocts are gly, his, ile, met, phe, pro and trp <dig>  less conserved trnas are arg, asn, ser <dig>  lys, thr and trp <dig>  as expected from the phylogenetic relationships, the trna sequences of flustra are most similar to those of the cheilostomate entoprocts watersipora  and bugula , whereas those of the cheilostomate flustrellidra are more dissimilar .

comparison of mitochondrial gene order
the order of the protein-encoding and rrna genes is highly variable within ectoprocts . the only conserved block in the cheilostomate ectoprocts flustra and bugula including three or more genes is cob-nad4l-nad4-nad <dig>  there is no block of three or more genes with identical order in flustra and the cheilostomate watersipora or the ctenostomate ectoproct flustrellidra. the block cob-nad4l-nad4-nad <dig> is also present in several other lophotrochozoans, e.g., entoprocts, phoronids, and some molluscs. thus, it might be a symplesiomorphy within ectoprocts. all breakpoint distances between the three cheilostomate ectoprocts  calculated with crex  <cit>  amount to  <dig>  the breakpoint distances between the three cheilostomate ectoprocts and the ctenostomate ectoproct flustrellidra to  <dig> and the breakpoint distances between the ectoprocts and other lophophorates and entoproct to 9- <dig> . the breakpoint distances between the three brachiopods are 13- <dig>  thus, there were so many gene order rearrangements within ectoprocta and within brachiopoda that there is almost no chance to reconstruct older rearrangements, which might provide evidence for the relationships of ectoprocts and brachiopods with other lophotrochozoans. in contrast, gene order rearrangements may be useful for inferring phylogeny within ectoprocts and brachiopods. however, a denser taxon sampling is necessary to resolve the sequence of rearrangements that caused the many differences observed within ectoprocts and brachiopods.

nucleotide composition and codon usage
there is a high variation in nucleotide composition of metazoan mitochondrial genomes. in our data set the variation of overall a+t content ranges from  <dig> %  to  <dig> % , with an average overall value equal to  <dig> % . the lowest values are found in deuterostomia , the highest in ecdysozoa . the average value of lophotrochozoa  and the overall a+t content of flustra foliacea  equal exactly the overall average . the overall a+t content of flustra foliacea corresponds with the a+t content of the partial mitochondrial genome of the phoronid phoronis psammophila  and is intermediate between that of the other sequenced cheilostomate ectoprocts bugula neritina  and watersipora subtorquata  and the entoprocts loxocorone allax  and loxosomella aloxiata  on the one hand, and that of the ctenostomate ectoproct flustrellidra hispida  and of the brachiopods  on the other. the high a+t content is also reflected in the individual protein-encoding genes . it is especially high at third codon positions .

at skew = /; gc skew = /; a partial; b repetitive

at skew = /; gc skew = /

there is a high variation in at- and gc-skews in metazoan mitochondrial genomes. in our data set at-skews range from - <dig>   to  <dig>   . the range of gc-skews extends from - <dig>   to  <dig>   . compared with other ectoprocts, flustra foliacea is characterized by high at- and gc-skews . among lophophorates, similarly high at- and gc-skews have been found only in some brachiopods . nine genes of flustra  have an at-skew higher than  <dig>  and ten genes  have a gc-skew higher than  <dig>  . the gc-skew is positive for all  <dig> protein-encoding and the two ribosomal rna genes, whereas the at-skew is positive for all  <dig> protein-encoding genes, but negative for the two ribosomal rna genes in flustra foliacea mitochondria .

there are  <dig>  codons for all protein coding genes in the mitochondrial genome of flustra. the total number of codons is similar in the cheilostomate ectoprocts , whereas it was distinctly lower in the ctenostomate ectoproct flustrellidra . corresponding to the high percentage of t in the mitochondrial genome of flustra, there is a bias towards t-rich codons . the most frequently used codons are uuu  for phenylalanine, uua  and uug  for leucine, auu  for isoleucine, and guu  for valine. the most often used codon families in flustra are leu <dig>  val, phe, gly and ser <dig>  the least represented codon families are his, gln, arg, cys and the termination codons. compared with other ectoprocts, flustra has a higher leu <dig> and val and a lower leu <dig> and thr codon usage .

four-fold degenerate codon usage is a/t biased in the third position, and t is the preferred nucleotide . t is also the preferred nucleotide in two-fold degenerate codons ending in t or c. the codon usage is less biased in two-fold degenerate codons ending in a or g, with a predominating in leu <dig>  lys and met, and g predominating in gln, glu, trp and the termination codons.

phylogenetic analyses of the relationships of the lophophorate lineages
the major results of the phylogenetic analyses of the nucleotide as well as the amino acid sequences of the mitochondrial protein-encoding genes concerning the relationships of the lophophorate lineages, ectoprocts, brachiopods and phoronids, are summarized in table  <dig> 

unless noted otherwise, the analyses are based on alignments edited with aliscore and the nucleotide alignments are derived from the amino acid alignments. if a group is monophyletic, the posterior probability respectively the bootstrap support is given.

initially, we included all completely sequenced mitochondrial genomes of lophophorate lineages in the phylogenetic analysis . however, the mitochondrial genes of the brachiopod lingula are generally longer and deviate considerably in sequence from their orthologs in other animals  <cit> . therefore, these sequences introduced ambiguities into the alignments. thus, we excluded this taxon from all further phylogenetic analyses.

the newly sequenced cheilostomate ectoproct flustra clusters in all analyses with the two other included cheilostomate ectoprocts bugula and watersipora. ectoprocta is also monophyletic in all analyses. in the majority of the analyses flustra is sister group to bugula. only in some analyses bugula is sister taxon to watersipora instead. a closer relationship of bugula to flustra than to watersipora  is also supported by the presence of long intergenic sequences and the structure of some trnas in these taxa  and by phylogenetic analyses based on 18s rdna, 28s rdna and cox <dig> sequences  <cit> .

the lophophorate lineages are usually more closely related to trochozoan phyla than to deuterostomes or ecdysozoans confirming the lophotrochozoa hypothesis. only in a few of the analyses, ectoprocts cluster with a long-branch group including platyhelminths, nematodes and chaetognaths. however, the sister group relationships of the lophophorate lineages within lophotrochozoa differ strongly depending on the data set, method and evolutionary model . the different sister group relationships are not strongly supported by the data and may be affected by stochastic as well as systematic errors. surprisingly, a sister group relationship between ectoprocta and brachiopoda as reconstructed in several other analyses of mitochondrial sequences  <cit>  was not recovered in any of our analyses. the same applies to the previously proposed sister group relationship between ectoprocta and chaetognatha  <cit> . these vagaries indicate that there is no robust phylogenetic signal for such relationships in the mitochondrial sequences.

in the maximum likelihood tree  calculated based on the nucleotide alignment derived from the amino acid alignment and edited with aliscore  <cit>  comprising  <dig>  positions of  <dig> taxa using the gtr model implemented in raxml, a sister group relationship between brachiopods and annelids is comparatively well-supported . in this as well as in several of the following analyses platyhelminths, nematodes and chaetognaths, all of them characterized by high substitution rates, form a monophylum, so that neither ecdysozoa nor lophotrochozoa are monophyletic. such long branch artefacts have also been found in most other phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial nucleotide and amino acid sequences . the topology of the maximum likelihood tree based on the nucleotide alignment edited with gblocks  <cit>   differs from that based on the alignment edited with aliscore only with regard to nodes that are not well supported in any of the trees . the topology of the maximum likelihood tree based on a direct nucleotide alignment  does not differ from that based on the nucleotide alignment derived from the amino acid alignment in any strongly supported nodes.

in the bayesian inference tree based on the mitochondrial amino acid data set edited with aliscore  <cit>  comprising  <dig>  positions of  <dig> taxa calculated with the cat model implemented in phylobayes , the long-branch group is broken up and lophotrochozoa including platyhelminthes form a well-supported monophylum . the maximum likelihood analysis of this data set with the mtzoa+f model  resulted again in a long-branch attraction of platyhelminths, nematodes and chaetognaths. the monophyly of most of the lophotrochozoan phyla with the exception of the molluscs is strongly supported in both analyses, but the relationships between these phyla remains unresolved. the maximum likelihood tree based on the amino acid sequences edited with gblocks  <cit>   does not differ from that edited with aliscore in any strongly supported nodes. in the bayesian inference tree ectoprocts are sister group of annelids , and brachiopods are sister group of this monophylum . phoronida is sister group of a clade consisting of nemertea and polyplacophora . in contrast, according to the maximum likelihood tree ectoprocts are sister group to the long-branch group consisting of nematodes, platyhelminths and chaetognaths. brachiopods are sister group of annelids  and phoronids are sister group of entoprocts .

evaluation of compositional heterogeneity of mitochondrial nucleotide sequences and phylogenetic analyses accounting for it
a chi-square test indicates that the nucleotide composition of the used mitochondrial nucleotide sequences is significantly heterogeneous between lineages , p =  <dig> ). this is confirmed by the matched-pairs tests of symmetry, according to which  <dig> % of the pairwise comparisons show significant  heterogeneity. although the nucleotide composition is heterogeneous at all codon positions, it is less pronounced at the first , p =  <dig> ;  <dig> % significantly heterogeneous pairs) and second , p =  <dig> ;  <dig> % significantly heterogeneous pairs) than at the third codon positions , p =  <dig> ;  <dig> % significantly heterogeneous pairs).

a maximum likelihood analysis based on the first and second codon positions only resulted in a reduction of the support for a brachiopod-annelid sister group relationship , indicating that this grouping might be an artefact resulting from compositional bias.

alternatively, we accounted for the compositional heterogeneity in the nucleotide sequences by using the nonstationary model implemented in nhphyml-discrete. this analysis requires a starting tree, for which we used the maximum likelihood tree obtained with the nucleotide data set and the gtr model as well as the bayesian inference tree based on the amino acid sequences obtained with the cat model . the two analyses resulted in strongly different topologies . the tree obtained with the starting tree based on the nucleotide data set and the gtr model had a slightly higher likelihood  than the tree obtained with the starting tree based on the amino acid data set . in the latter platyhelminths are included in lophotrochozoa and phoronids are sister group of ectoprocts, whereas in the former platyhelminths are the sister group of nematodes and phoronis is nested in nemertea.

evaluation of compositional heterogeneity of mitochondrial amino acid sequences and phylogenetic analyses accounting for it
we evaluated the potential influence of compositional heterogeneity in the amino acid data set on the phylogenetic analyses by a posterior predictive test based on the phylobayes analysis of the complete data set . this test indicates that the assumption of compositional homogeneity made by most models for amino acid sequence evolution is strongly violated in the mitochondrial amino acid data . the test statistic for individual taxa indicates that the amino acid composition of  <dig> of the  <dig> taxa is significantly deviating. the compositional bias is much stronger than that found in a nuclear ribosomal protein data set  <cit> . thus, there might be artifacts resulting from compositional bias in the trees calculated with the usual evolutionary models.

one approach to reduce the compositional heterogeneity of the data set is the exclusion of taxa with strongly deviating amino acid composition. obviously, not all  <dig> taxa with significantly deviating amino acid composition can be removed from the phylogenetic analysis. after excluding the ten taxa with the most strongly deviating amino acid composition from the calculations , the cat model is still significantly violated  and the test statistic for individual taxa indicates that the amino acid composition of  <dig> taxa is significantly deviating. remarkably, ectoprocta and entoprocta form a monophylum, bryozoa, in the maximum likelihood tree based on the reduced data set as in some analyses of phylogenomic  <cit>  and rdna data sets  <cit> , albeit with no nodal support .

another approach for reducing compositional heterogeneity is recoding of amino acids in bins. we determined bins that minimize compositional heterogeneity with the minmax method described by susko and roger  <cit> . whereas the minimum p values for  <dig> or more bins are smaller than  <dig>  , the minimum p value for  <dig> minmax chi-squared bins  is  <dig> , which indicates that compositional homogeneity cannot be rejected for these bins according to the chi-square test. however, a posterior predictive test shows that the compositional heterogeneity has not been reduced  and that the cat model is still significantly violated  if the amino acid sequences of the mitochondrial proteins were recoded using these bins. this contradiction between the results of the chi-square test and the posterior predictive test might be explained by the fact that the chi-square test does not consider correlation due to relatedness of the taxa on a tree or by the biasing effect of invariable sites on this test  <cit> . a reduction of the categories to  <dig> minmax chi-squared bins resulted only in a minor reduction of the compositional heterogeneity  despite the minimum p value for  <dig> bins  being  <dig>  according to the chi-square test.

alternatively, we recoded the amino acid data into the six groups of amino acids  that tend to replace one another  <cit> . a posterior predictive test showed that the compositional heterogeneity even increased  compared to the unrecoded data set .

the phylogenetic analyses of recoded data sets  yielded again contradictory results concerning the relationships of the lophophorate lineages . none of the possible relationships of the lophophorate lineages is strongly supported.

we analysed the amino acid sequences also with a non-stationary model of sequence evolution by performing a bayesian analysis with the cat-bp model as implemented in the program nhphylobayes  <cit> . we started  <dig> chains with the mitochondrial amino acid data set. the mean number of breakpoints n, at which the amino acid composition changes, varied between  <dig> and  <dig>  because the prior on n used in the cat-bp model is conservative, an n as high as observed in our analysis confirms that there is compositional bias in the data. the high number of breakpoints reflects the result of the posterior predictive test that  <dig> taxa belonging to several different clades have amino acid compositions that significantly deviate from the assumptions of the cat model . despite almost nine weeks of calculation for each chain on a  <dig>  ghz processor no convergence of the chains was achieved. a consensus of all chains is shown for illustrative purposes . lophotrochozoa including platyhelminthes is monophyletic, but the relationships between lophotrochozoan phyla are largely unresolved.

phylogenetic analyses accounting for saturation
finally, we tried to mitigate saturation and long-branch-attraction problems by excluding fast evolving sites. we removed 20% of the positions with high rates from the nucleotide alignment  and 10% of the amino acid alignment positions . despite the exclusion of the fastest evolving sites, the long-branch group including platyhelminths, nematodes and chaetognaths could not be broken up  and the relationships between the lophotrochozoan phyla could not be resolved more robustly. however, there is strong support  for a sister group relation between brachiopods and annelids in the tree based on the nucleotide data set.

CONCLUSIONS
altogether, the results obtained in the phylogenetic analyses of the mitochondrial nucleotide and amino acid sequences are contradictory and weakly supported by the data . most of the results concerning the phylogenetic relationships of the lophophorate lineages are in strong contrast to the results of recent phylogenomic analyses  <cit>  and phylogenetic analyses of nuclear rdna  <cit>  that support the monophyly of bryozoa  including ectoprocta and entoprocta as well as the monophyly of brachiozoa including brachiopoda and phoronida. jang and hwang  <cit>  showed that a topology test based on mitochondrial amino acid data rejects both, brachiozoa and bryozoa. thus, the differences between the phylogenetic results based on mitochondrial data and the phylogenomic analysis based mainly or exclusively on nuclear data cannot be attributed to stochastic errors alone. the posterior predictive tests indicate that the phylogenetic analyses of the mitochondrial amino acid sequences are strongly affected by compositional bias, a systematic error source that is not taken into account by topology tests. thus, the apparent contradiction between the phylogenetic results based on mitochondrial amino acid data and the phylogenomic analyses may be due to compositional bias. this is supported by the results of the approaches to reduce compositional heterogeneity in the data sets respectively the analyses with non-stationary models . although bryozoa including ectoprocta and entoprocta were rejected in the topology tests performed by jang and hwang  <cit>  based on mitochondrial amino acid data, bryozoa was found in our maximum likelihood analysis with the mtzoa+f model with the  <dig> taxa set, albeit with no nodal support .

phylogenetic analyses of nuclear protein sequence data of metazoa are also affected by compositional bias  <cit> . however, none of several approaches accounting for this bias supported a sister group relationship between ectoprocta and brachiopoda or between phoronida and entoprocta  <cit>  as did some of the phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial data .

the weak support for relationships between phyla in the analyses based on the mitochondrial data  indicates that the information content of the mitochondrial sequence data set, which is almost one magnitude smaller than current phylogenomic data sets, is insufficient for a robust resolution of the divergences of the lophotrochozoan phyla . in addition, the strong compositional bias in the mitochondrial data  complicates phylogenetic analyses of these data. the high variability of the gene order in some lophotrochozoan phyla like ectoprocts, brachiopods or molluscs undoes the hope that this character set may help to disentangle the relationships between lophotrochozoan phyla. with current methods and evolutionary models mitochondrial genome data can contribute little to resolving the relationships of the lophotrochozoan phyla.

however, our study revealed several rare genomic changes like the loss of the dhu arm and changes of the anticodon sequence of trnas and the evolution of long intergenic sequences, that may be helpful for reconstructing ectoproct phylogeny more robustly in future studies.

