BACKGROUND
surveillance of poultry for notifiable avian influenza virus  and virulent newcastle disease virus  is critical for maintaining export markets under the guidelines of the world organization for animal health . moreover, in the us, aiv surveillance is a key component of the us national poultry improvement plan . in addition to the extensive level of testing of commercial poultry globally, aiv surveillance is conducted in live-bird markets and in wild birds. accurate test results, which are affected by collection and transport conditions, are critical for screening since both false negative and false positive results can have negative impacts on disease control and trade.

surveillance testing for aiv and ndv have been established and successfully implemented in many countries, however there has been minimal work to validate sample collection methods. evaluations of swab pooling for aiv using only real-time , but not virus isolation have been reported  <cit> . similarly, detection of aiv with wet versus dry swabs from pekin ducks tested by rrt-pcr only has been compared  <cit> .

currently, collection methods are not standardized; there are variations depending on poultry species, industry compartment, surveillance objectives and guidelines, and the availability and cost of materials. therefore questions continually arise from personnel involved in aiv and ndv testing and the design of surveillance programs about what approach is best. importantly, the specific details of sample collection practices have not been fully evaluated for their effects on the sensitivity and specificity of rrt-pcr or commercial antigen immunoassays , and in some cases virus isolation , the most widely used detection tests for aiv. with the large scale of testing currently being conducted, small differences in sensitivity and specificity could translate into a substantial impact on diagnostic accuracy. therefore, the objective of this work was to determine the optimal sample collection methods for aiv detection based on practical variations in several aspects of aiv sample collection and transport. in addition, pooling of specimens was evaluated for ndv since similar to aiv, both rrt-pcr and vi are used for the detection and surveillance for ndv.

the elements of aiv and ndv sample collection and transport that were evaluated are: 1) swab construction type , 2) transport media, 3) transport of dry swabs versus wet swabs, 4) leaving swabs in the media after collection or removing them, 5) media volume, and 6) swab pooling. the conditions selected for evaluation are minor modifications of those currently in use or are new technologies which have shown improvements for public health testing for influenza and other diseases, for example: swab construction, transport conditions and pooling  <cit> . importantly all elements are expected to be economically and logistically feasible for poultry applications.

RESULTS
general
in general, with aiv too few cloacal  swabs were positive by either vi or rrt-pcr for meaningful analysis, therefore the results will focus on oro-pharyngeal  swabs, which are the preferred sample for aiv and ndv detection in gallinaceous poultry. also no samples were positive at day  <dig> post inoculation  or later for any experiment.

swab construction material and transport media
since swab construction material type and transport media were evaluated in the same experiment the results will be presented together.

all rrt-pcr samples were positive from days 1– <dig> pi . therefore the titers of virus in the specimens were compared. too few samples were positive at 7 days pi   to make conclusions and all samples were negative for virus detection  <dig> through  <dig> dpi. there was significantly more virus recovered  by flocked or foam swabs at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dpi when bhi was used as the transport media and at days  <dig> and  <dig> pi when pbs was used as the transport media . this indicates that flocked swabs and foam swabs were better able to capture the most sample and release it into the media. there was no difference in virus detection based on transport media with rrt-pcr. the overall trend was that flocked swabs were marginally better than foam, and both were better than non-flocked swabs in the amount of virus they recovered.


statistical groups  are denoted with letters, where the difference between groups which do not share a letter are statistically significant with a p of value <  <dig> . abbreviations: bhi = brain heart infusion broth, dpi = days post inoculation, pbs = phosphate buffered saline.

*. number positive/total tested .

differences in the numbers of positive samples by virus isolation  were not statistically significant based on swab construction. however, there were fewer vi positive samples when pbs was used as the transport media at all sample days, and the number of positive samples was significantly lower at  <dig> dpi with non-flocked swabs and at  <dig> dpi with all  <dig> swab types.

the number of positive samples detected by the two commercial agia licensed in the us was compared among swab construction type and media with complicated results as swab type appeared to be affected by media . with agia assay a there were significantly  more positive samples with foam and flocked swabs versus non-flocked swabs with bhi, and with pbs there were more positive with non-flocked and flocked swabs than foam. with agia assay b, when using bhi, there were significantly more positive samples with flocked swabs than with either other type. with pbs, no samples collected with foam swabs were positive which was significantly different from flocked and non-flocked swabs. overall, samples collected with flocked swabs appeared to be the most consistently positive by both agia assays and were not affected by media type, which correlates with the higher titers of virus from swabbings observed with rrt-pcr.


data from days  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> post inoculation were pooled. statistical groups  are denoted with letters, where groups which do not share a letter have a statistically significant difference with a p of value <  <dig> . abbreviations: bhi = brain heart infusion broth, pbs = phosphate buffered saline.

*. number positive/total tested .

transport conditions
virus isolation from swab media  did not appear to be affected by whether the swab was left in the vial during transport or removed in the field, nor by the number of swabs  per vial . there were fewer aiv positive samples when swabs were transported dry; these differences were statistically significant at day  <dig> pi with vi. antigen immunoassays were run with samples from  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dpi. there was only one positive sample using assay a which was from the  <dig>  ml bhi, swab not removed prior to transport,  <dig> swab pool group and  <dig> positive samples with assay b from the same treatment group. therefore, we were not able to draw conclusions for the agia’s, although this does reiterate the lower sensitivity of agia’s versus vi and rrt-pcr. by rrt-pcr at  <dig>   <dig> and 4 days pi, dry swabs recovered less virus than wet swabs, which was significant for some groups . with rrt-pcr the proportion of positive samples was not significantly different among any of the transport conditions, although there was a clear trend of fewer positives with the dry swabs and rrt-pcr titers were decreased. also, although not consistently significant, higher titers of virus were detected from groups with a single swab where the swab was left in the vial during transport, suggesting that removing the swab may marginally decrease virus detection.


flocked swabs and brain heart infusions broth were used for all sample collection except dry transport where culturettes with self-contained swabs were used. statistical groups  are denoted with letters, where groups which do not share a letter have a statistically significant difference with a p of value <  <dig> . abbreviations: bhi = brain heart infusion broth, dpi = days post inoculation, rrt-pcr = real-time rt-pcr, vi = virus isolation.

*. number positive/total tested .

media volume
using bhi and flocked swabs 2 ml of media was compared to the standard of  <dig>  ml usda-aphis, national veterinary services laboratories, . from  <dig> through 4 days pi 90-100% of samples were positive by both vi and rrt-pcr regardless of media volume . at  <dig> dpi no swabs collected in 2 ml were positive by either vi or rrt-pcr. however, of the swabs collected in  <dig>  ml of media, 20%  and 40%  were positive by vi and  <dig> %  were positive by rrt-pcr . so there was a trend toward more positives in the  <dig>  ml group at 7 days pi. none of these differences were significant for either vi or rrt-pcr. additionally, there were no significant differences in titers by rrt-pcr based on media volume alone .

swab pooling for aiv detection
combining  <dig> or  <dig> swabs in one tube  was compared for aiv detection with vi and rrt-pcr. single swabs from virus inoculated birds were included as a control. there was no difference in aiv detection from op swabs among  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> swabs pooled in a single vial using either rrt-pcr or vi . the titer of virus based on rrt-pcr was compared between each swab pool, and on  <dig> dpi and  <dig> dpi, single swabs had significantly lower titers of virus as compared to  <dig> or  <dig> swab pools .


non-flocked swabs were collected in brain heart infusion broth and were tested by virus isolation and real-time rt-pcr. there were no statistical differences by number of swabs pooled. abbreviations: dpi = days post inoculation, rrt-pcr = real-time rt-pcr, vi = virus isolation.

*. number positive/total tested .

swab pooling for ndv detection
similar to aiv, combining  <dig> or  <dig> swabs in one vial  was evaluated for virus detection and compared to a single swab. there were no statistical differences or numerical trends in ndv detection based on the numbers of swabs pooled in a vial .


non-flocked swabs were collected in brain heart infusion broth and were tested by virus isolation and real-time rt-pcr. there were no statistical differences based on the number of swabs pooled. abbreviations: dpi = days post inoculation, rrt-pcr = real-time rt-pcr, vi = virus isolation.

*. number positive/total tested .

discussion
using swabs collected from chickens experimentally exposed to lpaiv we evaluated numerous elements of sample collection and transport for aiv and evaluated swab pooling with ndv. this data provides concrete information on which factors in sample collection are critical for the most common tests for aiv. thus allowing surveillance programs to be better tailored to specific situations, including what the best alternatives are when some component of an optimal program is not available.

based on this data, the optimal method for collecting aiv oral swab samples from poultry would be flocked swabs with bhi media as this provided the best results consistently with all three detection methods. the results with the agia were complicated, as there was variation based on assay, swab construction type and media, but the most positives were observed consistently with flocked swabs.

previous studies  <cit>  have shown the superiority of bhi to pbs for the isolation of aiv, but this had not been evaluated using rrt-pcr, a more commonly used surveillance tool at the present time. the improved capture and release characteristics of flocked swabs have been shown with clinical specimens previously  <cit>  and one study found that foam swabs were superior to flocked swabs for rapid influenza testing using human specimens  <cit> , which is consistent with our results. flocked swabs were marginally better than foam, but not always significantly. therefore, foam swabs could be used if the cost  or availability of flocked swabs prevents their use. also, while the reasons are not clear at this time, foam swabs should not be used in conjunction with pbs media for agia testing since results using both kits were poor. regarding media, in certain situations where only rrt-pcr will be used and vi will not be attempted , pbs which is cheaper and has a longer shelf life at refrigeration temperatures may be used as a transport media.

transporting the specimen with wet media was most critical for vi, but also seemed to affect detection of aiv by rrt-pcr as titers were reduced. this seemed to contradict a previous study where wet and dry transport of swabs from ducks was compared  <cit> , however the differences in results may be explained by a few methodological differences. the key difference was that virus isolation was not attempted, and this is where the differences were most clear in this study. furthermore, their samples were from pekin ducks, which primarily shed cloacally and ours were from chickens, therefore as roelandt, et a. suggest, the fecal material may protect the virus  <cit> , which we could not evaluate since there were too few positive cloacal swab samples from chickens.

additionally, it did not matter whether the swab was left in the media during transport or wrung out and removed prior to transport. it should be taken into account that when multiple swabs are left in the media they will absorb it, which reduces the amount available for testing. the advantage of removing the swab prior to transport is that it eases processing for the diagnostic lab, eliminates the loss of media due to absorption by the swabs, and reduces the potential for cross-contamination by aerosols in the event that the swabs are removed in the lab.

media volume was evaluated because it can have a direct effect on virus concentration and the concentration of inhibitors in a specimen. the initial volume used in a swab tube needs to balance media cost with having adequate final volume to conduct all necessary tests. in addition the initial volume and tube size must allow all swabs to be immersed in the transport media in the event the swabs are left in the tube. the initial volume also needs to account for the number swabs which may be collected in a single vial, since more swabs will absorb more media regardless of how well the material is expressed from the swab. for example a vial in which  <dig> swabs are collected must have more volume  than a vial in which only  <dig> are collected . there are two aspects to this question: 1) what should the initial volume be? and 2) if fewer swabs are collected in a vial prepared with a volume for a larger amount will this affect detection? fortunately initial volume did not have a measureable effect on any of the detection assays with op swabs.

swab pooling is used to decrease costs by consolidating the samples from a single premise or flock. five swabs per vial has frequently been used as a maximum recommended number. an upper limit of  <dig> swabs has been suggested based on the statistical calculation where  <dig> swabs from a flock  should be sufficient to detect 25% infection rate with 95% confidence, which is the level of surveillance outlined by the npip. a previous study comparing  <dig> and  <dig> swabs for detection of lpaiv from broilers by rrt-pcr has been reported and found no difference  <cit> . another study comparing a single swab with pools of  <dig> with samples from turkeys also found no difference  <cit>  this study agrees with those results and adds a comparison with single swabs, five and  <dig> swab pools in one experiment and very importantly, data for vi. furthermore, ndv was included in the evaluation of swab pooling because it is an important differential of aiv and pooled specimens are often tested for both aiv and ndv. swab pooling from ndv infected birds provided similar results, indicating that pooling up to  <dig> swabs would not affect detection by rrt-pcr or vi.

although the detection data seems to support that up to  <dig> swabs can be pooled in a vial, it is critical to note that when implementing testing programs logistics for the field and diagnostic lab must be considered. in this case, a larger vial is needed to assure all swabs are immersed in the transport media if the swabs are going to left in it during transport, and to accommodate an increase in media volume to assure sufficient media is present for both surveillance and confirmation testing which includes virus isolation. the larger  <dig> swab vial is more difficult to handle, thus increasing the time to process. also with all the samples in one tube if loss or breakage occurs new samples must be collected. the entire testing process needs to be considered in the cost-benefit assessment of any testing program.

as expected, the differences observed were relatively minor since the detection tests are already so near to their limits of detection, although a few parameters were statistically significant. in addition to providing data on what the optimal methods are, this work also showed that there are some sample collection and transport methods which should be avoided, for example using foam swabs with pbs and transporting swabs dry. bhi was shown to be the optimal vial transport media especially when specimens are collected after 3 days post exposure.

CONCLUSIONS
this work provides practical information which may be applied directly in developing and implementing the optimal surveillance and diagnostic testing programs for aiv and ndv. flocked swabs performed the best for aiv recovery by both vi and rrt-pcr and were the most consistent with agia’s. foam swabs also performed well with significantly more virus recovery than non-flocked swabs  based on rrt-pcr at several sample points pi. brain heart infusion broth was optimal for virus recovery by virus isolation, as there were more positive specimens versus those collected in pbs. transporting swabs in media appeared to be critical for virus detection by both vi and rrt-pcr, as there were fewer positive with swabs that were transported without media and the mean titers detected by rrt-pcr were decreased. some of the elements of sample collection and transport that were not observed to impact virus detection were; pooling up to  <dig> swabs, and whether the swab was removed or left in the vial during transport.

