BACKGROUND
a major challenge for systems biology is to understand the combinatorial regulation in signaling cascades and transcription initiation mechanisms that underlie complex cellular behaviors. signaling pathways regulate essential processes in living cells and determine cellular responses to external stimuli. traditional biochemical and molecular biology approaches focus on functional contributions of individual molecules and often overlook that activation of multiple signaling molecules determines cellular response to external stimuli. such information will be crucial for constructing predictive and descriptive models of cell decision processes and identifying how pathological conditions such as uncontrollable cellular proliferation arise from abnormalities in signaling networks. in contrast to transcriptional regulatory networks for which high-throughput technologies such as dna microarrays, genome-wide knockouts/rnai and chromatin-immunoprecipitation are available for profiling network activities, the analysis of signaling networks at the biochemical/molecular level has been hindered by the absence of sensitive high-throughput approaches. recently, several such methodologies have been described that use either multiparameter flow cytometry with causal  networks  <cit>  or combinations of protein signaling assays with bayesian networks  <cit> , principal components analysis   <cit> , and partial least-squares regression   <cit> .

the typical approach for studying cellular signaling in such experiments is based on the notion of cues – signals – responses paradigm and involves several steps in experimental design and computational modeling   <cit> . first, one or several signal transduction cascades are chosen depending on the questions that are addressed. for example, the apoptosis signaling network can be selected to study different rates of apoptosis in cancer cells. since even a small number of signaling cascades may include hundreds of proteins and other signaling molecules, this step also involves selection of the smaller subset of signaling proteins, "signals", which are believed to be the most relevant for the regulation of a signaling network . as a final step in this design phase, the choice for specific perturbations – "cues" – is made to induce changes in the information flow through the signaling network and a number of specific cellular responses are assayed to analyze output of the network. for example, in the apoptosis signaling networks, different combinations of cytokines and growth factors can act as cues and assays measuring apoptosis intensity can act as responses.

in the second step the activity and concentration of signaling molecules as well as corresponding cellular responses are measured experimentally across different cues/treatment conditions. possible experimental approaches include western blotting, high-throughput kinase activity assays and protein microarrays  <cit> . assays for quantification of cellular responses vary depending on the specific application and may include measurements of cell migration, overall cell integrity or secretion of specific ligands.

the third and final step involves data analysis that addresses issues of building predictive and descriptive models of signaling networks. for instance, principal component analysis has been used to find how different cues and treatment conditions are positioned in the low-dimensional subspace of intracellular signals  <cit> . alternatively, information on the activity and amount of intracellular signaling molecules was used to build plsr model for prediction of cellular responses and selection of the most informative for classification subset of signals   <cit> . it should be noted that three steps of the systems biology methodology outlined above can be extended in various ways, for example the raise in activity of signaling molecules in response to different cues can be measured along many time points.

in this study we investigated the relationship between cues, signals and responses using two different cell signaling networks: apoptosis signaling network in human adenocarcinoma cells and the survey of multiple signaling pathways in  <dig>  macrophages.

to analyze the apoptosis network we considered a previously published protein signaling dataset known as the cytokine compendium  <cit> , for which quantitative western blotting, high-throughput protein kinase assays and protein microarrays were used to investigate the combinatorial effect of tumor necrosis factor , epidermal growth factor  and insulin on apoptosis of human adenocarcinoma cells. the question addressed in the original study was how different combinations of three cytokines influence cancer cell death or survival. for example, depending on its concentration and the presence of other cytokines, tnf can have either a proapoptotic or prosurvival effect  <cit> . consequently, the original aim was to investigate how the apoptosis signaling network was activated in response to different levels of tnf, egf and insulin and how such differential activation contributes to antagonistic cellular decisions, such as cell death versus survival in cancer cells. by measuring activities of  <dig> different intracellular molecular signals  during a  <dig> hour time course and relating measured activities to apoptotic responses, a highly effective plsr model for signals governing apoptosis was constructed  <cit>  . the trained model predicted with 90% accuracy the apoptotic responses from the test data with new experimental conditions , and found major principle components of molecular signals that contribute most to correct predictions.

however, it may not always be possible to apply a fully-supervised dimensionality reduction approach to study how changes in the activity of signaling network influence cellular responses. for instance, janes et al  <cit>  used measurements of network activity across multiple early time points to predict apoptosis outcome at later time points, whereas in some applications it may be desirable to relate signals to responses at identical time points  <cit> . in the context of the variable and conflicting cellular responses to the various tnf, egf, and insulin treatment conditions noted above it would be useful to understand how different treatments are positioned within the resulting space of intracellular molecular signals.

the second signaling network represented a large-scale survey of pathway interactions in response to  <dig> combinations of  <dig> different ligands  carried out by the alliance for cellular signaling  in raw  <dig>  macrophages  <cit> . the phosphorylated states of  <dig> proteins were measured after  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> minutes of treatment with ligands two study interactions between different ligands in terms of intracellular signaling space of phosphoproteins. the ligands were selected to stimulate a diverse set of signaling pathways through toll-like receptors , g protein-coupled receptors , cytokine receptors and tyrosine kinase receptors , many of which are co-activated during physiological signaling events. responses included measurements of secretion of  <dig> cytokines.

here we assessed applicability of unsupervised dimensionality reduction techniques for the analysis of these two signaling networks. our key aim was to infer connections between external cues, intracellular molecular signals and corresponding cellular responses. more specifically, by using cytokine signaling data compendium and afcs double ligand screen we aimed to answer the following questions:

 <dig>  can different treatment combinations of ligands be positioned into separate clusters of cues in the low-dimensional signaling space?

 <dig>  what are characteristics of these clusters in the low-dimensional space ?

 <dig>  can low-dimensional embedding be intuitively explained in terms of original dimensions of molecular signals?

 <dig>  can the low-dimensional representation of signaling networks be used for predictive  modeling of cellular responses, i.e. apoptosis intensity?

 <dig>  are there any differences in performance between linear and nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques in the case of both supervised and unsupervised learning ?

to address these questions we applied a non-linear dimensionality reduction approach isomap  <cit> . isomap and a similar technique, local linear embedding   <cit>  have already been successfully applied as dimensionality reduction approaches for gene networks  <cit>  and many other problems in cognitive sciences and computer vision. these algorithms have been found superior to pca and multidimensional scaling  in finding low-dimensional submanifolds in many cases. for instance, a modified lle algorithm local context finder  enabled successful reconstruction of a low-dimensional representation of the pathogen induced gene network in arabidopsis  <cit> .

to apply isomap specifically in the context of signaling networks we extended it with graph-based clustering  and neural networks  . finally, we used the low-dimensional embedding found by isomap to build a classifier for prediction of apoptosis intensity . in our application isomap generates a low-dimensional projection of signaling networks represented by the activity of molecular signals, where groups of different cues/treatment conditions could be easily identified and visualized . consequently, the main contribution of this paper is analysis of signaling networks in the new unsupervised learning context using nonlinear dimensionality reduction approaches.

RESULTS
cytokine compendium dataset
the main details of the cytokine compendium dataset  <cit>  that are relevant for the present study are as follows. ht- <dig> epithelial cancer cells were treated with  <dig> combinations of saturating or subsaturating concentrations of tnf, egf and insulin , which collectively represent all the cues used in the study.  <dig> molecular signals were chosen to characterize changes in signaling network activity in response to each cue condition . finally, to incorporate temporal information  <dig> measurements were made during the  <dig> hour time course after treatment with cues . each measurement was performed in triplicate to assess reproducibility of individual assays. to correlate apoptosis level in ht- <dig> cells to measured signals in the network, cell-death phenotype was measured for each of  <dig> different cytokine combinations using four distinct apoptosis assays that characterized early , middle , and late  apoptotic responses.

data representation and transformation
in our analysis of the cytokine compendium each measurement comprises a single treatment condition at a distinct time point . this representation gives  <dig> data points in  <dig> dimensions of molecular signals and produces a one-to-one mapping between the apoptosis signaling network and associated cellular responses. such data prepossessing is different from the one used by janes et al  <cit>  where the whole time course for  <dig> molecular signals and additionally derived metrics were used to predict apoptosis for the  <dig> distinct combinations of cytokine treatments  . the approach of janes et al leads to the plrs regression model with only ten data points in 200-dimensional space, which for leave-one-out cross-validation  may in some instances lead to the problem of high variance. considering each time point as an individual measurement here allows us to avoid this problem. in addition, it allows us to investigate the activity of the apoptotic signaling network in more detail, in particular how early and later time points correlate under different cytokine treatment conditions.

pca and pls-da could not find low dimensional embedding of apoptosis signaling networks
first we applied pca to the cytokine compendium to investigate if this linear dimensionality reduction technique can find meaningful clusters in a low-dimensional representation of the apoptosis signaling network. pca was unable to find an optimal embedding: the first two leading eigenvalues accounted for just 53% of the variance  and the reconstructed two-dimensional map had broad and unclear patterns and clusters . similar results were obtained when alternative cross-validation technique was applied to find pca components . pca selects components that best explain variance in the data, and they may not be the ones with the strongest predictive power for apoptosis intensity or/and tnf-egf-insulin treatment conditions. to test if incorporation of class labels information improves separation of cytokine treatments we used pls discriminant analysis , which maximizes separation between groups of observation/response variables by rotating pca components such that the maximum separation among different classes is obtained. two pls-da experiments were performed on the cytokine compendium. in the first, apoptosis intensity was discretized to represent class labels for low, medium and high rates of apoptosis; in the second, class labels were the  <dig> different cytokine treatment combinations. with this approach we were able to test assumptions of linearity both from treatment conditions to intracellular signaling space and from intracellular signaling space to apoptosis responses. classification accuracy obtained via  <dig> fold cross validation for pls-da + cytokine treatments class labels and pls-da + apoptosis intensity class labels were  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively for the first three principal components . these results suggest that both supervised and unsupervised linear dimensionality reduction may ineffectively characterize the apoptosis signaling network when attempting the one-to-one signals-to-responses mapping.

we sought to apply our extended isomap approach to see if non-linear dimensionality reduction can find the low-dimensional embedding of the apoptosis signaling network. extended isomap approach involves three main steps: the isomap algorithm first constructs a low-dimensional embedding of the apoptosis signaling network, graph-based clustering with multilevel k-way partitioning then finds clusters in this low-dimensional space and an ensemble of neural networks are used to find meaningful interpretation of isomap components in terms of original dimensions.

we have extended isomap with graph-based clustering specifically to analyze noisy biological data. the original algorithm and most of its later applications dealt with high dimensional image and text data, e.g. images of the same object, shifted by small angles  <cit> , where a low-dimensional continuous submanifold can be found. consequently, isomap projection is often used in machine vision and text mining for visualization and dimensionality reduction purposes. such continuity of submanifold is not an intrinsic feature of signaling networks in cells treated with different cytokines or growth factors, which often activate distinct  subsets of proteins. in systems biology applications the detection of functional subsets within biological networks is of primary importance, since this allows to find clusters in the signaling space that correspond to similar cytokine treatment conditions.

after applying isomap we found that the first three isomap components captured 71% of the variance , suggesting that isomap was able to find a low-dimensional embedding of the apoptosis signaling network. by using graph-based clustering in the first two isomap components we identified distinct clusters corresponding to different cytokine treatments . closer evaluation of the five recovered clusters indicates that all of them convey information about original cytokine treatments. in particular, isomap found clusters that reflect high concentration of insulin-tnf, mixed insulin-tnf and egf-tnf high/medium treatment conditions. moreover, the first isomap component largely explains changes in the apoptosis network activity from prosurvival to prodeath. one additional noteworthy observation is the non-globular shape of most clusters found by graph-based clustering . expectation maximization based clustering that uses euclidian distance and tends to detect globular clusters failed to identify clusters that reflect biologically meaningful treatment conditions . this suggests that  neighborhood properties for a particular treatment condition captured by k-nearest neighbors distance are important for identification of clusters in the isomap space and  the apoptosis signaling network tends to span low-dimensional embedding in a thread-like fashion rather than forming globular subclusters. since in our case the network is defined by the different cytokine treatments  this indicates that changes in cytokine combination and/or time at which the intracellular signals are measured leads to the directional changes in the apoptosis network activity, such as changes from insulin to insulin-tnf cluster.

features of cytokine clusters found by isomap
isomap was able to reconstruct not only the low-dimensional embedding of insulin-induced apoptosis network, but also captured temporal profiles of network activity, with early time points occupying far end of the map and later time points approaching the centre . the insulin cluster was closely followed by the insulin-tnf high concentration cluster on the map . this observation is consistent with current biological understanding of the role of insulin in the apoptosis signaling network, where insulin augments akt  activity. insulin-tnf treatment leads to a rapid increase in akt activity during the early time points and sustaines activation for  <dig> h, whereas with tnf alone the akt response is much smaller in magnitude  <cit> . for insulin-tnf treatment, the akt activity was held high for the first  <dig> hours and contributed to the decrease in the apoptosis rate. this indicates that insulin-tnf and insulin-alone treatments, which are most similar by their activity profiles in the cytokine compendium, were successfully placed by isomap in similar location on the low-dimensional embedding. since akt is considered to be responsible for a significant portion of prosurvival signaling in this apoptosis network, we hypothesized that isomap grouped time courses with insulin-tnf and insulin alone due to preferential low-dimensional projection along akt dimension. to test this hypothesis we applied isomap after removing the akt signal from the dataset. the distinct insulin-tnf and insulin-alone clusters disappeared from the two-dimensional map while other clusters were preserved confirming importance of the akt signal for low-dimensional projection.

the late tnf/tnf-egf high concentration cluster was reflected along horizontal axes to the insulin-tnf/insulin cluster, occupying the lower left corner on the map. isomap was able to clearly separate these distinct treatments that operate through different  pathways in apoptosis. by separating tnf and insulin clusters, isomap appropriately found differences in the signaling network in conjunction with differences in apoptotic cellular responses. interestingly, isomap also separated tnf-egf and insulin-tnf time points on the two-dimensional map, revealing distinct antagonistic effects of egf and insulin on tnf-induced apoptosis pathway. as was recently suggested, egf in combination with tnf directly antagonizes stress pathway signaling comprising early jnk <dig> activity, early mk <dig> activity, and late cleaved caspase- <dig>  in contrast, insulin in combination with tnf both antagonizes stress signaling and induces separate prosurvival signaling pathways through phosphorylated akt, insulin receptor substrate  <dig> , forkhead transcription factor , and procaspase- <dig> metrics  <cit> .

another clearly identifiable cluster on the two dimensional map was the egf-alone treatment cluster, located in the centre of the map. this cluster was more compact than the two previously described clusters, which reflects higher homogeneity between time points after egf treatment. this particularly applies to middle – later time points after disappearance of the early transient peaks of akt, mek and erk activities. we have found that one of the closest subclusters to the no treatment cluster was the late high concentration tnf cluster . this may be caused by the return of measured kinase activities to their basal state, primarily due to the onset of apoptosis following tnf treatment. however, further experiments are required for better understanding of these results.

although isomap found clusters in the network corresponding to treatments with high doses of cytokines/growth factors, it failed to identify most of the clusters treated with low doses, which formed one supercluster of several low dose treatment conditions. for instance, low doses of tnf-egf and insulin-tnf clusters were almost inseparable on the cytokine map. this indicates that the network was not perturbed sufficiently enough to show clearly distinct response phenotypes. the only two distinct clusters corresponding to low concentration treatments are the low tnf/insulin-tnf low concentration cluster and no treatment cluster. interestingly, when the number of expected clusters in the graph-based clustering is increased from  <dig> to  <dig>  all original clusters remain intact and partitioning is made across the super cluster . however, even by increasing the number of clusters we were unable to further separate the low dose treatments super cluster. this might suggest that low concentration treatment conditions perturb apoptosis network less significantly than treatments with higher doses.

interpretation of components recovered by isomap
an important characteristic of linear dimensionality reduction methods such as pca is the intuitive interpretation of components in the low-dimensional space in terms of the original dimensions. unfortunately, since exact one-to-one correspondence between the original and low-dimensional subspace can not be recovered through application of isomap, it is difficult to interpret low-dimensional projections in terms of original multidimensional input space. however, in contrast to image data, input variables in the signaling space have direct biological interpretation  and it is essential that such information is captured by low-dimensional embedding. we applied neural networks  to approximate the nonlinear projection from original input space into low-dimensional space found by isomap, followed by the sensitivity analysis to choose the best subset of predictive variables in the input space.

the subset of variables with the highest rank/scores  includes phosphorylation/activity of mapk-activated protein kinase  <dig> , insulin receptor substrate  <dig> , mek kinase , akt kinase , and procaspase- <dig>  level , which conform to the pervious study of  <cit> . however, in our case variables define isomap projection through a nonlinear combination, the exact form of which remains unidentifiable. interestingly, they are not the obvious ones that would have been chosen based on our current understanding of the regulation of apoptosis . the presence of proteins from different kinase pathways  as significance variables further suggested that only systems-level view can accurately model mapping functions in signaling networks. another noteworthy feature is that isomap components include not only caspases as immediate downstream effectors of apoptosis, but also more upstream signals such as insulin receptor substrate  <dig> 

supervised comparison of pca and isomap
many non-parametric classification algorithms in machine learning such as k-nearest neighbors  perform poorly in a multidimensional space where pairwise distances between input datapoints become large. consequently, we sought to compare classification accuracy of several machine learning algorithm using apoptosis intensity as class labels and original 19-dimesnional space of molecular signals, isomap components space and pca components space as input datasets. we assigned class labels representing  <dig> levels of apoptosis intensity  to each time point using expectation maximization clustering and performed classification with support vector machines , k-nn or quadratic discriminant analysis  in three dimensional isomap/pca subspace and original multidimensional space . k-nn and qda classifiers based on isomap dimensions showed comparable performance to classifiers that used original dataset and in both cases were better than pca-based classifiers . svm did not detect statistically significant differences between pca and isomap dimensions. this in part can be due to more spherical clusters generated by pca, which makes it easier for svm to find the optimal margin in a low-dimensional space. since the exact assignment of apoptosis signatures to each data point was infeasible due to the absence of experimental measurements, the accuracy of classification based on isomap projection and original dataset was lower than that reported by janes et al. using plsr  <cit> . the difference in performance can most likely be attributed to different structure of mapping functions between cues and responses for the apoptosis signaling network  and is considered in detail below . we then tested whether isomap projection could achieve higher accuracy on predicting late time points of apoptosis network activity using training data derived from early signals. k-nearest neighbors, trained on early time points to predict later time points showed much higher accuracy than when the training set was chosen randomly. in particular, a test error of  <dig>  was obtained when the last three time points were used for testing . this is consistent with previous reports  <cit>  and suggests that protein activities at early times encode much of the information needed to specify an apoptosis-survival cell fate decision. it also indicates that isomap could be used in predictive modeling and for determining long term behaviors in signaling networks.

as the cytokine compendium comprises time series data for each combination of cytokine treatments, it was important to confirm that the low-dimensional embedding recovered by isomap is not solely governed by correlation between consecutive time points for each treatment condition. consequently we introduced a modified euclidian distance where points belonging to the same treatments receive more weight than points belonging to different treatments to see how this affects continuity of the submanifold found by isomap. the distance d' is defined by the formula:

 d'={edβyi≠yj1−e−dβyi=yj
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=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@65f1@ 

where xi is an input vector and yi are corresponding labels for each of  <dig> treatment conditions, d denotes euclidian distance and β is a scaling factor defined as an average distance between all pairs of data points. consequently, the dissimilarity between two points is equal to or greater than  <dig> if the cytokine treatments are different and is less than  <dig> if treatments are the same. to prevent overfitting, the parameter α =  <dig>  is used to reduce the restriction that intra-class dissimilarity is less than  <dig>  using isomap in combination with this distance metric we found that the low-dimensional embedding was distorted by disconnected components and  <dig> that were very distant from all clusters. this suggests that clusters found by isomap were not solely grouped by correlation between similar time points for any particular treatment condition.

afcs double ligand screen dataset
data representation and transformation
the data for afcs double ligand screen of phosphoproteins was downloaded from signaling gateway website at  <cit>  . in the screen the phosphorylated states of the following proteins were recognized : akt , erk , ezrin/radixin/moesin , gsk  <dig> α/β , jnk , p <dig> mapk , p <dig> phox , ribosomal s <dig> , nf-κb p <dig> , pkc δ/θ , pkcμ , p <dig> rsk , smad <dig> , stat  <dig> , stat  <dig> , and stat  <dig> . measurements were made after  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> minutes of treatment with ligands; basal phosphorylation was assessed in untreated cells. cells were treated with each individual ligand and simultaneously with the two ligand combination. to correct for lane-to-lane variation in total protein loaded, in the downloaded dataset all signal intensities were already normalized against the signal for rho-gdi detected by a phosphorylation insensitive antibody. after preliminary exploratory analysis we decided not to use the corresponding measurements of cytokines also available through the afcs double ligand screen. in contrast to the cytokine compendium data, the afcs has not made effort to insure that the same culture plates are used for the assessment of both phosphorylation and cytokine secretion, and in fact concentration of some ligands was different for the two screens. under such conditions reliable mapping between signals and responses can not be achieved, consequently we applied only isomap unsupervised learning procedure to the afcs double ligand screen data.

in our analysis of the afcs double ligand screen each measurement represents a single treatment condition with a particular ligand at one time point. after removing observation in which more than  <dig> measurements of phosphoproteins were missing the dataset comprised  <dig> data points in  <dig> dimensions of molecular signals. the final pre-processing included standardization of the dataset to the unit variance. for examples of scripts and software used in pre-processing see additional files  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> 

extended isomap analysis of the afcs dataset
to determine the relationship between ligands in terms of changes in the phosphorylation levels of phosphoproteins they induce, and to find out whereas the multidimensional space of phosphoproteins can form the low dimensional embedding of the signaling network, we used extended isomap to analyze the afcs double ligand screen data. the two dimensional map of the double ligand screen obtained after application of isomap featured tight clusters and the first two dimensions explained 59% of the variance . in contrast, the corresponding two-dimensional pca map gave unclear clusters  and the variance captured by the leading principal components was much lower – 40% . the graph based clustering using the first two isomap components identified  <dig> distinct clusters of different ligands treatment. to assess the biological significance of the clustering we calculated the functional coherence of clusters as the relative frequency  of occurrence of each ligand in each cluster normalized to the size of the cluster. isomap clusters appeared to be functionally coherent . for instance, cluster  <dig> on the isomap map was significantly enriched for  <dig> out of  <dig> toll-like receptor  ligands including lipopolysaccharide , p2c and p3c. their functional coherence scores were 35%, 36% and 31% respectively. the emergence of these ligands as a single cluster is in agreement with similar patterns of protein phosphorylation they induce. tlr ligands signal through the proximal adaptor protein myd <dig>  which results in activation of nf-κb and map kinase pathways  <cit> . interferons  and interleukin  <dig>  were also grouped into a single cluster  <dig>  by their pattern of stat phosphorylation  <cit> . 2-methylthio-atp , platelet activating factor  and uridine diphosphate  also clustered together , which is in agreement with similar phosphoprotein responses they induce  <cit> . on the contrary to isomap, pca has not found functionally coherent clusters  for tlrs ligands and interferons: interferons were split between clusters  <dig> and  <dig> and tlrs ligands – between clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> on the pca two-dimensional map. quite interestingly, after applying neural networks to determine the significance of individual variables we identified stat 3/ <dig>  and jnk/p <dig> kinases  as the most highly represented phosphorproteins in the first two isomap components . the first two principal components were more homogeneous and included contribution of many different phosphorproteins at a similar level. in general, broad and undefined clusters on the pca map are most likely attributed to the low informativeness of the leading two principal components that account only for the 40% of the variance. on the other hand, isomap captures more information in the first two components and can therefore reconstruct the state of the signaling network more accurately.

discussion
extended isomap can be used for visualization, predictive and descriptive modeling of apoptosis signaling network
if we consider signaling networks as multivariate nonlinear functions that map various perturbations and extracellular cues onto different cellular responses it becomes clear that only by understanding the network dynamics and interplay between its key components as a whole will we be able to construct predictive and descriptive models of cell decision processes. to explain different and sometimes antagonistic cellular responses to the same ligand, for example, tnf during angiogenesis  <cit> , accurate measurements with frequent temporal sampling will be required. since cells in vivo typically respond to multiple ligands all present at different concentrations, another important goal in signaling network research will be to identify how cells integrate and respond to multiple signals simultaneously. in this study we applied an unsupervised non-linear dimensionality reduction approach, extended isomap, to find similar instantiations of apoptosis signaling network in response to different treatments with tnf, egf or insulin. by projecting the original  <dig> dimensional space of intracellular signals into a 3-dimensional space, isomap was able to reconstruct clusters corresponding to different cytokine treatments that were then identified with graph-based clustering. alternative approaches were either unable to find biologically meaningful clusters  or produced broad and unclear clusters . potential biological applications of this method therefore include characterisation, visualisation and clustering of different treatment conditions  in terms of the changes in intracellular signaling they induce. we also applied neural networks to infer the contribution that original variables make into the low-dimensional subspace. the variables contributing most to the low-dimensional projection were phosphorylation/activity of mek, akt, mk <dig>  irs <dig> and proc <dig> cleavage, which is consistent with the previous reports  <cit> . consequently, these signals might be potential targets for further biological investigation on how different doses and treatment conditions with tnf, egf or insulin lead to different death/survival decisions in cancer cells.

previous studies have concentrated on the structural reconstruction of the signaling networks using bayesian networks  <cit>  or their extension to learn causal  networks  <cit> . other methods attempt to build signaling network regressors/classifiers that map cues into cellular responses, for example to build predictive models of migration speed in mouse fibroblasts  <cit> . our extended isomap approach instead focuses on a broader combination of unsupervised and supervised machine learning analysis of signaling networks through non-linear dimensionality reduction  <cit> . in this framework, different instantiations of the signaling networks  are first projected into low-dimensional space and then used to compare cues/treatment conditions by finding their corresponding low-dimensional embedding. moreover, the relative contribution of each molecular signal to the projection can also be inferred. for instance, we showed that akt activity is responsible for the segregation of the insulin cluster on the two-dimensional map. although isomap is primarily a technique for unsupervised learning and visualization, by feeding isomap output into supervised classification algorithms such as k-nn and qda, the technique can be successfully extended for predicting apoptosis outcomes. the isomap predictive power was especially pronounced when early activation time points in the apoptosis signaling network were used to predict the later ones.

extended isomap also outperformed pca on the afcs double ligand screen data. isomap identified more functionally coherent clusters than pca and captured more information in the first two-components. we have not attempted to functionally characterize the afcs double ligand screen as extensively as we analyzed the cytokine compendium due to the large number of ligands and signal transduction pathways involved. instead, our aim was to assess isomap performance on much larger survey of signaling pathways and compare it to pca. the isomap projection becomes slightly worse when more signaling networks are analyzed . for the pca this reduction is much more dramatic – 53% and 40% respectively, suggesting that the mapping function between cues and responses becomes more non-linear when large signaling pathways are considered.

factors contributing to isomap algorithm performance
multiple factors could contribute to the superior performance of isomap over linear dimensionality reduction approaches such as pca and pls-da. first, the apoptosis signaling network in our representation may itself be nonlinear, especially when signaling molecules are located proximally to the receptors. second, the application of isomap for analysis of the apoptosis signaling network is similar to the notion of invariance manifolds in the field of cognitive neuroscience and in computer vision. in the invariance manifold, relevant features of the multi-dimensional input space are often represented by a large number of different instances of the same object to form a nonlinear surface in the low-dimensional output space  <cit> . this is the case, for example, with images of the same objects shifted by small angles . isomap has been successfully applied to many image processing problems having invariance manifold representation. better performance of extended isomap approach for the analysis of signaling network might therefore be attributed to the fact that only a small portion of molecular signals, such as kinase activities, change significantly between different treatment conditions, especially when these conditions are similar . can activation profiles of other signaling networks be approximated by invariance manifolds? the invariance manifold concept suggests, in part, that as input cues are gradually varied , the activation state of intracellular signaling network also changes gradually. this systems-wide network view suggested by the non-linear dimensionality reduction differs from results obtained when studying smaller networks at the single cell level, where switch like behavior and population heterogeneity are documented . however, clusters found by isomap do not perfectly reproduce invariance manifold, suggesting that further research into signaling networks dynamics at the systems wide level will be required to corroborate this idea.

when assessing performance of predictive models for signaling networks it is important to distinguish between afferent and efferent cascades from cues to intracellular signals and from intracellular signals to responses respectively. while the former network from cues to intracellular signals operate through signal transduction mechanisms, such as protein phosphorylation and involve significant cross-talk between different pathways with many layers of interacting proteins, the network from signals to responses often include transcriptional events with much smaller number of components. our results suggest that when using one-to-one mapping between signals and responses both types of cascades tend to operate though non-linear interactions, although mappings from cues to intracellular signals are likely to be more dramatically nonlinear than mappings from signals to responses. in part, this agrees with previous studies on apoptosis  <cit>  and t-cell activation networks , where plsr accurately predicted cellular responses from signals using linear functions, although failed to predict signaling from cues to intracellular signals. the significant difference of those approaches from ours is that both used multiple time slices of the signaling network to predict cellular responses. an approximately multi-linear relationship between signals and responses, when multiple time slices of the signaling network are taken into account, might have important applications for predictive modeling of cell decision processes in clinical applications, considering that linear methods have much higher reproducibility and robustness. it also highlights the importance of choosing the optimal number of time points when producing cues – signals – responses data for predictive and descriptive modeling of signaling networks, as was described in the introduction.

our study could be extended in several ways. first, better approaches for analysis of isomap projections could be used. second, other non-linear dimensionality reduction techniques could be applied to study signaling networks in addition to isomap as used here. a disadvantage of isomap is the requirement for dense coverage of manifold with datapoints, which is necessary for accurate approximation of submanifold with geodesic distance. through sampling we have shown that the data in the cytokine compendium is sufficiently dense for isomap to approximate nonlinear submanifold. however, this may not be true for other datasets. research on spectral methods for dimensionality reduction continues at a rapid pace. other algorithms closely related to the isomap and lle include hessian eigenmaps  <cit> , local tangent space alignment  <cit> , laplacian eigenmaps  <cit>  and locally linear isomaps  <cit> . these methods allow handling of manifolds with more complex geometries that are more robust to noise and outliers and have the ability to scale to larger data sets. application of these techniques may provide further advances in systems wide analysis of signaling networks.

CONCLUSIONS
the construction of predictive and descriptive models for the analysis of signaling networks is essential for understanding cell decision processes at the systems wide level. cues – signals – responses paradigm provides a unifying framework for data analysis and modeling of signaling networks. the comparison of different treatment conditions in terms of changes in the intracellular signaling molecules they induce is particularly important. here we developed the extended isomap algorithm for the non-linear dimensionality reduction and applied it to the analysis of the two signaling networks: apoptosis signaling networks induced by treatment with tnf, egf and insulin in cancer cells and multiple signaling pathways derived from afcs double ligand screen dataset. we show that extended isomap can find clusters corresponding to different treatment conditions through the non-linear dimensionality reduction of the space of intracellular signaling molecules. by applying neural networks sensitivity analysis we also recovered the subset of signaling proteins that best explain isomap projection from the original into the low dimensional subspace. finally, we demonstrated how isomap components can be used in a supervised learning content for predictive modeling of apoptosis intensity. we conclude that extended isomap approach can be used for visualization, predictive and descriptive modeling of signaling networks.

