BACKGROUND
animals use their nervous systems to sense and respond dynamically to changing environments. nematodes constitute one of the most diverse and populous phyla in the animal kingdom, with estimates of up to  <dig> million extant species  <cit> . although all nematodes share a similar basic body plan, they have distinct morphological adaptations and can differ in length by four orders of magnitude. they have a wide geographical distribution, exploit diverse ecological niches, and can survive extreme environments like the antarctic  <cit> . nematodes are both parasitic and free-living and can obtain nutrients from a wide variety of materials. additionally, nematodes have evolved several different reproductive strategies, exhibiting gonochorism , hermaphroditism, heterogony, and parthenogenesis  <cit> . the phylum nematoda also exhibits genomic diversity. an analysis of expressed-sequence tags from  <dig> different species revealed that 30-50% of the sequences studied were unique to individual species  <cit> .

the detailed molecular genetic and neuronal bases of many nematode behaviors such as egg laying  <cit> , mechanosensation  <cit> , pharyngeal-pumping  <cit> , and male-mating  <cit>  have been described in detail from c. elegans. intraspecific variation in behaviors has also been examined in c. elegans and other nematode species, as well as differences between related species. for example, some wild isolates of c. elegans aggregate and feed socially whereas other strains disperse and forage independently  <cit> . species from two clades of entomopathogenic nematodes, steinernematidae and heterorhabditidae, exhibit different behaviors associated with infection of host insects  <cit> . four closely related species of pristionchus have unique chemoattraction profiles to  <dig> compounds classified as insect pheromones or plant volatiles  <cit> . finally, males of two gonochoristic caenorhabditis species, c. remanei and c. brenneri, are more efficient at spicule insertion during mating than males of the hermaphroditic species c. briggsae and c. elegans  <cit> .

few studies, however, have attempted to address the neural control of behavior across different species of nematodes  <cit> . such a study first requires the identification of a behavior that is at least partially conserved in multiple species. then, the neural circuitry of the selected species can be examined.

we undertook an interspecific comparison of a locomotory behavior modulated by feeding. sawin and colleagues  <cit>  showed that the presence or absence of food  as well as feeding status  affects the rate of locomotion of c. elegans. well-fed c. elegans worms have the fastest rate of locomotion in the absence of food, and their locomotion slows when food is present. this behavior is known as the "basal slowing response" . worms recently deprived of food move even more slowly in food, exhibiting a behavior known as the "enhanced slowing response" . the neural circuits that control the basal and enhanced slowing responses are distinct  <cit> . the bsr is mediated by the dopaminergic cep, ade, and pde neurons, which have sensory endings in the cuticle and likely detect the presence of bacteria by a mechanical stimulus. the esr is mediated by serotonin. mutant strains lacking serotonin have a defective esr that can be rescued by the addition of exogenous serotonin  <cit> . fluoxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, potentiates the esr, while serotonin antagonists prevent the behavior  <cit> . ablation experiments have failed, however, to unambiguously identify the serotonergic neurons required for the esr  <cit> .

we scored several species of nematodes whose phylogenetic relationships to c. elegans are known for the presence of the basal and enhanced slowing responses. we examined the patterns of dopamine-containing neurons in these species, and then also investigated whether the esr was modulated by serotonin and what serotonergic neurons are present. we found that only some of the species examined had slowing responses under the conditions tested, and there was no stereotypical array of serotonergic neurons present that might be required for the esr. dopamine-containing neurons were highly conserved although the bsr under the conditions tested was not. we propose the evolutionary source of the slowing behaviors based on a nematode phylogeny.

RESULTS
phylogenetic relationships of the nematode species tested for food-modulated behaviors
we chose seven representative free-living species from different groups of rhabditids with a range of phylogenetic distances to c. elegans for our comparative analysis. all species selected exhibited a sinusoidal pattern of body bends similar to c. elegans. the species tested were c. elegans , c. briggsae , caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> , oscheius myriophila , pellioditis typica , rhabditella axei , pristionchus pacificus , and panagrellus redivivus  . based on current molecular data, rhabditids can be divided into two major clades: eurhabditis and pleiorhabditis  <cit> . the species include both gonochoristic and hermaphroditic life histories, so hermaphrodites or females were used. c. elegans, along with other members of the caenorhabditis genus, belongs to the eurhabditis clade  <cit> . from the genus caenorhabditis, we chose c. elegans , caenorhabditis briggsae  and the less closely related caenorhabditis sp.  <dig>   <cit> . c. elegans and c. briggsae were isolated from compost, and caenorhabditis sp.  <dig>  was isolated from galleries of palm and sugarcane weevils  <cit> . oscheius myriophila , pellioditis typica  and rhabditella axei , also belong to the eurhabditis clade, but belong to a different branch than caenorhabditis  <cit> . from the group of diplogastrids, we chose the satellite model system pristionchus pacificus   <cit> , which belongs to a genus that associates with beetles  <cit> . panagrellus redivivus  was chosen as an outgroup. this nematode species has been isolated from sugar-rich environments such as sap of rubber trees and brewery mash  <cit>  .

some nematode species do not exhibit basal and enhanced slowing responses
we used both manual and automated methods to determine the locomotory behavior of eight species of nematodes chosen in our analysis . if the basal and enhanced slowing responses  present in c. elegans are adaptive, it is reasonable to predict that other species will also exhibit the behaviors. to explore the conservation of the slowing behaviors, we first determine a baseline locomotory rate for each species using well-fed animals on an agar plate with no bacteria . rates of locomotion varied considerably between species. caenorhabditissp.  <dig> had the highest average locomotory rate at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  hz . pristionchus pacificus had the lowest locomotory rate at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  hz. as previously reported  <cit> , well-fed c. elegans slowed significantly  in the presence of bacteria, and starved animals slowed even more dramatically  following reintroduction to bacteria . four other species, c. briggsae, caenorhabditis sp.  <dig>  o. myriophila and pellioditis typica, exhibited both a bsr and esr similar to that seen in c. elegans . for well-fed r. axei no bsr was detectable . similarly, the locomotory rate of starved r. axei on bacteria did not differ significantly from the baseline locomotory rate . both pristionchus pacificus and panagrellus redivivus lacked a bsr or esr; the locomotory rate was significantly higher in the presence of bacteria in both well-fed and starved animals . this observation is exactly opposite to the locomotory behavior of c. elegans, wherein the worm's locomotory rate slows in the presence of food.

it is possible that in species lacking a bsr or esr in our assays, the food presented  was not adequate to elicit a response. therefore, we tested two of the species - pristionchus pacificus and panagrellus redivivus - for their basal locomotion on other potential food sources . we chose some bacteria that were gram-positive and some gram-negative . we also tested c. elegans with the same set of bacteria. c. elegans slowed significantly on either e. coli strain tested, but not on the other three strains ; in fact, worms moved significantly faster on b. subtilis . pristionchus pacificus showed a significant increase in locomotory rate on the e. coli strains op <dig> and hb <dig>  but did not change significantly on the other bacteria . panagrellus redivivus moved significantly faster on all the bacterial strains tested .

dopaminergic neurons are similar across nematode species
dopamine has been implicated in the control of the bsr in c. elegans. unlike wild-type animals, worms with highly reduced dopamine levels such as cat- <dig> mutants  <cit> , fail to slow in bacteria  <cit> . elimination of a specific dopamine receptor, dop- <dig>  expressed in ventral cord motoneurons, also eliminates the bsr  <cit> . to determine whether the correlation between dopamine production and the bsr is conserved across species, we examined the pattern of dopamine-containing neurons in the same nematode species used in our behavioral studies. we used formaldehyde-induced fluorescence  and 5htp-induced serotonin immunoreactivity in da neurons to corroborate fif staining and to observe neuronal morphology . c. elegans hermaphrodites have  <dig> bilateral pairs of dopaminergic neurons located in cephalic, deirid and postdeirid sensilla:  <dig> ceps,  <dig> ades, and  <dig> pdes . all of these neurons are probably mechanosensory, as they extend ciliated dendrites with endings embedded in the cuticle, and do not contact the external environment  <cit> . cep endings are at the tip of the 'nose,' and ablation of all  <dig> cep neurons results in a moderately reduced bsr  <cit> . ade and pde have endings in the cuticle in the anterior and posterior body, respectively, and ablation of either cell type alone does not affect the bsr  <cit> . combined ablation of all  <dig> dopaminergic neurons completely eliminates the bsr, indicating that the ceps, ades, and pdes all contribute to the behavior  <cit> . the bsr can be induced with 20- <dig> μm particles , supporting the mechanosensory vs. chemosensory nature of the cells' function  <cit> .

we observed that all seven species had fif-positive somata that are plausible homologs of the bilaterally symmetric head cephalic sensory neuron ceps, the anterior deirid neuron ades and postdeirid pdes . in all the species examined, presumptive ventral ceps  were slightly more anterior than dorsal ceps , just as in c. elegans. the putative cep neurons were more strongly and reliably stained by fif; in some species, we saw putative ade neurons less often and pde neurons infrequently. this may partly be due to the very high background fluorescence in the body, especially from the intestine. there is typically much less background in the head and tail. putative ades were located in the posterior head around the posterior bulb of the pharynx, although in some species these cells were further anterior than typically found in c. elegans. along the dorsoventral axis, ade somata were located laterally to sublaterally. putative pde homologs were located subdorsally, and mid-posterior along the anteroposterior axis of the body.

for the species examined, we saw that fif staining worked better in larvae than adults. we consistently observed  <dig> pairs of cell bodies in the head of the larvae, indicating little or no change in da cells postembryonically other than the appearance of the pde. the pde neurons are born postembryonically in mid-late l <dig> stage in both c. elegans and panagrellus redivivus  <cit> , and hence are seen only in older larvae and adults. in a few species, we occasionally found an additional fif-positive cell in adults in the head and/or body, but these were less reliable. in pristionchus, we saw what appeared to be a ventral unpaired neuron in few adult heads; in o. myriophila we saw a few worms with a pair of fif-positive cells in the tail.

in our studies we found that fif stained neuronal cell bodies, but only rarely processes. to obtain a better picture of the neuronal processes, we used serotonin antibody staining after treating worms with 5-hydroxytryptophan , the immediate precursor to serotonin. 5htp is taken up by both serotonergic and dopaminergic neurons and converted into serotonin by their shared aadc enzyme  <cit> . therefore, dopaminergic neurons are stained among a background of known serotonergic neurons. with this technique, neuronal processes are often well-stained, revealing the morphology of the neurons. in stained worms where we had previously seen fif-positive somata, we observed serotonin immunoreactive cells that were not seen without 5htp treatment.  deirid neurons , which are relatively isolated from other neurons , were well-stained by this technique, showing bipolar cell bodies with sensory dendrites extending toward the outer surface of the worm. the morphology of putative ade and pde neurons in every species was very similar to that known from c. elegans, with minor differences in some species . for example, the putative pde homolog in pristionchus pacificus had a longer dendrite that extended anteriorly rather than dorsally.

the heads in 5htp-treated worms were more difficult to assess, especially in species that have numerous serotonergic neurons in the same region of the head as putative cep neurons . nevertheless, we were frequently able to see  <dig> additional somata in the same location of fif positive cells in the head. we also often saw  <dig> additional processes extending anteriorly into the 'nose' of the worms, consistent with the morphology known for c. elegans cep neurons. overall, the patterns of dopaminergic neurons in all the species we examined were nearly identical, suggesting strong conservation of this portion of the nervous system.

serotonergic neurons in the head differ dramatically across nematode species
serotonin has been implicated in the control of the esr in c. elegans. animals with mutations in genes required for serotonin biosynthesis, such as bas- <dig>  cat- <dig> and tph- <dig>  move faster than wild-type animals when starved and placed on bacteria  <cit> . serotonin probably controls the esr via a chloride-selective ion channel serotonin receptor ; mutants in the mod- <dig> gene are defective in the esr <cit> . serotonin-immunoreactive  head neurons found in the c. elegans hermaphrodite have been previously characterized. the first neurons identified were the nsms or "neurosecretory motor neurons"  <cit> , a bilaterally symmetric pair of neurons with somata located within the anterior bulb of the pharynx and bifurcating processes that extend into the pharyngeal isthmus  <cit> ; recently the structure of the nsm has been revised to include an additional fine neurite extending posteriorly into the terminal bulb of the pharynx  <cit> . ventral and lateral to the isthmus of the pharynx are the adfs, a bilaterally symmetric pair of serotonin-ir sensory neurons . adf neurons extend processes to the nerve ring and amphid  <cit> . rih is an unpaired serotonin-ir interneuron found ventral to the isthmus of the pharynx  that extends processes to the nerve ring and other pharyngeal ganglia  <cit> . finally, the aims are a bilaterally symmetric pair of interneurons with somata located near the midline just ventral to the posterior bulb of the pharynx . aim interneurons extend a single process to the nerve ring . the adf, rih and aim processes are rarely detected by immunohistochemistry in c. elegans. it is unclear, however, which serotonin-ir head neurons mediate the esr. ablation of the nsms, the most reliably and intensely staining serotonin-ir head neurons, only modestly affects the esr, and the additional ablation of other serotonin-ir head neurons with the nsms does not further affect the locomotion rate  <cit> . in serotonin-deficient tph- <dig> mutants, expression of wild type tph- <dig> in nsms partially restores the esr; expression in adf neurons does not  <cit> .

to explore which neurons might be associated with the esr, we examined serotonin immunoreactivity in the heads of the seven nematode species used in our behavioral studies. neurons required for the esr may be conserved in species that also exhibit the behavior. we observed clearly identifiable nsms with cell bodies located ventrally in the anterior bulb of the pharynx in all species studied . the nsms had bifurcating neurites projecting through the isthmus just to the posterior bulb of the pharynx, as observed in c. elegans. all the species tested in our analysis showed strong serotonin immunoreactivity in putative nsm neurons.  we also examined other serotonin-ir head neurons compared to those found in c. elegans. we observed adf-like neurons in all species except r. axei . these neurons were categorized as adf-like based on the position of their somata and occasionally a visible projection that is likely part of the amphid . again, there was no correlation between the presence of an adf-like neuron and the esr. some species contained possible aim and rih homologs, however, such identification would be highly tentative based on soma position alone in the absence of stained projections. other serotonin-ir neurons that can be identified as likely homologs across species include a faintly staining bilaterally symmetric pair located within the pharynx just anterior to the nsms, seen in oscheius myriophila, pristionchus pacificus, and panagrellus redivivus . these cells are not seen in c. elegans, and, as before, there was no correlation between the presence of these neurons and the esr.

the number of serotonin-ir head neurons varied dramatically in the species examined. o. myriophila had up to thirteen serotonin-ir head neurons , which was the most observed; caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> and r. axei had the fewest, with four each . it is possible, however, that the cells in caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> match those of c. elegans and c. briggsae. we noted that the axons of the nsms in caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> have numerous brightly staining varicosities, which could be obscuring a faint second pair of serotonin-ir neurons. caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> also rarely appear to have a faint unpaired cell. among all the species, the number of serotonin-ir neurons in the head does not appear to correlate with the presence of the esr. caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> and r. axei both have only four serotonin-ir head neurons  but caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> exhibited an esr, and r. axei did not. the staining patterns of pristionchus pacificus and panagrellus redivivus appear very similar to that of c. elegans, with the addition of the faintly staining pair of neurons anterior to the nsms ; c. elegans exhibits an esr whereas pristionchus pacificus and panagrellus redivivus does not. finally, there was no correlation between the number of serotonin-ir head neurons and the overall rate of locomotion under well-fed or starved conditions. overall, we conclude that the pattern of serotonin-ir neurons in the species studied cannot be used as an indicator of locomotory behavior.

the enhanced slowing response is blocked by a serotonin antagonist in some, but not all species
we used a serotonin antagonist , to test whether enhanced slowing is mediated by serotonin in the species in which we observed the response. although in mammals mianserin is classically an antagonist of 5-ht <dig> serotonin receptors  <cit> , in c. elegans it blocks both 5-ht2-like receptors  <cit>  and the mod- <dig> 5-ht receptor shown to mediate the esr  <cit> . animals were preincubated for  <dig> minutes on seeded or unseeded agar plates supplemented with  <dig> μm mianserin prior to locomotion assays. as previously reported  <cit> , we also found that mianserin treatment decreased or eliminated the esr in c. elegans . similarly, in our experiments, mianserin did not significantly affect locomotion either on or off bacteria . we saw the same results with mianserin in o. myriophila - mianserin eliminated the esr , well-fed worms on bacteria vs. food-deprived worms on bacteria, both mianserin-treated, p >  <dig> ). results with c. briggsae were less clear: although treatment with mianserin eliminated a significant difference between well-fed worms on bacteria vs. food-deprived worms on bacteria , there was also no significant difference between food-deprived worms on bacteria untreated vs. treated with mianserin . for both o. myriophila and c. briggsae, mianserin affected neither baseline locomotion in the absence of bacteria , nor the bsr in the presence of bacteria .

in contrast, mianserin had a very different effect in caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> . mianserin significantly reduced the locomotory rate both off and on bacteria , but had no effect on the locomotion of food-deprived worms on bacteria . in the presence of mianserin, an esr is also still apparent . one possibility is that mianserin in c. sp.  <dig> is acting more like a 5ht agonist than an antagonist, reducing the rate of locomotion overall; this could make it more difficult to detect an effect on the esr. clearly the effect of mianserin is altered in caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> relative to the other species tested, and the expression patterns or specificity of 5ht receptors in caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> seems likely to be quite different. whatever the change, the same results were obtained in locomotory assays of caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> preincubated in  <dig> μm methiothepin mesylate ; methiothepin is a serotonin antagonist that in c. elegans has broader specificity and also inhibits mod- <dig>  <cit> . these preliminary pharmacology experiments are suggestive of a similar function of serotonin in mediating the esr in c. briggsae and o. myriophila, although they must be viewed with caution given our currently limited information about drug responses and specificity in these other species.

discussion
basal and enhanced slowing responses in the eurhabditids vs. outgroups
most species we tested in the eurhabditis clade exhibited both basal and enhanced slowing behaviors, with the exception of rhabditella axei. the nematode species outside of the eurhabditis clade, pristionchus pacificus and panagrellus redivivus, exhibited neither a basal nor enhanced slowing response under the conditions we tested . we must consider possible reasons for the absence of these behaviors in some species, and in the strains we tested. slowing presumably increases the likelihood of the worms remaining in a location with a desirable food source. worms that do not slow may not find e. coli a desirable food, despite each of these laboratory wild type strains having been raised for many generations on e. coli as food. it is unlikely that any of these worms normally feed on e. coli in the wild, so it is possible that another bacterium would elicit a bsr. . our test of other bacteria with c. elegans, pristionchus and panagrellus  suggests there can be considerable variability in responses to different bacteria. no bacterial strain tested elicited a bsr in pristionchus and panagrellus - both tended to increase their locomotory rate in bacteria. c. elegans also failed to slow on the unfamiliar non-e. coli strains presented - there was no difference in rate on two pathogenic bacteria , and worms sped up on what should be an adequate food source . it is possible that responses would be different if worms were accustomed to the bacteria. c. elegans is known to alter its chemotaxis behavior following exposure to pathogenic bacteria  <cit> .

we should note that a purely mechanosensory effect of bacteria on modulating locomotion in well-fed worms - the model proposed by sawin and colleages  <cit>  - is called into question by our observations of locomotory rates on various bacteria in c. elegans. although both e. coli strains elicited slowing, the other bacterial species either had no effect, or caused worms to speed up. all these bacteria are of similar size and shape, and it is difficult to imagine that their mechanical properties are more different from e. coli than similar-sized sephadex beads . therefore it seems likely that bacteria elicit more than just a mechanosensory effect, even in well-fed worms. perhaps in c. elegans and other species, chemosensation can override mechanosensory input to prevent slowing in less desirable or unfamiliar food sources.

for the enhanced slowing response, we must ask, how long a period of food-deprivation is sufficient to 'motivate' worms to slow in food? perhaps we would see a bsr and esr in the presence of a desirable edible microbe, and an esr given an adequate period of starvation. what about the normal ecology of the species examined? the laboratory environment may not sufficiently mimic the natural ecology of some species to induce slowing behaviors. in general, the ecology of free-living nematodes and how their natural history influences their behavior is poorly understood . other environmental conditions that are known to strongly affect behavior include oxygen concentration; thick bacterial lawns can have significantly lower levels of oxygen  <cit> . the use of very thin lawns in our experiments should reduce the possibility of such a separate influence of bacteria on behavior. but a different oxygen concentration environment, for example, might reveal a bsr and esr in the other species. some or all of these worms likely prefer lower oxygen levels; c. elegans seems to prefer ~5-12% o <dig>  <cit> .

our studies suggest that particular forms of bsr and esr are present in the species in question, and are missing in the others. therefore, the available molecular phylogeny  <cit>  can suggest that the bsr and esr we observed may have evolved in the eurhabditis clade and were perhaps lost in r. axei . perhaps some aspect of behavioral and/or trophic ecology of r. axei is different from the other eurhaditids - despite r. axei having been isolated from compost like many of the other species. worm species lacking a bsr or esr might have evolved alternate behaviors, such as increased pharyngeal pumping, that optimize foraging without slowing locomotion. we must also consider whether laboratory strains may have lost behaviors that are found in the wild, due to genetic drift and selection in laboratory culture. while considering such a possibility we note that the c. elegans laboratory wildtype strain n <dig> - which has the bsr and esr - has been raised in the laboratory much longer than any of the other strains we tested, being isolated from the wild in  <dig>  <cit> .

it is interesting to note that distinct, non-overlapping circuits mediate the bsr and esr in c. elegans. this is seen most strikingly in c. elegans mutants lacking dopamine: although there is a complete loss of the bsr, after food-deprivation, the esr is undiminished  <cit> . therefore, under conditions evoking an esr, there is no contribution in slowing by a bsr. a plausible explanation for this observation is that the separation in the pathways mediating basal slowing versus enhanced slowing behaviors might have evolved at different times. given such a justification, however, it is interesting to note that among the species we examined, either both responses are seen or neither is seen.

evolution of biogenic amine neurons mediating slowing responses in rhabditids
the basal slowing response in c. elegans, presumably present to slow worms in food to increase feeding, is triggered by the mechanical sensation of bacteria by sensory neurons that release dopamine. these four bilaterally paired ciliated neurons appear to be highly conserved in nematodes <cit> . cephalic sensilla were likely present in the nematode stem species, deirids in the stem species of secernentea and plectida; postdeirids perhaps only in the stem species of secernentea , which includes all the species we examined. expression of dopamine in likely homologs may also be highly conserved. trichinella spiralis, traditionally considered a 'basal' nematode, has four catecholamine-positive cells with neurites in the cephalic sensilla  <cit> . the distantly-related plant parasitic nematode xiphinema americanum, also has four fif-positive cephalic sensilla neurons and  <dig> possible deirid neurons in locations very similar to those described here  <cit> . a similar pattern of dopamine-containing neurons to what we report here, but via dopamine immunoreactivity, has also previously been described for panagrellus redivivus  <cit> .

in our study, the presumptive cep, ade and pde homologs all appear to contain dopamine as they do in c. elegans . the positions of fif-positive somata in the head and body were very similar in all worms, and the morphology of processes seen by 5htp-induced serotonin immunoreactivity was also mostly like that seen in c. elegans da neurons. the most parsimonious explanation is that these are all homologous neurons. the alternative explanation - that different, non-homologous neurons express dopamine in some of the species we examined - requires two events: loss of expression in one cell type, and new expression in another.

it seems likely that the mechanosensory function of cephalic and deirid sensilla neurons is also conserved, despite the lack of conservation of the bsr in all the species we examined. as suggested above, perhaps the type of microbe matters: the mechanical properties of some bacteria  could be insufficient to activate the cells appropriately in some species. or, the neural circuitry could be different - either by altered connections, or distribution and number of receptors - so that the role of dopamine is changed. in c. elegans, dopamine actually plays a complex  role in regulating the bsr: whereas knockout of the dop- <dig> dopamine receptor causes loss of the bsr, in a double knockout mutant for both dop- <dig> and dop- <dig> dopamine receptors, the bsr is partially restored  <cit> . this indicates that dopamine also inhibits the bsr , and that a balance of these antagonistic influences likely fine-tunes the locomotory rate. therefore, it is easy to imagine the system being biased toward a different effect of dopamine release. such a shift in the balance of positive and negative influences of dopamine could underlie the increased locomotion of pristionchus on bacteria. in addition, other environmental conditions or the behavioral state of the worm that affects dopamine or its receptors could mean that a bsr will not be seen under the conditions we tested.

the role of serotonin and specific serotonergic neurons in experience-dependent modulation of locomotion in c. elegans is less clear-cut than the role of dopamine. loss of serotonin causes partial loss of the esr, and ablation of the nsms only slightly reduces the esr. ablation of many other serotonergic neurons along with nsms does not reduce the esr more than nsm ablation alone  <cit> . the clearest effect of serotonin in the esr is demonstrated by the role of the inhibitory mod- <dig> serotonin receptor  <cit> . it is likely that both serotonin and the neurons that use serotonin have both positive and negative effects on regulation of locomotion, similar to what is seen with dopamine. serotonin has been demonstrated to both promote and inhibit egg laying in c. elegans  <cit> . it is possible that the esr in c. elegans is primarily triggered by serotonin  released from the nsm. as with our examination of bsr and dopaminergic neurons, the presence of a given neuron in other species does not correlate with the presence of the behavior. nsms are clearly recognizable, and highly conserved among these nematodes . it is certainly possible that the serotonergic nsms are required, but not sufficient, for generating an esr in the species in which we observed it. other neurons are less well conserved, and difficult to identify definitively as homologous neurons. although likely adf homologs are found in many of the species in question, their presence does not correlate with the esr, and evidence in c. elegans suggests they do not play a role in the esr  <cit> .

our experiments with the serotonin antagonist mianserin suggest that the esr, like in c. elegans, is serotonin-dependent in oschieus myriophila, although this is less clear in c. briggsae. it should be noted, however, that we do not know the specificity of this antagonist with all the biogenic amine receptors in c. elegans, let alone in the other species. furthermore, more recent experiments have shown that mianserin can also affect identified tyramine receptors in c. elegans  <cit> , although there is no evidence of tyramine or octopamine involvement in slowing behaviors  <cit> . the role of serotonin in regulating locomotion may have changed in caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> - the serotonin antagonists mianserin and methiothepin depress the rate of locomotion with or without bacteria, and do not appear to block the esr. if these agents still work as antagonists , the balance has shifted in caenorhabditis sp.  <dig> wherein serotonin's normal predominant role may be to increase rather than inhibit locomotion. we may also conclude that evolutionary changes in behavior are less likely to be caused by obvious, gross changes in neurotransmitter expression of neurons, but by more subtle changes in neural circuitry or changes in gene expression in the different species. it has been shown that in certain conserved behaviors, the sensory architecture mediating these behaviors shows marked flexibility during nematode evolution  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
therefore, in conclusion the changes we observe in our modulated locomotion studies suggest that some of these changes could occur at the level of the neural circuitry mediating these behaviors. further understanding of the neural circuitry and the signaling pathways mediating these behaviors could shed light onto how these behaviors evolved.

