BACKGROUND
each year millions of tuberculosis patients perish, and fully one-third of the world’s population is infected with the causative agent of this disease, m. tuberculosis <cit> . m. tuberculosis h37rv is one of first fully sequenced m. tuberculosis strains  <cit> . with the increasingly intensive research focused on this pathogen around the world, m. tuberculosis h37rv protein-protein interaction  data has become an important source of protein function and relationship information for relevant studies in microbiology, molecular biology, computational biology and medicine. however, m. tuberculosis h37rv ppi data is far from complete and accurate. hitherto predicted m. tuberculosis h37rv ppis in the string database   <cit>  have seen the most frequent used  <cit>  because large-scale experimental ppi datasets have not been available until recently. the first large-scale proteome-wide ppi dataset of h37rv was produced in  <dig> using a high-throughput bacterial two-hybrid  approach  <cit> ; it comprises  <dig>  ppis covering  <dig>  proteins. no doubt in the foreseeable future, increasingly more studies on m. tuberculosis will be based on both of these datasets.

there is an extremely low overlap of just  <dig> protein-protein interactions shared between the  <dig>  h37rv ppis in the b2h dataset and the  <dig>  predicted h37rv ppis in string. it is the objective of this work to investigate the cause of this unexpectedly low overlap. we hypothesize that this low overlap between the two datasets may be due to  the b2h dataset is poor in quality,  the string dataset is poor in quality, and/or  the string dataset does not correspond to direct physical protein-protein interactions.

in order to test the quality of these two m. tuberculosis h37rv ppi datasets, we evaluate them based on correlated gene expression profiles, coherent informative go term annotations, and conservation in other organisms. two proteins that interact are expected to be expressed at the same time and space; thus their underlying genes are likely to exhibit correlated expression profiles. two proteins interact to effect a biological process or molecular function; thus they are expected to be annotated to some go terms in common or go terms that are closely related. many protein-protein interactions are expected to be conserved across several organisms that have common ancestry; thus real protein interactions are likely to coincide with interologs from such organisms.

these assessments indicate that h37rv b2h ppis agree less well with correlated gene expression profiles, coherent informative go term annotations, and conservation in other organisms than h37rv string ppis  . this suggests that ppis in the h37rv b2h dataset may contain a high level of noise .

s. aureus is a bacterial pathogen with available high-throughput experimental physical ppi data; and it is close to m. tuberculosis. thus interologs conserved in s. aureus should be very likely conserved in m. tuberculosis. however, h37rv predicted physical interologs from intact show quite low similarity with the h37rv b2h ppi dataset; and this similarity level is lower than that between the s. aureus mrsa <dig> predicted physical interologs from intact and s. aureus mrsa <dig> pull-down ppis. this suggests the h37rv b2h dataset may also be missing many real ppis .

to further confirm the suspected low quality of the h37rv b2h ppi dataset, we compare this m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h dataset with representative two-hybrid ppi datasets in other species   <cit> . these comparative analyses demonstrate that the quality of the m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi dataset is poorer than other two-hybrid ppi datasets.

as mentioned earlier, the h37rv string ppi dataset  , comprising entirely of ppis predicted using a variety of methods, shows good agreement with correlated gene expression profiles, coherent informative go term annotations, and conservation in other organisms. however, protein pairs that are functionally linked are also expected to agree well with correlated gene expression profiles, coherent informative go term annotations, and conservation in other organisms, even though many functionally-linked protein pairs do not have direct physical interactions. in order to test whether the predicted ppis in string correspond to direct physical protein-protein interactions, we should analyze the similarity between these predicted ppis with several distinct types of protein pairs such as experimental ppis obtained from two-hybrid assays, protein pairs that belong to the same protein complexes, and protein pairs that catalyze adjacent steps in enzymatic pathways. as these types of additional information are not available for m. tuberculosis, we turn to the model organism s. cerevisiae where more comprehensive information is available. we extract from string an unbiased representative s. cerevisiae ppi subset  that are predicted using similar methods as the h37rv string ppi dataset. for the three different types of protein pairs, we use the following gold standard:  the s. cerevisiae two-hybrid ppi dataset from yu et al  <cit> ,  all protein pairs found in the same s. cerevisiae protein complexes from wodak lab  <cit> , and  protein/gene pairs that catalyze/form successive reaction steps in biological pathways from kegg  <cit> , wikipathways  <cit>  and biocyc  <cit> .

this analysis indicates that the predicted s. cerevisiae string ppis show higher similarities with protein pairs in the same protein complexes and protein/gene pairs that catalyze/form adjacent reaction steps in biological pathways than with ppis reported in two-hybrid assays. therefore, the predicted s. cerevisiae string ppis are mostly not direct physical protein-protein interactions. as the h37rv string ppis are predicted using similar methods, in turn, they are also unlikely to correspond to direct physical interactions. nonetheless, their relatively good agreement with correlated gene expression profiles, coherent informative go term annotations, and conservation in other organisms suggest that the h37rv string ppis  are proteins that are functionally linked.

this work thus provides an important guidance to the researchers who might base their works on the two m. tuberculosis h37rv ppi datasets. the details of our analyses are presented in the sections below.

RESULTS
this section can be divided into four parts:  discover the low similarity between the two main h37rv ppi datasets.  evaluate the quality of the two h37rv ppi datasets in the same organism.  assess the quality of the h37rv b2h ppi dataset across organisms.  analyse characteristics of the string ppis in m. tuberculosis and s. cerevisiae.

lack of agreement between the two m. tuberculosis h37rv ppi datasets
the h37rv b2h ppi dataset is used as benchmark and different subsets of h37rv string ppis are tested against it. we consider all h37rv string ppis as well as string h37rv ppis based on specific methods  used for predicting them. for each subset, in figure  <dig>  we show the jaccard coefficient, precision, and recall of each predicted subset at string score ≥  <dig>  according to figure  <dig>  string score threshold at around  <dig> generally maximizes the overlap between two-hybrid ppis and string predicted ppis in m. tuberculosis h37rv. it is clear from figure  <dig> that the string ppis predicted by various methods all have extremely low precision, recall, and overlap with the h37rv b2h ppi dataset. below are some representative statistics:

summary of various subsets of h37rv ppis in string and their sources.

overlapping ppis between the two datasets:  <dig> 

string ppis precision:  <dig>  recall:  <dig> .

string ppis  precision:  <dig>  recall:  <dig> .

the extremely low agreement between the h37rv ppis in the string and b2h ppi datasets is rather unexpected. we hypothesize that it may be a result of one or more of the following situations. first, it may be that the h37rv b2h ppi dataset contains an unusually high level of noise. second, it may be that the h37rv string ppi dataset and subsets thereof contain an unusually high level of noise. third, it may be that the predicted ppis in string are not direct physical interactions; rather, they may primarily be other types of functional associations such as protein pairs in the same protein complexes and enzyme pairs catalyzing successive reaction steps.

overlap ppi number ratios at various string score thresholds
the results above reveal the surprisingly low coverage between the two h37rv ppi datasets. however, as shown in figure  <dig>  at string score ≥ <dig>  there is a higher level of overlap between the two datasets. this increase in overlap between two-hybrid ppi dataset and string predicted functional associations dataset at high scores is also observed in c. jejuni <cit> , synechocystis  <cit>  and s. cerevisiae <cit> . this suggests that string ppis with high score potentially has higher quality than string ppis with a lower score. nevertheless, the overlap between these two-hybrid ppi datasets and their respective string predicted functional association datasets is no more than 8% at any score interval. thus, even at a high string score threshold, there is no clear agreement between two-hybrid ppis and string predicted functional association datasets. assuming that not all of these two-hybrid ppi datasets are of low quality, this lack of clear agreement strongly suggests that string predicted ppis are unlikely to correspond mainly to direct physical interactions.

analysis of ppi dataset using ppi functional intensity matrix
we next use ppi functional intensity matrix to visualize the functional relationship between the two interacting proteins in ppis. figure  <dig> shows that the h37rv string ppi dataset  has strong intensity at the diagonal of its ppi functional intensity matrix. this means a substantial portion of ppis in this dataset have both partners in the same function category. in contrast, both the h37rv b2h ppi dataset and the h37rv string ppi dataset  exhibit weak intensity at the diagonal of its matrix. moreover, both the h37rv b2h ppi dataset and the h37rv string ppi dataset  have substantial amounts of ppis involving proteins that are functionally unclear or uninformative.

assessment of ppi datasets using informative go terms
the functional intensity matrix visualisation in figure  <dig> only provides broad perspectives on the functional distribution of ppi datasets. it is not sufficient for gauging the quality of the datasets. two interacting proteins are more likely to be localized in the same cellular component and/or having a common function role than not  <cit> . so we calculate the percentage of ppis in a ppi dataset having coherent informative go terms—i.e., the rate of interacting protein pairs with common function roles  and cellular localization  in the ppi dataset—to evaluate the quality of the ppi dataset.

the results of m. tuberculosis h37rv go term annotation and informative go term identification are summarized in table  <dig>  the percentage of ppis having coherent informative go terms is computed for each of the datasets in figure  <dig>  the datasets include subsets of string derived from specific source channels in string. note that some source channels may introduce go-related information into string. in particular, the “database” and “database transfer” channels may collect ppis derived from protein complexes in the gene ontology  database. thus, to avoid circularity in our results here and elsewhere, we mainly use statistics from an unbiased subset “predicted functional associations dataset” of string obtained by excluding the ppis from source channels that may introduce confounding factors. the “predicted functional associations dataset” consists of string ppis that are generated only from the following prediction approaches: gene neighborhood, transferred neighborhood, gene fusion, and co-occurrence, transferred co-expression, text mining, and transferred text mining. among the three categories of go terms, the datasets generally show a high percentage of coherence with respect to informative cc go terms. however, this observation should be dismissed because there are only three distinct informative cc go terms, which is an order of magnitude less than informative mf and bp go terms; see table  <dig>  the random ppi dataset has the lowest percentage of ppis with coherent informative go terms in all the tested ppi datasets, which makes sense. but the h37rv b2h ppi dataset has the second lowest percentage of ppis with coherent informative go terms and is very close to the random ppi dataset. this indicates that the m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi dataset has the lowest quality among all the ppi datasets been evaluated. the h37rv predicted functional association dataset  also has a low percentage of ppis with coherent informative go terms and is thus of low quality. however, most ppi datasets from string  show a much higher percentage of ppis having coherent informative go terms than the h37rv b2h ppi dataset, suggesting that a higher percentage of ppis in these datasets may have better reliability than those of the b2h ppi dataset and of the string ppi dataset as a whole.

this table summarizes the result of m. tuberculosis h37rv go term annotation and informative go term identification.

analysis of ppi datasets using gene expression profile correlation
two proteins that interact are more likely to be correlated in the expression of their underlying genes than not  <cit> . in fact, co-expression is one of the prediction methods in string  <cit> . however, table  <dig> shows no string ppi predicted from co-expression in m. tuberculosis h37rv. given that m. tuberculosis h37rv gene expression data is readily available in public repositories , this lack of h37rv ppis predicted using this information is an unexpected limitation of string. at the same time, this absence makes using correlation of gene expression profiles for assessing the quality of the h37rv b2h and string ppi datasets unbiased. the results in figure  <dig> clearly show that the h37rv string ppi dataset  has a much larger proportion of ppis that exhibit correlation in the expression profiles of their underlying genes than the h37rv b2h ppi dataset and the whole h37rv string ppi dataset. in fact, a mere  <dig> ppis in the h37rv b2h ppi dataset have significant correlated gene expression profiles . these  <dig> ppis are likely to be more reliable than most of the other ppis in the h37rv b2h dataset.

ppi datasets assessment using predicted interologs from string experimental ppis
as ppis are often conserved by related organisms, homology transfer is an often-used technique to predict ppis—the so-called interologs. on the one hand, a higher level of agreement that a ppi dataset has with interologs gives us confidence that the ppis are more reliable—i.e., fewer false positives—as they are conserved in other organisms. on the other hand, a lower level of agreement signals that ppis conserved in related organisms are potentially missing—i.e., more false negatives—in the ppi dataset.

we use different homology transfer methods to build a set of predicted interologs in the target organism m. tuberculosis h37rv from other  organisms that have experimental ppis in string. we then compare this set of interologs to both the h37rv string predicted functional associations dataset  and h37rv b2h ppi dataset. we use this subset of string ppis  to avoid possible confounding effects because the full set of h37rv string ppis contains some ppis that actually originate from interologs predicted from experimental ppis.

in order to find better source ppis for predicting interologs, a more reliable subset of the experimental ppis in string has been chosen in this experiment. this subset consists of the experimental ppis in string that also have string prediction supports.

predicted interologs from string experimental ppis and a summary of jaccard coefficient, precision and recall between the interologs datasets and two benchmarks.

predicted interologs from string experimental ppis  and a summary of jaccard coefficient, precision and recall between the interologs datasets and two benchmarks.

ppi datasets assessment using predicted interologs from intact prokaryotic physical interactions
the results discussed above are already persuasive but not precise enough to make sufficient judgment. in particular, the experimental ppis in string are a mixture of both experimental physical interactions and experimental functional associations . this may introduce some bias towards the larger agreement observed with the string predicted functional associations dataset. furthermore, some source experimental ppis in the dataset are not from organisms close to m. tuberculosis. to control for these potential confounding factors, we conduct another set of experiments using interologs predicted from the following two sources that—in theory—are closer to the characteristics of h37rv b2h ppis. the first source is the latest pull-down ppi dataset in s. aureus mrsa <dig>  <cit> . this dataset has just been released and is not yet included in the current string database . the second source comprises physical interactions of eight bacteria  in the intact database  <cit> . in particular, we have chosen rickettsia sibirica  <dig>  escherichia coli k <dig>  campylobacter jejuni, treponema pallidum, synechocystis sp. pcc  <dig>  mycoplasma pneumonia, myxococcus xanthus dk  <dig>  and streptococcus pneumoniae. we group the physical interactions of these eight bacteria from intact  <cit>  into the “selected intact prokaryotic physical interactions dataset”.

we transfer interologs from the “selected intact prokaryotic physical interactions dataset” to m. tuberculosis h37rv  and to s. aureus mrsa <dig> . we also transfer interologs from the s. aureus mrsa <dig> high-throughput pull-down ppi dataset to m. tuberculosis h37rv . all the homolog identifications of this experiment use the condition pide > <dig>  coverage > <dig> , e-value< 1*e- <dig> 

the comparative analyses results are given in table  <dig>  the results clearly demonstrate that the h37rv physical interologs dataset is much more similar to the h37rv pull-down interologs dataset than to the h37rv b2h ppi dataset. moreover, the similarity between s. aureus mrsa <dig> physical interologs dataset and pull-down ppi dataset is also much higher than that between h37rv physical interologs dataset and h37rv b2h ppi dataset. these results further strengthen the conclusion that the h37rv b2h ppi dataset has poor quality.

summary of the comparison results between physical interactions and predicted interologs datasets. “h37rv physical interologs dataset” consists of interologs transferred from “selected intact prokaryotic physical interactions dataset” to m. tuberculosis h37rv; “mrsa <dig> physical interologs dataset” consists of interologs transferred from “selected intact prokaryotic physical interactions dataset” to s. aureus mrsa252; “h37rv pull-down interologs dataset” consists of interologs transferred from “s. aureus mrsa <dig> high-throughput pull-down ppi dataset” to m. tuberculosis h37rv.

quality evaluation of two-hybrid ppi datasets from several organisms
in the discussions above, we have concluded that the quality of the m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi dataset is low in quality. however, it is generally believed that two-hybrid ppi datasets do not have high reliability because of their high false positives and false negative rates. it is thus of interest to determine whether this h37rv b2h ppi dataset is even worse than other two-hybrid ppi datasets in terms of quality. so we compare the m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi dataset to several representative two-hybrid ppi datasets in other organisms—viz., c. jejuni, synechocystis and s. cerevisiae <cit> —by calculating their percentage of ppis having coherent informative go terms. the results are shown in figure  <dig>  as these organisms have a large difference in the number of informative go terms and in the distribution of go term annotations to their proteins, we also calculate the ratio of the percentage of coherently annotated ppis in the dataset of an organism to that of appropriately generated random ppi datasets. the results are shown in table  <dig>  in particular, the ratios for m. tuberculosis, c. jejuni, synechocystis and s. cerevisiae are respectively  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> . these results sufficiently demonstrate that, compared to other representative two-hybrid ppi datasets, the m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi dataset has distinctly lower percentage of coherently annotated ppis.

we have also computed for each two-hybrid ppi dataset its similarity to the corresponding predicted functional associations dataset from string; see figure  <dig>  these results indicate the h37rv b2h ppi dataset also has the lowest similarity to the corresponding string predicted functional association dataset.

the table is a summary of the percentage of ppis having coherent informative go terms, number of informative go terms and “info go ratio” in each of the representative two-hybrid ppi datasets in four organisms.

info go ratio = percentage of ppis in two-hybrid ppi dataset having coherent informative go terms / percentage of ppis in random ppi dataset having coherent informative go terms.

analysis of the characteristics of m. tuberculosis h37rv ppis using integrated pathway gene pair relationships
from the results presented earlier, it seems that many h37rv string ppis may not be direct physical interactions. in order to understand what these ppis may better correspond to, we collect pair-wise protein/gene relationships  from several major pathway databases, and compare them with the various ppi datasets considered earlier in this paper. the ecrel dataset comprises enzyme pairs that catalyze successive reaction steps in enzymatic pathways. the pprel dataset comprises more direct protein-protein interactions but it also contains protein pairs in the same complexes. thus, a ppi dataset containing more indirect protein relationships should show high similarity to the ecrel dataset.

the detail explanations of the types of relationships in integrated pathway gene pair relationships are given below.

however, this task is hampered by the sparse information stored in all the current main pathway databases, like kegg  <cit> , wikipathways  <cit>  and biocyc  <cit> . therefore an integration of pathway information from the three main databases is needed to maximize the effectiveness of pathway information for this comparative analysis of ppi datasets.

the number of pathways obtained from the three major pathway databases  <cit> , and the number of pathways after integration are listed in table  <dig>  all together, the m. tuberculosis h37rv integrated pathway gene pair relationships contain  <dig> pathways, comprising  <dig>  gene pairs involving  <dig> proteins.

the table below shows the number of pathways from major pathway databases before and after integration.

in the m. tuberculosis h37rv integrated pathway gene pair relationships, most of the gene pair relationships are ecrel  and pprel , other type of relationships are very few. we calculate the jaccard coefficient, precision, and recall of each of the m. tuberculosis h37rv ppi datasets discussed earlier using ecrel  and pprel  from m. tuberculosis h37rv integrated pathway gene pair relationships as the benchmarks.

results from above experiments show that the m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi dataset shows very low similarity with ecrel dataset, while most of string ppi datasets show good similarity. this provides another explanation for the low similarity between the h37rv b2h and string ppi datasets. namely, the former dataset contains direct physical interactions, as it is to be expected of b2h assays; while the latter string datasets also include substantial amounts of ppis that are indirect protein relationships.

string ppi dataset analysis in s. cerevisiae
the comparative analysis of the various h37rv ppi datasets using integrated pathway gene pair relationships reveals that the h37rv string ppi dataset may contain a lot of indirect protein relationships. the string database has proclaimed itself as a database consisting of “known and predicted protein-protein interactions”  <cit> . in practise, both physical interactions and functional associations, and both predicted and experimental “ppis” are included in this database. therefore, it is important to clearly demonstrate which kind of ppis are contained in string. we return to the most comprehensively investigated model organism—s. cerevisiae —to more precisely analyze the characteristics of ppis in string. as a unified database, the ppis prediction approaches in the string database are consistently used on all the  <dig> organisms included in it. thus the phenomena discovered in m. tuberculosis h37rv should also exist in other organisms like s. cerevisiae, and vice versa. moreover, we have much more information in s. cerevisiae that can be used for conducting a much more precise analysis. if the situation observed earlier that the m. tuberculosis h37rv string ppi dataset contains a lot of indirect ppis is also observe in s. cerevisiae, then it will be a sound confirmation of our earlier conclusion.

we similarly obtain the integrated pathway gene pair relationships  for s. cerevisiae and also separate datasets prepared only from kegg  <cit>  for more precise reference. we further collect all protein pairs  that appear in the same protein complexes using the protein complexes dataset from wodak lab  <cit> . it is obvious that the “s. cerevisiae complex ppi dataset” may contain a lot of indirect ppis, like relationships between two non-directly-binding proteins in protein complexes. a representative s. cerevisiae two-hybrid ppi dataset  <cit>  is also included in this comparative analysis.

to avoid a biased comparison, as the full string ppi dataset may include many ppis from the datasets above, we use the s. cerevisiae predicted functional associations dataset from string database as the testing dataset in this analysis. the overlapping number of ppis, jaccard coefficient, precision and recall are calculated, and the results are given in figure  <dig>  from the results, the s. cerevisiae two-hybrid ppi dataset has the lowest similarity to the s. cerevisiae string predicted functional associations dataset, whereas the complex ppi dataset and ecrel datasets  reveal good similarity to the s. cerevisiae string predicted functional associations dataset. this result is in accordance with the results on m. tuberculosis h37rv, clearly demonstrating that the string database ppis include a substantial amount of ppis that are indirect protein relationships, including protein pairs in the same protein complexes and protein pairs catalyzing successive enzymatic reaction steps.

discussion
reliable m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi datasets
we have shown that the m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi dataset has low quality. in the process, we find four subsets of the b2h ppi dataset that may be more reliable than the rest of this dataset. the first subset consists of ppis where both interaction partners have coherent informative go terms—viz., b2h ppis sharing functional homogeneity or localization coherence. this subset contains  <dig> ppis and is named “b2hsamego dataset”. the second contains overlapping ppis between the h37rv b2h and string ppi datasets, which can be considered as b2h ppis supported by string prediction approaches. this subset consists of  <dig> ppis and is named “b2hstring dataset”. the third subset contains those h37rv b2h ppis that have been verified by different experiments  <cit> . this subset has  <dig> ppis and is named “b2hdiffexp dataset”. the fourth subset contains ppis where both interaction partners have significant correlated gene expression profile . this subset has  <dig> ppis and is named “b2hco-express dataset”. the overlap between any pair of these four subsets is small because the ppis in these four subsets involve very different proteins; see table  <dig>  when restricted to ppis with both interaction partners contained in two subsets being compared, the agreements are considerably high, see also table  <dig>  see additional file  <dig> for these reliable m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi datasets.

the table is a summary of brief comparative analysis of four reliable h37rv b2h ppi subsets.

there are several inherent limitations of ppi data generated by two-hybrid approaches , including ppis that are detected between over-expressed proteins, between fusion proteins, and in a different host . given the data available in this study, we are not able to clearly identify which erroneous b2h ppis are caused by which inherent limitations of the two-hybrid system. we leave this interesting and difficult challenge to a future project.

differences between functional associations and physical interactions
physical interactions correspond to direct protein relationships like two proteins binding to each other. functional associations can be both direct and indirect protein relationships; for example, two enzymes catalyzing successive reaction steps can be regarded as functional associations. this partially explains the differences between the h37rv b2h and string ppi datasets, as we have demonstrated earlier.

based on the approach used in generating the ppis, each of the two major categories can be further divided into two parts, “experimental physical interactions” ; “predicted physical interactions” ; “experimental functional associations” ; “predicted functional associations” . differences among ppi datasets from the four categories are inevitable, and they all have some portion of real ppis and some noise. however, a high noise level often overwhelms the agreement between the datasets from these four categories. real ppis are both functional associations and physical interactions , because if two proteins truly interact with each other in normal environments, the two proteins must have functional relationships. the four subsets of reliable h37rv b2h ppis identified by us only contain a small number of ppis and are not enough to illuminate the whole direct physical interactome in m. tuberculosis h37rv, see additional file  <dig> for the four subsets of reliable h37rv b2h ppis. although we have identified a reliable subset of string ppi dataset  it may contain a substantial amount of ppis that are indirect functional associations. some approaches  <cit>  used for protein complex prediction from ppi data can potentially be used to identify physical interactions from string functional associations. we leave this interesting problem to a future project.

comments on the string database
the h37rv string ppi dataset  has its merits, especially with respect to functional associations as described earlier. however, some obvious limitations of string still need to be overcome in order to maximize its benefits to the community.

firstly, string version  <dig>  does not make the source of individual ppis completely transparent to the public. neither the web interface nor the downloadable “protein.link.detail.v <dig> .txt” file provides a clear indication of a ppi’s exact source, especially for users who lack a license for accessing the “protein.link.full.v <dig> .txt” file. for example, they can only know that a ppi comes from “co-expression” but it can actually either come from “transferred co-expression” in other organisms through homology transfer or from “co-expression” of this organism. when looking at the “protein.link.detail.v <dig> .txt” file, the h37rv string ppi dataset contains  <dig>  ppis from experiments, whereas only  <dig> of which actually come from experiments in h37rv and the rest are from “transferred experiments”. when users have the license to access all the information in this database, they still do not have a clear sense of what type of ppis are included in string. it claimed to consist of “known and predicted protein-protein interactions” on its website  <cit> , though in its publications it emphasizes on “functional associations”  <cit> . actually, both “physical interactions” and “functional associations”, and both “predicted” and “experimental” ppis, are included in this database. it is helpful to collect and combine all the ppis in the string database; but users should be informed of each ppi’s source  and characteristics .

second, each version of the string database release time is quite long, making the string ppi datasets incomplete and often obsolete for many organisms. although some ppi datasets have been published months ago, like the s. aureus mrsa <dig> pull-down ppi dataset  <cit>  and the m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi dataset  <cit> , neither of them has been included in the string database current version  <dig> . the difficulty of keeping the ppi data of every organism updated in this large database  in a timely efficient manner is understandable. we suggest the string database team to divide the organisms included in the database into several tiers—for tier- <dig> organisms, frequent updates should be maintained; for tier- <dig> organisms, maybe less frequent updates are needed; and so on. this differential update process within the same large database should overcome this limitation and maximize the benefits of the string database.

compare the quality of high-throughput ppi datasets indirectly
ideally, we should have used confirmed ppi data as the benchmark in evaluating the quality of the h37rv b2h and string datasets. unfortunately, such confirmed ppi data is not available in a sufficiently large scale for m. tuberculosis h37rv. hence, we have resorted to the rather indirect evidence presented in this paper.

due to inherent limitations of two-hybrid approaches, both b2h- and y2h-generated ppi datasets usually have low quality. it is more appropriate to compare the quality of the m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h ppi dataset with that of other b2h ppi datasets; but such large-scale reference b2h ppi datasets are currently not available in public databases. however, by comparing the quality of the b2h ppi dataset with the quality of other representative two-hybrid ppi datasets, we can still conclude that, besides inherent limitations of two-hybrid approaches, the h37rv b2h ppi dataset has lower quality than other two-hybrid ppi datasets. this suggests that the noise introduced by individual experiments in this h37rv b2h ppi dataset may be higher than other datasets compared.

hopefully, in the near future, more high quality b2h ppi data will be reported and more m. tuberculosis h37rv gold standard ppi data will be confirmed. we will then be in more suitable position to address this concern in a more direct and effective way.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we have observed the strikingly low agreement between m. tuberculosis h37rv b2h and string ppi datasets. we have demonstrated the two main causes of this low level of agreement. the first reason is the low quality of the b2h ppi dataset, which seems to contain a significant amount of false positives as well as false negatives. the same is true of the h37rv string ppi dataset as a whole, though a subset comprising ppis with score ≥  <dig> seems more reliable. the second reason is that the string ppi dataset contains a substantial amount of predicted ppis that are not direct interactions, which seem more likely to correspond to protein pairs that are in the same protein complexes or protein pairs that are catalyzing adjacent reaction steps in enzymatic pathways.

because of the low quality of the h37rv b2h ppi dataset, it should not be used as a gold standard to evaluate the quality of other m. tuberculosis ppi datasets, predicted or otherwise. researchers who need to use this dataset should do so with great caution. yet, as the only available large-scale physical interaction dataset of m. tuberculosis h37rv at the moment, even though it suffers from high noise and low quality, the direct protein physical interaction information in this dataset should not be ignored. we have identified four subsets of this b2h ppi dataset that are more reliable, which can be combined into a single dataset, which can serve as a suitable reference h37rv physical interaction dataset for many applications.

string score is useful for indicating which string ppis have higher quality. we suggest a string score threshold set around  <dig>  nevertheless, the h37rv string ppi dataset  may contain a lot of indirect protein relationships attributable to protein pairs in the same protein complexes or protein pairs forming successive reaction steps in the same biological pathways. therefore, this dataset can be a good source as a functional associations reference, but it may not be the ideal choice for the purpose of studying physical interactions in m. tuberculosis h37rv.

