BACKGROUND
one of the common assertions in expression analysis is that genes sharing a similar pattern of expression are more likely to be involved in the same regulatory processes  <cit> . this proposition, commonly referred to as 'guilt-by-association', has been exploited by a large number of clustering algorithms, grouping genes into a  number of classes, based on the similarity of their expression profiles. while there are still many open problems associated with choosing a particular algorithm, clustering has already proven successful in a multitude of applications, such as the inference of putative functional annotations  <cit> , as well as the extraction of regulatory motifs in the upstream regions of genes  <cit> .

more recently, the data-centric view, i.e. based on measured expression levels alone, has been advanced to integrate additional information, such as existing functional annotations  <cit>  or protein-protein interaction  <cit> . in doing so, the paramount task is to enhance the biological interpretation of the data, e.g. by identifying physiologically relevant categories, based on existing bio-ontologies, associated with a particular grouping of genes.

however, prior to such a step, it is necessary to obtain a better understanding about the specific relationship between the data generated clustering and the information contained in the functional annotation of genes. that is, to what extent does a grouping of genes reflect their functional annotation, as e.g. given in terms of the structured vocabulary provided by the gene ontology  consortium? in this work, we thus investigate the relationship between groupings of genes and their respective functional categories. it will be shown that the information-theoretic concept of mutual information provides a suitable theoretical basis to address this question in a systematic way. importantly, the mutual information holds several favorable properties and i) allows to give a quantitative figure of merit between a clustering result and functional annotations. ii) allows to identify functional trends that characterize a given clustering or grouping of genes, iii) allows to address and incorporate the interdependence of functional annotation terms, and iv) can be straightforwardly applied to the whole set of clusters, or likewise, only to a single individual cluster of group or genes.

within this framework, we aim to extend the earlier work of gibbons and roth  <cit>  and seek to investigate to what extend individual attributes are sufficient to characterize or summarize a given cluster of genes. this question is also ultimately related to the problem of detecting significantly enriched attributes within a group of genes, well covered in the literature  <cit> . we will demonstrate that in certain situations a simple search for overrepresented attributes fails to uncover the specific functional description of clustering results.

the paper is organized as follows: in the first section, a brief synopsis of the mutual information as a measure of dependency between cluster membership and annotated gene attributes is given. in the second section, we address the capabilities of individual attributes to characterize or summarize a given cluster of genes. in the following section, two major shortcomings of this approach will be pointed out: the interrelatedness of gene attributes  and the failure of individual attributes to adequately describe a given clustering or grouping of genes. to overcome these problems, a heuristic strategy is devised that allows to detect combinatorial combinations of attributes, providing a more specific functional description of clustering results. the results are summarized and discussed in the last section.

RESULTS
the mutual information
following gibbons and roth  <cit> , the mutual information i provides a figure of merit between cluster membership c and known gene attributes a,

i = h + h - h       

where h, h and h denote the entropies of the distributions of c and a and the joint entropy of c and a respectively.

h=−∑iplog⁡p     
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwgibascqggoaakcqwgdbwqcqggpaqkcqgh9aqpcqghsisldaaeqbqaaiabdchawjabcicaoiabdoeadnaabaaaleaacqwgpbqaaeqaaogaeiykakiagiibawmaei4ba8maei4zacmaemicaanaeiikagiaem4qam0aasbaasqaaiabdmgapbqabagccqggpaqkasqaaiabdmgapbqab0gaeyyeiuoakiaaxmaacawljawaaewaceaacqaiyagmaiaawicacaglpaaaaaa@4956@

the mutual information is a general measure of dependency between two  variables  <cit>  and can be interpreted as a 'distance' between the hypothesis of statistical independence and the actual joint probability distribution  <cit> . a more detailed review concerning its mathematical properties and the estimation from finite data was given elsewhere  <cit> . importantly, the mutual information i is zero if and only if the two variables, here the gene attributes a and the cluster membership c, are statistically independent. as will be demonstrated below, this property incloses and extends conventional approaches, such as finding significantly enriched annotations associated with a group of genes.

in the most simplest setting, each gene is uniquely assigned to one particular functional category ai and is grouped into a cluster cj by a given clustering algorithm. in this case the estimation of the mutual information is straightforward: one constructs a contingency table and estimates the respective probabilities from the relative frequencies of occurrence, as schematically visualized in fig.  <dig> 

the mutual information thus provides a systematic quantitative measure of the relationship between cluster membership and given gene attributes  <cit> . in particular, it opens the possibility to judge the quality of a clustering result, not based on internal measures of consistency, such as within cluster distances to inter cluster distances, but based on existing additional information.

however, in our case, the multi-functions of genes, as reflected in current annotation databases, defy the straightforward approach outlined above. in the following, we will make use of the curator-controlled annotation of s. cerevisiae genes, as provided by the gene ontology consortium   <cit> .

the go database is organized in a rooted directed acyclic graph , with three branches corresponding to the three categories 'cellular component', 'molecular function' and 'biological process'. each gene  is annotated by one or multiple go terms along the graph. the hierarchical nature of go implies that genes annotated with a specific node are also annotated with every ancestor of that node. nodes closer to the root of the graph usually correspond to more abstract functional descriptions and cover more genes, while nodes farther away from the root correspond to more detailed functional descriptions. note that the structure of go is not necessarily a tree since each node may have multiple parents and may have multiple paths to the root of the graph  <cit> .

the go database, as downloaded in june  <dig>  already includes more than na >  <dig> nodes within all three branches  <cit> . for further numerical processing, each gene is assigned to a vector consisting of binary attributes a = {a <dig>  a <dig> ..., ana
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwgbbqqdawgaawcbagaemota40aasbaawqaaiabdgeabbqabaaaleqaaaaa@304b@} with ai ∈ { <dig> }, where ai =  <dig> indicates that the gene has been annotated with the go term ai or one of its descendants.

clearly, in such a situation, a straightforward estimation of the mutual information must inevitably fail: we would have to take into account all possible combinations of attributes ai, resulting in a contingency table with up to 2na
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqaiyagmdaahaawcbeqaaiabd6eaonaabaaameaacqwgbbqqaeqaaaaaaaa@3028@ columns, as illustrated in table  <dig>  even though the vast majority of combinations does not occur for the genes under consideration, a direct evaluation of eq. , even for just a few hundreds of different attributes, is beyond all computational and statistical means.
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwgbbqqdawgaawcbagaemota40aasbaawqaaiabdgeabbqabaaaleqaaaaa@304b@}, described by a number ai ∈ [ <dig>  2na
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqaiyagmdaahaawcbeqaaiabd6eaonaabaaameaacqwgbbqqaeqaaaaaaaa@3028@ - 1]. the contingency table to evaluate the mutual information i, taking all possible combinations into account, would thus include up to 2na
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqaiyagmdaahaawcbeqaaiabd6eaonaabaaameaacqwgbbqqaeqaaaaaaaa@3028@ columns.

to overcome this problem, gibbons and roth  <cit>  suggested to approximate the total mutual information as a sum of the mutual information between clusters and each individual attribute.

i≈∑i=1nai     
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwgjbqsdaqadiqaaiabdoeadjabcycasmaadmgabagaemyqae0aasbaasqaaiabigdaxaqabagccqggsaalcqgguaglcqgguaglcqgguaglcqggsaalcqwgbbqqdawgaawcbagaemota40aasbaawqaaiabdgeabbqabaaaleqaaagccaglbbgaayzxaaaacagloagaayzkaagaeyisis7aaabcaeaacqwgjbqscqggoaakcqwgdbwqcqggsaalcqwgbbqqdawgaawcbagaemyaakgabeaakiabcmcapawcbagaemyaakmaeyypa0jaegymaedabagaemota40aasbaawqaaiabdgeabbqabaaaniabgghildgccawljagaaczcamaabmgabagaeg4mamdacagloagaayzkaaaaaa@5241@

with

i = h + h - h       

note that this approximation assumes both, independence and conditional independence between all attributes.

to illustrate this, we make use of a simple example involving just two attributes a <dig> and a <dig>  one has to evaluate

i = h + h - h       

since for statistically independent attributes h = h + h, we only need to consider the last term h. assuming conditional independence h = h, we obtain

h = h + h - h       

thus eq.  indeed reduces to

i = i + i       

given the structure of the go database, as described above, the assumption of statistical independence is, of course, not fulfilled: the attributes are not statistically independent but strongly dependent on each other. in particular, any annotated attribute ai implies that all of its parents are also annotated. this interdependence will be considered in more detail below.

unfortunately, eq.  does likewise not allow to give an upper or lower bound on the true mutual information. it is well established that this approximation does not result in a systematic bias, i.e. in general one may not tell whether the violation of the assumptions under- or overestimates the true mutual information  <cit> .

however, for the moment we accept eq.  as a reasonable approximation of the mutual information. based on this assumption, it was already demonstrated that clustering results and the go annotations indeed possess a mutual information significantly different from zero  <cit> . interestingly, the widely used hierarchical clustering gave results not significantly different from random assignments and was found to be far worse than other common algorithms, such as k-means.

in the following, we will draw upon these results, using the same datasets and preprocessing of the go database as described by gibbons and roth  <cit> . but addressing slightly different questions instead.

the case of individual attributes
given that clustering results and the known functional annotation indeed yield a mutual information significantly different from zero, the question arises how this mutual information is distributed among the individual attributes. are there only few attributes which correspond to and summarize the cluster? or, on the other hand, is the observed overlap tightly embedded within the structure of the go annotations – a combined effect of a multitude of attributes, where neither of them is sufficient to characterize a given cluster on its own?

to evaluate this, we must have a closer look on the distribution of the individual terms contributing to eq. . restricting ourselves to a k-means algorithm , the individual mutual information i between the clustering c and all attributes was estimated.

to assess how related each each attribute is with the clustering, we evaluate randomized assignments of genes to clusters, i.e. each gene is randomly assigned to a cluster, preserving the total number of genes within each cluster. this results in the z-score

s=idata−〈irandom〉σrandom     
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwgtbwucqgh9aqpdawcaaqaaiabdmeajjabcicaoiabdoeadjabcycasiabdgeabjabcmcapmaacaaaleqabagaeeizaqmaeeyyaemaeeidaqnaeeyyaegaaogaeyoei0iaeyykjeuaemysakkaeiikagiaem4qamkaeiilawiaemyqaekaeiykakyaawbaasqabeaacqqgybgccqqghbqycqqgubgbcqqgkbazcqqgvbwbcqqgtbqbaagccqghqms8aeaaiigacqwfdpwcdawgaawcbagaeeocainaeeyyaemaeeoba4maeeizaqmaee4ba8maeeyba0gabeaaaagccawljagaaczcamaabmgabagaegioagdacagloagaayzkaaaaaa@5ad2@

where σrandom denotes the standard deviation of the estimated mutual information for the randomized data. for the z-score to he considered significant, we further require that the number of random assigments is larger that the total number of tested attributes and that tor each attribute all random assigments result in a lower mutual information.

interestingly, the highest scoring attributes do not change substantially when different datasets are considered . this indicates that different experimental conditions, corresponding here to different datasets, do not significantly influence which attributes are selected as the most descriptive for the clusters.

combinatorial combinations of attributes
two essential shortcoming of our analysis have to be pointed out: first of all. fig.  <dig> strongly suggests that the top scoring attributes are largely redundant, i.e. that the individual terms contributing to the aggregated mutual information of eq.  are not independent.

in fact, a gene product annotated with the cellular component 'cytosolic ribosome'  is necessarily also annotated to the cellular component 'ribosome' . while this is a trivial consequence of the tree structure of the database , other relationships between attributes are less straightforward. for example, and even without any computational assistance, gene products annotated to the cellular component 'ribosome'  can mostly be expected to be also annotated to the biological process 'protein biosynthesis' . however, it is worth pointing out that this, in contrast to the former example, is not an inherent consequence of the tree structure of the database, as both nodes appear within distinct, branches of the tree. more systematically, we can assess the redundancy between two selected attributes again by means of the  mutual information i  between two attributes ai arid aj. table  <dig> gives the contingency tables for the five top scoring attributes of fig.  <dig>  as can be seen, the selected attributes are indeed highly interdependent.

this, of course, points to a major drawback of the analysis: the individual attributes contributing dominantly to the sum of eq. , do not represent independent information about a specific grouping of genes or clustering result. rather, by selecting the attributes according to their individual mutual information, we explore areas in which the go annotations are interdependent.

it should be noted that a similar situation occurs in the conventional search for overrepresented attributes within a group or cluster of genes. again, not taking the non-independence of attributes into account will often result in a selection of mostly redundant functional annotation terms. this, of course, affects the interpretation of the results, as these attributes do not actually contribute to a characterization of the given clustering. in the following, after pointing out a second drawback of our analysis, we will thus devise a strategy that incorporates the interdependence of attributes.

detecting combinations of attributes
apart from above described shortcoming, restricting ourselves to the mutual information between a given clustering and single individual attributes, entails yet another problem. while these  attributes can indeed indicate a functional association between the genes gathered in a particular cluster, other, more specific, functional descriptions might be easily missed.

in most cases, it will not only be one attribute that defines or characterizes a group or cluster of genes, but rather a specific combination of attributes. table  <dig> gives an illustrative example of such a situation. here, neither of the attributes share any mutual information with the grouping of the genes into two clusters, nor is any attribute overrepresented within the two groups. however, looking at the combination of both attributes does immediately reveal that these attributes are nonetheless highly descriptive for the given cluster: their combination does uniquely determine to which cluster a particular gene belongs, or, vice versa, which annotation coincides with a particular cluster.

obviously, the tremendous computational demands prevent to conduct an exhaustive go-wide search for all possible combinations of attributes. to still detect relevant combinations for large-scale data, we thus devise a simple heuristic strategy: starting with a seed attribute a <dig>  the one that gives the highest mutual information i, we iteratively look for attributes that result in the largest information gain, i.e. the largest increase in mutual information, when included in the list of attributes. schematically:

initialize: a = a0

search ∀i : i → max ⇒ al

test for significance: i

update: a = 

thus, at each step a new attribute al is included into the vector a of already selected attributes and the mutual information i is calculated without using the approximation of eq. . in this way. attributes which are highly redundant to those already included in a will not be selected. for example, assume that after an attribute a <dig> a second attribute a <dig> is tested. if both are fully redundant, then h = h and h = h. thus, according to eq. , i = h + h - h ≡ h, i.e. there is no gain in information and the attribute will not be included into a.

the iteration stops after a predefined maximal number of steps lmax or when no new attribute leads to a significant increase in mutual information. the latter is tested at each iteration step by comparing the result to randomized counterparts of the attribute to be included. as in the previous section, we require that the number of randomized assignments is larger that the total number of tested attributes and that no randomized assignment yields a mutual information equal or higher than the attribute that is to be included. otherwise, the increase in mutual information is not considered significant and the iteration stops. note that this also avoids statistical problems due to finite size effects  <cit> . if the vector of attributes becomes too large, a reliable estimation of the mutual information is no longer possible. in this case, the resulting values upon inclusion of a new attribute will not significantly deviate from those of randomized attributes.

thus, instead of conducting a comprehensive search for all possible combinations, we consider only those attributes which further contribute to a characterization of a clustering result, given the already selected attributes. in this way, we avoid the inclusion of a large number of redundant attributes. note that this procedure is reminiscent of a decision tree  <cit> , aiming to predict the cluster assignment based on the go annotation.

constructing the associated contingency table of the  <dig> top scoring attributes, analog to table  <dig>  indeed reveals that the pair wise mutual information between the selected attributes is significantly lower. the respective z-scores are given in table  <dig> 

again the results were not specific for the particular dataset. repeating the analysis for all datasets given in table  <dig> resulted in similar attributes. those attributes that were selected among the top  <dig> for all datasets under consideration are indicated in bold in table  <dig> 

this again indicates that the specific experimental condition, under which the dataset was obtained , has no, or only little, influence over the prevailing functional annotations that characterizes the clustering of this respective dataset. this is noteworthy, as in each case different genes were selected for the analysis . moreover, the clustering results itself were sufficiently different, i.e. this mutuality in descriptive annotations is not straightforwardly apparent on the level of clusters itself.

most importantly, the selected attributes indeed provide a functional categorization of the obtained clustering, improving the search for significantly enriched annotations. this is visualized in fig.  <dig>  shown is a graphical representation of the contingency table between the clustering result  and the combined annotations. as can be observed, the combined annotations provide a more specific functional descriptions of the clustering result. for example, using solely the highest scoring attributes of fig.  <dig>  genes included in the clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> are assigned almost uniformly to all selected attributes. however taking only the top five selected attributes of table  <dig> into account, several cluster are dominated by specific combinations of attributes, e.g. for cluster  <dig> genes annotated to 'cytoplasm' , but to none of the other four attributes, are clearly overrepresented.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we have investigated the use of the mutual information as a measure to detect and quantify the interrelation between data generated clusterings and the known functional annotations of genes. starting with the contribution of individual attributes, we found that the mutual information between a given clustering result and the attributes is highly inhomogeneously distributed. few attributes show a remarkable overlap with the clustering, while the vast majority of attributes show no, or only little, overlap with the data-driven clustering. these results were robust with respect to parameters in the clustering algorithm, as well as to different choices of datasets.

one of the primary advantages of the mutual information is that it is not restricted to consider only individual attributes contained the go database. focusing on combinations of attributes that resulted in a maximal mutual information between the  annotations and the clustering, we demonstrated that this approach extends and enhances the more conventional search for overrepresented attributes in a group of genes of interest. in particular, including only those attributes that further contribute to a characterization of the clustering, in addition to the already selected ones, circumvents the problem of redundant attributes. within a group of highly dependent attributes, only the one which results in the largest information gain will be selected.

interestingly, our results indicate that the experimental conditions under which a particular dataset was obtained has no major influence on the top-ranking attributes. for all considered datasets a nearly identical list of highly descriptive attributes was found. also, these attributes mostly referred to rather abstract functional descriptions, such as 'cell growth', 'catalytic activity', or 'protein metabolism'. this, of course, questions the use of clustering results to gain insight into specific phenomena, such as the transcriptional response to a particular experimental perturbation or knockout experiment. rather, one usually observes cluster of genes that are known to be tightly co-regulated, such as protein synthesis genes. only with massive experimental interventions, we must expect the resulting pattern of gene expression to be fundamentally changed and to be directly related to the respective experimental condition.

finally, it should be emphasized that the application of the mutual information holds a vast potential for further improvements of the method. as yet, we have not focused at predicting a putative functional classification of a specitic cluster. rather, the mutual information, as used here, represents an average quantity, quantifying the relationship between functional annotation and clusterings as a whole. in this sense, the validity of clustering results can be judged and compared to existing functional annotations. however, the approach tan be straightforwardly extended to detect the prevailing functional annotations of individual clusters, based on the information contained in the go database.

along similar veins, the mutual information may also be utilized to further improve the annotation of gene products. reversing our approach, unknown functional annotations can be predicted based on the available annotations, as well as on membership in a specific cluster. another advantage of the mutual information in this respect is that, in incorporating additional biological information complementing the go annotations, it is not restricted to categorical data, but can be extended to include continuous data as well. in particular, the additional information to which a clustering or grouping is compared, is not necessarily restricted to functional annotations. table  <dig> may hold any attributes or quantities related to a particular gene or gene product. in this sense, the mutual information constitutes a systematic theoretical basis to investigate the relationship between groups of genes and additional biological information.

authors' contributions
rs provided the conceptual backgroung to the analysis and wrote the manuscript. ph performed all computations, including database preparation and clustering. js participated in in manuscript preparation and supervised the work. all authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.

appendix: database preprocessing and clustering
throughout this work, we have used the same preprocessing of the go database and the gene expression datasets as described in 13: prior to the evaluation of eq. , the go attributes were filtered using the following parameters: i) no attribute should be shared among almost all genes. all attributes held by more than nmax genes are removed. ii) no attribute should be annotated to a single or only a few genes. all attributes that are held by fewer than nmin were removed. iii) redundant attributes should be avoided. to account for this, the normalized pair-wise mutual information  was estimated between all attributes. one of each attributes of a pair that had a  mutual information larger than umax was removed from the analysis. note that this step does not fully eliminate the problem of interdependence between the annotation terms. as can be seen later in fig.  <dig> and table  <dig> the top scoring attributes will still be highly redundant.

the preprocessing removes a large fraction of the attributes. the results were found to be robust with respect to particular choices of . in the following the values nmin =  <dig>  umax =  <dig> , and nmax = max  were used. the clustering of the data was performed using the open source clustering library described in  <cit> . all results were compared with the algorithms implemented in the software packages matlab and r . k-means clustering was chosen in accordance with the results obtained previously in  <cit> . all scripts used in the analysis are provided as additional files .

supplementary material
additional file 1
source code for data evaluation. the zipped archive  contains the source code implementing an algorithm to select the gene ontology attributes that describe a clustering of expression profiles.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we wish to thank j. kurths  for discussions and in particular f. gibbons for supporting information and clarifications concerning his work. r.s. acknowledges financial support by the hwp project  <dig> –  <dig> of the german federal state brandenburg.
