BACKGROUND
piggybac is a class ii transposable element that was originally discovered as the ifp <dig> element from the lepidopteran insect cell line, tn- <dig>  due to its tendency to insertionally inactivate certain baculovirus genes to produce mutants with a distinctive plaque phenotype known as few polyhedra  <cit> . functionally, piggybac encodes a transposase with a precise cut and paste mechanism and a unique preference for ttaa sites  <cit> . thus, it is considered to be the type element of the ttaa-specific transposon family  <cit> . structurally, piggybac is a  <dig>  kb dna molecule with a single  <dig>  kb open reading frame that terminates on both ends with  <dig> bp perfect inverted terminal repeat domains . piggybac also has two additional  <dig> bp subterminal inverted repeats located asymmetrically  <dig> bp from the 5'-trd and  <dig> bp from the 3'-trd  <cit> . sequences similar to the piggybac open reading frame have been identified in all animal species for which extensive genomic sequences are available, including the human. however, most appear to be either incomplete or interrupted and, therefore, probably do not encode functional transposons  <cit> .

the mobility and transposition functions of piggybac have been established and exploited to develop an important binary system for insect germline transformation  <cit> . this system consists of a dna vector, which can be mobilized due to the presence of the piggybac 5'- and 3'-trd sequences, and a helper plasmid, which encodes the transposase. the vector also includes a promoter, which controls transcription of an inserted, heterologous gene of interest, and a whole-body or eye color marker, which can be used to identify transgenic offspring.

the mediterranean fruit fly was the first target organism to be successfully transformed using the piggybac system  <cit>  and it has subsequently been used to transform a wide variety of insects . recently, the piggybac system has been used to transform many other types of organisms ranging from the protist, plasmodium falciparum  <cit>  to the mouse, mus musculus  <cit> . thus, piggybac is widely and increasingly recognized as an important tool for genetic transformation in many different biological systems.

current piggybac vectors are designed to introduce a single heterologous gene of interest into the genome of a target organism, in addition to the marker gene. however, some transgenic approaches require the introduction of multiple heterologous genes of interest into a single target organism. to meet this requirement, we constructed a new set of piggybac vectors designed to simultaneously transfer pairs of heterologous genes placed under the control of dual constitutive or regulated transcriptional elements, which included duplicate promoters in a back-to-back configuration. one advantage of this approach is that it allowed us to couple both promoters to a single enhancer or regulatory domain, which minimized the overall size of the transcriptional control region.

during the process of characterizing the induction of heterologous gene expression in lepidopteran insect cells by these new piggybac vectors, we discovered an unexpected position effect, in which the rightward-oriented heterologous genes were consistently expressed at higher levels than the leftward-oriented ones. further analysis revealed that this was the result of stimulation by a previously unrecognized activator element in the 3'-trd of piggybac. we subsequently duplicated this activating sequence and used it to balance expression of the rightward and leftward heterologous genes in our new vectors. thus, this study yielded not only a substantial set of new piggybac vectors, but also provided new basic information on this important transposable element, both of which will be of general interest to the biomedical research community.

RESULTS
new piggybac vectors for transfer and constitutive or inducible expression of heterologous gene pairs
previous studies have established that the addition of six mammalian genes can effectively humanize the protein n-glycosylation pathway of sf <dig>  a lepidopteran insect cell line . one of our current projects is designed to extend those studies by using these same genes to humanize the protein n-glycosylation pathway in an intact, multicellular lepidopteran insect. the piggybac vector system was an obvious tool to use for this purpose. however, we were concerned about the efficacy of an attempt to use six separate vectors and, realizing that there were no piggybac vectors that could be used to simultaneously transform an insect with multiple genes, we decided to construct a new set of vectors that could be used to transform a target organism with pairs of heterologous genes. we had previously designed and constructed plasmid vectors containing a transcriptional control element consisting of two back-to-back baculovirus immediate early gene  promoters separated by a baculovirus  enhancer  <cit> . in addition, we had inserted pairs of heterologous genes into these vectors and used the resulting constructs to transform lepidopteran insect cell lines independently of piggybac and to isolate derivatives that constitutively expressed both heterologous genes  <cit> . thus, we chose to construct a new set of piggybac vectors in which pairs of heterologous genes could be placed under the control of the dual ie1-hr5-ie <dig> control element. we also considered that producing viable or fertile transgenic insect lines that constitutively express mammalian n-glycan processing genes might not be possible. therefore, we constructed a second new set of piggybac vectors in which pairs of heterologous genes could be placed under the control of a mosaic, tetracycline-inducible control element, which consisted of two back-to-back copies of the minimal human cytomegalovirus immediate early gene promoter  separated by an operator . this transcriptional control element had been shown to provide tetracycline-inducible gene expression in an insect system  <cit> . in addition to these transcriptional elements and heterologous gene pairs, each of these new piggybac vectors also contained one of three different fluorescent protein-encoding genes under the control of an insect eye-specific promoter . a. pcr amplification of the fluorescent eye color markers. b. assembly of intermediate plasmids that include the dual constitutive transcriptional control element, fluorescent eye color markers, and appropriate polyadenylation sites.

an unexpected position effect on heterologous gene expression by the new piggybac vectors
the molecular cloning schemes used in this study initially yielded four sets of piggybac vectors in which six different heterologous genes were placed under the control of the constitutive or inducible regulatory elements described above . six of these vectors had the three "glyco-a" genes  with a rightward orientation , while the other six had these same genes with a leftward oriention  with respect to the 5'- and 3'-trd elements of piggybac, as defined by li and coworkers  <cit> .

the first set of transient expression assays focused on the ability of the piggybac vectors containing the dual constitutive transcriptional element  to induce heterologous gene expression. unexpectedly, the results showed that the vectors containing the rightward heterologous genes induced higher levels than those containing the leftward genes . for example, cells transfected with the piggybac vector containing the gntii gene in the rightward orientation  had about  <dig> x more gntii activity than cells transfected with the piggybac vector containing this same gene in the leftward orientation . similarly, vectors encoding galt, st6gali, and st3galiii genes in the rightward orientation induced about 8x, 8x, and 3x more activity, respectively, than vectors encoding these genes in the leftward orientation . this effect was not restricted to mammalian glycosyltransferase genes, as piggybac vectors containing sas and cmp-sas genes in the rightward orientation induced about 3x and 4x higher sialic acid and cmp-sialic acid contents, respectively, than those containing these same genes in the leftward orientation . furthermore, this effect was not restricted to the dual constitutive control element , as it also was observed with piggybac vectors containing heterologous gene pairs under the control of the inducible control element . these results revealed that the new piggybac vectors constructed in this study exhibited a strong position effect, in which heterologous genes cloned in the rightward orientation were uniformly induced at higher levels than the same genes cloned in the leftward orientation, irrespective of the identity of the heterologous gene or control element used for its expression.

the position effect does not reflect antisense down-regulation of the leftward genes
one hypothetical explanation for this striking position effect was that the piggybac transposase promoter located in the 5'-trd of the piggybac vectors, which is downstream and in opposite orientation of the leftward genes, produced antisense transcripts that down-regulated expression of these leftward genes. experiments were designed and performed to address this possibility. if the position effect observed with the new piggybac vectors reflected down-regulation of the leftward genes by antisense transcription originating in the downstream 5'-trd, the introduction of a polyadenylation signal between the two transcription units should reduce or eliminate this effect. the new polyadenylation signal would be expected to direct cleavage and polyadenylation of transcripts originating in the 5'-trd, resulting in transcripts that would not overlap with the downstream region encoding the leftward heterologous gene in the opposite orientation. thus, the newly inserted polyadenylation signal would be expected to block any potential negative effect arising from an antisense rna mechanism. the two piggybac vectors encoding constitutive or inducible galt genes in the leftward orientation  were used as targets for the insertion of a bghpolya signal in the appropriate orientation downstream of the 5'-trd. subsequently, transient expression assays were performed to compare the galt expression levels induced by these new piggybac derivatives with those induced by the original vectors encoding the constitutive or inducible galt genes in either the rightward or leftward orientations. the results confirmed that the original vectors encoding the rightward  galt genes induced higher levels of galt activity than those encoding the leftward  galt genes. the results also showed that insertion of the bghpolya signal failed to reduce or eliminate this position effect, irrespective of promoter type .

another way to reduce or eliminate a potential negative effect of antisense transcription on leftward gene expression was to delete the 5'-trd internal domain sequence, which contains the transposase transcriptional initiation region  <cit> . thus, this region was deleted from piggybac vectors containing the constitutive galt gene in the leftward or rightward orientations  and galt expression levels induced by these new derivatives were compared to those induced by controls containing the intact promoter. interestingly, the piggybac vectors with the transposase promoter deletion induced about 20-30% higher galt activity than the controls, irrespective of the orientation of the galt gene . however, the promoter deletion failed to reduce or eliminate the observed position effect, as the levels of galt expression observed with the leftward gene remained lower than those observed with the rightward gene, even when the 5'-trd internal domain was deleted.

together, the results of the transient expression assays performed using the piggybac vectors with bghpolya insertions or transposase promoter deletions strongly suggested that antisense transcription originating in the piggybac transposase promoter within the 5'-trd is not responsible for the observed position effect.

the position effect reflects activation of the rightward genes
another hypothetical explanation for the position effect observed with the new piggybac vectors was that gene expression in the rightward direction is somehow activated relative to gene expression in the leftward direction. a preliminary clue indicating that this might be the correct hypothesis was obtained by comparing the levels of expression induced by piggybac vectors containing the rightward or leftward heterologous genes with those induced by precursor  plasmids containing the same genes outside the context of piggybac . the results of these assays revealed that the levels of activity induced by the precursor plasmids were more similar to those induced by the piggybac vectors containing the leftward than the rightward heterologous genes. the activity levels induced by the piggybac vectors containing the heterologous genes in the rightward orientation were significantly  higher. thus, together with our previous results, these results suggested that the position effect observed with our new piggybac vectors results from the activated expression of heterologous genes cloned in the rightward orientation, irrespective of the transcriptional control element. additional experiments were designed to further examine this possibility.

a previously unrecognized activator sequence in the piggybac 3'-trd
the most obvious source of a sequence that might be able to activate expression of the rightward genes in our new piggybac vectors was the downstream 3'-trd, which includes the piggybac 3' terminal repeat and a  <dig> bp internal domain sequence with an 83% at content  <cit> . the 3'-trd internal domain sequence  was targeted for further analysis. a pcr-amplified copy of this sequence was inserted downstream and in the same orientation with respect to the leftward facing constitutive and inducible genes into a selected subset of the piggybac vectors produced in this study . the enzyme activities induced by these new piggybac derivatives, which contained the leftward-facing heterologous genes plus the 3'-trdid insert, were then compared to those induced by the original piggybac vectors containing the same heterologous genes in either orientation, but without the additional 3'-trdid insert. the results of these assays showed that insertion of the putative activator sequence downstream of the leftward-oriented genes eliminated the position effect, irrespective of the identity of the heterologous gene or promoter type .

additional transient expression assays were performed to compare the influence of inserting a single copy of the 3'-trdid sequence into the constitutive and inducible piggybac derivatives downstream and in the same  or opposite  orientation, relative to the leftward-facing galt gene. constitutive and inducible piggybac vectors containing the galt gene in the leftward orientation with no downstream copy of the 3'-trdid sequence  were used as negative controls and a constitutive piggybac vector containing the galt gene in the rightward orientation  was used as a positive control. the results of these assays showed that addition of the 3'-trdid sequence downstream of the leftward facing galt genes induced higher activity levels, irrespective of its orientation, relative to the negative controls lacking the downstream 3'-trdid sequence . this effect was not completely orientation-independent, however, as the piggybac vectors containing the 3'-trdid sequence in the same orientation as the leftward facing galt gene  induced higher levels of galt activity than those containing the 3'-trdid sequence in the opposite orientation .

functionality of dual piggybac vectors in transgenic insects
finally, we examined the insect transformation functions of two representative members of our large new set of dual piggybac vectors, one designed for constitutive expression and the other designed for inducible expression of heterologous gene pairs. in the first experiment, d. melanogaster was transformed with one of our dual piggybac vectors encoding sas and cmp-sas under the control of the dual constitutive transcriptional control element. five transformed fly lines were then fed with n-acetylmannosamine, larval homogenates were prepared, and sialic acid and cmp-sialic acid contents were assayed, as described in methods. the results showed that this representative piggybac vector could, indeed, be used to transform an insect for constitutive expression of this heterologous gene pair, as the transformed fly lines all had high levels of both free sialic acid and cmp-sialic acid than the wild type control . in the second experiment, d. melanogaster was transformed with one of our dual piggybac vectors encoding galt and gntii under the control of the dual inducible transcriptional control element. five transformed fly lines were then fed with or without doxycycline, larval homogenates were prepared, and galt and gntii activities were assayed, as described in methods. the results showed that all of the fly lines had higher levels of gntii activity and all but one had higher levels of galt activity than the wild type controls , which indicated that the inducible control element is not tightly regulated in transgenic insects. however, doxycycline induced gntii and galt activities in 4/ <dig> and 3/ <dig> lines examined, respectively. thus, while undetermined factors, such as the nature of the integration site, can influence its function, these data show that the representative dual piggybac vector designed for inducible expression of heterologous gene pairs was functional in transgenic insects.

CONCLUSIONS
the initial purpose of this study was to produce and characterize new piggybac vectors that could be used to transfer heterologous gene pairs into the genome of a target organism in either constitutively- or inducibly-expressible forms. functional characterization of these new vectors revealed an unexpected position effect that was independent of the identity of the heterologous gene or the transcriptional control element. in the process of performing experiments designed to help us understand the underlying reason for this position effect, we discovered a previously unrecognized cis-activating element derived from the internal domain of the 3' terminal repeat in the piggybac transposable element. this element appears to function as an enhancer element, as it stimulates heterologous gene expression in an essentially orientation-independent fashion, albeit to different levels. however, formal definition of this element as an enhancer would require additional characterization to determine if it can function autonomously in a position- and orientation-independent fashion.

the discovery of this element will be of general interest to investigators who are aware of piggybac and its widespread and growing applications as a transformation vector. in addition, given their ability to provide constitutive or inducible expression of heterologous gene pairs, the large set of new dual piggybac vectors described in this study will be of interest to investigators who need to introduce multiple genes into a single target organism.

