BACKGROUND
osteochondrosis has often been reported to be the main cause of lameness in pigs  and is still currently causing substantial economic losses and alarming welfare concerns for both sows and slaughter pigs  <cit> . it is estimated that 80 % of the pigs in today’s porcine industry show superficial to mild signs of oc  <cit> . oc has been defined as a multi-focal disturbance in the endochondral ossification process that occurs during skeletal growth, leading to lesions in both the articular and physeal cartilage  <cit> . many advances have been achieved in the understanding of the disease process, for example with respect to the identification of etiological factors. however, little is known still on the natural course of the disease and especially on the early stages  <cit> . nevertheless, the fact that the molecular and cellular structure of epiphyseal cartilage and that the mechanism of disruption of the endochondral ossification process are similar in different species, lead us to believe that these early stages could also be comparable in the pig . this means that recent findings in equine medicine on oc, where it is suggested now that there is a dynamism of the interplay process between lesion initiation and early repair, could be extrapolated to porcine oc  <cit> . additionally, the existence of a point of no return  has also been discovered in the horse. in the pig, this pnr is anticipated to be before 13 weeks of age, after which lesions can no longer be repaired, as vascularization of the cartilage tissue has disappeared  <cit> . the understanding of oc has for a long time principally relied on data that was acquired by either radiography or post-mortem analysis  <cit> , however more recent techniques have also shown promising results, such as micro-ct  <cit> . in the pig, good correlations have been reported between radiographic results and post-mortem macroscopic and microscopic data, although this was in animals showing more the later clinical stages of the disease  <cit> , than the early stages or subclinical signs of oc. in spite of the valuable performance of radiography, there is a need in the field to have other effective in-vivo detection methods able to detect the early signs of oc in a higher through-put way. in other species, such as the horse, the dog and cattle, the development of locomotion in relation to leg and claw disorders has been studied successfully using modern gait analysis techniques . in this pilot study, we investigated the frequency of oc in our pigs and per joint. we studied also the bilateral symmetry of oc, and the efficacy and suitability of three non- invasive techniques to detect early signs of oc, by comparing them to the gold standard . these in-vivo techniques included the visual scoring of the conformation and gait of the animals, the use of a pressure mat to quantify gait and radiographic screening.

RESULTS
health-prevalence of oc-bilateral symmetrical aspect
average daily weight gain of the  <dig> pigs was 253 g/day  and average body weight was  <dig>  kg  and  <dig>  kg , at  <dig> and 14 weeks of age respectively. at necropsy, no macroscopic oc lesions were detected in any of the joints in any of the pigs. at histology, most of the lesions were observed in the femoropatellar joint, which featured the most severe lesions . the oc status appeared to be highly symmetrical in left and right joints for all three joints with an identical histological score  or an h score differing only by one unit in over 80 % of cases .fig.  <dig> histology scores for n =  <dig> pigs 


aonly the outcomes where left and right histology scores were available for each location



in-vivo versus post-mortem gold standards 
the comparison between histology and radiography was done using the data from both techniques from the  <dig> radiographed pigs at the last time point. fig.  <dig> shows a receiver operating characteristic  curve describing the sensitivity/specificity of radiographic results for all joints with different cut-offs of histology, considered as the gold standard, table  <dig> shows the statistical difference in sensitivity and specificity between the radiographs and histology. results show that the sensitivity increases and the specificity decreases, as the threshold setting for histology increases.fig.  <dig> roc curves showing the difference in sensitivity and specificity of radiography versus the gold standard, histology using various thresholds


r scores radiographic scores, h scores histological scores, auc area under the curve, roc




when examining the different areas under the curve , which measure the general accuracy of the test, for each threshold setting, the range is chronological from  <dig>  %  to  <dig>  % . this demonstrates a good overall specificity and sensitivity of radiographs compared to the gold standard, which appears to increase as the histological lesions become more severe. concerning the correct identification of negative joints for oc, radiography has a good specificity from r score  <dig> up to r score  <dig>  but is accompanied by a low sensitivity.

above r score  <dig>  the opposite occurs: the sensitivity dramatically increases up to  <dig>  % compared to  <dig>  % , and specificity decreases, demonstrating that radiography identifies positive histological joints better from r score  <dig> onwards . overall, from these results we can establish that there is a good relation between histology and radiography and additionally both sensitivity and specificity vary with the cut-off. figure  <dig> shows typical examples of histological lesions with the corresponding radiographs.fig.  <dig> 
a–i. typical images of the histological grades with corresponding radiographic findings. photo pairs a, b, d, e and g, h are radiographic images taken of  <dig> different respective pigs at 14 weeks of age. pictures c, f and i are the corresponding histological slides in chronological order to the radiographic paired images. all stained with hematoxylin and eosin. all pictures depict assessments of the femoropatellar joint with g/h/i being from the left limb only. a–c represent the lateral side and d–f and g–i represent the medial side of the distal femoral condyle. all three pairs represent animals with no oc lesions present , with mild oc lesions  and with severe oc lesions 



longitudinal radiographic monitoring
our results showed that lesions remained stable  except for the femoropatellar joint, where progression, regression and even resolution of lesions were apparent . resolution occurred in all joints after the hypothetical timing of the pnr .table  <dig> frequencies of lesion development detected radiographically at  <dig>   <dig> and 14 weeks of age 



visual scoring reproducibility
inter-observer agreement was good to excellent  for all scored parameters but one: .table  <dig> percentages of the frequencies of all visual scoring categories scored  by both raters for all pigs measured at all time points



pressure mat reproducibility
table  <dig> gives intra-class correlation  data on the pressure mat kinetic factors showing overall excellent reproducibility .table  <dig> intra-class correlation data for the pressure mat parameters



comparison of visual scoring and histology
when considering visual scoring and histology,  <dig> pigs were selected on the basis that they were the only ones showing the highest number of results present for both techniques, in a total of  <dig> joint locations . this comparison showed that the hind pasterns was the only element that showed a significant relationship at joint level, once the benjamini and hochberg false discovery rate correction was applied to all the spearman correlation test results .table  <dig> associations between visual scoring and histology 



comparison of pressure mat and histology
using the same set of pigs as for the visual scoring/histology comparison, four comparisons between the asis  and histology were tested. the first two were based on the asis and the transformed h scores. only fore/hind asis showed relations with animal and femoropatellar levels .table  <dig> associations between pressure mat and histology data 



thirdly, an “asi animal level score”  was compared to the h score on animal level, but no associations were found . finally, a direct comparison between asis of severe histologically oc positive joints  and those of oc negative joints was tested. only asi pmax fore  showed a significant link with the presence and absence of severe histological oc lesions .

discussion
frequency, severity of and bilateral symmetrical aspect of oc lesions
in the present study,  <dig>  % of the animals showed microscopic signs of oc, with  <dig>  % having histologically severe lesions . the femoropatellar joint had the highest incidence of lesions and the highest number of high grade lesions. nevertheless, in clinical terms, only 7 % of animals lesions of a high grade radiographically  and at necropsy, no lesions were macroscopically visible in any of the pigs. we were therefore unexpectedly unsuccessful in creating clinically oc, despite using environmental conditions  and nutritional regimens  designed to promote the development of the disorder  <cit> . the advantage of this situation was that we were able to assess our non-invasive methods under challenging conditions. few studies have looked at the the frequency of oc in pigs on a longitudinal scale and in the early subclinical phases of oc. some studies reported frequencies from  <dig>  % using macroscopic evaluation to 78 % using microscopy  <cit> . there are also large differences with respect to the frequency per joint, with some studies reporting the tarsocrural joint as the joint to be most commonly affected  <cit> , while others mention the medial condyles of the femur and humerus  <cit> . the techniques used to detect oc were similar in nature, thus these differences are most likely linked to the multifactorial aspect of this diseases, which can affect one population of identical genetic pigs differently if they were exposed to different environmental conditions for example. regarding the bilateral symmetrical effect, the humeroradial joint was the most consistent in showing this effect in our study . oc is generally seen as a multifocal disease with a relatively strong bilateral occurrence of lesions  <cit> . this finding has even prompted some studies to analyse solely one side of the animal  <cit> . our results confirm these previous findings.

in-vivo radiography as a diagnostic tool for oc detection compared to histology
unsurprisingly, the different auc results measuring the accuracy of radiographs versus histology showed that radiography performed best for detecting the most severe histological lesions . additionally, in terms of specificity, radiography showed that all histological lesions from h score  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were identified as oc negative. this was expected, as these lesions are mostly mild subclinical ones and would be therefore challenging to visualize with a clinical tool, such as radiography. all things considered, from these results, we can conclude that the most reliable threshold for radiography, to identify correctly the oc status of these joints, is situated around h score  <dig>  when lesions are at high score histologically. this observation is important, as it demonstrates the ability of radiography to detect only the more severe subclinical oc lesions in pigs reliably. although radiography is considered currently as the standard imaging method to diagnose clinical oc  <cit> , and most studies have investigated oc in other species , not many have focused on pigs  <cit> . other studies have also shown significant correlations between both methods, which were joint dependent  <cit> , however these studies were performed on older pigs and foals. our results show a similar relevant correlation between both methods. in terms of monitoring, the results showed that lesions occur already at 7 weeks of age, and are mostly of a low grade nature for radiological standards . although oc lesions progressed, as expected, between  <dig> to 14 weeks of age, mostly in the humeroradial and femoropatellar joints, simultaneous repair processes were also taking place. this means that the pnr, which was anticipated to be before 13 weeks of age, is probably situated somewhat later in time. in horses, oc is known to be a very dynamic disease in which lesions appear, but then may, to a large extent, resolve spontaneously afterwards as a repair process starts immediately after occurrence of a lesion  <cit> . for the pig, we can conclude that a similar dynamic picture emerges, with differences per joint. unexpectedly, there does not seem be a straightforward relation with the time window until 7–13 weeks of age, when the growth cartilage is still vascularized  <cit> . the current paradigm is that oc is very likely caused by a failure of the vascular supply of the growth cartilage through cartilage canals in specific focal areas, which then leads to small necrotic areas that are not yet visible radiographically and are hence called osteochondrosis latens. if not resolved, these lesions may become larger and of clinical relevance, at which stage the term osteochondrosis manifesta is used  <cit> . whether or not oc latens lesions will turn into oc manifesta lesions depends on both the initial size of the lesions and the repair capacity of the cartilage, which decreases rapidly with time, as the animal gets older  <cit> . this latter aspect is influenced by the changes in vascularization of the epiphyseal growth cartilage due to the ongoing process of endochondral ossification that will ultimately lead to the mature state in which there is only avascular articular cartilage left.

visual scoring and pressure mat reproducibility and comparison with histology
in this study, visual scoring of lameness and the pressure mat showed both a good reproducibility within session measurements . only one relationship was found between the hind pasterns and the femoropatellar joint. in the literature, visual assessment as a potential indication of oc has only been compared with macroscopic joint assessments thus far  <cit> . some reports claim no relationship  <cit> , or weak associations  <cit> , whereas others claim to have found positive associations when lesions were severe  <cit> , or even strong associations between leg weakness and oc macroscopic scores, at joint level only  <cit> , or animal and joint level  <cit> . our results hence seem to reflect the current contradictory position in the literature regarding this relation. until recently, quantifying lameness was usually performed by a force plate system, measuring the ground reaction forces. however, our more recent pressure mat system is able to provide information on the pressure distribution pattern of the foot or claw, and has already been used successfully in recent studies in horses, cattle, dogs and pigs , however never in this study format for detecting oc. for the pressure mat, very few associations with histological data were established in this study, mostly with hind limb and animal level parameters. other more direct comparisons between the two methods were unsuccessful. the reason for this could be the low number of pigs having clinical oc, and the presence of only sub clinical oc. this would be the reason why conformational changes, in terms of lameness, are not occurring due to oc, or that if there are conformational changes taking place, that they are actually occurring but they are not linked to oc. this makes it difficult to appreciate the full potential of the pressure mat in detecting the earliest signs of oc in-vivo, as intended in this study, and requires more testing to be performed on larger populations with more clinical oc present.

CONCLUSIONS
whereas the frequency of clinical oc lesions in this study was much lower than expected, histological prevalence of oc lesions was relatively high, especially in the femoropatellar joint, providing a good opportunity to assess the potential value of the in-vivo measuring systems under scrutiny for the detection of subclinical porcine oc. moreover, as in other studies, the strong bilateral character of oc was confirmed. from the positive correlations found between radiological and histological findings in all joints and especially in the femoropatellar joint, we can conclude that in-vivo radiography performs well in terms of diagnosing and monitoring oc only at high radiographic scores and works safely in pigs at a young age. lesions were already radiographically detected at 7 weeks of age and progression and regression/resolution of lesions continued until 14 weeks of age, which suggests that the pnr may occur later in time, than previously expected. both visual scoring of lameness and pressure mat measurements appeared to be repeatable and well feasible in a logistical sense, but their relationship to the gold standard was weak and they are not apt to detect subclinical oc. nevertheless, further development of the pressure mat approach seems to show potential for high-throughput assessments of joint disorders in pigs, even at a very young age and warrants further exploration in more heavily affected populations and over a longer timescale.

