BACKGROUND
in real-time rt-pcr, the expression levels of the target genes of interest are estimated on the basis of endogenous controls. various housekeeping genes, ribosomal rna  and total rna are most commonly used as references in gene expression analysis today. the purpose of these controls is to remove or reduce differences due to sampling, i.e. differences in rna quantity and quality. the ideal endogenous control should be expressed at a constant level among different tissues of an organism, at all stages of development and should be unaffected by the experimental treatment. it should also be expressed at roughly the same level as the rna under study  <cit> . however, data normalization in real-time rt-pcr remains a real problem, especially for absolute quantification  <cit> . numerous studies have revealed that no single universal gene has a constant expression level under all developmental or experimental situations. the best choice of reference gene to use as an endogenous control varies, depending on the tissues of interest in the experiment. a large number of genes have for this reason been selected for normalization of mrna expression data  <cit> . if the selected reference gene fluctuates randomly between samples, small differences in expression between the genes of interest will be missed. gene expression coefficient of variation  between different groups of individuals should ideally be as low as possible  <cit> . in general, the stability of several potential reference genes should be tested in every examined tissue or cell, and under different experimental design  <cit> . an increasing number of papers are discussing the selection of reference genes in real-time rt-pcr analyses  <cit> .

two of the most commonly used reference genes are those encoding glyceraldehyde-3p-dehydrogenase  and β-actin. recently, the use of these two genes as endogenous controls has been scrutinized, and several studies have documented that the gapdh and β-actin genes should be used with caution as controls  <cit> . gapdh in mammals is known to play a role in a broad range of cellular mechanisms , including being a key enzyme in glycolysis. overall, gapdh mrna levels might be regulated under a large number of physiological states, and its use as a reference is inappropriate for most experimental conditions. actin is a major component of the protein scaffold that supports the cell and determines its shape, and is the most abundant intracellular protein in eukaryotic cells. even though commonly used as a reference, the application of the β-actin gene has recently been characterized as a historical carryover from northern blots and conventional rt-pcr . eukaryotic elongation factor 1a  plays an important role in translation by catalyzing gtp-dependent binding of aminoacyl-trna to the acceptor site of the ribosome. however, the protein is involved in a broad diversity of functions and constitutes 1–3% of the total cytoplasmic protein content of the cell. in human, cdnas of two actively transcribed isoforms have been cloned  . two paralog ef1a genes  have recently been applied as references in real-time qrt-pcr of atlantic salmon  <cit> . it is plausible to assume that the presence of these highly similar genes is a result of a tetraploidization event that occurred in a salmonid ancestor in the comparatively recent past  <cit> .

previously, the 18s rrna gene was considered to be an ideal internal control in qrt-pcr analysis . ribosomal rna constitutes up to 80–90% of total cellular rna, and several studies have shown that rrna varies less under conditions that affect the expression of mrnas . however, questions have been raised against the use of ribosomal rna genes as references. vandesompele et al.  <cit>  have stressed the fact that there sometimes might be imbalances in rrna and mrna fractions between different samples, making genes encoding ribosomal rnas unsuitable as references. to meet these challenges of accurate interpretation of real-time qrt-pcr data, the authors suggested that an index of the most stable housekeeping genes should be used for normalization, and developed the genorm vba applet for microsoft excel in this regard  <cit> . a similar software tool, the bestkeeper, has been developed by pfaffl et al.  <cit> . these tools can be used to find the most stable reference genes under different experimental conditions. we used the genorm software which determines the individual stability of a gene within a pool of genes  <cit> . the stability is calculated according to the similarity of their expression profile by a pair-wise comparison, using their geometric mean as a normalizing factor. the gene with the highest m, i.e. the least stable gene, is then suggested excluded in a stepwise fashion until the most stable genes are determined, and an index suggested, based on the best genes. genorm has been used to select the most stable reference genes in several recent studies .

the aim of this work was to evaluate the usefulness of six potential reference genes in the atlantic salmon. salmonid fish are among the most widely studied model fish species in general, and extensive basic information on many different aspects of their biology has been collected  <cit> . large-scale dna-sequencing projects on salmon have been initiated in several laboratories ; ; ; . in this work we selected the two 'classic' reference genes encoding gapdh and β-actin, two genes encoding 18s rrna and s <dig> ribosomal protein and two paralog genes encoding elongation factor 1a . to evaluate their usefulness as reference genes, rna from eight tissues of six adult salmon were subjected to real time pcr. the relative transcription levels of the genes were also estimated in four phases of young salmon going through smoltification, in order to check their stabilities under physiological stressful conditions.

RESULTS
ranking of six potential reference genes in atlantic salmon
the ranking of the six examined genes analyzed by genorm is shown in table  <dig>  in six tissues , the ef1ab gene emerged as the most stable, whereas the ef1aa gene was ranked number one in brain and the β-actin gene was ranked number one in intestine. the 18s rrna and s <dig> genes were ranked among the worse genes in all tissues. not surprisingly, the gapdh gene was ranked worse in five tissues , confirming the general skepticism against the use of this gene as reference  <cit> . combined, the total ranking reads ef1ab>ef1aa>β-actin>18s rrna>s20>gapdh. we did not analyze our data with the bestkeeper software. analyzing reference genes in virus infected cells, radonic et al.  <cit>  concluded that the bestkeeper tool gave results that slightly deviated from, but nevertheless corresponded to, those obtained using genorm.

to be able to evaluate gene stability under stressful conditions, mrna expression of the selected genes was examined in gills of salmon going through smoltification. prior to seawater entry, juvenile anadromous salmon undergo a parr-smolt transformation, characterized by behavioral, morphological and physiological changes, known to be challenging for the fish. physiological alterations include increased seawater tolerance, olfactory sensitivity, metabolic rate, scope for growth and changed hemoglobin and visual pigments  <cit> . we selected to examine the gills during smoltification, because this tissue plays a major role in ionic and osmotic regulation during adaptation to hyperosmotic seawater. figure  <dig> shows the raw ct values of the studied genes in gills before, during and after smoltification . in figure  <dig> the same data are presented, but now normalized against an index calculated by genorm of the three most stable genes . based on the m values, genorm ranks the stability of the six genes from  <dig> fish going through smoltification in the following order: ef1ab>ef1aa>β-actin>s20>18s rrna>gapdh . in figure  <dig> it can be seen that the 18s gene had the lowest individual raw ct variation. most individual raw ct variation of the studied genes is seen in the presmolt and smolt groups. a characteristic drop in expression can be seen for all genes in the smolt group, compared to the presmolt group. after transfer to seawater, the individual raw ct variation decreased for all genes. overall, the raw ct data suggest that the physiological challenging smoltification process affected the expression of all six genes. when the same data were normalized against an index of the three most stable genes, β-actin, ef1aa and ef1ab, the relative expression levels were altered for all genes. now the ribosomal 18s gene emerges as the second worse, whereas the two paralog ef1a genes became the most stable. this might have to do with the fact that genorm will top-rank co-expressed genes  <cit> , a weakness that has to be considered when evaluating paralog genes likely to be co-regulated. even though the eef1a- <dig> gene has been identified as an important oncogene and has been shown to be differently expressed in human tissues  <cit> , hamalainen et al.  <cit>  found the eef1a- <dig> gene to be a good reference gene in real-time rt-pcr examinations. a similar finding was reported by frost and nilsen  <cit>  in salmon louse, where they showed that the eef1a and s <dig> genes were valid candidate references, whereas the 18s rrna and gapdh genes were unsuitable. the current findings based on genorm evaluation question the recommended application of ribosomal genes as references , and are in line with earlier warnings against the use of rrna genes as references  <cit> . to avoid the normalization of the genes for β-actin, ef1aa and ef1ab against an index partly based on their own expression, the s <dig> gene was included in the index instead, and the mean normalized expression for these three genes calculated with the new index. the patterns of expression, however, were approximately the same for the three genes as seen in figure  <dig>  suggesting that the gene-stability measure m can be used to find the most appropriate reference genes.

pcr poisoning
we see a correlation between the a260/ <dig> absorbance on the nanodrop and the pcr efficiency . we tend to get pcr efficiencies that are too high in some samples with low a260/ <dig> ratios. when the samples are treated with dnase solution, the a260/ <dig> ratio usually drops. after dnase treatment, the a260/ <dig> ratio increased from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . at the same time, the a260/ <dig> ratio dropped from  <dig>  to  <dig> . the dnase treatment therefore adds substances to the rna solution that increases the absorbance at  <dig> nm more than it decrease the  <dig> nm absorbance. the added substance  may inhibit the rt reaction or the pcr reaction, sometimes called pcr poisoning. we have seen that the a260/ <dig> ratios are quite low in samples that give inadequate pcr efficiency slopes, especially with rna from head kidney, thymus and intestine tissues, in which the gradient of the standard curve is less than - <dig>  . the reason one obtain better amplification rate efficiencies with the more diluted samples is because the inhibitor has been diluted below its effective level. the obvious way around this problem is to dilute the amount of cdna put into the pcr reaction. alternatively, cleanup columns can be used to purify and concentrate the rna.

transcription levels of the examined genes and the coefficient of variance  in different tissues varied considerably. mrna levels in tissues are regulated by numerous endogenous and exogenous stimuli  <cit> . transcription rates in metabolic active tissues might be up-regulated compared to those of less active tissues, whereas inter-tissue variation in degradation rates of mrnas, for example, might affect mrna stability  <cit> . the results revealed that muscle had the lowest cvs of the studied genes, compared to higher cvs in more active tissues like thymus, head kidney and spleen. in thymus, intestine, head kidney, gills, brain, liver and spleen, the 18s and s <dig> genes had the lowest cvs, based on raw ct values. in all tissues, except intestine, the gapdh gene had the highest cv. except for thymus, the two elongation factor genes had relatively similar expression in all eight examined tissues. their expression are most likely co-expressed in the examined tissues, and therefore favored in genorm calculations  <cit> . the results also demonstrated that assays optimized for one tissue of an organism do not necessarily work equally well in other tissues. of the tissues studied in this work, intestine, head kidney and spleen were the most troublesome.

CONCLUSIONS
our data, based on genorm calculations, suggest that the atlantic salmon ef1a genes that have been tested in the present study may be good candidate reference genes. the gapdh gene seems unsuitable as a reference in quantitative real-time rt-pcr. with regard to the 18s rrna gene, this must be applied with caution. tools like the genorm applet for microsoft excel can be useful to help select the most stable genes in various experiments.

