BACKGROUND
the interactions of membrane-active peptides with lipids are of basic interest in a range of biological processes  <cit> , including membrane fusion  <cit> , the action of antimicrobial peptides  <cit> , and lipid recognition by membrane binding domains in larger proteins  <cit> . a precise thermodynamic description of such interactions is crucial for understanding membrane protein folding. systematic series of model peptides are an excellent tool to gain insight in the effect of different side chains on partitioning of peptides and membrane proteins. wimley and white have created a hydrophobicity scale for interfacial partitioning based on the pentapeptides ace-wlxll, where x stands for all  <dig> naturally occurring amino acids  <cit> .

in a previous paper, we have investigated the properties of ace-wlrll and ace-wlkll, with an emphasis on salt-bridge formation between the charged arg or lys side chain with the c-terminus  <cit> . in this paper we extend these simulations to  <dig> different peptides, with different side chain properties for residue 3: hydrophilic, hydrophobic, anionic, cationic, or aromatic. we study the behavior of this set of peptides at the water/cyclohexane and the water/phospholipid interface.

our primary questions are: where do the peptides partition at the water/hydrophobic interface, and can we distinguish statistically significant differences between the different peptides?

the location and structure of the peptides is relevant for a molecular interpretation of the thermodynamic hydrophobicity scale. these well-characterized peptides are also useful models for a broad range of antimicrobial peptides that are thought to interact at the lipid/water interface  <cit> . finally, computer simulations are becoming an extremely popular tool to study membrane proteins and interactions between lipids and membrane proteins  <cit> , but the amount of accurate experimental data that can be used to critically test simulations of lipid-protein interactions is very limited. it is important to understand the strengths and limitations of computer simulations to study such peptides. the present set of simulations addresses the question of timescales involved in the equilibration and dynamics of peptides at different interfaces. it also shows that there are no significant differences between simulations of the dopc bilayer with constant area and constant pressure, probably because the chosen constant area is approximately the same as the area obtained from the constant pressure simulations.

a long-term goal of the work presented in this study is to be able to calculate the relative free energies of transfer for different side chains in such a way that the calculations are directly comparable to the experiments. although we show here that this is currently not feasible using standard free-energy methods  for the case of the lipid/water interface, it is likely this will become feasible with improved simulation algorithms and faster computers in the coming years. in addition, simulations on these well-characterized peptides may help to establish protocols to study less characterized but biologically more important peptides.

RESULTS
orientation of the peptides at the cyclohexane/water interface
at the cyclohexane/water interface the peptides rapidly find a preferred depth, after which they fluctuate around this position. figure  <dig> shows snapshots of each of the ten peptides after ten nanoseconds of simulation. although these are single snapshots, it is clear that all peptides have a well-defined orientation, with leucine side chains in the cyclohexane phase, tryptophan side chains predominantly in the cyclohexane phase, and hydrophilic side chains in water. the backbone of the peptides is predominantly extended. movie  <dig>  shows in detail the dynamics of one of the ten peptides. figure  <dig> shows the center of mass of each of the peptides as function of time, as well as the centers of mass of three of the side chains, the cyclohexane, and water. the initial movement of the peptides from their starting location in the water phase to the water/cyclohexane interface occurs mostly in the first nanosecond, followed by a stable location of the peptide as whole. the side chains show somewhat larger fluctuations around their average depth compared to the entire peptide, but overall the peptides are firmly anchored at the interface.

distribution of the side chains at the cyclohexane/water interface
orientation of the peptides at the dopc/water interface
the picture for the dopc/water interface is more complicated. the interface itself is quite broad, comparable to the width of the distribution of the peptide at the sharp cyclohexane/water interface. white and co-workers have previously pointed out that the interfacial width of ca.  <dig>  nm is wide enough to accommodate a standard alpha-helix  <cit> . figures  <dig> and  <dig> show snapshots of each of the peptides after  <dig> ns of simulation.

the snapshots broadly suggest an amphipathic orientation comparable to the orientation in the cyclohexane/water case, although the picture is somewhat obscured by the ability of water to penetrate more deeply into the membrane. the snapshots also necessarily show a somewhat exaggerated view because they are side projections that do not fully do justice to local transient changes in the lipid structure. movie  <dig>  shows the dynamics of one of the peptides at the lipid/water interface. figures  <dig> and  <dig> show the location along the bilayer normal of the peptides and the 1st, 3rd, and 5th side chain as a function of time. there appears to be little difference between simulations with constant pressure versus simulations with constant area. in the constant pressure simulations, all peptides remain at the interface as expected and fluctuate slowly in depth, both because of the slow fluctuation of the interface itself and their intrinsic internal and external motion at the interface.

distribution of the side chains at the dopc/water interface
figures  <dig> and  <dig> show the density profiles for the ten peptide simulations at constant area  and at constant pressure . the density distribution for the upper and lower peptide has not yet converged to the same distribution in most cases, even in  <dig> ns. this puts a lower limit on lipid-peptide simulations even for small peptides of  <dig> ns, for clearly amphiphatic peptides that do not get locked in spurious secondary structure. the difference in distributions between the two sets of simulations  does not appear to be significant compared to the difference in distribution between the two peptides within a single simulation.

as in the water/cyclohexane simulations, the w <dig> residue is located most deeply inside the membrane interior, with l <dig> usually the furthest inside the water phase. of particular interest is the location of x <dig>  for charged amino acids, the distribution overlaps with the distribution of l <dig> and in a few cases even extends further into the water, as in one of the lys and one of the asn peptides. hydrophobic residues are typically located further inside the membrane, with small hydrophilic residues taking intermediate positions.

orientation of the trp ring at the dopc/water interface
constant area versus constant pressure
the constant pressure simulations allow us to investigate the effect of the peptides on the area of the unit cell. table  <dig> gives the average area per lipid, calculated from the size of the simulation box lx × ly/ <dig>  where  <dig> is the number of lipids in each of the two leaflets. fluctuations in area are significant and the statistical uncertainty in averages calculated over  <dig> ns is substantial in this small system. the expected differences due to the difference in one of  <dig> side chains with a peptide that is otherwise the same are small, but it is conceivable that with better averaging we would observe a difference between e.g. trp and arg in the  <dig> position. table  <dig> also gives the average lateral pressure for all  <dig> constant area simulations. in all ten, the average normal pressure is between - <dig> and + <dig> bar, with an estimated standard error of  <dig> bar. in all cases the standard deviation for both the normal and the lateral pressure is hundreds of bar, normal fluctuations caused by the small system size. peptides with the more hydrophobic residues cause a larger negative pressure, indicating a tendency to contract the box. this agrees with the trend in the areas calculated from the constant pressure simulations. we have not calculated in detail the effect of the peptides on the lipids, but because the areas per lipid show very minor changes we expect only small local perturbations to the lipids that are directly interacting with the hydrophobic side chains that protrude into the membrane interior. perturbations by small molecules like pentachlorophenol  <cit>  and pyrene  <cit>  were minimal, while major effects of antimicrobial peptides on lipid structure imply major changes in the lipid area  <cit> .

discussion
overall, the difference in orientation between the different peptides is small, supporting a key assumption of the experimental design of these peptides  <cit> . at the water/cyclohexane interface sampling is so fast that we can obtain converged distributions quite rapidly. the peptides are clearly able to adopt minor structural changes to allow x <dig> an orientation consistent with its chemical nature. although this overall trend is visible in the distributions of the side chains at the water/phospholipids interface, the intrinsic motions of both lipids and the peptide at this interface are too slow to obtain accurate convergence on a  <dig> ns time scale of hydrophobicity.

ideally, we would like to make a direct link with the experimentally measured hydrophobicity scale. although the density profiles can in principle be converted to free energy profiles for the distribution of side chains, in practice this requires computational sampling of orientations that have a low probability. because such states are not accurately sampled in an equilibrium simulation, the results would be unreliable. it should be possible at the current state of the art in molecular dynamics simulations to calculate a hydrophobicity scale using the water/cyclohexane interface. this is analogous to the use of calculations of free energy of hydration and free energy of transfer between water and cyclohexane for side-chain analogues in recent studies on several commonly used force fields  <cit> . a reasonable approach would be to alchemically mutate each x <dig> side chain to a 'dummy' side chain that does not interact with its environment.

we initially suspected that constant area simulations would make it harder for the peptides to equilibrate at the interface, as this might require fluctuations in the area of the interface. we obtained some anecdotal evidence in simulations where a peptide left the interface and would not reinsert on a reasonable time scale with constant area, but would reinsert with constant pressure. in the final set of simulations, however, the difference between constant area and constant pressure appears minimal. one reason for this is likely that the average area of the interface in both sets of simulations is the same. from a technical point of view, it would be worth examining this matter in more detail at different fixed areas. it is also likely that there would be a size-effect, as a constant small area might be more restrictive than a constant large area for insertion of the same peptide.

the procedures and force field used in this study are in common use and have not failed any critical tests against experiment. we would also expect some possible errors to cancel in a direct comparison between the different peptides within the same simulation setup. one possible source of concern are the errors in the free energy of transfer between water and lipid for the peptide side chains, termini, and backbone. villa and mark calculated the free energy of transfer for the side chains of this force field between water and cyclohexane  <cit> . there is room for improvement of the force field, but the relative order in free energy of transfer for the residues used here is correct, and we expect reasonable distributions of the side chains at the interface. these inaccuracies in the free energy of transfer will be a serious problem in attempts to quantitatively reproduce the experimental hydrophobicity scale, and will have to be addressed. although we cannot obtain accurate numerical agreement with the experimental values for the hydrophobicity scale from these simulations, we believe the atomistic picture emerging from the present simulations is likely to be accurate and could be considered the best 'structure' of the pentapeptides in their environment available.

CONCLUSIONS
the simulations provide a detailed atomistic picture of the behaviour of these peptides and give insight in the molecular basis of the free energy scale. the peptides are generally extended and have the flexibility to allow the guest residue x <dig> to interact with either the lipid/cyclohexane or the water phase. although at the current state of the art in molecular dynamics simulations it is not yet possible to calculate the exact values of this hydrophobicity scale, our results suggest that such calculations become a viable way for force field testing and development in the near future. in future work, we are calculating the hydrophobicity scale for the water/cyclohexane and water/octanol case. while this is a major undertaking with present computers, we expect this will be useful in further refinement of computational models for lipid-peptide interactions.

