BACKGROUND
population genetics models  <cit>  emphasise the importance of different stochastic processes related to geographical isolation, such as the founder effect and genetic drift, on the differentiation of small populations. severe reductions of genetic variability and population size are suggested to favour drift and constrain natural selection  <cit> . however, recent studies  <cit>  have shown that natural selection could be the dominant diversifying agent in the evolution of quantitative traits. irrespective of whether we consider natural selection or random drift as the major causative agent in evolution, together they may allow populations on isolated islands to evolve a collection of traits that distinguish them from their mainland relatives.

differences between mainland and island populations of mammals have often been referred to as the island rule or island syndrome  <cit> . the most familiar pattern on islands is the evolution of larger-bodied species towards a smaller size and smaller-bodied species towards a larger size  <cit> . in small mammals, the pattern also includes reduced reproductive output, higher survival rate, and differences in behaviour . recently the generality of the island rule has been criticized by meiri and colleagues  <cit> . according to their phylogenetic analyses, the increase in body size might only hold true in some mammalian groups . they argued that earlier reviews were biased by a few extreme examples in some mammalian groups , and these reviews might have ignored many examples where body size has not changed. furthermore, it has been suggested  <cit>  that future studies should be focused more clearly on the possible differences in natural selection caused by island characters   <cit> , ecological mechanisms   <cit>  and species specific mechanisms .

here we focused on the possible genetic differentiation in morphological and life-history traits between insular and mainland populations of a small mammal, the bank vole myodes glareolus. our previous studies have indicated a large additive genetic variation in reproductive traits  in the mainland population of our study species  <cit> . furthermore, we have shown that the rapid selection caused by intraspecific competition can significantly regulate the proportion of genetic reproductive tactics  in mainland populations  <cit> . in the present study, we tested the hypothesis that the selection for reproductive tactics might differ in an insular environment, causing genetic differentiation of insular populations from mainland ones. we also tested the relative importance of natural selection and random drift on genetic differentiation. in these analyses fitness-related additive genetic variation was compared to neutral genetic variation   <cit> .

RESULTS
we observed neither morphological differentiation in the breeding females, nor a significant difference in their reproductive effort between insular and mainland populations of the bank vole. by contrast, females that originated from the islands produced significantly larger offspring than those from the mainland , indicating either environmental or genetic responses of mothers to the insular environment. the size of island or distance to mainland did not affect the breeding characters of insular females .

only the test statistics of origin are presented from the mixed model analyses . origin of mother was used as a fixed factor and population as a random factor in the analyses. mother was also used as a random factor in the analysis of offspring body mass. reproductive effort  = l × mo <dig> /mm <dig> , and reproductive effort  = l × mo/mm; where l is litter size; mo is mean pup mass at birth, and mm is weight of the female after delivery. ndf = numerator degrees of freedom, ddf = denominator degrees of freedom.

as the phenotypic differences in neonate size do not necessarily imply micro-evolutionary differentiation, the genetic basis of offspring size was further analysed in the laboratory using paternal half sib analyses. males originating from island populations fathered significantly heavier offspring at birth than mainland fathers , when both were mated to a common stock of females. moreover, the analyses indicated significant additive genetic variance only among the mainland fathers , whereas genetic variance was zero or very low among island fathers . heritability estimates differed significantly between the mainland and island fathers  .

origin of sire, sire and dam  were used as fixed factors and population as a random factor. ndf = numerator degrees of freedom, ddf = denominator degrees of freedom.

phenotypic variances , additive genetic variances  and heritabilities  of body mass were estimated by half-sib analyses from the variance components among sires separately for the different environments. standard errors of va and h <dig> were estimated using the formula in  <cit> . the effect of population  was included to the models as a random factor.* p <  <dig> , n.s.= non-significant.

the relative importance of natural selection and random drift on offspring size divergence can be tested by comparing among-island differences based on additive genetic variation and measures based on neutral marker genes   <cit> . here the island populations were different according to neutral markers  but not according to the additive genetic variance  . this means that the va was less than expected on the basis of genetic drift alone. mainland populations  did not differ according to neutral markers . fst values differed significantly between mainland and island populations .

discussions and 
CONCLUSIONS
the present results are in agreement with earlier suggestions that offspring size might be the first life-history characteristic to evolve in insular populations of vertebrates  <cit> . large neonate size can be a local adaptation to an insular environment, where many ecological selection pressures, e.g. intra- and inter-specific competition and predation, differ from larger mainland populations  <cit> . here we could not directly test the biological significance of larger offspring size , but according to our previous research, the increase in female offspring size from  <dig>  g to  <dig>  g may have an important impact on the future fitness of bank vole offspring  <cit> . for example, the age of first breeding would decreased by  <dig> days, calculated by a linear regression model , and the probability of breeding was increased from  <dig>  to  <dig> , calculated by a logistic regression model  =  <dig> x -  <dig> ; fig. 2a in  <cit> ).

the breeding density of territorial bank vole females seems to be lower in open populations   <cit>  compared to the artificially enclosed populations   <cit> . if intra-specific competition between breeding females is similarly increased on  islands, it could be an important selective force for the larger offspring size at birth. in general, the precise mechanisms of selection and when intra-specific competition may favour the fitness of larger offspring or adult size have not yet been tested in insular populations  <cit> . there exists only indirect evidence that competition is lower on larger islands, decreasing selection for body size in mammals  <cit> . here we did not find any effect of island area or isolation on the measured morphological or life-history traits. we suggest that compared to the earlier studies, the present islands were relatively small and variation in size might be too low to find the significant effects of island characters. however, our findings are in agreement with most of the earlier studies, which do not support the importance of island characters for the differentiation of insular individuals from their mainland descendants  <cit> .

the phenomenon to produce large offspring can also be linked to the genetic dispersal tactics of individuals  <cit> . the individuals which are more prone to take risks, e.g. by dispersing over large open ice to islands, might also genetically differ according to many other traits besides offspring size. the change in offspring size could then be a by-product of selection on other traits. this possibility cannot be ruled out before knowing more about population genetics and the behaviour of individuals  in our island system. even the loss of additive genetic variation in offspring body mass that we have shown here can be explained by non-adaptive genetic processes, e.g. random drift. however, our analyses of differentiation in neutral marker loci  indicate that va is less than expected on the basis of genetic drift alone  <cit> . here, we were not able to analyse additive genetic variance or variance in neutral markers within single islands, as our estimates of additive genetic variance were based on a few individuals per location. therefore, comprehensive comparisons of differentiation in neutral marker loci and additive genetic variation in quantitative traits are still lacking  <cit> .

in contrast to the island populations, additive genetic variation in offspring body mass has been observed in mainland populations . additive genetic variation was also higher than expected by the variation in neutral markers. similarly, a large additive genetic variation has also been show in several other life-history traits in different systems  <cit> . in agreement with our findings, the additive genetic variation is also usually higher than the variation in neutral markers  <cit> . additive genetic variation in life-history traits can be maintained by a trade-off  between two traits  <cit> , in this case between the size and number of offspring  <cit> , especially when natural selection favours one trait under current conditions and another at a later date  <cit> . strong annual and multi-annual density fluctuations  are suggested to maintain additive genetic variation and even genetic polymorphism in life-history traits, particularly in rodent populations  <cit> . in fact, our recent findings with the bank vole indicate that density- and negative frequency-dependent selection favour the genetically different allocation tactics between the size and number of offspring  <cit> .

we supposed that if density fluctuations and other ecological parameters related to them are more stable in insular environments, selection for large offspring size could also be stable long term. theoretically, strong selection might decrease additive genetic variation found in our islands  <cit> . moreover, selection for large offspring size might simultaneously decrease litter size  <cit> . a future goal would be to show whether large neonate size is an adaptation to insular environments, and also how genetic differentiation in this particular trait is related to other life-history and behavioral traits  as well as their evolution.

