BACKGROUND
it has been known for several decades that human fetuses will heal cutaneous wounds without scarring  <cit> . rowlatt's work documented that early human fetuses heal their cutaneous wounds by mesenchymal proliferation resulting in perfect regeneration  <cit> . furthermore, although the extracellular matrix  deposited during fetal wound regeneration is the same composition as that identified in postnatal and adult wound healing they exhibit a distinct difference in the temporal and spatial distribution of each component. for example, the deposition of collagen in fetal repair is indistinguishable from that of the surrounding uninjured tissue whereas in the postnatal human, collagen deposition during wound healing is disorganised  <cit> . it has therefore been proposed by a number of groups that fetal fibroblasts are the key repair 'effector' cells because it is believed that they dictate collagen deposition, the main component of the dermal ecm  <cit> .

igf-i is believed to play a role in adult wound healing through its action on fibroblasts and others have shown that the expression of igf-i and -ii increases substantially between days 1– <dig> post wounding  <cit> . igf-i plays an important role in cell growth both in vitro and in vivo  <cit> ; and is known to stimulate fibroblast mitogenesis and ecm synthesis <cit> . igf-i's biological actions are mediated by its receptor, a tyrosine kinase, igf-ir  <cit> . binding of igf-i to its receptor  results in receptor autophosphorylation followed by phosphorylation of a number of adaptor signalling proteins such as shc  <cit> . studies have shown that the phosphorylation of shc followed by mapks causes mitogenesis and that igf-i increases collagen type i mrna also via the mapk pathway  <cit> .

treatment of wounds with igf-i has been shown to accelerate wound healing by the stimulation of fibroblast collagen synthesis, in addition to its mitogenic effect on both keratinocytes and fibroblasts  <cit> . however igf-i has also been implicated in a range of fibrotic conditions e.g. keloids, hypertrophic scars, crohn's disease, fibrotic lung disease and glomerular disease  <cit> .

although both igf-i and igf-ii are expressed in the embryo, igf-ii is thought to have a predominant role early on in development  <cit> . igf-ii is a member of a small family of genes that have been shown to be subject to genomic imprinting  <cit> . an imprinted gene is expressed primarily from one specific parental allele and such genes have been shown to exert important effects, primarily on fetal development. igf-ii acts through the same receptor as igf-i, the tyrosine kinase igf type i receptor, but also binds both the insulin receptor and the igf type ii receptor which is thought to be responsible for igf-ii degradation  <cit> . dechiara et al, showed that igf-ii is required for normal fetal growth, as igf-ii null mice were 60% smaller than their wild type littermates  <cit> . however, these growth deficient animals were otherwise apparently healthy and fertile, so igf-ii is not essential for development or survival. conversely experiments on igf-i homozygote knockout mice  have shown that animals are not only reduced in size but display severe muscle dystrophy and most  died at birth  <cit> . clearly therefore both igf proteins play distinct roles during fetal development and growth. nevertheless the relative contribution of each igf during fetal wound healing is currently unknown.

the aim of this study was to determine if early gestational age human fetal dermal fibroblasts  respond in the same manner as their developmentally mature counterparts  to the addition of exogenous igf-i and igf-ii with regard to proliferation, collagen production and finally intracellular signalling. any differences detected may contribute towards the ability of fetal but not developmentally mature fibroblasts to regenerate the dermis rather than form scar tissue. our data demonstrates clear differences in cellular responses between the two cell types, with fdf demonstrating minimal mitogenic response to either form of igf and failing to synthesise collagen in response to igf-i but not igf-ii. distinct patterns in the phosphorylation of intracellular proteins in response to igf stimulus were also identified for fdf and mdf. the contrasting responses of dermal fibroblasts from different developmental stages to these important cytokines may well relate to their dissimilar wound healing responses of either perfect regeneration of dermal architecture or crude filling of the tissue deficit by scar tissue formation.

RESULTS
fibroblast proliferation
a comparison of the proliferative responses to igf-i and igf-ii by fdf and mdf are shown in figure 1a and 1b respectively. identical results were obtained using the wst- <dig> assay  and the crystal violet proliferation assay . mdf demonstrated a clear dose dependent response to igf-i, with significant increases in cell number above that observed by the untreated control at all concentrations tested . the increase in mdf cell number reached a maximum of over four times that of the untreated control at the highest concentration tested . in contrast fdf showed a less profound response with a much lower maximal response of twice that of the untreated control, which was reached at a lower concentration of igf-i at  <dig> ng/ml, although only became statistically significant at  <dig> and  <dig> ng/ml igf-i . this response was significantly lower than that exhibited by the mdf cell strains at the two highest igf-i concentrations tested .

the proliferative response to igf-ii was almost identical to that of igf-i, showing an increase in proliferation induced for both cell types although again to a lesser extent by fdf compared to mdf cell strains . fdf showed a significant increase  throughout the concentration range used compared to untreated cells, whereas although mdf exhibited a greater response throughout the concentration range this was only significantly different from their untreated controls at  <dig> ng/ml  and  <dig> ng/ml  due to high variability at lower concentrations. nevertheless the maximal response seen with mdf cell strains was again over four times greater than untreated controls, whereas that seen for fdf strains was significantly lower at  <dig>  and  <dig> ng/ml  being only twice that seen in the untreated fdf control.

collagen synthesis
modulation of collagen synthesis by igf-i and ii were estimated in vitro and the responses between fdf and mdf cell strains compared. igf-i elicited a dose dependent increase in collagen synthesis by mdf . collagen synthesis became maximal at concentrations of  <dig> ng/ml and over, a 39%  increase above that elicited by untreated control cells. by contrast, non-collagen protein synthesis did not significantly alter in response to igf-i, regardless of concentration assessed . a comparison of the effect of igf-i on the levels of collagen synthesised as a proportion of total protein produced over the exposure period is shown in figure 2c. this demonstrates that igf- <dig>  significantly and selectively increases collagen synthesis; above any effects on total protein production compared with untreated control cells . in contrast, fdf did not exhibit any significant response to igf-i, with regard to either collagen or non-collagen synthesis. indeed anova analysis of the relative collagen synthesis data determined a statistically significant difference  in the response of fdf and mdf.

quantification of igf-i receptor 
protein lysates from quiescent cells treated with serum free media alone were analysed for expression of igf-ir using sds-page and western blotting using a specific antibody. a typical western blot for both igf-ir and loading control together with the graph showing the densitometric analysis of band density after correction for equal loading is shown in figure 4a–b. statistical analysis failed to detect any significant difference between the igf-ir expression of fdf cell strains and mdf . fluorescence activated cell sorter  analysis was also performed  on fdf and mdf cell strains  to quantify the relative levels of cell surface igf-ir, and demonstrated no significant difference between the two different cell sources.

intracellular signalling
tyrosine phosphorylated proteins
protein lysates from quiescent cells treated with serum free media alone  or with the addition of either exogenous igf-i or igf-ii were analysed by western blot using an antibody specific for tyrosine phosphorylated proteins. western blots were assessed by densitometry after ensuring that each sample had equal loading by the use of the memcode reversible™ protein stain . a number of tyrosine phosphorylated protein bands were clearly identified in both untreated fdf and untreated mdf lysates and igf-i or igf-ii stimulated groups . the pattern  of tyrosine phosphorylated bands was the same for both fdf and mdf cells strains and did not change on stimulation. although the density of all bands appeared higher in unstimulated fdf compared to mdf, this only reached significance for the  <dig> kda band .

the density of all the tyrosine phosphorylated protein bands appeared slightly higher in mdf cell strains after stimulation with igf-i, but were mainly unchanged or lower for fdf cell strains, however none of these differences reached statistical significance . the only exception to these apparent trends was a band at  <dig> kda in fdf cell strains, which increased on igf-i stimulation, but again this increase failed to reach statistical significance. despite the similar tendency of this band to increase in density on igf-i stimulation in mdf and fdf strains alike, that of mdf cells was significantly lower than that of fetal cells .

both fdf and mdf demonstrated a trend toward increased density of most tyrosine phosphorylated protein bands after igf-ii stimulation . this increase in density on stimulation was statistically significant  for the  <dig> kda band seen in fdf lysates, but failed to reach statistical significance for all bands detected in the mdf strain lysates, the increased tyrosine phosphorylation of this  <dig> kda band in fdf strains was also significantly higher than that induced in mdf . an exception to this overall increase in band density on stimulation was a tyrosine-phosphorylated band at  <dig> kda in fdf cell strains, which was significantly reduced .

shc
protein lysates were immunoprecipitated, with an anti-shc antibody and the precipitate electrophoresed and analysed by western blotting with an anti-tyrosine phosphorylated antibody. three bands were identified, which corresponded to the three isoforms of shc,  <dig> kda,  <dig> kda and  <dig> kda .

the apparently higher levels of tyrosine phosphorylated  <dig> kda shc exhibited by unstimulated fdf strains compared to both igf-i stimulated fdf cells and mdf cells irrespective of stimulation did not reach statistical significance. the other isoforms clearly showed no difference between cell strains or between igf-i treated and untreated control. on combining data for the similar acting shc isoforms , the elevated expression of p46/p <dig> seen for untreated fdf, over both untreated mdf and igf-i treated fdf still failed to reach statistical significance.

protein lysates from cells stimulated with exogenous igf-ii were also immunoprecipitated with an anti-shc antibody and analysed by western blotting as described previously. fdf and mdf showed different patterns of shc phosphorylation , with mdf showing a significant increase in the phosphorylated form of p <dig> with stimulation  whereas fdf did not. indeed there was significantly lower phosphorylated p <dig> in stimulated fdf compared to stimulated mdf . unstimulated fdf cells in this experiment also showed the same elevated p <dig> as that demonstrated in the igf-i experiment, though again this did not reach statistical significance between either cell strain types or treatments. combining data for the similar acting p <dig> and p <dig> isoforms, there was again no statistical significance between cell strains or between untreated and igf-ii treated samples.

p-erk
protein lysates were electrophoresed and analysed by western blotting which was probed with an anti-p-erk antibody. mdf significantly increased phosphorylated p <dig> on igf-i stimulation . a similar trend was demonstrated for phosphorylated p <dig>  however this just failed to reach significance . in contrast, the pattern of phosphorylation of both erk isoforms in fdf did not alter on stimulation with igf-i. indeed, the amount of phosphorylated p <dig> detected in igf-i-treated fdf cells was shown to be significantly lower than that seen in stimulated mdf cells .

stimulation with igf-ii showed no change in erk phosphorylation in mdf following stimulation whereas fdf showed a fall in the phosphorylation of erk with stimulation though this did not reach statistical significance . the level of phosphorylated p <dig> in mdf stimulated with igf-ii was higher compared to stimulated fdf though this failed to reach statistical significance .

discussion
the biological actions of the igfs are well defined and include substantial effects on growth, differentiation or apoptosis in a number of cell types, including fibroblasts, and myofibroblasts  <cit> . both forms of igf are substantially up regulated during adult wound healing and igf-i at least is thought to play a prominent role via direct effects on dermal fibroblasts  <cit> . given the presence of these cytokines throughout cutaneous wound healing and their implication in fibrosis of other tissues, we have compared their effects on dermal fibroblasts derived from two developmentally distinct sources that differ in their predisposition towards cutaneous scarring  <cit> : early gestational age human fetuses  and developmentally mature tissue . our study has shown that dermal fibroblasts derived from these different sources  differ in the extent of their proliferative response to both forms of igf . both igf-i and -ii significantly induce the proliferation of mdf , whereas fdf showed a significantly lower proliferative response reaching a maximum of only double that of the untreated control. these results suggest that human dermal fibroblasts derived from early gestational fetuses exhibit a lower response to the mitogenic  properties of these important wound healing cytokines. as far as the authors are aware this is the first publication that shows the effects of these igfs on dermal fibroblasts derived from a non-scarring phenotype  and a scarring phenotype . other studies published comparing the effects of igfs on "fetal" versus adult fibroblasts appear to contradict our findings, however these studies used more developmentally mature tissue sources  rather than the non-scarring early gestational age fetal cells used here  <cit> . interestingly a similar reduction in proliferative response has also been reported after stimulation with tgf-β <dig>  by early gestational age  murine dermal fibroblasts compared to later gestational age samples  <cit> .

igf-i has also been shown to stimulate collagen production in a number of developmentally mature tissues and cells including fibroblasts and myofibroblasts  <cit> . in agreement, our study has demonstrated that mdf are stimulated to synthesise collagen, both total and relative to total protein synthesis, in response to igf-i. in contrast however, fdf cells failed to show any increase collagen synthesis in response to igf-i. a similar tendency of developmentally immature cells and tissue exhibiting reduced collagen synthesis has been suggested in other experimental systems, both in vivo and in vitro  <cit>  ; the latter being reported in response to stimulation with exogenous tgf-β <dig>  <cit> . indeed morphometric studies using in situ hybridization of rabbit tissue suggest that although collagen expression does increase on wounding in the early fetus, that this is simply through an increase in cell number within the wound site  <cit> . adult wounds, however, increase collagen synthesis by both fibroblast migration and an induction of increased collagen expression by individual cells.

collagen synthesis  resulting from stimulation with igf-ii was less clear-cut, but converse to the igf-i results appeared significantly induced in fdf cells, with mdf cells exhibiting no significant response over the entire titration range of this cytokine. although grotendorst et al also established that igf-ii failed to stimulate collagen synthesis in developmentally mature cells , this absence of response may also be tissue specific since murphy et al demonstrated that igf-ii but not igf-i increased collagen synthesis in healing adult rabbit tendons  <cit> .

interestingly our results suggest a potential developmental switch in the response of dermal fibroblasts to these growth factors that is mirrored by known changes in their relative expression during embryonic development, where circulating levels of igf-i are reported to be low in the fetus and increase throughout gestation, whereas igf-ii predominates in fetuses  <cit> .

the igf-i receptor, igf-ir, is a tyrosine kinase that mediates igf-i's biological actions, any changes of which would affect cellular responses  <cit> . however, western blotting of total protein levels of igf-ir and facs analysis of cell surface levels of igf-ir demonstrate identical expression by both mdf and fdf.

cell regulation and cell responses to growth factors such as the igfs are relayed by a number of pathways involving intracellular signalling proteins, often involving alteration of the phosphorylation state of tyrosine, serine, or threonine residues on a number of intracellular signalling proteins  <cit> . furthermore, a close correlation exists between increased tyrosine phosphorylation and increased activity of a number of receptor tyrosine kinases such as the igf-i receptor. work to date on the role of tyrosine phosphorylation in fetal regeneration has solely used animal models e.g. rat, where five tyrosine phosphorylated protein bands were identified in quiescent fetal dermal fibroblasts  whereas postnatal specimens showed only one band   <cit> . however, further work by chin et al on human dermal fibroblasts from developmentally mature tissue demonstrated the same pattern of five bands as that seen in fetal rat cells  <cit> . in addition, our work using a commercially available antibody and cells that had been quiescent for  <dig> hrs demonstrated comparable patterns of multiple phosphorylated protein bands ranging from 37– <dig> kda in both fdf and mdf in the absences of stimulation with either of the igfs. on stimulation with igf-i we saw no significant change in either the band pattern or band densities in either mdf or fdf cell preparations. similarly, chin et al also found no enhancement of the tyrosine phosphorylation pattern for the five bands identified in quiescent dermal fibroblasts on stimulation with serum  <cit> . on stimulation with igf-ii we did not detect any change in banding pattern or density in mdf, however fdf showed a statistically significant increase in the density of a  <dig> kda band along with a slight but significant decrease in the density of a  <dig> kda band.

we went on to examine specific signalling proteins known to be activated by igf's and to be required to elicit either their proliferative or collagen synthesis response  <cit> . the adaptor protein shc is expressed as three known transcripts with differing effects on function; shc p <dig> and p <dig> are found in every cell type with an invariant reciprocal relationship, whereas p <dig> expression varies between cell types and is sometimes absent  <cit> . shc isoforms are tyrosine phosphorylated after activation by a large number of tyrosine kinase receptors e.g. that of insulin, igfs, epidermal growth factor, platelet derived growth factor and fibroblast growth factor  <cit> . activated p46/ <dig> isoforms transmit signals to other signalling proteins  and have been implicated in the cytoplasmic propagation of mitogenic signals in a number of cell types including fibroblasts <cit> . it remains unclear if p <dig> and p <dig> have functional differences, whereas p <dig> is distinct being part of the complex inhibitory-stimulatory network that converges on growth factor regulated genes, e.g. fos  <cit> . the relative positive/negative signal balance of the three shc isoforms within different source cells could determine differential cellular responses to igfs.

surprisingly neither mdf nor fdf exhibited any statistically significant differences in the phosphorylation of all three shc isoforms following stimulation with igf-i. perhaps of note is the observed trend of higher phosphorylation of the p <dig> form of shc in fdf compared to mdf, which appeared to be reduced on treatment with both igf-i and -ii. nevertheless, although these differences were reproducible, the high variability demonstrated between individual strains meant that they failed to reach statistical significance. stimulation of mdf with igf-ii gave a significant increase in the phosphorylated form of the shc isoform p <dig>  which was also significantly greater than that seen in stimulated fdf, whereas the other two isoforms did not significantly change. fdf showed no significant change in any shc isoform with stimulation of exogenous igf-ii. the pattern of phosphorylation of shc isoforms does not correspond with the pattern of the  <dig> kd band seen in the phosphorylated tyrosine western blots.

another signalling event associated with igf-r <dig> function is the activation of map kinase  and subsequent translocation into the nucleus, where it mediates the phosphorylation of specific transcription factors, and progression through the cell cycle  <cit> . in addition, map kinase activity has been shown to be required for the igf-i-induced increased expression of collagen α <dig>  in rat intestinal epithelial cells <cit> . our data has shown that on stimulation with igf-i quiescent mdf show an increase in the phosphorylation of the erks, which was statistically significant for p <dig> . whereas fdf cell strains showed no change in phosphorylation pattern, which is consistent with the reduced mitogenic response and lack of induction of collagen synthesis seen on stimulation with igf-i. neither fdf nor mdf showed any significant increase in phosphorylation of erks after induction with exogenous igf-ii. others, studying different cell types have suggested that igf-ii can activate erk in keratinocytes, the c2c <dig> cell line and the extravillous trophoblast  <cit> . work is on-going to assess the phosphorylation of erk in response to igf-ii over a longer and more comprehensive time course. the differing outcome between igf-i and igf-ii in the tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins in fdfs compared to mdf may well be indicative of a developmentally related change in response to these growth factors.

in summary human fetal dermal fibroblasts appear to respond differentially to the two igfs and in an apparently converse manner to that of their developmentally mature counterparts. fdf exhibit a significantly lower mitogenic response to both igf-i and -ii than that seen with mdf, and furthermore unlike mdf cell strains, clearly fail to synthesise collagen in response to igf-i. in contrast to mdf cell strains, fetal cells do appear to demonstrate a slight induction  of collagen synthesis in response to igf-ii. fdfs do not appear to increase the tyrosine phosphorylation of a number of proteins including shc and erks in response to igf-i over the time course used. however, fdf do appear to respond to igf-ii by significantly increasing the density of an as yet unidentified  <dig> kd tyrosine-phosphorylated protein and reducing the density of a  <dig> kd tyrosine-phosphorylated protein, though again neither shc nor erk showed any increase in activation with treatment. in contrast mdf cell strains exhibited no significant difference with stimulation of either form of igf in the general amount of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins, although significantly increased phosphorylation of the p <dig> form of shc after igf-ii stimulation and in the p <dig> form of erk after igf-i stimulation. work is ongoing to further study the signalling pathways involved in the response of fdf to igf-i and -ii. it may be possible in future to switch off the specific response of postnatal cells to igf-i, thus making their behaviour more like that seen with fetal dermal fibroblasts. manipulation of cell behaviour from postnatal to fetal with regard to these cytokines may result in improvement of scarring.

CONCLUSIONS
dermal fibroblasts exhibit different responses to the two forms of igf depending on their developmental maturity. this may relate to the developmental transition in cutaneous wound healing from regeneration to fibrosis.

