BACKGROUND
the derivation of human embryonic stem cells  from somatic cell nuclear transfer  blastocysts represents an innovative strategy for overcoming immune rejection during transplantation. however, autologous human therapeutic cloning using human donor cells and oocytes has been continuously faced with legal and moral quandaries. thus, monkey primary cells and bovine oocytes have been used as alternative donor and recipient cells for scnt, respectively. in addition, interspecies scnt  shows promise as a technique for examining nucleocytoplasmic interactions  <cit> , stem cells  <cit> , and the cloning of endangered animals whose oocytes are difficult to obtain  <cit> . the most important application of iscnt lies in its potential to facilitate the reprogramming of human somatic cells into embryonic stem cells, thus avoiding ethical issues associated with using human oocytes. therefore, iscnt may increase the feasibility of human therapeutic cloning by providing comprehensive information about a variety of developmental events.

many iscnt embryonic studies have used bovine oocytes or oocytes from a variety of other species, such as pigs, rats, sheep, and monkeys  <cit> . the bovine oocyte is one of the most popular recipient cytoplasts for iscnt because of the large number of oocytes that can be retrieved and because the in vitro culture system is well established. although bovine oocytes support development beyond the morula stage in dogs  <cit> , humans  <cit>  and monkeys  <cit> , the poor developmental efficiency of iscnt embryos remains a crucial problem when compared to in vitro fertilization  and intraspecies scnt techniques. some studies have reported that high rates of abnormal iscnt development may result from aberrant gene expression  <cit>  or epigenetic modification by dna methylation  <cit> .

among mammals, embryonic genome activation  is the most critical event for viability during early development  <cit> . ega occurs at the 2-cell stage in mice  <cit> , at the 8- to 16-cell stage in humans  <cit>  and bovines  <cit> , and at the 6- to 8-cell stage in monkeys  <cit> . it requires the expression of the housekeeping genes hsp <dig> , pgk <dig>  and pdha <dig>   <cit> , as well as imprinting genes such as ndn  and xist   <cit> . in addition, the transcription of ribosomal rna  serves as a marker for ega and coincides with a dramatic increase in nucleolar gene activation in mice  <cit> , bovines  <cit> , and pigs  <cit> , resulting from the formation of functional nucleoli. when the inactive nucleolus, or nucleolar precursor body , is transformed into an active nucleolus, it consists of the innermost fibrillar centers  surrounded by dense fibrillar components , which are bordered by granular components   <cit> . the fcs contains rdna transcriptional enzymes, such as rna polymerase i and upstream binding transcription factor . the dfc, which delivers pre-mature rrna to the gc, contains fibrillarin. the gc includes nucleophosmin and nucleolin, which are associated with the processing of premature rrna  <cit> . the various nucleolar proteins must be localized in a specific nucleolar region for the formation of a functional nucleolus  <cit> .

impaired nucleologenesis often coincides with failed early development in scnt embryos. the bovine ooplasm successfully supports initial nucleolar assembly in embryos cloned from bovine and porcine cells  <cit> , whereas delayed nucleolar assembly and decreased fibrillarin content were found in mouse  <cit>  and monkey embryos  <cit> . however, little or no data have been gathered regarding the reprogramming of a monkey donor genome within ooplasms of different species, especially that of the bovine, although the iscnt strategy facilitates monkey embryogenesis studies and their subsequent applications.

the aim of the present investigation was to understand why monkey-bovine -iscnt embryos have poor developmental rates to the blastocyst stage compared to ivf and bovine-bovine -scnt) embryos. the objectives were to: 1) compare the developmental competence of ivf, bb-scnt, and mb-iscnt embryos to the blastocyst stage, 2) investigate the expression of housekeeping and imprinting genes, 3) compare nucleolar ultrastructure by transmission electron microscopy , and 4) compare the expression of nucleolar component proteins among ivf, bb-scnt, and mb-iscnt embryos by immunofluorescence confocal laser scanning microscopy and real-time polymerase chain reaction .

RESULTS
development of ivf, bb-scnt, and mb-iscnt embryos
rhesus monkey ear fibroblast cells  were fused with enucleated bovine oocytes  using the same fusion parameters used for bovine fibroblasts . ivf bovine embryos were also cultured to control for the effect of the nuclear transfer  procedure. eight-cell stage ivf, bb-scnt, and mb-iscnt embryos were observed  after  <dig> days of culture. pcr-based mitochondrial dna  analysis was used to confirm that 8-cell-stage mb-iscnt embryos had fused. pcr amplification of d-loop mtdna was performed using species-specific primers. monkey and bovine mtdna were detected in 8-cell iscnts . no difference in cleavage rate was observed among mb-iscnt , ivf , or bb-scnt embryos . the developmental rates of ivf and bb-scnt embryos were  <dig>  ±  <dig> % and  <dig>  ±  <dig> %, respectively. however, the mb-iscnt embryos did not develop into blastocysts .

cleavage and developmental rates are expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean  from three independent experiments. the superscripts "a" and "b" indicate significant differences between experimental groups . bb: bovine-bovine; mb: monkey-bovine

down-expression of housekeeping and imprinting genes during ega in mb-iscnt embryos
we used the terminal transferase dutp nick-end labeling  assay to examine the frequency of apoptotic cells in 8- to 16-cell-stage mb-iscnt embryos on day  <dig> ; however, no difference was observed compared to the ivf and bb-scnt embryos . next, we determined whether pre-ega  and post-ega  mb-iscnt, ivf, and bb-scnt embryos expressed the hsp <dig>  pdha, and pgk <dig> housekeeping genes and the ndn and xist imprinting genes. interestingly, there was an increase in the expression of the three housekeeping and imprinting genes in the 8-cell-stage ivf and bb-scnt embryos compared to their respective 4-cell stages, but the mb-iscnt embryos only expressed the hsp <dig> housekeeping gene during the same period . these results suggest that the failure of mb-iscnt embryos to develop into blastocysts was due to the down-regulation of housekeeping and imprinting gene transcription during ega.

abnormal nucleolar morphology during ega in mb-iscnt embryos
given the abnormal housekeeping and imprinting gene expression during ega in the mb-iscnt embryos, we suspected abnormal transcription of the nucleus. thus, we investigated the nucleolar ultrastructure of mb-iscnt embryos during ega and compared it to ivf and bb-scnt embryos using tem. we described the nucleologenic stages of the embryos according to kopecny et al.  <cit>  and evaluated the proportion of ivf, bb-scnt, and mb-iscnt embryos showing a given nucleolar stage during ega. control nuclei from ivf and bb-scnt embryos contained npbs with large and small vacuoles. approximately 48% of the ivf and 60% of the bb-scnt ega-stage embryos were in stage  <dig> of nucleolar development , whereas few stage  <dig> nucleoli were observed among ega-stage mb-iscnt embryos . interestingly, abnormal nucleolar structures, which were scattered near the nuclear membrane, were prevalent in mb-iscnt embryos , indicating that they failed to develop normal nucleoli. otherwise, the nuclear membrane, mitochondria, the golgi apparatus, and other ultrastructural features were similar among all three types of embryos .

given that nucleologenesis is related to the embryonic developmental stage  <cit> , we investigated the difference in the proportions of nucleolar-stage ivf, bb-scnt, and mb-iscnt embryos from early  to late  ega. as shown in figure 3c, there was a greater proportion of stage  <dig> nucleoli  than stage  <dig>  or stage  <dig>  nucleoli among early-ega ivf and bb-scnt embryos. abnormal nucleoli were found in  <dig> % of ivf and  <dig> % of bb-scnt embryos. similar results were observed for late-ega ivf and bb-scnt embryos. interestingly, stage  <dig>  nucleoli were only observed in late-ega bb-scnt embryos. conversely, the mb-iscnt embryos exhibited stage  <dig>  and stage  <dig>  nucleoli, but showed very large numbers of abnormal nucleoli . these results suggest that bovine enucleated oocytes have a limited capacity for supporting nucleologenesis in embryos produced via nuclear transfer from rhesus monkey somatic cells.

abnormal expression and disorganization of nucleolar component proteins in mb-iscnt embryos
a variety of nucleolar component proteins must be expressed and localized in the appropriate nucleolar regions to form a functional nucleolus. however, our results indicate that failed early development in mb-iscnt embryos is closely associated with abnormal nucleologenesis, as well as defects in ega.

we investigated the expression and localization of nucleolar component proteins, including ubtf, fibrillarin, nucleophosmin, and nucleolin, in ivf, bb-scnt, and mb-iscnt embryos during ega. ubtf is typically found in focal clusters in putative nucleoli  <cit> . although ubtf was found in small focal clusters in interphase ivf and bb-scnt cells , very few clusters were observed in mb-iscnt embryos  and some nuclei did not express ubtf . in previous studies, fibrillarin was localized in clusters of intensely labeled foci, and nucleolin and nucleophosmin were found in a shell-like structure that appeared as a ring-like image  <cit> . unlike ivf and bb-scnt embryos, fibrillarin was detected in some blastomeres derived from mb-iscnt embryos . however, fibrillarin expression was reduced in mb-iscnt embryos and it was spot-shaped . nucleophosmin and nucleolin were co-localized in the nucleolus in almost all ivf and bb-scnt embryos and appeared as shell-like structures , whereas nucleophosmin and nucleolin expression levels were lower in mb-iscnt embryos and were spot-shaped .

we quantified the expression of these proteins in individual blastomeres from ivf, bb-scnt, and mb-iscnt embryos in early  and late ega . although we observed significantly lower expression in early- and late-ega stage mb-iscnt blastomeres, we found similar protein expression rates in early and late ivf and bb-scnt blastomeres . immunofluorescence confocal laser scanning microscopy results indicated that ubtf, fibrillarin, nucleophosmin, and nucleolin expression levels were significantly reduced in mb-iscnt embryos compared to ivf and bb-scnt embryos . this may suggest that the abnormal expression and disorganization of nucleolar component proteins resulted in the formation of abnormal nucleoli in mb-iscnt embryos.

discussion
our results demonstrate that the abnormal expression and disorganization of nucleolar component proteins during ega results in abnormal nucleolar structure, which leads to lower developmental rates in mb-iscnt embryos. when the developmental rates of ivf, bb-scnt, and mb-iscnt embryos were examined, the cleavage rates of mb-iscnt embryos, which received monkey fibroblast nuclei and bovine oocyte cytoplasm, were similar to those of ivf and bb-scnt embryos; however, they failed to develop to the blastocyst stage . these results suggest that mb-iscnt embryos could not proceed through the transition from maternal to embryonic development. these findings also demonstrate that the ooplasm at the second metaphase, and not the nucleus, is principally responsible for early embryonic development prior to ega, a finding consistent with results reported in iscnt mice  <cit>  and cats  <cit>  generated using bovine enucleated oocytes.

the culture system is a very important factor affecting the efficiency of nuclear transfer. non-human primate iscnt embryos derived from donor human adult somatic cells and recipient bovine oocytes have been successfully cultured in ivc medium  <cit> . similarly, park et al.  <cit>  reported that mb-iscnt embryos developed to the 8-cell stage in cr1-aa medium, even though ega occurs at the 2-cell stage in mouse embryos. therefore, to identify whether the limited developmental competency of the mb-iscnt embryos described here is related to the type of culture medium, we cultured the embryos using several well-known culture media, including cr1-aa, ivc- <dig>  ivc- <dig>  g- <dig>  g- <dig>  complete early cleavage, and complete blastocyst medium. however, no culture medium was capable of supporting the early embryonic development of mb-iscnt embryos . these results suggest that the developmental competency of iscnt embryos may be more dependent upon the donor species than the recipient species or the culture medium used.

a recent study showed that 20% of mb-iscnt embryos exhibited dna damage compared to scnts that were parthenogenetically activated  on day  <dig>  <cit> . however, in the present study, the tunel assay revealed no difference in the frequency of apoptotic cells among ivf, bb-scnt, and mb-iscnt embryos on day  <dig> . therefore, it appears that developmental failure was not due to apoptosis. these results led us to hypothesize that the inability to progress through ega was responsible for developmental failure in mb-iscnt embryos. ega is associated with transcriptional activation  <cit>  and its timing is species-specific  <cit> . a failure to regulate the timing of activation or the types of genes expressed can lead to developmental arrest during preimplantation  <cit> , and previous studies have shown that mb-iscnt embryos undergo developmental arrest due to failed gene expression at the appropriate time  <cit> . in agreement with previous studies, we found an increase in the expression of hsp <dig>  pgk <dig>  pdha, ndn, and xist in 8-cell-stage ivf and bb-scnt embryos   <cit> ; in contrast, pdha, pgk <dig>  ndn, and xist expression decreased in mb-iscnt embryos, indicating that blastocyst development did not occur in the 8-cell stage mb-iscnt embryos due to a failure to complete ega.

it is generally accepted that the transcriptional activity of the nucleus is associated with a change from a compact nucleolus  to a functional nucleolus , and that greatly increased transcription is indicative of ega  <cit> . we observed stage  <dig> and  <dig> nucleoli during early ega in mb-iscnt embryos, but stage  <dig> nucleoli were sparsely observed in early or late ega; furthermore, these embryos showed irregularly shaped npbs . this finding coincided with those observed when transcription is inhibited by alpha-amanitin, which causes the disintegration of npbs and embryonic developmental arrest  <cit> . conversely, a greater proportion of stage  <dig> nucleoli were also observed in early-ega bb-scnt embryos than in early-ega ivf embryos, and stage  <dig> nucleoli were only observed in late-ega bb-scnts. we assumed that bb-scnts developed to the nucleolar stage at a faster rate than the ivf embryos, as in previous studies  <cit> . in addition, previous studies have reported that the nucleoli in late-ega, 8-cell-stage ivf-derived embryos have nucleolar vacuoles, whereas 4-cell stage bb-scnt embryos display both small and large vacuoles  <cit> . interestingly, we previously observed that normal blastocyst development in goat-bovine iscnt embryos was associated with functional changes in nucleoli , and development was similar to that of goat-goat scnt embryos  <cit> . from an ultrastructural viewpoint, it is clear that mb-iscnt embryos were unable to form a functional nucleolus during ega. these results suggest that functional nucleoli are critical for the normal development of iscnt embryos and that successful development may be donor species-dependant.

we demonstrated that developmental arrest in mb-iscnt embryos may be caused by aberrant expression of nucleolar proteins during early embryonic development. numerous additional studies have shown that abnormal nucleologenesis is observed during the development of iscnt embryos  <cit> . however, until now, no direct evidence was available as to whether this nucleolar defect is a cause or a result of developmental failure in iscnt embryos.

it was recently suggested that the aberrant expression of nucleolar proteins causes abnormal nucleologenesis in scnt embryos  <cit> , which leads to failed ega and developmental arrest  <cit> . in particular, the expression of nucleolar proteins is frequently dependent upon epigenetic modifications such as genomic methylation. we attempted to determine whether the reduced nucleolar protein expression observed in mb-iscnt embryos is due to epigenetic modification. however, no difference was observed in the methyl profiles of cpg islands in fibrillarin promoters between monkey donor cells and mb-iscnt embryos . given these findings, we propose two possible hypotheses or mechanisms regarding the reduced expression of nucleolar proteins such as fibrillarin. one possible explanation is differences in histone modification, which were not examined in this study. alternatively, it is possible that the bovine oocyte-derived transcriptional machinery was unable to express the monkey fibrillarin gene. for example, successful embryonic or full-term development of iscnt embryos may depend on the accurate spatio-temporal action of donor cell species-specific transcription factors. to investigate these hypotheses, we are currently developing rescue strategies, including a lentiviral vector system expressing same-species transcription factors.

a functioning nucleolus requires numerous components  <cit> , but the location of these components is not completely understood  <cit> . it is, however, well known that various nucleolar component proteins such as ubtf, fibrillarin, nucleophosmin, and nucleolin must be expressed and localized in the appropriate nucleolar region to form a functional nucleolus. ubtf is detected in first-cell cycle zygotic embryos, it is localized to small spherical bodies, and it is one of several transcription factors required for the binding of rna polymerase i to rdna in ivf embryos  <cit> . fibrillarin is localized to the fcs and dense dfcs of nucleoli  <cit>  and is associated with rrna modification  <cit> , ribosome assembly  <cit> , nucleolar assembly  <cit> , and early embryonic development  <cit> , an indicator of ega  <cit> . nucleolin is a phosphorylated protein present in large amounts in nucleoli during active ribosomal biogenesis  <cit> ; it is localized to dfcs and gcs of nucleoli  <cit>  and plays essential roles in rdna transcription, rrna maturation, ribosome assembly, nucleocytoplasmic transport, and nucleologenesis  <cit> . nucleophosmin is involved in the shuttling of proteins into the nucleolus  <cit> . as shown in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  the initial targeting of nucleolar proteins appears to be normal; however, the reduced expression of nucleolar protein seems to be associated with impairment in further nucleologenesis during ega. although we could not address the relationship between nucleolar protein expression and nucleologenesis, our findings suggest that impaired nucleologenesis is a major hurdle in iscnt technology.

we examined the expression patterns of nucleolar component proteins and the localization of functional nucleoli in mb-iscnt embryos. as in previous studies  <cit> , ubtf and fibrillarin were displayed as clusters of small foci in the putative nucleolus of 8-cell-stage ivf and bb-scnt embryos , and nucleolin and nucleophosmin appeared as ring-shaped structures at ega ; these results are consistent with a previous study  <cit> . however, in mb-iscnt embryos, ubtf, fibrillarin, nucleolin, and nucleophosmin were sporadically detected as small foci . these results indicate that the dysregulation of these nucleolar proteins may have led to nonfunctional nucleoli, which might be separated into dfcs and gcs, and the down-regulation of housekeeping and imprinting genes during ega. as the result, mb-iscnt embryos exhibited developmental arrest.

finally, we observed significantly lower expression of these nucleolar proteins in individual mb-iscnt blastomeres than in ivf or bb-scnt blastomeres . these results suggest that it is important for mb-iscnt embryos to continuously maintain the expression of nucleolar proteins during ega. our future studies will use an adenoviral vector to examine whether an increase in nucleolar component proteins during the first three cleavage cycles overcomes nucleolar dysfunction and allows development to reach the morula or blastocyst stage.

CONCLUSIONS
mb-iscnt embryos derived from donor monkey fibroblasts and bovine recipient oocytes did not develop to the blastocyst stage. we determined that this failure was caused by the down-regulation of ega, and that it was not related to apoptosis. instead, impaired nucleologenesis and aberrant nucleolar formation in mb-iscnt embryos lead to developmental arrest. abnormal expression and disorganization of the nucleolar component proteins also resulted in the down-regulation of ega in mb-iscnt embryos. these results provide insight into the early stages of development in iscnt embryos, useful model for understanding nucleoar biology and will assist in the development of techniques to resolve these issues in iscnt technology and spur the development of further applications.

