BACKGROUND
breast tumours are currently primarily classified based on histological appearance or grade, as well as using certain molecular biomarkers. numerous studies have correlated variation in gene expression between individuals to phenotypic diversity in breast tumours  <cit> . information about expression of biologically important genes may improve clinical decision-making by improving the prediction of clinical outcomes, in comparison to traditional histological grade  <cit> . perou et al.  <cit>  pioneered breast tumour classification based on hierarchical clustering of genes, identifying biologically meaningful molecular signatures associated with features such as cellular proliferation and signalling pathway activity. related work  <cit>  has identified five distinct molecular-based subtypes : basal, her <dig>  luminal a, luminal b and normal-like breast tumours. a recent study has clustered a combined dataset including germline and somatic copy number variation, snp information and gene expression data for some  <dig> breast tumours, finding  <dig> molecularly defined subgroups with apparently distinct biology and disease-specific survival characteristics  <cit> .

many of these studies use clustering techniques  <cit>  to group tumours with similar gene expression patterns, and thus to identify clinically relevant molecular biomarkers for tumour classification. however, genes that are co-expressed across one subset of tumours may be expressed almost independently in another subset  <cit> . therefore, subtle but important biological features characterised by specific gene sets may be missed when viewed across data sets made up of a wide range of tumours.

to overcome this limitation, biclustering algorithms group genes and tumour samples simultaneously, to identify subsets of genes with similar expression patterns over subsets of tumour samples. biclustering was first applied in gene expression profiling studies by cheng and church  <cit> . since then various biclustering approaches have been proposed  <cit> . we reasoned that biclustering may be able to identify clinically-significant gene expression modules that stratify breast cancers according to inter-tumour heterogeneity. to our knowledge, the use of biclustering has not previously been investigated for this purpose. we used a biclustering technique, cmonkey  <cit> , to group breast tumours from  <dig> patients into subgroups which were conditionally dependent on expression profiles of specific gene subsets. we subsequently determined the association of biclusters with differential survival outcomes, and examined the potential for biclusters to improve prediction of early relapse, in order to test the suitability of biclusters as stratified biomarkers that are personalised to specific subsets of breast cancer patients.

RESULTS
biclustering breast cancer gene expression data identifies tumour subgroups with similar clinical features
we analysed a previously published dataset which combines affymetrix hg-u133a and hg-u133plus <dig> microarray data and matched clinical data from  <dig> cohorts of patients from independent studies. we selected  <dig> primary breast tumours from patients who had not received adjuvant or neo-adjuvant chemotherapy, endocrine-based therapy or radiotherapy . we restricted our analysis to non-adjuvant treated tumours so that direct associations between molecular information and long-term disease outcomes might be observed without the confounding affects of different treatments. after processing, the dataset consisted of  <dig> probe sets  across the  <dig> tumours. the  <dig> clinical annotations for each tumour/patient were: lymph node  status; hormone receptor status  status and progesterone receptor  status); tumour grade; tumour subtype; tumour size; patient age. the clinical information associated with these  <dig> tumours is summarised in figure  <dig>  more than 90% of these were lymph node negative  tumours, which is consistent with the fact that a clinical decision had been made not to treat these patients with adjuvant therapy.

using cmonkey to bicluster the dataset we obtained  <dig> biclusters with an average number of  <dig> tumours contributing to each bicluster. to determine whether the tumour subgroups and corresponding gene modules identified by biclustering were biologically and clinically meaningful, we assessed whether tumours allocated to the same bicluster had similar clinico-pathological annotations and clinical outcomes, and whether the genes contributing to these biclusters were associated with the activity of distinct biological pathways. to make sure that the tumour subgroups identified in the biclusters do not simply recapitulate clinical cohort we verified that biclusters contain data derived from a range of cohorts. then we computed the proportion of tumours in each subgroup in each of the  <dig> clinical categories. figure  <dig> illustrates the proportion of tumour samples in each category of  histological grade,  er status, and  molecular tumour subtype in each of the biclusters, ranked in order of the proportion of patients who suffered early relapse . these results show that biclusters do not simply recapitulate any of the already available clinical annotations.

analysis of the clinical annotations of tumours in each bicluster however reveals similar clinico-pathological features. clinical annotations for each bicluster are summarised in the supplementary material . for example, a summary of clinical annotations for biclusters  <dig> and  <dig> are shown in figure  <dig>  both consist of  <dig> tumour samples collected from all six cohorts. in bicluster  <dig> most tumours  have either basal-like  or her <dig>  intrinsic subtype; most  are estrogen-receptor negative , and are grade  <dig>  or  <dig> . therefore, the clinical information for bicluster  <dig> suggests that tumours in this group are aggressive and have pathological features associated with poor prognosis. by comparison, tumours in bicluster  <dig> are predominantly luminal-like tumours, i.e. luminal a  and luminal b , and are estrogen-receptor positive , and histological grade  <dig>  or  <dig> . thus the clinical information of tumours in bicluster  <dig> suggests that patients in this group have clinical features that are generally associated with less aggressive tumours, associated with good prognosis. similar patterns can be observed in the remaining biclusters .

overall, these data suggest that biclustering identifies subgroups of tumours selected from multiple cohorts, which do not simply recapitulate existing clinical annotations, but which are similar in clinico-pathological characteristics.

biclustered subgroups are associated with differential survival outcomes
to test the hypothesis that subgroups of tumours identified in biclustering are associated with differential patient outcomes, we examined the disease free survival  distribution of patients in each bicluster. figure  <dig> shows kaplan-meier survival curves for all  <dig> biclusters  superimposed on the survival curves for histological grade  and tumour subtype . bicluster-associated survival curves show a greater range than the grade-associated and subtype-associated survival curves. to test whether this range of survival distributions might arise by chance, we randomly assigned  the  <dig> tumours into  <dig> arbitrary groups with the same distribution of sizes as found in the biclusters. the kaplan-meier survival curves of these arbitrary groups  visually suggest that the bicluster-specific survival curves are more widely separated than expected at random. in order to assess this statistically, we computed the logrank-p values for all possible pairings of biclusters and for all possible pairings of the randomised groups. a two-sample kolmogorov-smirnov  test rejected at the 5% significance level the null hypothesis that these distributions were the same . these results indicate that membership of the biclusters is associated with differential survival outcomes.

tumours grouped in biclusters are molecularly distinct
to reveal molecular activities of oncogenic pathways associated with the biclusters, we used a univariate cox ph model to determine the molecular features most strongly associated with clinical outcome for each bicluster, identifying probe sets whose expression was significantly associated with dfs . we then used the genesetdb web tool  <cit>  to identify the significantly enriched  functional annotations of these genes . for example, rnas associated with several of the biclusters were enriched for cell cycle annotations , proliferation . rnas associated with several of the biclusters were also enriched for immune response annotations . genes strongly associated with specific biclusters were also found to be significantly enriched for cancer-associated transcription factors, such as myc , stat <dig> , e2f , sp <dig>  and nfe2l <dig> , and enriched in regulatory pathways, which play an important role in breast cancer progress, such as regulatory dna replication  and p53-dependent g1/s dna damage checkpoint ) in bicluster  <dig>  g1/s-specific transcription  in biclusters  <dig> and  <dig>  interferon signalling  in biclusters  <dig> and  <dig>  and srebp signalling  in bicluster  <dig>  additional file 3: table s <dig> summarises biological meaningful annotations for biclusters associated with low risk of disease recurrence and for biclusters associated with high risk of relapse.

to compare the gene sets identified for each bicluster we searched for biologically significant genes which were differentially expressed between pairs of biclusters, showing a significant difference  in survival distribution . as an example, additional file 3: table s <dig> summarises significant differentially expressed genes between bicluster  <dig> and bicluster  <dig>  we analysed these gene classifiers and found them to be highly enriched in go categories including response to estrogen stimulus, mammary gland development, defence response and wound healing. . the gene classifiers were also highly associated with transcription factor stat group , and were significantly enriched in regulatory pathways such as downregulated of mta- <dig> in er-negative breast tumors  and role of erbb <dig> in signal transduction and oncology . breast abscess  and abnormal mammary gland alveolus morphology  were also found in genes characterizing the difference in survival outcomes between these two biclusters.

overall, these results imply that the biclusters are molecularly defined by functionally coherent, but distinct, gene expression modules.

bicluster gene classifiers are different to commercial oncotype dx and mammaprint profiles
to determine whether currently known biomarkers are associated with the biclusters, in figure  <dig>  we plot gene expression for tumours in each bicluster of genes from the commercialised oncotype dx and mammaprint diagnostic tests, the genetic grade signature proposed by ivshina et al.  <cit> , and other key oncogenic markers. the figure indicates three broad groupings of biclusters, which have significant differences in disease-free survival, shown in figure  <dig> . the first  <dig> biclusters  are associated with low risk of disease recurrence . the last  <dig> biclusters  are associated with high risk of disease recurrence . the heatmap suggests that these known biomarkers are not able to distinguish patient subgroups identified by biclustering.

we then looked at the genes and related pathways identified as being differentially expressed between biclusters associated with low and high survival prognosis. interestingly, many of these gene classifiers are not found in currently available prognostic gene classifiers for breast cancer. for each pair of biclusters showing differentially survival outcomes, we used prediction analysis of microarrays   <cit>  to identify those of probe sets which were able to accurately characterise survival outcome differences between the biclusters . among the gene classifiers for bicluster  <dig> and bicluster  <dig> , grb <dig> and erbb <dig>  and esr <dig> and bcl <dig>  are members of the oncotype dx gene list. overall, however, we found only a small proportion of gene classifiers that coincide with the commercial gene lists.

biclusters show strong prognostic association with breast cancer patient survival in comparison to conventional clinical markers
we used a univariate cox ph model to examine the association between conventional prognostic factors  and disease free survival  time. clinical variables were entered as binary data while tumour size and age were discretized into categorical variables . the strength of association between clinical variables and the survival outcome, as quantified by cox ph p-value, was compared to prognostic significance of biclustered tumour groups, using the same univariate cox ph model. bicluster membership was found to have a strong association with dfs , after ln status  and tumour size , shown in additional file 3: table s <dig> . we also found that biclusters give better prognostication of relapse compared to the conventional molecular tumour subtype .

next, we used a multivariate cox ph model to estimate the association of biclusters with dfs in combination with the conventional clinical factors. we found that biclusters were significantly statistically associated with dfs time , multivariate cox ph p =  <dig> ; compared to randomly allocated groups, additional file 3: table s <dig> , multivariate cox ph p =  <dig> ).

finally, we also found that biclusters show stronger prognostic association with disease recurrence within pathology-specific tumour subsets -: ln- patient subgroup, univariate cox ph p =  <dig> ; er+ patient subgroup, p =  <dig> ; grade  <dig> tumour subgroup, p =  <dig> ; grade  <dig> tumour subgroup, p =  <dig> ). in each of these pathology-specific tumour subsets, multivariate cox ph analysis also demonstrated that the tumour biclusters were significantly in associated with dfs compared to molecular tumour subtype when combined with other conventional clinical variables -).

these univariate and multivariate cox ph analyses suggest that the classification of tumours using biclustering can, alone or in combination with other clinical factors, be a significant prognostic variable, especially in pathology-specific patient subsets, in comparison to conventional clinical-pathological factors.

biclusters increase prediction of patient survival
the ultimate goal of tumour classification is to improve prediction of an individual’s risk of relapse, so as to aid the clinician in decision making on treatment strategy . to test whether biclusters improve prediction of patient survival, we used a conditional inference tree model to predict disease recurrence. we chose to examine disease recurrence  within 2 years of primary surgery. therefore, we defined a dichotomous clinical outcomes decision tree, in which early relapse equates to disease free survival time ≤ 2 years, and late relapse to dfs time ≥ 8 years . bicluster membership  and clinical information including hormone receptor status , lymph node status, histological grade, tumour size and patient age were included as binary variables for each tumour.

initially we generated a decision tree based on conventional clinical covariates only. figure  <dig>  demonstrates that lymph node  status was found to be the most important clinical variable for estimation of patient clinical outcomes  in comparison to the remaining clinical variables, followed by tumour grade  and er status . since ~90% of the tumours in our dataset are ln negative tumours, we constructed a decision tree for the ln− branch, shown in figure  <dig> . in ln− tumours, histological grade was the most significant variable , followed by tumour size  and er status . next we constructed a decision tree for ln− tumours using both biclusters and clinical variables. figure  <dig> shows that the bicluster  <dig>  and bicluster  <dig>  were significant molecular covariates in ln− tumours compared to the other clinical variables. we determined similar decision trees for continuous dfs time without dichotomisation .

to assess the performance of the conditional inference tree predictors, we performed a cross-validation by generating  <dig> random splits of the data into training  and test  sets, ensuring that both training and test sets contained similar proportion of early and late relapse patients as the full data set. biclusters derived by applying cmonkey to the training data only were combined with clinical variables and used to generate the decision tree. performance was assessed by comparing relapse time predicted by the decision tree to the actual survival outcomes of patients in the test set. tumours in the test set were assigned to biclusters by calculating correlation with the first principal component of the gene expression profile of each bicluster . to assess the contribution of biclusters to prediction of relapse times, we compared these results with relapse times predicted using decision trees constructed from clinical variables only. the average rate of correctly predicted early relapse increased from 41% to 58% by incorporating biclusters into the predictors.

to assess the performance of the predictors for a clinically-determined subset of tumours we estimated of early relapse for patients with moderately differentiated grade  <dig> and poorly differentiated grade  <dig> tumours. we found 17% and 20% improvements in prediction of early relapse in these patients by including bicluster information .

we note that the conditional inference tree prediction model performed consistently with different choice of survival time boundaries : no significant deviation in the performance was observed when different cut-off times for relapse were chosen. we also considered an alternative prediction model. bøvelstad et al.  <cit>  performed a comparative study of six cox regression-based survival prediction methods, including univariate selection, supervised principal component analysis, partial least squares regression, ridge regression and lasso, finding that ridge regression presented the best overall performance. we repeated the above analysis using a cox regression-based ridge regression model. a higher median area under the roc curve   <cit>  was observed, in particular for dfs time less than 2 years, across  <dig> random data splits when the model incorporated bicluster information , indicating better prediction of early relapse compared to the model with clinical covariates only, qualitatively consistent with the results from the conditional inference tree.

taken together, these results suggest that combining conventional clinical information with bicluster membership is able to provide a better prediction of early relapse in breast cancer patients.

discussion
in this study we have shown biclustering to be a useful approach to identifying subgroups of tumours, based on the use of stratified biomarkers that are personalised to specific subsets of patients. biclustering determines gene modules and related clinical features which are important in determining phenotypic and clinical outcomes in those patients, but not in others.

in particular, we have applied biclustering to a large breast cancer expression data set that includes careful clinical annotations, and have used this method to identify clusters of breast tumours conditional on common expression profiles across a set of genes. we also demonstrated that biclusters do not simply recapitulate any obvious single, known clinical covariate , but instead represent a group of tumours co-expressing a set of genes that are associated with similar clinical presentation and give rise to recurrence risk. we found that biclusters have strong prognostic association with patient survival outcomes, especially in pathology-specific tumour subsets, compared to conventional molecular tumour subtype. the predictive value of biclustering in the prediction of early relapse of disease was observed by comparing prediction of conditional inference tree models constructed from clinical covariates with those constructed from a combination of clinical covariates and biclusters. on average we found that including biclusters provided close to a 20% improvement over prediction of early relapse using clinical covariates only.

we identified  <dig> biclusters in the dataset studied here. comparisons showed that the tumours comprising some of these biclusters were enriched for similar clinical features, showing no significant difference in their kaplan-meier survival curves, despite subtle differences in the gene signatures contributing to the biclusters, i.e. different molecular signatures contributing to similar phenotype or disease state. such differences may provide important information for prognosis and may contribute to our understanding of genetic regulatory mechanisms underlying patient outcomes.

our analysis suggests that unsupervised biclustering is able to discover tumour subgroups determined from biologically meaningful gene sets. however, overall we found only a small proportion of these gene classifiers coincide with the 21-mrna oncotype dx rt-pcr assay  <cit>  and the 70-mrna mammaprint  <cit>  gene lists, which have been developed for determining the risk of breast tumour recurrence in patients with stage i or ii node-negative breast cancer. by examining the expression pattern of oncotype dx and mammaprint profiles, as well as genetic grade markers proposed by ivshina et al.  <cit> , across all biclusters, we found that the expression patterns of these gene markers were associated with two broad groups of patients with differential clinical outcomes ). membership of these groups is much broader than that of the biclusters we have identified. given the functional enrichment analyses of the bicluster gene classifiers showing strong biological significance in breast cancer, this suggests a potential avenue for identifying new mrna-based profiles for predicting disease recurrence.

biclusters may overlap one another, both in the tumours and the gene signatures which determine them. the clinical and molecular heterogeneity within breast cancer suggests that it is unlikely that one may accurately determine unique characteristics of tumours or predict patient clinical outcomes using a single or a small group of gene markers. different combinations of molecular pathways may be activated in, and therefore significantly associate with the recurrence of the disease in different patients. therefore, biclusters which are determined from multiple and potentially overlapping gene expression profiles may be more relevant in the context of personalised medicine, which requires finer groupings of patients with specific molecular and clinical characteristics.

in performing cross-validation analysis we assigned ‘test’ tumours to biclusters derived from the ‘training’ set of tumours by ranking correlation with the first principal component of the gene signature of each bicluster. we found relatively high correlations between all members of the test set and all biclusters. nevertheless, samples were allocated to biclusters with consistency in both molecular and clinical characteristics. in practice, new patients arriving in the clinic could be assigned to biclusters on the basis of both tumour gene expression and clinical covariates . furthermore, the power of the predictive model can be improved by including new cases into the current ‘training’ population once clinical outcomes are known, hence re-determining biclusters periodically.

CONCLUSIONS
with the increasing clinical use of genomic profiling, which is producing very large amounts of data for large numbers of patients, methods to use this data to segregate patients into prognostic and treatment groups is increasingly important. our study proposes a biclustering approach to identify stratified biomarkers, without pre-selection of gene markers or molecular pathways. our results show the utility of biclustering in identifying of molecularly and clinico-pathologically distinct tumour subtypes that are strongly associated with differential clinical outcomes. the prognostic significance of biclustered patient groups was observed in well-, moderately- and poorly- differentiated disease. bicluster-specific patient stratification characterised by different gene profiles fits well within the context of personalised medicine: different sets of molecular pathways being active in different tumours.

