BACKGROUND
eucalyptus tree species are an extremely important source of hardwood for forest industries worldwide. it is the most widely planted hardwood species in the temperate, sub-tropical and tropical zones. in south africa, about  <dig>  million ha are eucalyptus plantations which accounts for  <dig> % of total forest plantations  <cit> . eucalyptus grandis are the most commonly used trees in forest plantations. the most serious problem affecting wood quality and product yield of south african eucalyptus trees is the high level of growth stress that develops as the trees grow, manifesting itself in severe splitting when the trees are felled and cut into logs  <cit> . molecular markers linked to wood splitting in e. grandis were developed by barros et al.  <cit>  and were successfully used in the selection of non-splitting clones as part of a marker-assisted breeding programme. however, no genes linked to the differential response of e. grandis trees to wood end splitting and to growth stress were identified. growth stress arises from the deposition of lignin within the secondary walls during maturation of fibrous cells, which includes the biosynthesis of polysaccharides and cell wall proteins  <cit> . the genes and genetic mechanisms that underlie growth stress are of particular interest in e. grandis due to the potential of identifying trees with desirable wood properties.

a variety of molecular techniques are available to identify differentially expressed genes. cdna-aflp has been successfully used in the identification of a wide range of candidate genes including genes with possible roles in plant defense response  <cit> , in fruit ripening processes  <cit>  and in cell wall biosynthesis in eucalyptus  <cit> . recently, expressed sequence tag  sequencing proved to be an efficient approach to identify gene types and novel genes during wood formation. using this technique allona et al.  <cit>  found a significant representation of cellulose, lignin and other cell-wall biosynthesis genes and a comparable percentage of ests. pavy et al.  <cit>  identified a total of  <dig> differentially expressed gene sequences and the gene encoding the smad <dig> interacting factor by statistical analysis of ests belonging to the tigr pinus gene index. in a similar experiment, ramussen-poblete et al.  <cit>  described transcription factor families such as the aux/iaa  family, myb  <dig> and hd containing domains  that regulate genes participating in xylem development and secondary cell wall formation   <cit> .

the accumulation of large est libraries have allowed the construction of high-throughput cdna microarray chips  <cit> , which could be used to study gene expression in tree species such as eucalyptus  <cit> , pine  <cit> , poplar  <cit>  and aspen  <cit> . demura et al.  <cit>  used cdna microarrays to identify clusters of zinnia elegans genes that punctuate the major morphological and biochemical events of the transdifferentiation of tracheary elements  <cit> . further evidence of the identity of major genes involved in wood formation has been gained in a separate study by foucart et al.  <cit>  who established a portfolio of eucalyptus xylem genes. this technique can also be used to assay dna sequence variation in different phenotypes reducing the genotyping effort as well as producing quantitative raw data that can then be converted into discrete genotypes and has been used in several studies  <cit> .

a strategy that combines high-throughput microarray expression profiling with genotyping offers the opportunity to explore gene expression of a tree that has not been completely characterized at the molecular level. the aim of the study was to develop a prototype microarray chip from differentiating xylem tissue of e. grandis trees differing in their splitting characteristics and in their lignin contents. cdna-aflp and cdna microarray analysis was used to identify individual e. grandis trees exhibiting preferred wood qualities and to identify differential expressed genes underlying different aspects of wood development that could help elucidate wood splitting. this study also evaluates the potential of combining expression analysis with fingerprinting analysis for the early detection of e. grandis trees that are prone to severe splitting. trees identified as being prone to splitting could be excluded from breeding populations and add value to plantation forestry.

RESULTS
rna and cdna quality
the rna extracted from wood-forming tissue of the seven e. grandis trees was found to be of high quality and the absence of contaminating genomic dna was confirmed for all cdna samples . the amplification of a region of the cad <dig> genes from cdna yielded the expected  <dig> bp mrna-derived amplicon, which was clearly distinguishable from the  <dig> bp genomic dna-derived, intron-containing fragments .

assembly of clones from cdna library and cdna-aflp
cdna libraries were constructed from rna extracted from the seven e. grandis trees and a total of  <dig> cdna clones were arrayed onto a microarray slide to be used for transcript profiling of the trees. the cdna-aflp clones were also generated from the seven trees and the selective amplification using the single + <dig> mse/+2pst primer combination showed high variable expression levels among the trees. amplified fragments ranged in sizes from  <dig> bp to over  <dig> bp when visualized on polyacrylamide gels. these fragments were cloned and spotted onto the same microarray slide. in total  <dig> cdna-aflp clones were spotted to be used for the identification, fingerprinting and expression profiling of e. grandis trees.

analysis of the combined array
the combined microarray containing a total of  <dig> clones was hybridized with cdna from the seven e. grandis trees. hybridization profiles showed that  <dig>  cdna-aflp clones and  <dig>  cdna library clones were differentially expressed. this revealed that both approaches generated a similar amount of differentially expressed clones suggesting that both techniques are equally useful for expression profiling.

general expression patterns of the combined array
a 1578-probe prototype cdna microarray was constructed by arraying selective amplifications  of  <dig> cdna-aflp fragments and  <dig> cdna library clones from seven individual eucalyptus trees onto silanized glass slides. the cdna profiles were clustered according to their expression patterns using pearson's correlation in the cluster program of eisen et al  <cit>  and are shown in fig. 1a. based on the clustering, ten different groups of co-expressed genes could be annotated . clusters  <dig> and  <dig> contain genes that were up-regulated in the high lignin and the two high splitting trees. most transcripts represented in these clusters are involved in cell wall biogenesis and include genes such as glucuronic acid decarboxylase  <dig> , xyloglucan endotransglycosylate  and caffeoyl-coa 3-o-methyltransferase . cluster  <dig> represents genes that were up-regulated in the high lignin and in the two high splitting trees. most transcripts belonging to this cluster are associated with stress/defense. one transcript belonging to cluster  <dig>  the putative zinc finger protein, was up-regulated in one low lignin and in the two low splitting trees. this gene is also part of the stress group. in general it was observed that stress-related genes were mostly up-regulated in the high lignin and high splitting trees. a similar pattern was also observed for the transcripts responsible for the higher lignin content which were up-regulated in both the high splitting trees and high lignin trees.

the combined microarray was further analyzed by determining the statistical significance of changes in transcript abundance using the method described by wolfinger et al.  <cit> . eighty clones were found to be distinctly differentially expressed with a fold change of at least  <dig>  or - <dig>  and a p value of  <dig> . these clones representing different gene clusters were isolated and functionally classified based on the mips standard  <cit> . this revealed that 10% of the expressed sequence tags  were involved in cell wall biogenesis, 4% in cell growth, 4% in protein metabolism, 2% in transcription, 1% in energy, 5% in metabolism, 4% in signal transduction and 2% in stress . a high proportion of the ests  were classified as either having unknown function  or as not producing any hits . at least ten cdna clones of each distinct group were sequenced to get precise information on their potential functions. fragments sequenced fitted into the broad classification of similarity-inferred est identities based on blastx results. the putative functions of the fragments sequenced are listed in table  <dig> 

anumbers indicate individuals  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> 

the majority of ests were up-regulated in the low splitting trees and seem to be involved in metabolism and transcription. a d-isomer specific 2-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase, which has oxidoreductase activity, a 26s ribosomal rna, a putative glycyl trna synthetase and a splicing factor prp <dig> were identified in these groups. most of the transcripts belong to the functional category cell wall biogenesis and include transcripts such as glucuronic acid decarboxylase  <dig> , xyloglucan endotransglycosylate  and caffeoyl-coa 3-o-methyltransferase . all three transcripts are known to play a fundamental role in regulating cell wall architecture and mechanical strength  <cit> . a second group of candidate transcripts that were up-regulated in the high lignin and high splitting trees were associated with stress/defense-related functions. this group contains transcripts such as a leucine-rich repeat, a lipase family protein and an antigen. only a putative zinc finger protein in this group was up-regulated in one low lignin and in the two low splitting trees. all the transcripts associated with stress/defense are known to be strongly expressed in response to stress during secondary cell wall synthesis  <cit> .

quantitative expression analysis of cdna-aflp clones
quantitative expression data for cdna-aflp clones was obtained by assaying the presence or absence of microarray markers using the hybridization patterns of the  <dig> e. grandis clones among trees. generally, fragments on the array ranged in size from  <dig> bp to over  <dig> bp. of  <dig> clones spotted onto the slide  <dig>  were found to be polymorphic among the trees. the analysis was limited to only those spots for which clear threshold values  could be assigned. spots with clear threshold values could be easily converted to binary scores . a unique microarray pattern was obtained for each eucalyptus tree. hybridisation profiles resulting from individual trees were 96% identical to those obtained in replicate, by reverse labelling reactions.

qrt-pcr verification
the combined cdna array analysis was representative of differentially expressed transcripts from seven e. grandis trees. real-time pcr was performed on five ests representing different expression clusters to verify the accuracy of cdna microarray quantification. the ests chosen included udp-glucuronic acid decarboxylase  <dig> , a histidine-containing phosphotransfer protein  <dig> , d-isomer specific 2-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase, caffeoyl-coa 3-o-methyltransferase  and protein-l-isoaspartate o-methyltransferase. microarray analysis suggested that ribosomal rna was expressed constitutively and was, therefore, used as a control for normalization of the real-time pcr data. analysis of results from both microarray data and qrt-pcr showed that the trends and patterns are consistent between the two different methods . the higher fold values of transcripts detected by qrt-pcr were expected.

confirmation of the expression patterns of five clusters by relative quantification of transcript abundance using qpcr. fold change  of a subset of e. grandis transcripts chosen for their functional relevance.

discussion
identification of superior e. grandis trees not prone to growth stress is essential for maximising the effectiveness of plantations adding value to the forestry industry. the genes and genetic mechanisms that underlie growth stress are of particular interest in e. grandis, due to the potential of selecting trees prone to severe splitting that could be excluded from breeding populations. in this study, a 1578-probe cdna microarray was developed for both genotyping and expression profiling using seven different e. grandis trees. the combined microarray offers an opportunity to discriminate between individual trees as well as analyze transcript abundance, variability and the usefulness of the chip for fingerprinting.

for the transcript profiling and genotyping, a 1578-probe prototype cdna microarray was constructed by arraying  <dig> cdna-aflp fragments and  <dig> cdna library clones from seven eucalyptus trees onto silanized glass slides. this provided an overview of transcript abundance, variability and the usefulness of the chip for fingerprinting transcripts. analysis of the cdna clones suggested that a significant proportion of genes expressed in the wood forming tissues of eucalyptus are strongly up- or down-regulated. the high variability in gene expression patterns demonstrates that the sampling strategy used was successful in separating differentiating xylem tissue from the seven e. grandis trees and shows the extent to which the tissues of different tree phenotypes differ in function, biochemistry and morphology.

clustering of expression profiles allowed the identification of distinct groups of co-expressed genes. these distinct groups may contain genes that are involved in the main metabolic or developmental processes occurring during tissue differentiation. a total of  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts representing different gene clusters were isolated and characterized. ten percent of differentially abundant transcripts were identified as having roles in cell wall biogenesis. two of them, glucuronic acid decarboxylase  <dig>  and xyloglucan endotransglycosylate , were found to be up-regulated in the high lignin tree and in the two high splitting trees. the increased expression of the uxs <dig> gene in the high lignin tree was expected as this gene was shown to be a precursor of xylan production in arabidopsis  <cit> . xylan is a component of hemicellulose and an increase in xylan will result in increased lignin. the up-regulation of the uxs <dig> gene in the two high splitting trees could be the result of the involvement of this gene in cell wall biosynthesis. this gene is responsible for the organization of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin in cell walls, and therefore determining the mechanical strength of the cell wall. the xet gene which is similar to the arabidopsis xet protein xth <dig>  <cit>  and to poplar xet gene   <cit>  was found to play a fundamental role in the construction and modification of cell wall architecture. nishikubo et al.  <cit>  observed that the xet gene is involved in the repair of xyloglucan cross-linkages, creating and reinforcing the connections between the primary cell wall and the secondary cell wall layers. since the xet gene was found to be up-regulated in the two high-splitting trees its role in wood splitting and in growth stress could be speculated. growth stress originates in the cambial region of the stem during the maturation of the cells where the contraction of the cellulose molecule during lignin deposition is a contributing factor to the stress  <cit> . high splitting trees are thought to have elevated levels of growth stress and thus the higher expression of the xet gene. this could confirm the greater activity of this gene in expanding the cell wall during secondary cell wall thickening. the growth stress in the trees is in equilibrium but as soon as it is cut, and this state of balance is modified, log deformations and splits occur. equally interesting is the transcript profiling pattern of genes encoding important enzymes in lignin biosynthesis, such as caffeoyl-coa 3-o-methyltransferase . this gene is a key transcript directly associated with lignin biosynthesis  <cit>  and has been characterized in tobacco  <cit>  and poplar  <cit> . paux et al.  <cit>  reported that the ccoaomt gene was up-regulated in eucalyptus gunni xylem and this gene was shown to be involved in cell wall formation. the up-regulation of the ccoaomt gene in the high lignin tree was expected as this gene is involved in lignin biosynthesis. the up-regulation of ccoaomt in the high splitting trees suggests that this gene responds to signaling mechanisms and triggers a stress-related compensatory deposition of lignin.

the second largest group of candidate transcripts identified was associated with stress/defence-related functions. most the transcripts in this group were up-regulated in the high lignin and in the two high splitting trees suggesting that the cells in the xylem layer could play a role in protecting the cambium under stress conditions. only one transcript associated with stress, a putative zinc finger protein, was up-regulated in the two low splitting trees and in the low lignin tree. zinc finger proteins have been speculated to interact with cellulose  <cit>  and to be strongly expressed in response to gravitational stress during secondary cell wall synthesis  <cit> . the up-regulation of the gene coding for this protein in the low lignin and low splitting trees could not be explained at this stage.

several studies in forest trees have reported high proportions of sequences lacking similarity to any known proteins  <cit> . in this study, similar results were obtained. many transcripts showed no significant homologies to publicly available sequences. a high proportion of cdna clones  were classified as transcripts lacking similarity to any known sequences  or as transcripts not producing any hits . the genes of unknown function are most probably transcripts that are highly and specifically expressed in wood-forming tissues. these differentially expressed genes are a source of novel genes whose function should be characterized in future studies to determine their role in secondary xylem formation and, represent an important source of candidate genes to improve the quality of wood in e. grandis.

another important aim of this study was the development of a combined microarray for the characterization and genotyping of e. grandis trees for future breeding programmes. the observed high variability in gene expression patterns among the seven individual trees representing the four phenotypes provided a starting point for the clustering of the  <dig> cdna-aflp clones. in this context, direct comparison of signal intensity profiles suggest that the cdna chip developed will allow the genome-wide fingerprinting of the seven e. grandis genomes since a unique microarray pattern was obtained for each individual tree. some of the genes preferentially and/or specifically expressed in eucalyptus cambium were shown to exhibit a distinctive expression pattern, which could be related to the bimodal distribution of the expression patterns.

CONCLUSIONS
a new microarray prototype was constructed that combined expression profiling and genotyping of e. grandis trees. this provides a tool for the identification and characterization of trees with superior qualities in breeding programmes. furthermore expression level analysis gave a perspective of the types of genes active in wood-forming tissues while genotyping allowed the identification of individual trees. the genetic markers identified in this study in the form of genes that are either up- or down-regulated in the four different phenotypes could be used to develop gene-specific markers. the long-term objective of this study is to use the combined microarray for the identification of individual trees prone to splitting and for the identification of novel genes targeted to specific pathways. novel genes for which no function has yet been assigned may hold the key towards a better understanding of the developmental processes and biochemical pathways that underlie wood formation and could be the source of candidate genes to improve the quality of wood in e. grandis.

