BACKGROUND
colonies of social insects have evolved collective disease defences to counteract the high risk of disease transmission within social groups . this social immunity complements individual immune defences of all group members and comprises sanitary behaviours, use of antimicrobials and modification of interaction frequencies . whereas adult colony members can display a variety of anti-pathogen defences, the brood depends on care by workers, particularly in the holometabolous social hymenoptera , where eggs, larvae and pupae are largely immobile, in contrast to the hemimetabolous termites in which juvenile stages act as workers  <cit> . the cuticle of the larvae and pupae is not fully sclerotized and melanised  <cit> , making the brood highly susceptible to infection with entomopathogenic fungi that enter their hosts by penetration of the body surface  <cit> . in social hymenoptera, brood care therefore seems crucial to avoid fungal infection.

in ants, sanitary brood care by workers comprises mostly two complementary behaviours, 1) brood grooming, which reduces the pathogen load and germination ability of the pathogen  <cit> , and 2) brood removal from the colony, termed “hygienic behaviour”  <cit> . whereas grooming is a general response against pathogens in social insects , hygienic behaviour is by definition restricted to the immobile brood of social hymenoptera. it was originally reported from honeybees  <cit> , and has recently been found also in ants  <cit> . it seems likely that brood grooming is a first line of defence against external pathogens, like the conidiospores of entomopathogenic fungi, while brood removal occurs as a second step, being triggered either by exposure or later by successful infection  <cit> . whereas brood grooming may prevent infection of individual brood items, brood removal invariably leads to the death of the contaminated brood, but may reduce transmission to the healthy brood in the colony. in ants, where brood is placed together in joint brood piles  <cit> , transmission risk among brood items is probably much higher than in wasps and bees, where each brood item is placed in an individual brood cell.

most brood of ants is uncovered , but in some species pupae are enclosed in a silk cocoon . the trait that larvae spin a silk cocoon upon pupation is remarkably variable in ants. it differs mostly among subfamilies but can also vary within subfamilies  <cit> . the function of cocoons remains debated, and ultimate explanations for the presence or absence of cocoons are still missing. it has been suggested that cocoons may protect the pupae either against 1) environmental fluctuation in temperature and humidity, 2) predators and parasitoids, or 3) microbial parasites and pathogens  <cit> . given that brood in social insects is reared within the protected nest under controlled conditions  <cit> , the first two mentioned functions may be of less importance, whereas a recent study, which describes how attine ants cover their naked pupae in mycelia of their symbiotic fungus  <cit> , discusses a possible protective function of the cocoon against pathogens in ants.

in this study, we test the hypothesis that the presence of a pupal cocoon may affect sanitary behaviours and fungal infection in ants. as our study system we chose five ant species and the entomopathogenic fungus metarhizium brunneum, a natural pathogen of ants  <cit> . upon contact with the insect cuticle, conidiospores of m. brunneum start to germinate and penetrate the cuticle to continue growth inside the host body. at high doses this eventually causes host death, after which fungal outgrowth of the corpse occurs  <cit> . we used m. brunneum to experimentally expose larvae and pupae of two ant species with naked pupae  and two ant species with cocooned pupae , in order to analyse brood grooming and brood removal behaviour, as well as fungal infection patterns. the host species were chosen to represent different subfamilies of ants  with nesting ecology either directly in the soil or in rotten logs near the ground  <cit> , therefore all being likely targets of soil-borne pathogens such as m. brunneum. since between-species comparisons may be affected by phylogenetic constraints or other confounding species differences, we complemented this comparative approach with a within-species analysis, using a single, also ground-nesting, ant species  in which naked and cocooned pupae co-occur within the same nest  <cit> .

RESULTS
between-species comparison
brood intake
across species, a total of 72% of all presented brood was carried into the brood chamber within the first two days of the experiment. except for c. smithi, which brought in more larvae  than pupae  , both brood types were retrieved at equal rates . brood intake was not affected by treatment, i.e. whether brood items had received a sham treatment or had been exposed to dead or live fungal conidiospores, in li. humile, la. neglectus and p. punctata . only c. smithi brought in fewer pupae treated with live fungus than dead fungus or sham control, with the latter being retrieved at non-significantly different rates . workers of all species placed all brood, irrespective of type and treatment, onto a single pile in the brood chamber and groomed the brood.

percentage of larvae and pupae  taken into the brood chamber by ant species with either naked  or cocooned pupae . statistics for brood intake rates originate from the cox mixed-effects model. significant p values  are denoted in bold.

brood grooming
workers of all four species overall groomed larvae and pupae at similar frequencies . the two species with naked pupae showed no significant differences in grooming frequency between sham-treated and dead or live fungus-exposed brood . in contrast, the two species with cocooned pupae groomed live fungus-exposed brood significantly more than sham-treated brood, and showed a near-significant trend for higher grooming frequency of brood treated with live vs dead fungus .

brood removal
overall, 49% of all brood that was previously brought into the brood chamber was removed again over the twelve days of the experiment in the four ant species. the two species with naked pupae removed more pupae than larvae , whereas the two species with cocooned pupae removed fewer pupae than larvae . larval removal patterns depended strongly on treatment. larvae exposed to live fungal conidiospores were removed earlier and at higher rates than larvae exposed to dead fungus or sham treatment, which was significant for all species except li. humile . similarly, in the two species with naked pupae, live fungus-exposed pupae were removed at higher rates than sham-treated pupae , and also than dead fungus in c. smithi, whereas li. humile only showed a near-significant trend in this direction . in contrast, treatment had no significant effect on pupal removal in the species with cocooned pupae . the general emerging pattern was thus that removal of larvae and naked pupae was increased after the live fungus treatment, whereas cocooned pupae exposed to live fungus were removed at equally low rates as cocooned pupae treated with either a sham control or dead fungus. lastly, all species created a common dump pile outside of the nest where removed brood was placed.

within-species analysis
brood intake
f. selysi workers brought 69% of all presented pupae into the brood chamber within the first two days of the experiment, with cocooned pupae being taken in at somewhat higher numbers  than naked pupae . brood treatment  did not significantly affect brood intake rates .

brood grooming
neither pupal type  nor brood treatment  significantly affected grooming frequencies in f. selysi .

brood removal
f. selysi workers removed 54% of all pupae previously taken into the nest, thereby taking out fewer cocooned  than naked  pupae . brood treatment affected the removal of naked pupae , but not of cocooned pupae . naked pupae that were exposed to live fungus were removed significantly faster and in higher numbers than sham treated pupae , but not differently than dead fungus-exposed pupae , which were also removed more than the controls .

fungal outgrowth
we determined the infection status of all individual dying workers and brood items  by observation of fungal outgrowth. overall, only  <dig> %  of the workers from all five species died during the twelve days of the experiment from contracting an infection with m. brunneum. over all species, brood with fungal outgrowth was mostly found outside the brood chamber  and only rarely inside . fungal outgrowth was not restricted to the brood items that were experimentally exposed to live fungal conidiospores, but also occurred on sham-treated and dead fungus-exposed brood , indicating that the disease had been transmitted to approximately 22% of the previously healthy brood. fungal outgrowth on these groups occurred with some delay compared to the originally exposed group .

across all study species, the brood with fungal outgrowth showed a positive correlation between the time of outgrowth and the time of removal from the brood chamber , with removal always preceding fungal outgrowth . when comparing fungal outgrowth between brood types that were exposed to live fungal conidiospores, a significantly lower proportion of cocooned pupae showed fungal outgrowth compared to both naked pupae and larvae .

discussion
we found that the presence of a pupal cocoon affects sanitary behaviours and fungal infection in ants. species from different subfamilies of ants showed consistent patterns depending on pupal type , suggesting that the presence or absence of the cocoon may be a main predictor of the observed effects. this is further corroborated by the fact that similar patterns were found within a single species that simultaneously produces naked and cocooned pupae within the same nest. still, as we have only covered four subfamilies of ants , the generality of this finding across the whole ant phylogeny remains to be tested.

similar to previous studies  <cit> , the ants in our experiment showed some differences in retrieval of the various brood types, likely as a consequence of chemical, morphological, and behavioural brood recognition cues , modulated further by brood developmental stage. interestingly, with the exception of pupal intake in c. smithi, the ants did not distinguish between brood treatments, and brought in the live pathogen-exposed brood in equally high numbers as dead fungus or sham-treated brood . this confirms a similar finding in another ant species  <cit>  and seems to reveal the general pattern that, on one hand, the pathogen cannot manipulate its host in retrieving a higher proportion of contaminated versus healthy brood, and on the other hand, that potential repellent effects of the pathogen are likely overridden by the attractiveness of brood. this is despite the fact that social insects are capable of quickly detecting pathogen presence . brood being a strong elicitor for intake behaviour is also exploited, for example, by parasitic maculinea butterflies, which morphologically and chemically mimic ant larvae and are picked up and brought into the nest  <cit> .

rapid detection and reaction to the fungal pathogen also occurred in our experiment. brood grooming frequencies were significantly increased towards live fungus-exposed brood in species with cocooned pupae, la. neglectus and p. punctata,  within the two days post exposure , whereas application of dead fungus was not enough to elicit this effect. this finding confirms previous reports of elevated grooming frequencies in other social insects, directed either towards live pathogen-exposed ant larvae  <cit> , or adult nestmates in both ants  <cit>   and termites  <cit> . currently it cannot be resolved, whether the other three species  did not show this adaptive behaviour due to a lack of pathogen detection or response. it seems that these species had an overall high grooming activity towards all brood, including the sham-treatment, which may suggest a constitutively high grooming level, acting as prophylactic defence . importantly, the observed upregulation of grooming directed towards pathogen-exposed brood in the two species with cocooned pupae documents that the presence of a silk cocoon around the pupae does not interfere with the ants’ capabilities to detect fungal conidiospores.

sanitary brood care is not limited to the mechanical removal of infectious particles from the brood surface during allogrooming, and the following disinfection of those particles in the mouth of the cleaning individual and discarding in dump sites  <cit> . la. neglectus workers were recently found to further apply their antiseptic poison on their brood, thereby efficiently inhibiting germination of metarhizium conidiospores  <cit> . the poison of other social hymenoptera is also known to have antimicrobial properties and to be applied during nest hygiene . it is thus likely that also the other ant species in our experiment may employ their poison in chemical brood disinfection. ants further have evolved a unique gland–the metapleural gland–that produces potent antibiotic secretions, which can serve as antifungal defence  <cit> . all our study species possess metapleural glands, which may represent a second component of chemical surface disinfection complementing mechanical removal, though in la. neglectus, metapleural gland components do not seem to play a major role in protection of brood against metarhizium fungus  <cit> .

if these cleaning measures fail to prevent infection of the individual brood items, removal of the diseased brood from the colony is an effective way to limit disease transmission inside the colony. in fact, all ant species in our experiment showed hygienic behaviour, i.e. they removed assumedly infectious or infected brood from the brood chamber, thereby dooming this brood to death. this suggests that hygienic behaviour–so far mostly known from honeybees  <cit> –is a widespread behaviour also in ants. species with naked pupae removed consistently more brood items  treated with live fungus than sham control and dead fungus . species with cocooned pupae removed only their larvae in the same pattern, i.e. they also removed more live fungus-exposed larvae than either sham or dead fungus-treated larvae . however, in the three species with obligatory or facultative cocoons, the cocooned pupae were all removed at equally low rates, independent of being exposed to the pathogen or control treatments .

differential removal patterns seem to represent an adaptive behaviour by the ants based on infection state . the risk of getting infected after exposure to live fungus, during the course of our experiment, was lowest in cocooned pupae, which were also removed less frequently, as compared to both, naked pupae and larvae . by combining sanitary behaviours and selective removal of diseased brood, the ants successfully reduced the likelihood of the pathogen to self-replicate inside their nest. only 5% of all fungal outgrowth thus occurred inside the nest, whereas 2/ <dig> of the removed brood showed fungal outgrowth .

fungal outgrowth was not limited to the brood experimentally exposed to live fungal conidiospores, but also occurred on approximately 20% of the previously unexposed brood items, revealing disease transmission among brood . these high disease transmission rates explain, why also previously un-exposed control brood was removed at relatively high rates–particularly in the case of larvae . it is interesting that the ants do not seem able to contain the transmission to healthy brood, and place all retrieved brood onto a common brood pile enabling disease contraction, but later are highly efficient in removing the infected brood.

in contrast to the high transmission of disease at the brood stage, cross infection of adult workers through contact to contaminated brood was practically absent . this may result from both hygiene–including sanitary behaviours  <cit>  and use of exocrine gland-derived antiseptics  <cit> –and a lower susceptibility due to a melanised and sclerotised cuticle  <cit> . low rates of workers contracting the disease after contact to fungus-exposed brood or workers have also been reported for other ants and termites  <cit> , whereas contact with sporulating cadavers led to high infection rates in ants  <cit> . this emphasizes the importance of hygienic brood removal before any visible fungal outgrowth. indeed, in our experiment, we found that brood removal anticipated fungal outgrowth, and was performed approximately one to two days before fungal outgrowth , revealing that the ants are able to detect the infection state before infectious stages occur.

CONCLUSIONS
our study revealed that ants removed pathogen-exposed cocooned brood less frequently than exposed naked brood from their brood chamber, and that this behaviour seems adaptive given the lower risk of infection of the cocooned brood. future work is required to disentangle the mechanism underlying the observed protective effect of the pupal cocoon in ants. among the proposed mechanisms are i) more frequent or efficient sanitary actions performed by the ants, ii) interference of the cocoon with fungal pathogenicity, or iii) a combination of both. moreover, it remains to be tested if the pupal cocoon acts as a barrier restricting infectious fungal conidiospores to get in contact with the insect cuticle, which triggers germination  <cit> . notably, the ant silk cocoon does not provide full protection against metarhizium infection  <cit> , in contrast to what has been found in other hymenoptera . differences in the level of the protection conveyed by cocoons may be due to differences in silk composition, as e.g. lepidopteran silk proteins can have antimicrobial effects  <cit>  with peptides in the cocoon acting as bacterial and fungal proteinase inhibitors  <cit> . in addition, antibiotic-producing bacteria can be integrated into the cocoon during weaving, as is the case in beewolves  <cit> . regardless of the underlying mechanism, the presence of a silk cocoon seems to give the pupae some protection against fungal infection in the tested ant species. this may explain why at least a fraction of pupae have cocoons in species like f. selysi despite their production cost . our results thus support the hypothesis that f. selysi has a dual strategy, producing naked pupae that develop faster but run a higher risk of fungal infection, simultaneously with the more costly, slower developing but better protected cocooned pupae  <cit> .

