BACKGROUND
mirnas are a large class of tiny non-coding rnas . they have been identified in many species and their sequences have been published in databases  <cit> . mirnas regulate a large number of genes in animals and plants by binding to the 3'utr or other regions of target mrnas leading to degradation or translational repression during development, cell lineage division, and tumor generation  <cit> . in animals, mirna transfection experiments showed that target genes are regulated by repression. however, increased evidences demonstrated that even in animals, target mrnas can be degraded by mirnas that also play key roles in the processes of tumorigenesis and cancer development  <cit> .

mirna microarray technology is an efficient method to generate mirna expression profiles. these microarray data can be used to extract information regarding the regulatory pathways initiated by mirnas, especially regulation due to degradation, by integrating the mrna expression profiles of predicted mirna target genes. such an approach has been applied to study the functional linkage between mirnas and physiological or pathological processes  <cit> .

recently, thomson and his colleagues  <cit>  used mirna microarray technology to study mirna expression in mice. they demonstrated that there is a relationship between the expression profiles and the staged embryo temporal regulation of a large class of mirnas, such as members of the let- <dig> family. wienholds et al.  <cit> , using microarrays with locked-nucleic acid-modified oligonucleotide probes, determined the temporal and spatial expression patterns of  <dig> conserved vertebrate mirnas in zebrafish embryos. they found that most of the mirnas were expressed in a highly tissue-specific manner during different developmental stages and physiological processes.

several studies have indicated that some mirnas are specifically expressed in human, mouse and zebrafish tissues  <cit> . because the rat is a general animal model for biological research, tissue-specific expression of mirnas has recently been studied in this model. wang et al.  <cit>  investigated the tissue-specific expression of mirnas in six rat tissues , and found that mir- <dig> and mir-200c were expressed specifically in the lung. their work suggested that there is some functional relevance between the lung-specific mirnas identified and the normal physiological and pathological processes of the lung. landgraf et al.  <cit>  sequenced over  <dig> small rna libraries from  <dig> tissue systems and cell types in human, mouse, and rat, providing a mammalian mirna expression atlas. to study mirna expression in the rat, they used six neural tissues or cell types  and one non-neural tissue  to generate mirna expression profiles. the expression of mirnas in the vertebrate central nervous system, such as human, mouse and zebrafish, has been previously reported  <cit> . for example, bak et al. reported  <dig> mouse central nervous system enriched mirna and found that  <dig> mirnas were more than threefolds enrichment in the brain regions. kapsimali et al. studied  <dig> abundant conserved mirnas in developing and adult zebrafish brain by using in situ hybridization method and indicated that mirnas have a different profile in neural cells.

previous studies mainly focus on mirna expression in human, mouse and zebrafish central nervous system or brain different regions. in order to investigate the differences in mirna expression profiles in rat neural and non-neural tissues in detail, unlike the previous reports, we deliberately selected seven rat neural tissues, including central and peripheral neural tissues  and seven non-neural tissues . of these tissues, only two neural tissues  were previously studied by landgraf et al.  <cit>  to analyze the mirna expression profiles by sequencing.

furthermore we investigated the functional information of these neural tissue-specific mirnas and the related regulatory networks, and the target genes of the selected mirnas predicted by three public datasets  were studied in detail by function and pathway enrichment analysis. thus, a global view of rat neural-specific mirna expression profiles and their target maps was developed in this study.

RESULTS
main procedure
in this study, experiments and bioinformatics methods were integrated to create a global view of rat neural tissue-specific mirnas, thus allowing their targets and functions to be identified .

mirna expression profiles of  <dig> rat tissues
in this study, mirna tissue expression patterns were studied in seven rat neural tissues  and seven non-neural tissues . in our previous study, we established an oligonucleotide microarray platform to detect mirna signals  <cit> . a total of  <dig> different probes including  <dig> rat precursor mirnas and  <dig> internal controls were designed for the production of customized mirna microarrays, which represented  <dig> rat mirnas. tissue-specific mirna expression profiling was performed based upon this platform. the correlation coefficients of repeated experiments were greater than  <dig>  in the microarray experiments. the present call rate among all the microarrays was from 36% to 74%, with the average present rate being 56%. the print-tip loess normalization method was chosen for pre-processing the raw data because this method yields high quality normalized microarray data  <cit> . an expression data matrix of  <dig> mirnas was produced, and this excluded all of the precursors and controls.

fourteen tissues were clustered using a hierarchical clustering strategy  <cit>  based upon the expression data matrix of the mirnas that was produced. from the clustering results, the neural and non-neural tissues were correctly grouped into two classes  , except for two tissues, the dorsal root ganglion  and spinal cord. these tissues are generally considered part of the peripheral nerve system and were not grouped into the central neural tissue class , and this may be due to the peripheral location or intrinsic physiological properties of these two tissues.

for further confirmation and visualization of the above classifications, principal component analysis  was also performed, and similar results were obtained .

identification of neural tissue-specific mirnas
signature mirnas for each tissue were extracted from neural tissues for comparison of neural mirna expression profiles with non-neural tissues using the moderated t-test and empirical bayesian methods. in total,  <dig> relatively specifically expressed mirnas in neural tissues were found with p <  <dig>  . these mirnas have relatively higher expression levels in neural tissues than in the seven non-neural tissues. the olfactory bulb had the most neural-specific mirnas; there were  <dig> mirnas highly expressed in the olfactory bulb . the drg expressed eight mirnas at high levels. furthermore, there were seven mirnas that were only expressed at high levels in one neural tissue, for example let-7b, mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  and mir- <dig> specifically expressed in olfactory bulb . mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> were specifically expressed in drg . in order to intuitively detect tissue-specific mirna signatures, the mirna expression matrix was rearranged as in figure 2c. eight mirnas were randomly selected and validated by real-time pcr, and the data were reported in our previous study  <cit> .

target mapping and functional annotation
to further investigate the functional significance of these neural tissue-specific mirnas and related regulatory networks, heuristic information of the mirna target genes was needed. by integrating three public databases ,  <dig>  target genes of the  <dig> neural tissue-specific mirnas were collected . comparing with targets of randomly selected mirnas by hypergeometric test , the results indicated that these  <dig>  targets were not obtained by chance . of the seven neural tissues, the specific mirnas in the olfactory bulb had  <dig>  target genes, which was a much greater number of targets than the other neural tissues. these  <dig>  target genes were then carefully annotated by the go function, kegg pathway, and regulatory network enrichment analysis.

go function and kegg pathway enrichments were performed by mapping the predicted target genes from the neural tissue-specific mirnas to the go and kegg databases, respectively. for these mirnas,  <dig> go functions and  <dig> kegg pathways were annotated. each tissue had its own enriched pathway and function . in this study, we have mainly presented the go function and pathway results from two tissues  . in the olfactory bulb, which had the highest number of neural tissue-specific mirnas, "regulation of progression through cell cycle" was the most enriched go function  . in the drg, four go functions  and five kegg pathways  were significantly enriched by the targets of  <dig> drg specific mirnas . on the other hand, we randomly selected  <dig> drg non-specific mirnas for  <dig> times and predicted their targets. then, these targets were annotated to those functions or pathways enriched in drg. in these functions and pathways, most of the average  <dig> p values were more than  <dig>  . these results indicated that the enriched functions and pathways by the targets of  <dig> drg specific mirnas were significantly different from those obtained by chance.

furthermore, in order to identify regulatory relationships amongst the target genes, we developed a strategy to construct general gene regulatory networks by transfac v <dig>  and to match target genes into the resulting networks using the steiner tree algorithm. finally, a specialized connected regulatory network was extracted for the predicted target genes that were classified by tissue-specific mirnas. in the drg,  <dig> target genes of the specific mirnas were included in the regulatory network . of these, the sp <dig> gene occupied the central position in the network, and it regulated many more downstream genes than other regulatory genes in the drg. in the olfactory bulb,  <dig> target genes were included .

three kinds of enrichment maps for function, pathway, and regulatory networks were generated for each tissue. figures  <dig> and  <dig> show examples of the three maps for the mirna targets expressed in the drg and olfactory bulb, which may provide insights into the combinatorial regulation mechanisms initiated by tissue-specifically expressed mirnas.

discussion
in this study, high-throughput mirna microarray technology with  <dig> mirnas selected from mirbase was used to detect mirna expression in  <dig> rat tissues. the seven neural tissues selected included olfactory bulb, cortex, hippocampus, brain stem, hypothalamus, spinal cord, and dorsal root ganglion. the tissues selected represented both the central and peripheral nervous systems. the neural mirna expression profiles were compared with profiles from seven other tissues, including heart, lung, muscle, spleen, testicle, kidney, and liver in order to identify neural-specific mirnas. although several studies have previously reported the existence of neural-specific mirnas, only the striatum, cortex, and hippocampus were selected for these previous analyses. for example, landgraf et al.  <cit>  studied the mammalian mirna expression atlas by sequencing  <dig> small rna libraries representing  <dig> different human and rodent organ systems and cell types, and wang et al.  <cit>  used home-made mirna microarrays to identify the rat lung-specific mirnas, mir- <dig> and mir-200c. the number of tissues in this work was up to date the largest rat nerve system related tissue set. the mirna expression data were integrated with carefully screened functional data from public databases using bioinformatics and bio-statistics based strategies. tissue-specific mirna expression profiles were obtained from rat neural and non-neural tissues, and the neural tissue-specific expression profile related mirnas and their significant target genes. this provided a global view of rat tissue-specific mirna profiles and their target maps, thus contributing to a better understanding of the role of mirnas in neural systems. in comparison to the previous studies that investigated neural-specific mirna expression, we have obtained a more detailed picture of rat tissue mirna expression profiles using a larger number of neural tissue types. moreover, based upon our analyses of tissue-specific expression profiles, the resulting signature mirnas may be used as biomarkers for the classification of tissues from different sources.

after performing the data analysis, we found a total of  <dig> mirnas that were specifically expressed in neural tissues. in them, four mirnas  were previously reported to be specifically expressed in the cortex and hippocampus in rat  <cit> . comparing with other animals such as mouse or zebrafish, the expression of several mirnas agrees with previous study. for example, in mouse  <cit> , mir-10b is highly expressed in spinal cord; mir- <dig> is widely expressed in brain tissues; mir-200b, mir-128a, mir-128b, mir- <dig> are specifically expressed in olfactory bulb; mir-200a is highly expressed in olfactory bulb; mir-7b is highly expressed in hypothalamus. moreover, mir-200b is enriched in zebrafish olfactory bulb; mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> expression are detected throughout adult brain  <cit> . but more neural specifically expressed mirnas were found in rat tissues in this study. although the data were generated from completely different platforms or methods and different mirna probe sources were used in these studies, several mirna expression patterns were consistent with previous results, in which the same types of tissues were used in different animal models. collectively, the data provides convincing evidence that tissue-specific mirna expression processes and related regulatory mechanisms are highly stable, and may also indicate that the regulatory mechanisms mediated by mirnas are conserved, and may play a more important role in physiological or pathological processes that previously believed. we identified a number of mirnas specifically expressed in neural tissue; however, the functions and cell type distributions of most of the mirnas were not clear. these will be studied in detail in the future.

furthermore, targets of the specifically expressed mirnas were mapped to gene function databases, pathway databases, and regulatory networks. this approach clearly illustrated that specifically expressed mirnas and their targets perform integrated regulatory functions. for example, the fact that a large number of mirnas were very highly expressed in the olfactory bulb but not in other tissues suggests that more specific combinatory regulation mechanisms may be performed by these mirnas and their targets. the only enriched go function in the olfactory bulb is "regulation of cell cycle", which could be affected by processes that modulate the rate or extent of progression through the cell cycle. in the drg, there are more enriched functions, such as cell migration, cytoskeleton organization, and biogenesis, negative regulation of transcription, and positive regulation of transcription from the rna polymerase ii promoter. the pathways enriched in the drg are those associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, glycine, serine and threonine metabolism, seleno-amino acid metabolism, and the adipocytokine signalling pathway. these results imply that as the primary afferent sensory neuron, the drg takes on a very important role in sensory signal transduction, conduction, and transmission. this study described the neural specifically expressed mirna target genes, gene ontology and network information. biological validation experiments needed to be further studied.

in this study, tissue-specific expressed mirnas were also classified into different groups based on the information regarding mirna families found on the sanger website. groups containing more than one mirna were selected to compute inter-family and intra-family correlation coefficients. the analyses indicated that there were no significant differences between the correlation coefficients of intra-family and inter-family mirnas . this is not a surprising result, given that compensatory mechanisms of mirnas are known to exist.

in summary, this study attempted to create a holistic view of rat tissue-specific mirna expression profiles and combinatorial regulation mechanisms using seven neural tissues and seven non-neural tissues. by integrating the data and information obtained from function enrichment, pathway enrichment, and regulatory networks of tissue-specific mirna targets, we also obtained regulatory networks mediated by tissue-specific mirnas in an intuitive manner. our strategies for extracting significant tissue-specific mirna expression profiles, approaches for public data integration and extensive curated data sources may serve as valuable tools for the further experimental investigation of regulatory mechanisms of mirnas in neural systems.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we selected seven neural tissues and seven non-neural tissues and analyzed their tissue-specific mirna expression profiles. after performing general clustering procedures, the  <dig> rat tissues can be clearly classified into neural and non-neural tissues based on their mirna expression profiles. thirty mirnas were found to be specifically expressed in neural tissues. the neural-specific mirnas were chosen to predict target genes based on three public datasets, and then a pathway analysis of these target genes was performed. the data from this study will contribute to further investigations of mirna regulatory mechanisms in neural systems, as well as to functional studies.

