BACKGROUND
germline development results in two highly adapted and dimorphic cell types; eggs and sperm  <cit> . in adult drosophila, the majority of sexually dimorphic gene expression occurs within the germline, where it is likely dedicated to gamete production  <cit> . although much of gamete development in drosophila is gonad autonomous , gene products expressed in non-gonadal somatic tissues are clearly required to support gamete development by mediating metabolism and behavior  <cit> .

there is a clear role of non-gonadal and gonad communication in drosophila and non-drosophilid females to control egg development. yolk proteins  are synthesized in the fat body, exported to the hemolymph and ultimately taken up by developing eggs. yp gene expression is positively correlated with nutritional status  <cit> . microarray experiments have shown that expression of oogenic gene batteries are altered by nutrient conditions  <cit>  or application of the hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone   <cit> . additionally, neurons in the fly brain that secrete insulin-like peptides regulate germline stem cell division in early oogenesis directly linking egg production with nutrient sensing  <cit> . in non-drosophilids, mosquitos produce yp in response to a blood meal that also implicates hormonal signalling from ecdysone as well as biochemical pathways such as the target-of-rapamycin  pathway .

expression profiling of females or males with and without germ cells has demonstrated that about half of the sex-biased expression in non-gonadal adult drosophila is germline dependent  <cit> . this conclusion is based on experiments where wildtype gonadectomized carcasses were compared to non-gonadectomized progeny of tud <dig> mutant mothers. despite the absence of somatic gonad structures in the gonadectomized flies, there were more genes with sex-biased expression  <cit>  . this prompted us to directly examine germline-dependent non-gonadal somatic expression at a distance from the germline.

we have extended our previous study  <cit>  to directly compare genotypically matched non-gonadal somatic tissue from flies that developed with a wildtype germline vs. progeny that develop in the absence of a functional germline. we refer to these somas as either germline conditioned or germline naïve . microarray analysis of non-gonadal somatic tissue from germline naïve flies shows batteries of genes that are regulated in a germline-dependent manner. many of these genes encode metabolic functions consistent with a role in maintaining homeostasis. interestingly, we find that some genes previously thought to be expressed in a larval-specific, or sex-specific pattern are regulated more indirectly by the presence of germ cells, not by life stage or the sex determination hierarchy. we also found that ecdysone titers are both highly female-biased and germline dependent. these data are consistent with a drosophila soma/germline hormonal reproductive axis analogous to those found in mammals.

a separate cultures for germline-conditioned and naïve flies, allowed to mate.

b grown in same culture, isolated sexes as virgins and cultured separately for 3- <dig> days.

c grown in same culture, allowed to mate.

RESULTS
germline-dependent expression in somatic tissue
given the large energy requirements for gametogenesis, germline naïve flies should have an altered energy balance in the absence of feedback mechanisms. we designed a series of experiments to test for gene expression changes in distant somatic tissues in germline naïve flies. we used maternal effect sterile mutations at two distinct loci for these experiments. the germline forms in embryos by the migration of nuclei into a region of specialized cytoplasm containing germline determinants. females homozygous for either gsn <dig> or tud <dig>  <cit>  produce sterile progeny due to defects in the germ plasm or in the migration of nuclei into the germ plasm respectively. homozygous mutant mothers thus produce viable adults with rudimentary gonads that lack germline cells. these maternal effect mutations allowed us to determine the influence of the germline in genetically identical progeny differing only by the genotype of the mother. importantly, the mutations affect distinct processes required for germline formation. the only common phenotype is germline ablation. therefore genes showing expression changes in germline conditioned vs. naïve flies are unlikely to be due to some aspect of the maternal effect unrelated to the germline. it is well known that there is extensive germline/soma communication within the gonad. because we were interested in studying long-range effects, not local cell-cell communication, we isolated the non-gonadal tissue by removing the full gonads of wildtype and the atrophic gonads of germlineless flies.

to determine if homeostasis is maintained by transcriptional regulation, we performed expression profiling experiments on germline naïve or conditioned somas using the flygem platform  <cit> . we performed a total of  <dig> hybridizations comparing germline-conditioned or -naïve flies or of either sex  and asked what genes show germline-dependent expression .  <dig> genes  were preferentially expressed in the non-gonadal tissues of germline-conditioned females , while  <dig> genes were preferentially expressed in germline-naïve females . there was slightly less differential expression in males.  <dig> genes  were preferentially expressed in the non-gonadal tissues of germline-conditioned males , while  <dig> genes were preferentially expressed in germline-naïve males . we have previously shown that the flygem results and northern blotting are in good agreement  <cit> . to validate some of the microarray results showing gene expression is affecting somatic tissue at a distance from the gonad, we performed northern blots on rna from similarly genotypically matched germline-conditioned and -naive flies. 100%  were validated. for example,  <dig> cytochrome p <dig> enzymes are highly expressed in germline-naïve females. germline-naïve gonadectomized carcasses showed high expression of the cyp6d <dig> transcript on northerns as well. the effect of a germline on distant non-gonadal expression was clear .

to determine the general functions of the genes showing germline dependent expression, we determined enrichment in the gene ontology terms  <cit>  using gostats  <cit>  and a cut-off of p <  <dig>  . these data indicate that genes involved in metabolism are differentially regulated in germline-naïve vs germline-conditioned flies . surprisingly, the germline-naïve flies  preferentially express many genes that would be expected to be required for increasing energy utilization. for example, genes encoding serine-type peptidases and amylases were over-represented. this included several members of the 'jonah' family of chymotrypsin-like encoding genes that were preferentially expressed in either germline-naïve females , germline-naïve males , or both . these genes have digestive roles, are expressed in the midgut and have been shown to respond to starvation conditions  <cit> . four triacylglycerol lipases  were also preferentially expressed in germline-naïve females. such lipases would be expected to promote the release of fatty acids for biosynthesis and energy production  <cit> . genes encoding proteins with functions in lipid  or protein storage  and  <dig>  <cit> ) are also preferentially expressed in germline-naïve flies, suggesting that energy storage is also augmented in the absence of germ cells. collectively, these data suggest that flies without germ cells have altered expression profiles in pathways required for energy capture and utilization.

hormones
hormone signalling is a possible mechanism by which the germline controls gene expression in distant somatic tissues  <cit> . this view is supported by the expression of genes implicated in hormone biosynthesis. for example, a drosophila juvenile hormone esterase  was preferentially expressed in germline-naïve males suggesting that the effects of germline-conditioning are modulating juvenile hormone metabolism. also of particular interest are the cytochrome p <dig> enzyme genes  that are preferentially expressed in germline-naïve females. cypp <dig> proteins are required in the synthesis of a wide range of steroid hormones, including ecdysone  <cit> .

the best studied drosophila hormone is ecdysone  <cit> . while we know for example, that mating and insulin signalling alter female ecdysone titers  <cit> , with the exception of handler  <cit>  very little is known about ecdysone titers in adult males. we therefore tested if, and to what extent, ecdysone titers differ between the sexes and if those titers are affected by the germline. ecdysone radioimmune assays in whole fly extracts from germline-conditioned and -naïve whole flies  <cit>  showed a striking female-bias in ecdysone titers in germline-conditioned flies . we also observed a reduction of ecdysone titers to ~10% of that seen in conditioned females in germline-naïve females. interestingly, there was no effect of germline on ecdysone titers in males. these results confirm that the bulk of ecdysone produced in the female is germline-dependent, but ecdysone is also produced in males and is not germline-dependent.

sex-biased expression due to long-range repression and feedback
germline-dependency confounds life stage and sex-biased expression patterns: adult flies are characterized by gamete production, therefore at least some genes showing stage specific expression might do so as a result of the germline and not the developmental stage per se. for example, the larval serum protein  <dig>  gene encodes a hexamerin-like storage protein found throughout the invertebrates that is expressed in the head fat body  <cit> . as suggested by the name, it is highly expressed in third instar larvae and found at low levels in adults  <cit> . we found that lsp- <dig> mrna is preferentially expressed in both germline-naïve males and females at the mrna  and at the protein level . thus, we suggest that the third instar specific expression in wildtype flies is due at least in part to the absence of maturing gametes in larvae. our results suggest that lsp- <dig> expression is de-repressed in the absence of an adult germline. perhaps, metabolic output normally destined for the egg is shunted to lsp production in the absence of a germline. interestingly, the lsp- <dig> gene is regulated in adult females by ecdysone at the transcriptional level in the head fat body  <cit>  supporting the idea that there is a germline-dependent hormonal axis.

we also asked if some sex-biased expression in drosophila is due to repression by the germline of the opposite sex. three genes  with highly male-biased expression in the head  <cit>  were preferentially expressed in germline-naïve females. similarly, two of the cyp <dig> genes preferentially expressed in germline-naïve females  show highly male-biased expression in wildtype  <cit> . this suggests that some genes with male-biased expression are repressed by a female germline. interestingly, expression patterns of two of these genes with male-biased expression in wildtype flies, and high expression in germline-naïve females, sodh- <dig> and cg <dig>  show increased expression when timeless expressing neurons are perturbed  <cit> , raising the possibility of a germline cns interaction.

we also found evidence for negative feedback on sex-biased gene expression. the female sterile independent of transformer  gene is expressed in the female head fat body  <cit>  and showed even more dramatic female-biased expression in germline-naïve females in our experiments. thus, the germline may also regulate feedback circuits to dampen sex-biased expression. these findings have important implications for ongoing work to determine the targets of somatic sex determination genes  <cit> . we had previously observed that at least half of the sex-biased expression in the soma is due to the germline  <cit> , suggesting that long range germline-dependent expression may be as important as the sex determination hierarchy in many aspects of sex-biased expression. because the mutants used to probe the sex determination hierarchy  often have severe effects on germline development  <cit> , it is not possible to determine if sex-biased expression in those animals is due to autonomous action of the hierarchy or an indirect effect of altered germline development from expression profiles in these mutants by simple profiling experiments.

mating behavior
we observed that  <dig> of the genes showing reduced expression in germline conditioned females relative to germline naïve females were among the genes showing reduced expression in mated females relative to unmated females  <cit> . direct comparisons of data sets between the studies is complicated by differences in data handling and experimental designs. however, if there is a relationship between mating and germline presence, then a coherent set of functions should be implicated by both studies. to investigate this connection further, we uploaded the lists of genes regulated by sperm, seminal fluid, or seminal fluid components  <cit>  and the lists of genes regulated by the germline and merged intersected ids in the data mining environment at flymine  <cit>  and visualized the gene ontology term hierarchy in vlad  <cit> . these genes that are negatively regulated by the germline and by mating are enriched for lipid and carbohydrate metabolism functions .

to more directly assay for similarities in expression profiles in unmated germline conditioned females and in germline naïve females, we performed two hybridizations of mrna prepared from the carcasses of unmated germline naïve females and unmated germline conditioned females . we found no significant differences . these preliminary results are consistent with a non-additive effect of mating and germline conditioning, suggesting that both the mating response and the germline conditioning response are in the same pathway. it is unclear if germline dependent expression is caused by failure to mate. we found that germline naïve females resisted mating in pair-mating experiments in  <dig> hour bouts, but we observed sperm transfer in longer mating assays . additionally, germline naïve females have been used in previous studies and no mating latency was observed .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, although much of sex determination and differentiation in the drosophila soma is cell autonomous, our data show a surprising amount of sex-biased expression in the soma is germline dependent. in mammals, gene expression in distant tissues and organs is coordinated by sex hormones produced in the gonads. it seems likely that a thematically similar hormonal axis exists in drosophila.

