BACKGROUND
recent reports indicate that central line associated bloodstream infections  are responsible of considerable burden of illness in many countries, with a pooled prevalence of  <dig>  per  <dig> central line days in icus from latin america, asia, africa and europe  <cit> . many microorganisms can develop biofilms on central venous catheters and therefore be responsible of central line associated bloodstream infections , although the most commonly isolated microorganism from hospital-acquired central line associated bloodstream infections , accounting for almost 35 % of cases, are coagulase-negative staphylococci   <cit> . among cons, staphylococcus epidermidis  is responsible of a great number of those infections  <cit> . pathogenesis of cla-bsis has been extensively reviewed; intraluminal or extraluminal surface colonization of catheters, subsequent biofilm formation, dispersal and entry into the bloodstream are the classical steps described in cla-bsis development .

current guidelines recommend removal of catheters in cla-bsis due to s. aureus however, antibiotic lock therapy  could be used in other staphylococcal cla-bsis provided sepsis, endocarditis, suppurative thrombophlebitis or other septic complications have been excluded  <cit> . during alt the lumen is filled with a highly concentrated antibiotic solution and allowed to dwell  for a period of time to eradicate bacteria embedded in the intraluminal biofilm of the catheter  <cit> . since 1980s several authors have reported case series regarding efficacy of alt against different microorganisms, and although there are some comprehensive reviews on this topic  <cit> , its utility is still a matter of debate. recent efforts have been made to overcome this paucity of data, but apart from the need of randomized controlled trials no other conclusions have been obtained  <cit> .

similarly, experimental evidence for the selection of antimicrobials, alone or in combination is scarce and limited to a 24–48 h period without further evaluation of the persistence of biofilm, limiting the interpretation of results .

to overcome some of these limitations we compared daptomycin and teicoplanin alone, and in combination with clarithromycin, gentamicin and ethanol, using an in vitro catheter model that evaluates their activity in a catheter lock solution by quantifying antimicrobial kill after 72 h of catheter-lock therapy. both drugs are antibacterial agents with documented efficacy as catheter lock solutions . in addition, to evaluate relapse of infection we allowed catheters to dwell without antibiotic for another 24 h, simulating clinical practice of reutilization of central line after alt.

RESULTS
isolates were susceptible to daptomycin  and to teicoplanin  and resistant to oxacillin , gentamicin  and to clarithromycin .

all antibiotic combinations resulted in significant reductions  of log10cfu/ml at 72 h compared with control. among single-agent regimens, daptomycin resulted in significant reductions of log10cfu/ml versus teicoplanin  for all strains tested, however, neither daptomycin nor teicoplanin were able to reduce log10cfu/ml below the limit of detection at 72 h, and full regrowth was observed after 24 h of alt removal.

regarding combinations, daptomycin plus ethanol or clarithromycin and teicoplanin plus ethanol or clarithromycin were able to eradicate biofilm at 72 h but only daptomycin plus ethanol against all strains and daptomycin plus clarithromycin against two strains prevented regrowth after alt removal and reincubation with sterile fresh media .table  <dig> mean bacterial count recovered from the in vitro catheter model at different time-points

data expressed as log10cfu/ml

t = 0: baseline. t = 72: end of antibiotic lock therapy. t = 96 h: after reincubation with sterile fresh media

*p <  <dig>  versus control

**p <  <dig>  vs teicoplanin 

fig.  <dig> activity of teicoplanin  and daptomycin  alone and in combination against strain 1018

fig.  <dig> activity of teicoplanin  and daptomycin  alone and in combination against strain 1022

fig.  <dig> activity of teicoplanin  and daptomycin  alone and in combination against strain 1076

fig.  <dig> activity of teicoplanin  and daptomycin  alone and in combination against strain 1098



despite full regrowth of all cons after alt removal no emergence of resistance was detected against any of the antibiotics tested.

in our study we found ethanol and clarithromycin combinations more efficacious than monotherapy with either daptomycin or teicoplanin. although monotherapy reached the limit of detection at 72 h against some strains, only daptomycin plus ethanol or clarithromycin prevented regrowth after alt discontinuation.

main objective of alt is catheter salvage, allowing for reutilization of the catheter after discontinuation of alt. if complete eradication has not been achieved, bacterial regrowth and resurgence of clinical infection are likely to occur. in our study, in an attempt of mimicking clinical practice, we introduced a 24 h dwell period with fresh media after alt removal.

although many authors have reported eradication of microorganisms after alt with daptomycin, vancomycin or linezolid, because relapse after alt was not evaluated, their results cannot be extrapolated to clinical practice  <cit> . in our study, daptomycin alone  and some teicoplanin combinations achieved the limit of detection at 72 h but without complete eradication of biofilm. on the contrary, daptomycin plus clarithromycin  and daptomycin plus ethanol  maintained eradication after 24 h of alt removal and re-incubation with fresh media, suggesting a potential role in salvage of infected catheters with a low rate of relapse.

a recent metanalysis support the use of alt as adjunctive therapy in cla-bsis  <cit> , however, a 20 % rate of relapse was observed in patients treated with alt despite negative blood cultures drawn at the end of therapy. this high rate of relapse suggests the persistence of biofilm-embedded bacteria not detected immediately after end of therapy. our results, negativization at 72 h, but regrowth after 24 h incubation with fresh media following alt removal, corroborate what has been described, and might support the use of clarithromycin and ethanol combinations. aumeran et al. reported the significant decrease of bacterial inoculum of mrse in an in vitro model of subcutaneous injection port infection using daptomycin, vancomycin or ethanol, with a significant regrowth after discontinuation of alt, similar to what we found  <cit> . although they used a different methodology, the similarity of our results suggest that our hypothesis is true and relapse of cla-bsis is related to biofilm persistence despite negative blood-cultures drawn from the catheter after alt.

chaudhury et al. reported the efficacy of ethanol at  <dig>   <dig> and 80 %, in an in vitro study of mrsa and mrse biofilm-associated infection  <cit> . ethanol at any of the concentrations tested was more efficacious than vancomycin, ciprofloxacin and gentamicin in their model of biofilm-associated infection. similarly qu et al. reported that lock therapy with ethanol at 40 % was more efficacious than oxacillin, gentamicin, vancomycin, ciprofloxacin and rifampicin, alone or in combination  <cit> . we tested ethanol at  <dig>   <dig> and 80 % and found a significant decrease in log10cfu/ml but without preventing regrowth after alt discontinuation . these preliminary results, similar to those reported by raad et al.  <cit>  that reported the inability of ethanol alone to eradicate an in vitro model of mrsa biofilm or aumeran et al.  <cit> , prompted us to explore antibiotic-ethanol combinations.

similarly to what raad et al. reported  <cit>  antibiotic-ethanol combinations were significantly better than monotherapies and prevented regrowth after reincubation. they found that only ethanol  plus minocycline  and triple combination of ethanol, minocycline and edta  were able to eradicate biofilm and prevent regrowth in a modified robbins device. in this silicone disk biofilm colonization model, although ethanol plus minocycline performed better than single-regimen therapies and eradicated biofilm, only triple therapy was able to prevent regrowth. in our study, the in vitro model of catheter infection was different, however we obtained very similar results, suggesting that ethanol plus antibiotics could eradicate biofilm and prevent regrowth after antibiotic lock removal.

finally, clarithromycin has shown to interact with bacterial biofilms through a non-bactericidal or bacteriostatic effect. it has been proven to inhibit the production of hexose, a basic component of staphylococcal biofilms  <cit> . many authors have demonstrated this increased activity of clarithromycin combinations against staphylococcal biofilms despite no antibacterial activity of clarithromycin . in this study, clarithromycin combinations outperformed single-regimen therapies. daptomycin plus clarithromycin prevented regrowth of two strains, suggesting complete eradication of biofilm. on the other hand, teicoplanin plus clarithromycin, although reduced the bacterial burden below the limit of detection, was not able to prevent regrowth, consistent with a reduced activity of teicoplanin against mrse compared to that of daptomycin.

our study has some limitations. our protocol allowed for prolonged dwelling times, a situation that might limit its reproducibility in clinical practice. however, the fact that daptomycin plus ethanol and daptomycin plus clarithromycin  were able to eradicate biofilm after only 72 h could avoid the need for this prolonged dwelling time. on the other hand, therapies longer than 3 days could improve our results. second, we explored only four mrse, so our results could not be extrapolated to all cla-bsis, however, as previously commented, other authors have reported similar results with ethanol or clarithromycin combinations with different strains  <cit>  which make plausible that our results could be generalized to mrse and maybe, against mrsa, although the latter should be taken with caution based on paramount differences between cons and staphylococcus aureus. third, we did not evaluate the biofilm forming capability of the mrse strains. although is true that biofilm forming ability is different among different strains, we have selected four strains isolated from catheters of patients with documented cla-bsis. this clinical aspect together with the high log10cfu/ml recovered prior to any antibiotic challenge suggests high biofilm forming ability.

finally we tried to simulate daily clinical practice, so we chose commercially available drug powders and iv solutions for human use to make antibiotic lock solutions instead of on analytical powder. although most other studies have used analytical drugs powder and so, our results are not completely comparable, we believe that our results would have been the same with analytical powder and, what is more important, they are more reproducible in clinical practice. finally, we relied on the absence of precipitation as an equivalent of drug-stability; although there can be loss of potency without physical changes, it is widely accepted that absence of precipitation is an equivalent of stability and lock solutions can be use if no physical changes are documented .

CONCLUSIONS
our study provides strong evidence of the potential of daptomycin plus ethanol and daptomycin plus clarithromycin to eradicate biofilm and prevent regrowth after antibiotic lock removal. although clinical trials should be performed, our results provide enough rationale supporting its use in antibiotic lock technique against mrse.

