BACKGROUND
reproduction has long been viewed as a cooperative exercise between male and female partners. yet, the evolutionary interests of males and females are often different . only in the rare case of semelparity, or when there is full and lifelong monogamy of the pair members will the interests, e.g. in mating rate or amount of parental care, be equal for both sexes  <cit> . only recently, however, have researchers started to explore the implications of sexual conflict on speciation, breeding systems, and evolution of various life-history traits  <cit> . sexual conflict is a potent evolutionary force that may mold morphology and behavior  <cit> , and promote speciation  <cit> . for instance, behavioral traits of dung fly, sepsis cynipsea, in populations undergoing intense sexual conflict diverged to a greater extent than flies under relaxed conflict, resulting in different levels of reproductive isolation  <cit> . extra-pair copulations in monogamous passerines may also result from sexual conflict. the negative selection for direct benefits from extra-pair copulations for females appears to be greater than the positive selection for indirect benefits, which supports the notion that extra-pair copulations reflect pre-zygotic sexual conflict  <cit> .

conflicts between parents over care  emerge via a trade-off between parental effort and alternative mating opportunities for each parent. as a result, each parent is expected to avoid the costs of care and shift those costs to its partner  <cit> . this may happen through a continuous adjustment of parental effort in response to the mate's current effort , or through a discrete decision to either care for the offspring or to desert the partner and offspring  <cit> . conflict over care typically occurs when there is an opportunity to reduce parental contribution. for example, a parent may desert the brood when one parent is sufficient to successfully raise the offspring  <cit> . this may occur when resources are plentiful  <cit>  or when offspring require little care, as is often the case with precocial young  <cit> . by deserting, the parent may benefit from finding a new mate and breeding again, thereby enhancing its reproductive success . with increasing levels of polygamy, variance in reproductive success increases and thus polygamous breeding systems are usually associated with intense sexual selection  <cit> . subsequently, sexual selection is expected to act stronger in species experiencing greater disparity in care provisioning.

here we test a priori predictions of sexual conflict theory about the impact of sexual conflict on morphology and behavior by comparing two closely related species of penduline tits  <cit> : the sequentially polygynandrous eurasian penduline tit remiz pendulinus  and the socially monogamous cape penduline tit anthoscopus minutus .

the ept is a small passerine  with a widespread distribution across europe and central asia. intense conflict between parents is indicated by several studies that showed that parental care is carried out by a single parent only   <cit> . in addition, about one third of clutches is deserted naturally by both parents; a pattern consistent between five european populations  <cit> . both polygyny and polyandry are common, and since the deserted parents often obtain new mates both sexes may mate with up to six partners in a single breeding season. by deserting the clutch both males and females enhance their own reproductive success, whereas caring reduces reproductive success in both sexes . in contrast, the cpt  is socially monogamous, and parents cooperate to incubate the eggs and rear the brood together, sometimes assisted by helpers at the nest  <cit> . the pair usually stays together throughout and sometimes across breeding seasons .

firstly, given that ept is frequently polygamous and thus likely experiences a larger variance in reproductive success, we predicted more intense sexual selection in ept than in the socially monogamous cpt. this is expected to result in a stronger sexual plumage dimorphism and more complex song in ept than in cpt. both song and plumage are often sexually selected traits in birds, including penduline tits .

secondly, we tested the prediction that male epts with a wider eye-stripe, which signals male attractiveness  <cit> , desert the nest more often than males with a narrower eye-stripe, thus imposing the costs of parental care on their mate. we expected that males with wider eye-stripes desert more frequently than males with narrower ones, since males with wider eye-stripes more often and more quickly procure new mates after desertion  <cit> . as such, males with wider eye-stripes should derive greater benefits from desertion to offset the potential cost of biparental desertion. females mated to males with wider eye-stripes, however, face the costs of care and/or reduced reproductive success .

finally, nests of both species are sophisticated structures  and built by both sexes. following predictions from sexual conflict theory , however, we expected that in ept, in which nest desertion is common, parents will attempt shifting the costs of care to their mate. nest desertion by both males and females takes place at around the third day of the egg laying phase  <cit>  and the process of desertion appears to be rapid in our population during which either the male or the female may desert first  <cit> . this is consistent with the prediction from sexual conflict theory that parents attempt to force their mate to work harder  <cit> . given the intense conflict in ept  <cit> , a parent may abstain from building a nest expecting its mate to make up the shortfall. specifically, we predicted ept pairs to attend the nest less frequently and less synchronously during the egg-laying phase than in cpt, in which parents are expected to cooperate over nest attendance. in the cooperating cpt we predicted synchronous nest attendance and coordinated nest building by both parents.

RESULTS
plumage
consistently with the prediction, in ept, the eye-stripes of males were significantly  larger than that of females, whereas in cpt the size of the eye-stripe was not different between males and females .

d = cohen's effect size, 1-β = power. the sample size required for a statistically significant difference is provided for cpt given the effect size d of the underlying data of cpt and the power 1-β set at  <dig>  , and given the effect size d in ept and the power 1-β set at  <dig>   .

male epts with large eye-stripes deserted their first clutch more often than those with small and thus less attractive eye-stripes . females, however, did not care more often for clutches of males with large eye-stripes .

song
from the song recordings of ept ,  <dig> males)  <dig> syllables were analyzed. adding all recordings from all males together, the total number of different syllables sung in the population  in ept did not increase after 46% of the total recording time. additionally, after the first 52% of recorded syllables  we obtained  <dig> out of the  <dig> different syllables we recorded in total . all different syllables sung by an individual male were obtained after 71% ± 24% of the total number of syllables recorded per individual. we may have underestimated the repertoire size for individual males, although this would only make our results more conservative . the song recorded from cpt  contained a total  <dig> syllables. we did not find variation in the number of different syllables sung by cpt, so we are confident that we obtained the full repertoire size for cpt.

the song output was not significantly different between species: ept males sang  <dig>  ±  <dig>   syllables per hour at the nest, whereas cpt males sang  <dig>  ±  <dig>   syllables per hour . epts used  <dig>  ±  <dig>  different syllables , whereas song was invariably mono-syllabic in cpt .

nest attendance
eurasian and cape penduline tits differed significantly in the frequency of synchronous nest attendance by male and female  versus  <dig>  ±  <dig> % , respectively; figure 5; mann whitney u; z = ±  <dig> , p <  <dig> , n =  <dig> pairs, d =  <dig> , 1-β > <dig> ). this result was corroborated by comparing the absolute time spent at the nest by male and female jointly .

comparing the expected versus observed times at the nest by both parents, we found a significant effect of species : epts spent significantly less time together at the nest than expected by chance , whereas in cpt the expected versus observed times were not different . finally, epts spent significantly less time at the nest  than cpts .

discussion
penduline tits  are emerging as one of the model systems in investigations of parental conflict  <cit> . here we found support for several a priori predictions of sexual conflict theory by comparing the behavior and plumage dimorphism of two closely related species. firstly, we found substantial sexual plumage dimorphism in ept, but not in cpt. secondly, we found that ept males had a more complex song  than cpt males. these results together suggest that sexual conflict influences the evolution of plumage dimorphism and complexity of song through intensified sexual selection. we realize that the power to detect a significant difference between the sexes of cpt in size of the eye-stripe is low. however, the sample size required to detect a sexual dimorphism in the size of the eye-stripe in cpt, given the effect size and power , is unrealistically large , yet with our sample we would have been able to detect a sex difference in eye-stripe size in cpt if it had been of a similar intensity as in ept . therefore eye-stripes are sexually monomorphic in cpt. we note that ept males and females can easily be distinguished in the field, but not cpts , and we thus suspect our results would be robust even with larger samples sizes.

thirdly, we found that ept males with wider eye-striped were more likely to desert their mate than males with narrower eye-stripes. however, females mated to males with wider eye-stripes did not provide care more often than those females that were mated to males with narrower eye-stripes. this somehow contradicts the prediction of the differential allocation hypothesis, which predicts that females mated with more attractive males are willing to invest more in the offspring than females mated to less attractive males  <cit> . one interpretation is retaliation by the females to avoid being exploited by the males: if an attractive male deserts, a female may still desert, despite the loss of the eggs . nevertheless, although females may obtain direct and/or indirect benefits from mating with attractive males, they also pay the full costs of caring or, in case they desert too, their efforts invested in nest building and egg-laying appear to be in vain. this points to the dilemma of ept females: by choosing an attractive mate she may actually lose  <cit> .

sexual conflict may be associated to a process of manipulation by one parent and resistance by the other. this potentially affects the evolution of various traits  <cit> , and may also explain the difference in sexual dimorphism and song complexity between the two species of penduline tit. evidence for this arms race between male and female partners derives from pre-copulatory sexual conflict where males are harmful to females during copulation  <cit> . males may, for instance, cause genital damage to the female  <cit> , or force the female to mate at a suboptimal rate  <cit> . males may also try to exploit the female's perception system during mate choice and parental investment, for instance through exaggerated sexually selected traits in males, such as ornaments or song. females are expected to counter-adapt through more selective mate choice  <cit>  leading to female resistance to mating and the evolution of exaggerated male display to overcome this resistance . in that light, the evolutionary driving force of preference is resistance to male-imposed costs, rather than gaining benefits from mating with preferred males, as described under classic sexual selection  <cit> . mediated by such a dynamic process male epts may try to manipulate their partner via elaborate plumage and song. this, in conjunction with resistance by the female, may have led to the exaggeration of those traits in ept, but not in cpt.

an alternative explanation for the elaboration of traits in ept is the higher population density than in cpt and thus more intense selection driven by male-male competition  <cit> . however, this argument has been challenged  <cit>  and breeding density itself is not a selective process, but rather an environmental trait that amplifies or de-amplifies sexual conflict. for instance, more potential mates may be available when breeding densities are high and a parent may then benefit more from desertion rather than caring for the offspring. we believe sexual conflict is a more parsimonious explanation than the alternatives, because our previous work showed strong evidence of intense sexual conflict in ept  <cit>  and the intensity of sexual conflict is unrelated to breeding density in ept  <cit> .

finally, we found that ept parents not only spend less time overall on nest attendance than cpt, but they also were at the nest less synchronously. the latter was also true when we compared the estimated absolute time the parents spent jointly at the nest, confirming that the difference in day length between our two study sites does not alter our results. these results suggest that ept parents appear to avoid each other at the nest - consistent with our argument above that one parent may force the partner to work harder. an alternative explanation for the observed pattern in ept is role division so that ept partners may take over the job of nest building from each other rather than actively avoiding each other at the nest. this would also result in less time spent together at the nest, albeit that this should be interpreted as a more cooperative behavior as opposed to avoidance due to conflict. the fact that the total time spent on nest attendance  is lower in ept than in cpt, however, corroborates the idea that they actively try to avoid each other, rather than taking over each other's work as a cooperative effort .

an alternative hypothesis, mate guarding  <cit> , predicts the opposite pattern to what we found: due to frequent mate change and dense breeding population in ept, one would predict more intense mate guarding in ept than in cpt and thus more synchronous appearance at the nest.

we acknowledge alternative selective processes to sexual conflict that may influence the evolution of morphology and behavior by acting themselves or acting with sexual conflict. to establish the generality of these results and to test alternative hypotheses, we need phylogenetic comparative studies using the appropriate framework. we are currently working on the first comprehensive phylogenetic hypotheses for remizinae , which will serve as backbone for future analyses  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we tested a priori predictions from sexual conflict theory using two closely-related species of penduline tits that exhibit different breeding systems. differences in behavior and morphology between the two species were consistent with the predictions of sexual conflict theory. although various studies have found support for these predictions in relation to pre-zygotic sexual conflict , whether the same is true for sexual conflict exhibited after fertilization was hitherto unclear. detailed data from the field, collected from multiple, closely-related species exhibiting a variety of breeding systems in various habitats will further advance this field. the diverse breeding systems of penduline tits are an excellent model system to understand how sexual conflict and cooperation may have shaped the evolution of morphology, behavior, neuro-endocrinology and genome of organisms.

