BACKGROUND
real-time polymerase chain reaction  in combination with reverse transcription  provides a powerful tool for accurate quantification of dna and rna copy numbers and has opened the way to the study of subtle modulations of gene expression in small numbers of cells, as well as small-scale genetic analyses aimed at establishing chromosome numbers, the presence of mutations, or allele dropout. the reliability of these measurements, however, depends on the accuracy of each step, including preparation and recovery of rna and/or dna, reverse transcription of rna into cdna, and quantifiable and specific amplification of all desired sequences. the importance of optimizing each of these steps is well recognized  <cit> , as is the need to minimize the number of tube-to-tube transfers in order to avoid the loss of templates and decrease the risk of contamination. this risk is posed by environmental rnases, material carried over from sample to sample, as well as previously generated amplicons present on laboratory equipment. sequential performance of several steps in a single-tube is therefore highly desirable, especially when starting with small numbers of target molecules, such as chromosomes of individual cells or a few virus particles  <cit> .

our laboratory has already demonstrated that bound proteins prevent reliable pcr amplification of genomic dna and that a thorough proteolytic digestion followed by heat inactivation solves this problem  <cit> . for accurate gene expression studies, rna molecules also need to be released intact and free of proteins from all subcellular compartments, but proteases cannot be used both because they are not fast enough to inhibit the rnases  and because rna is sensitive to the high temperatures required for protease inactivation  <cit> . commercial kits for rna purification therefore commonly employ either chaotropic agents or lysis buffers containing strong detergents, or a combination of the two, in order to achieve rapid denaturation of proteins. nucleic acids are then extracted to remove these chemicals, because their presence interferes with subsequent enzymatic reactions. alternatively, some rt-pcr kits bypass nucleic acid purification in favor of a simple dilution step, but in this case only a small aliquot of the lysed sample can be added to the rt mixture, due to volume restrictions. this approach introduces imprecision of its own and makes single cell analysis impossible. on the other hand, gentler lysis conditions that are compatible with single-tube analysis of a whole small sample do not remove proteins completely, resulting in substandard template preparations. for instance, protocols involving simple freeze-thaw cycles to produce cell lysis do not generate protein-free rna or dna. similarly, mild detergents that do not lyse the nuclear membrane preclude quantification of dna or rna located in the nucleus, and are unlikely to completely remove proteins bound to cytoplasmic rna.

the chaotropic agent guanidine isothiocyanate  has long been the chemical of choice for nucleic acid preparation. it is particularly useful for rna studies  <cit> , because it rapidly denatures all cellular proteins, as well as serum proteins, including rnases, added to culture media. gitc has also proven superior to all other tested methods for the recovery of either dna or rna extracted from mummified tissue  <cit> . due to its strong chemical action, gitc at high concentrations offers the further advantage of allowing safe storage of the samples until they are processed for quantification. for the same reason, however, all traditional protocols require removal of gitc prior to rt and pcr to avoid inactivation of the enzymes involved. typically gitc is removed by extraction with phenol-chloroform and purification of the nucleic acids through alcohol precipitation cycles  <cit> , or by absorption of the freed rna to a matrix such as glass fiber filters, silica-gel membranes, magnetic beads or proprietary compositions, usually followed by elution in a relatively large volume. both these approaches are time-consuming and involve a number of steps that can lead to incomplete rna recovery.

in view of these limitations we devised an alternative strategy in which the sample is collected and denatured in a minimal volume of a gitc solution, briefly heated to allow dry storage, and, when needed, is directly analyzed in the same tube by performing quantitative rt-pcr in a volume large enough to lower gitc concentration to negligible levels. this new procedure, hereafter referred to as puramp  and described here in full for the first time, is the only available method that allows a whole sample, such as a single embryo or cell, to be processed from lysis to rt-pcr in the same tube, under conditions that permit precise quantification of both rna and genomic dna copy numbers. this fully optimized method is sensitive enough to detect specific sequences within a single chromosome in one cell, yet robust enough to measure the presence of thousands of rna molecules released from hundreds of cells.

puramp has made it possible for us to conveniently investigate expression levels of two gene types essential for early mouse embryo development: xist, responsible for x-inactivation and dosage compensation in female cells  <cit> , and the heat-shock inducible hsp <dig>  and hsp <dig> , jointly called hsp70i  <cit> . xist rna is a noncoding transcript that exerts its particular function of gene-silencer by coating the inactive x-chromosome. unlike hsp70i rna and most other mrnas, it is therefore localized in the cell nucleus and particularly challenging to extract. besides their biological relevance, both xist and the hsp70i genes offer the advantage of naturally-occurring unambiguous controls for the specificity of transcripts amplified with rt-pcr. xist rna is, in fact, virtually absent from male cleavage stage embryos  <cit> , while hsp70i rna is predominantly synthesized in response to stress although minimal levels of hsp70i transcripts are normally present in embryonic cells. a careful quantitative analysis of hsp70i heat and culture stress-response in preimplantation embryos at different developmental stages, and its implications for development, will be presented elsewhere . in addition, we have been able to detect and quantify the genomic sequences of xist, the hsp70i and the male sex-determining gene sry  <cit> . because the number of these sequences is known and very low in samples comprised by an identifiable number of cells, such as early embryos that have undergone few cleavages, their precise quantification provided an optimal internal control to demonstrate the strength of this novel technique. the quick and reliable detection of dna  in very low copy number is, however, not limited to the role of internal control, but holds much wider utility for a variety of applications such as genetic studies and detection of viral sequences in a sample. further, this method can be successfully employed for the study of individual cells, as shown by the present report, and is easily adaptable to analysis of subcellular fractions or aliquots from bodily fluids; it also minimizes the use of toxic chemicals and the possibility of contamination, while allowing dry storage of the collected samples. all these features concur to render puramp ideally suitable for fast but highly sensitive gene and gene expression screening of multiple samples, including small whole specimens or fractions of larger ones.

RESULTS
single-tube xist rna, xist dna and sry dna quantification in individual male and female blastocysts
the puramp method presented in this study is performed in a single tube from cell lysis to cdna or genomic dna amplification, thus eliminating possible loss of template molecules due to procedures such as phase separation and recovery, repeated washing and re-suspension of nucleic acid pellets, elution from binding matrices and vessel-to-vessel transfer. this strategy offers an immediate improvement in the precision of gene expression analyses, at the same time shortening considerably the experimental protocol compared to traditional methods.

in order to validate our method, we initially measured the xist rna content of a group of female mouse embryos at the blastocysts stage and quantified xist and sry dna copy numbers in their male counterparts. our previous analysis of these parameters in single female and male mouse embryos at different developmental stages provided us with an ample pool of data obtained with commercially available nucleic acids preparation methods  <cit> , which we used as a reference for comparison with our new results.

quantification of the real-time pcr data obtained from the three male embryos in fig.  <dig> indicated that, on average, each embryo contained  <dig> ±  <dig>  copies of xist genomic dna, consistent with the previous estimate of  <dig> ±  <dig> genomes per male blastocyst  <cit> . both values are higher than the expected cell number per embryo at this stage , due to endoreduplication in trophoblast cells  <cit> , a phenomenon also responsible for some variability between samples. in contrast, a total of five female blastocysts analyzed via the puramp method yielded an average of  <dig>  ±  <dig> copies of xist cdna + genomic dna per embryo. since each female blastocyst contains about  <dig> copies of the xist genomic sequence , the accumulation of xist rna per female blastocyst averages above  <dig>  copies, considerably higher than our previous measurement of  <dig> ±  <dig> copies obtained using a multistep nucleic acids isolation procedure  <cit> . the data in figure  <dig> demonstrate that the amplification efficiency of both the xist and sry sequences is neither decreased nor increased by the presence of diluted denaturing solution  during real-time pcr. in fact, additional experiments revealed that xist/sry real-time pcr was unaffected by a gitc concentration as high as  <dig> mm . taken together these results suggest that the higher levels of xist cdna measured using the puramp method are due to an improvement in rna recovery at the initial step of cell lysis.

quantification of low-to-high xist rna and dna copy numbers in single embryos and blastomeres
as shown above, blastocysts are comprised by many cells and contain hundreds of copies of the xist and sry genes and thousands of copies of xist transcripts, with rather wide sample-to-sample fluctuations. in order to more carefully determine the quantitative capability of the new assay, we next analyzed embryos at earlier developmental stages containing lower and, in some cases, precisely known numbers of template copies. figure  <dig> illustrates the real-time pcr plots of the xist amplicons generated in the course of two separate experiments by, right-to-left, i) a 3-cell male embryo ; ii) a 4-cell male embryo ; iii) a single blastomere isolated from a 4-cell female embryo ; iiii) a 4-cell female embryo ; iiiii) a female blastocyst . the gender of each embryo was confirmed by the detection of an sry-specific fluorescent signal in male samples . the quantitative analysis of these results confirmed that the 3-cell male embryo contained  <dig> copies of the xist gene, while the 4-cell male embryo contained  <dig> copies of the xist gene, indicating that dna duplication had occurred in two of the blastomeres. it has long been known that two of the blastomeres of a 4-cell embryo divide ahead of the other two  <cit> , an observation in agreement with our finding. the numbers of xist templates measured in these male embryos also confirmed the expectation that these samples did not contain xist rna because xist is not expressed in male cells  <cit> . conversely, the xist signal of the female 4-cell embryo arose about five cycles earlier than the xist signal of the 4-cell male embryo , denoting the presence of xist transcripts , albeit at considerably lower levels than those measured in the female blastocyst . these measurements are consistent with other studies demonstrating that xist transcripts are accumulated in the developing embryo beginning at the late 2-cell stage  <cit>  and with our previously published xist developmental profile  <cit> .

the quantitative accuracy of the puramp method was further confirmed by the fact that the xist signal generated by a single blastomere isolated from a 4-cell female embryo arose  <dig>  cycles later than the xist signal of the whole 4-cell female embryo . a left-to-right shift of  <dig> cycles is exactly what is expected for a fourfold decrease in template numbers quantified by real-time pcr amplification. figure  <dig> illustrates this point by showing xist rna + genomic dna levels in two individual blastomeres isolated from a 4-cell female embryo, as compared to xist template levels measured in intact 4-cell embryos of different sex and then calculated on a per cell basis. even at this early developmental stage, the presence of xist rna is clearly detectable in the female samples, absent from the male, and not affected by the blastomere isolation procedure  <cit> .

hsp70i rna and dna measurements in heat shocked and non-heat shocked single embryos and blastomeres
in order to more extensively test the validity of the puramp approach to template quantification in single cells, we measured transcript levels of the heat shock-inducible genes hsp <dig>  and hsp <dig>  in blastomeres isolated from embryos at the pre-compaction 8-cell stage, when cells can be easily counted and separated. the sequences of these two genes are almost entirely identical, they are located on the same chromosome and they encode the same protein  <cit> . for this reason, there has been some confusion in their identification and nomenclature in past studies. heat-inducible hsp <dig> transcription, previously indicated as hsp <dig>  expression, is now more precisely designated as the sum of hsp <dig>  and hsp <dig>   rnas.

a preliminary set of experiments was carried out on embryos at the blastocyst stage, when heat shock response is fully established  <cit> , with the goal of evaluating the effect of hyperthermia on hsp70i expression. like sry, the hsp70i are naturally intronless genes and therefore once again our pair of pcr primers simultaneously amplified both genomic dna and cdna sequences. the data in table  <dig> clearly indicated that heat shock  produced a sharp rise in hsp70i template numbers due to the presence of thousands of copies of hsp70i rna, although these numbers were considerably lower when samples were prepared with a multistep/multitube phenol-chloroform extraction  <cit>  rather than with the puramp method. during these initial experiments, embryos were allowed to recover for 30– <dig> minutes after heat shock. under these conditions, however, only five out of seven blastocysts exposed to hyperthermia showed an increase in hsp70i rna levels. based on these results, the duration of the recovery period was increased to at least two hours in all following experiments, eliminating the finding of "non responsive" embryos.

copy numbers of hsp70i rna were then quantified in whole 8-cell embryos that had or had not been exposed to a temperature increase, as summarized in table  <dig>  the number of hsp70i genomic dna copies measured in the absence of rt was consistent with the presence of four copies of the genes per cell, one hsp <dig>  and one hsp <dig>  on each chromosome  <dig>  and with the fact that some of the cells analyzed had already duplicated their dna. only a minimal amount of hsp70i rna, calculated as the difference of template copy numbers obtained with and without reverse transcription , was present in non-heated embryos, indicating that the embryos were not stressed by culture conditions  <cit> .

expression of hsp70i rna increased sharply after a 30-minute heat treatment, followed by a recovery period of either  <dig> or  <dig> hours necessary for transcripts synthesis and accumulation. some of the heat-shocked embryos were harvested intact, while others were dissociated in single blastomeres. the average numbers of hsp70i template copies per blastomere were calculated from the isolated cells  and compared to the average per blastomere values obtained from whole embryos. the results show that the amount of hsp70i rna + genomic dna per cell calculated by these two approaches is very similar. a post-heating recovery period of  <dig> hours rather than  <dig> hours increased the hsp70i rna levels only slightly, indicating that the onset of transcription and the major build-up in rna occur quickly. single cells derived from non-heated embryos contained only trace amounts of hsp70i rna, consistent with whole embryo measurements, and pcr efficiency was, again, unaffected by the puramp components .

efficiency of dnase treatment within the puramp protocol
the puramp method described above automatically results in the quantitative recovery of genomic dna, which can then be used as a quality control and a convenient internal standard for the simultaneous recovery and measurement of mrna . applications such as microarray analysis, however, are based on rna-only amplification. for this reason, we introduced a dnase digestion step preceding rt in the xist/sry puramp protocol and analyzed the efficacy with which the genomic dna was degraded. genome numbers in embryos at the morula stage were calculated by counting xist and sry copies in five male samples  and averaged at  <dig>  ±  <dig> , consistent with the fact that embryos at this stage are normally comprised of 16-to- <dig> cells. after treatment with dnase i, only  <dig>  ±  <dig>  genomes per embryo were still present in a group of  <dig> male samples, demonstrating that the enzyme had successfully degraded  <dig> % of the dna. figure  <dig> illustrates the effects of dnase digestion on xist  and sry  dna in a group of eight male and eight female single embryos. as expected, control male samples  contained equal numbers of xist and sry copies, as shown by the equal ct values, corresponding to the genomic dna copy number. both amplicons were absent from dnase-treated embryos that could be identified as male because they were devoid of xist rna . in contrast, control female samples  contained xist rna and dna but lacked sry. dnase treatment caused a delay in the xist signals arising from female embryos , consistent with the elimination of all  <dig> copies of genomic xist dna in each embryo plus some decrease in the number of xist transcripts. the amount of rna recovered in these samples averaged at 75% of control levels. the fact that some rna is lost during the dnase step is not surprising as it is well known that some rna hydrolysis is unavoidable , and is not linked to the single-tube procedure. we anticipate that further optimization of the available dnase protocols and reagents will minimize this problem. thus, the data in fig.  <dig> demonstrate overall that a dnase digestion step can be successfully inserted within the puramp procedure, without disruption of the dnase enzymatic activity.

discussion
it is increasingly clear that individual cells in a population do not exhibit identical patterns of gene expression and, hence, that expression profiling is more informative if it is quantitative and carried out at the single cell level  <cit> . this consideration is particularly relevant to current efforts aimed at understanding early mammalian embryogenesis in which totipotent cells generated during the first few cell divisions gradually become committed to particular lines of development. the mechanisms of this process are under intensive scrutiny and appear to be rooted in differential gene expression resulting from epigenetic modifications. it is in this context that we have been measuring rna levels in single cells of cleaving embryos  <cit>  and it is to increase the reliability of these measurements that we have now developed the puramp method. this completely single-tube approach is easy to use, eliminates loss of material, and improves the quantitative accuracy of gene and gene expression studies.

first, cell lysis and protein denaturation occur very rapidly upon delivery of the sample to crystalline gitc, thus ensuring both protein removal from dna and rna and inactivation of cellular nuclease that would otherwise quickly degrade rna  <cit> . transcripts localized in the nucleus, such as xist rna, are freed and made available to reverse transcription as well as cytoplasmic mrna molecules, a result unattainable by mild detergent treatment that leaves nuclei intact  <cit> . second, the brief heating period after cell lysis enhances complete denaturation of proteins and also reduces the volume of the sample, thereby further increasing the guanidine concentration. the semi-dry sample can then be safely stored without risk of nuclease activity. third, carrying out cell lysis in nanoliter volumes allows a manifold dilution of the chaotropic agent after addition of the rt cocktail, so that rt can be performed on the whole sample and in the same vessel in which it was collected without inhibition of the enzymatic activity. finally, rt and pcr can be carried out immediately after cell lysis, rather than after cumbersome and lengthy nucleic acid preparation procedures, thereby further reducing the time required to process many samples, as well as the risk of contamination.

our quantitative measurements of xist rna levels in developing mouse embryos highlight one of several merits of the puramp method over the traditional, multistep approach to nucleic acids purification  <cit> . in fact, while genome numbers obtained with the two methods are similar as expected, xist rna levels are higher with the single-tube protocol. the same culture conditions and procedures were used in the two groups of experiments, making it unlikely that differences in embryo quality were the cause of the increase in xist rna. we, therefore, conclude that the higher levels of xist rna observed using the new procedure reflect improved template preparation with efficient inactivation of rnases and reduced loss of rna molecules. xist rna is known to trigger x-chromosome silencing through interactions with numerous proteins and possibly with the nuclear matrix scaffold  <cit> . the results presented in this study clearly show that the very high initial concentration of gitc thoroughly breaks up protein-rna interactions, but the denaturant does not inhibit subsequent rt once is diluted. similarly, our quantification of hsp70i templates in heat-shocked blastocysts supports the view that larger pools of rna are detected in puramp-treated samples than when using phase separation-based nucleic acid extraction. the later method, in fact, presents several steps that require extreme care to avoid loss of material, including complete recovery of the upper phase, thorough precipitation of all nucleic acids molecules, and repeated re-suspension and washing of barely visible pellets. all these manipulations render the results obtained with this technique particularly operator-dependent, while, in contrast, puramp simply requires sequential addition of reagents into the same tube. once the sample is delivered to the lysodot in the reaction vessel , therefore, this technique is much less dependent on the operator's specific skill.

individual blastomeres of pre-compaction mouse embryos are easily harvested due to their size, and laser zona drilling efficiently preserves rna pools allowing dependable single-cell analysis  <cit> . we thus used measurements of xist and hsp70i rna levels in single blastomeres to further validate the quantitative accuracy and reliability of the puramp method, as shown by the fact that transcript levels in individual cells are comparable to average rna levels per cell calculated from whole embryos. based on these results we anticipate that puramp will prove useful for quantification of rna levels in small pieces of tissue from many sources, as well as single cells and even fractions of cells such as neuronal dendrites and axons  <cit> . the small volume in which denaturation is carried out is also amenable to analysis of biological material isolated by laser capture microdissection or laser pressure catapulting  <cit> .

genomic dna has recently been proposed as the optimal standard for gene expression studies  <cit>  and it is the required internal standard when cdna is quantified with the strategy of amplification competition  <cit> . in this case, dna and rna are purified together, as in our experiments, and one set of primers is designed to co-amplify a genomic sequence that spans an intron as well as the corresponding intronless cdna. the alternative strategy that we developed makes use of primer sets that do not span introns and therefore amplify genomic dna sequences that have the same length and composition as their corresponding cdna's, eliminating any possible difference in pcr efficiency for the two types of templates . we have found it very informative to measure genomic dna copy numbers in addition to rna levels of the genes under study, because this strategy provides a reliable internal control for primer specificity and for nucleic acids recovery, particularly when performing single-cell analyses. in the case of early mouse embryos, detection of the sry gene, which is not expressed at those stages, has also allowed us to identify the sex of each embryo.

the recovery and quantification of genomic dna together with rna has previously enabled us to establish genome number averages for developing embryos  <cit> . while these numbers are very similar to the number of cells in early embryos, measurements of dna copies are more accurate because they indicate whether the cells have completed s phase. genome quantification becomes even more critical after the late 8-cell stage, because the embryos compact making it very difficult to count individual cells. moreover, endoreduplication takes place in trophoblasts at the blastocyst stage, greatly increasing the number of genome copies present in those cells  <cit> . all these factors render the counting of dna copy numbers important if gene expression data are to be calculated on a per-genome basis, independently from a cell's ploidy.

a further reason to preserve dna molecules in preparations for rt-pcr is that all dnase digestion protocols currently available lead to partial hydrolysis of rna when the enzyme is heat-inactivated in the presence of divalent cations at the end of the reaction  <cit> . we have consistently found a decrease in amplified cdna in dnase-treated samples, particularly when performing rna isolation with traditional methods , even when a chelating agent was added prior to the heating step. incomplete rna recovery after dnase inactivation in the presence of edta was not evident in past reports, due to the use of non-quantitative methods of nucleic acids analysis  <cit> . our real-time pcr results, however, agree with numerous more recent findings . efforts have been made, therefore, to devise alternative ways to eliminate the dnase once digestion has occurred. these methods, however, depend on removal of the enzyme which, in turn, implies manipulations such as phenol extraction that may still generate nucleic acids loss.

for all of the above reasons as well as the fact that we are working with very small amounts of material, we prefer single-tube preparation-to-amplification of both rna and dna templates, an approach made possible for the first time by the procedure described in this paper. previously reported single-tube template preparation protocols, in fact, have been aimed at measuring only specific rnas and employ lysis buffers containing low concentrations of the mild detergent np- <dig>  <cit> , or they bypass the lysis step altogether and are limited to neuron studies  <cit> . while these methods are valuable for detection of protein-free rna molecules, they utilize non-denaturing conditions, as clearly demonstrated by the addition of proteic rnase inhibitors to the extraction buffers, and therefore preclude quantitative analysis of dna  <cit>  as well as of protein-bound rna pools.

CONCLUSIONS
due to its ability to thoroughly remove proteins from both rna and dna molecules in a rapid and simple way, puramp is suitable to a wide variety of applications, including gene expression quantification, studies on genetic mutations, and viral detection. because the presence of dna is undesirable for certain applications, such as microarray-based expression profiling, we have also shown that a dnase digestion step can be easily included in the single-tube format. we anticipate that treatment with other enzymes, such as cellulase in the case of plant cells, can similarly be inserted into the puramp protocol to digest other "undesired" components of particular cells prior to amplification. thus, puramp is a very flexible technique that affords the investigator a variety of ways of processing the contents of a lysed sample with a heightened level of precision .

