BACKGROUND
the genus leptospira is composed of both saprophytic and pathogenic species  <cit> . pathogenic leptospira spp., such as l. interrogans, l. borgpetersenii, l. weilii and l. kirschner, are the causative agents of leptospirosis, a serious world-wide disease in humans and animals  <cit> . the disease in humans occurs mostly after contact, often through skin wounds, with soil or water contaminated by urine of infected animals. its severity varies from mild to rapidly fatal. severe symptoms are characterized by visible jaundice involving hepatic injury, acute renal failure, carditis and hemorrhage, and case fatality varies from a few percent to 25%  <cit> . however, the mechanisms of disease caused by pathogenic leptospira spp. remain largely unknown.

both pathogenic and saprophytic leptospires express two endoflagella . one of the endoflagella is attached at one end of the cell and is located between the protoplasmic cylinder and the outer membrane sheath  <cit> . the endoflagella, rotating within the periplasmic space, are responsible for spirochete motility. in pathogenic leptospira species, this motility is considered to contribute to invasion into hosts and diffusion within the hosts during infection  <cit> . in previous studies, we found that pathogenic leptospires can adhere to host cells with one or two termini of the microbial bodies, while non-pathogenic leptospiral strains lacked this ability  <cit> . the adhering positions were located at the terminal knobs in which flagellar basal bodies are found  <cit> . at the bottom of the flagellar structure, there is a basal body composed of ms and c rings  <cit> . in flagellated bacteria, some proteins in the fli family form the c ring, which functions as the flagellar rotor and contains the directional switching capability of the flagellar motor  <cit> . however, a possible role for the leptospiral endoflagella in pathogenicity has never been explored.

a complete set of flagella-associated genes were found in the genomic sequences of l. interrogans serovar lai strain lai and serovar copenhageni strain fiocruz l1- <dig>  including four genes that encode flagellar motor switch proteins   <cit> . in bacteria, the flagellar motor switch proteins play a critical role in control of flagellar motor direction  <cit> . thus far fliy has been found in some spirochetes and a few bacteria but does not exist in most bacteria  <cit> . particularly, fliy of bacillus subtilis was shown to be a chey-p-hydrolyzing protein in the chemotactic signaling cascade  <cit> . in addition, leptospiral fliy carries a carboxy-terminal domain of  <dig> amino acid residues that is homologous to a domain of yscq in yersinia pestis  <cit> . the yscq protein was identified as a member of the flagellar associated type iii secretion system , with multiple functions such as controlling the directional rotation of flagella and the export of virulence factors including yop proteins  <cit> . the c ring of escherichia coli does not have fliy, but its flin has a high sequence homology with fliy of l. interrogans strain lai  <cit>  and flin is an essential agent for motility and virulence protein export  <cit> . these data suggest that fliy of pathogenic leptospira species may have important functions in motility and virulence.

in the present study, we constructed a fliy gene knock-out  mutant of l. interrogans serovar lai strain lai based on homologous recombination using a suicide plasmid. to examine the possible role of fliy in pathogenesis, the mutant and wild-type strain were compared in assays of motility in liquid medium and migration on semisolid agar, adhesion to macrophages, stimulation of apoptosis in infected host cells, and lethality to guinea pigs.

RESULTS
products of fliy gene amplification and rfliy expression
the amplification segments with expected size of the entire fliy gene  from l. interrogans serovar lai strain lai were obtained by pcr . the cloned fliy gene had 100% nucleotide sequence identity with the reported sequences in genbank   <cit> . the recombinant plasmid, e. coli bl21de3pet32a-fliy, expressed rfliy under inducement of isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside , and the purified rfliy by ni-nta affinity chromatography showed a single band on a polyacrylamide gel after electrophoresis . the rabbits immunized with rfliy could produce rfliy-specific serum antibody and the immunodiffusion titer of antiserum against rfliy was 1: <dig> 

characterization of the fliy- mutant
to create a fliy- mutant of l. interrogans, we cloned the fliy gene into p2nil and inserted an ampicillin gene at the bgl ii site near the 5' end. this plasmid was then introduced into l. interrogans followed by selection for ampicillin resistance, to create a fliy bla mutant. sequencing data indicated that the fliy gene and ampicillin resistance gene  segments in suicide plasmid p2nilfliy-bla had the same orientation, and the nucleotide sequences were the same as in the original cloned fliy and bla genes. the fliy- mutant could grow in  <dig> μg/ml ampicillin-contained korthof liquid medium for at least  <dig> months in our laboratory. the generation time of the mutant  was the same as that of the wild-type strain. subsequent pcr analysis confirmed that the mutant maintained a modified fliy gene that was larger  than the wild-type gene , into which inserted the ampicillin resistance gene  had been inserted . the western blot analysis also revealed the absence of expression of fliy in the mutant . furthermore, the absence of mrnas for the flip and fliq genes, downstream of fliy gene, indicated that the transcription of the two genes were inhibited . in fact, ten genes  should be transcribed by the same operon, based on the genome structure predicted by the software, microbesonline operon predictions .

persistently lower motility of the fliy- mutant
normally, leptospires have a typical motive manner with rotation. however, all microbes of the fliy- mutant in liquid korthof medium by dark-field microscopy only had 40% of rotative motion frequency per minute of the wild-type strain, but presented a similar shape to the wild-type strain . on semisolid korthof agar plates, the colonies of the fliy- mutant were noticeably smaller  than that of the wild-type strain  , consistent with attenuated motility of the mutant.

altered adhesion of the fliy- mutant
the wild-type l. interrogans strain lai could adhere to the surface of j774a. <dig> cells with one or both bacterial ends . the attached wild-type leptospires were visible on the cell surface after  <dig> min post inoculation  and the adhesion ratios approached a plateau after  <dig> to  <dig> min p.i. . however, the fliy- mutant was significantly impaired in its ability to adhere to the macrophages, compared to the wild-type strain  .

host-cell apoptosis induced by the wild-type and the fliy- mutant strains
as shown in fig  <dig>  the wild-type l. interrogans strain lai induced apoptosis of j774a. <dig> cells, and the maximal apoptotic ratio  appeared after  <dig> h coincubation, as detected by flow cytometry . however, the ability of the fliy- mutant to cause apoptosis was markedly decreased, and the levels of apoptosis and late apoptosis/necrosis at all the different incubation times were significantly lower than those induced by the wild-type strain  .

attenuated lethality of the fliy- mutant strain in guinea pigs
the lethality to guinea pigs of the wild-type l. interrogans strain lai was significantly larger than of the fliy- mutant during a 10d post-challenge period . no animals infected by the fliy- mutant strain died comparing with 100% death, which were infected by wild-type strain with the same dosage. when the challenge dosage for the fliy- mutant was increased to ten times the dosage used for the wild-type strain, only 60% of the animals infected with the fliy- mutant died.

discussion
recent reports have shown that flagellin and other flagella-associated proteins from many bacteria participate in adhesion to host cells and colonization of hosts  <cit> . in vitro studies have suggested that the role of flagella could be to increase invasion into host cells and survival within macrophages  <cit> . however, the correlation between flagella and pathogenicity of pathogenic leptospira spp. had not been investigated until now. l. interrogans serogroup icterohaemorrhagiae serovar lai strain lai is the most prevalent pathogenic leptospiral strain, which is responsible for over 70% of human leptospirosis cases in china  <cit> . we therefore inactivated the fliy gene in l. interrogans strain lai using a suicide plasmid, which is a frequently adopted strategy for determining the function of a target gene. recently, croda and his colleagues used plasmid pb2sk to successfully construct a suicide plasmid with spectinomycin resistance for inactivating the ligb gene of l. interrogans serovar copenhageni strain fiocruz l1- <dig>  <cit> . in the present study we first used another plasmid, p2nil, with an ampicillin resistance gene  to construct a fliy gene knock out  mutant. a fliy- mutant has been constructed, but that fliy inactivation by ampicillin cassette insertion also negatively affected downstream genes; therefore, care has to be taken when interpreting the phenotypes observed for this mutant.

the inactivation of the fliy gene has shown different effects on formation of flagella in different bacteria. in bacillus subtilis, the deletion of fliy resulted in the loss of flagella  <cit> . however, the flagella were still produced in the fliy-deleted strain of bacillus cereus  <cit> . although the leptospiral fliy- mutant generated in this study displayed remarkably attenuated motility compared to the wild-type strain, it maintained the typical spiral shape and propeller movement which is caused by the periplasmic endoflagella  <cit> . as mentioned previously, the major function of flagellar motor switch proteins is to control flagellar motor direction  <cit> . thus, we infer that the fliy gene inactivation should not affect the formation of the endoflagella.

it is well known that adhesion to host cells is a primary and critical step for bacterial infection  <cit> . recently, the importance of cell adhesion for pathogenic leptospira spp. has been demonstrated  <cit> . adhesion to host cells also acts as an essential role for pathogenicity of other spirochetes  <cit> . mononuclear macrophages are the most important phagocytes in the human innate and acquired immnune systems. however, many pathogenic bacteria can evade host immunity by inducing apoptosis of macrophages  <cit> . similarly, pathogenic leptospira spp. can escape from the host immune system by promoting macrophage apoptosis  <cit> . in the present study, we provide evidence that the ability of the fliy- mutant to adhere to j774a. <dig> cells, to induce apoptosis in the cells, and to cause death in guinea pigs is much lower than for the wild-type strain. all the phentotypes observed, including lower pathogenicity, could be a consequence of fliy inactivation, or a consequence of the polar effects, or of both.

t3ss is one of protein export systems used by most gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . morphologically, as a transmembrane channel, t3ss is composed of multiple protein complexes called an injectisome, responsible for transporting virulence factors into host cells, some of which cause cell metabolic disorder and death  <cit> . however, the flagellar export apparatus can also function as a bacterial virulence protein secretion system  <cit> . for example, flif of pseudomonas aeruginosa, a flagellar associated protein component in the ms ring, is involved in adhesion by controlling secretion of bacterial adhesins  <cit> . although the t3ss and flagellar export apparatus are two relatively separate systems in many pathogenic bacteria  <cit> , the t3ss and flagellar export apparatus in yersinia enterocolitica play a common role in secretion of bacterial phospholipases during infection  <cit> . taken together, these observations suggest that inactivation of the leptospiral fliy gene  may decrease the export of some unknown adhesion- and cytotoxicity-associated virulence proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
inactivation of fliy clearly had polar effects on downstream genes. the phentotypes observed, including decreasing motility, adhesion to macrophages and host-cell apoptosis, and attenuating lethality in infected guinea pigs, could be a consequence of fliy inactivation, but also a consequence of the polar effects.

