BACKGROUND
tinnitus – the sensation of sounds without objectively identifiable sound sources – poses a significant problem for millions of people in the world. estimations range from 4–15% for prevalence of chronic tinnitus  <cit> . the underlying physiological mechanisms that lead to this phantom sensation are still largely unknown. from a clinical perspective, this means that no therapy reliably abolishes, or even reduces in a significant manner, the tinnitus sensation. tinnitus seems to not be solely produced in the periphery of the auditory system, even though a hearing damage is almost always implied  <cit> . studies show that after eliminating afferent input by transsection of the auditory nerve fibers, tinnitus usually persists. even aggravations have been reported  <cit> . eggermont and roberts  <cit>  pointed out that after damage to cochlear receptors, a cascade of changes is set in motion of which some could serve as a 'neural code' for tinnitus. in the central nervous system at least three correlates are discussed: enhanced spontaneous firing rates in various structures of the auditory system  <cit> , altered synchronous cortical activity  <cit> , and tonotopic map reorganization of the auditory cortex  <cit> . regarding the latter aspect, parallel changes have been observed in the somatosensory system of phantom pain following limb amputation, leading some researchers to assume similar underlying neurophysiological mechanisms  <cit> . nonetheless, inconsistent results were obtained for some of these correlates  <cit> . furthermore, they cannot account for all aspects of the tinnitus sensation. for example, structural and morphological changes require time to develop and may then contribute to functional map reorganization in tinnitus. however, tinnitus is usually perceived immediately after an experienced noise trauma. therefore, other explanations are needed to account for both the immediate and lasting tone perception. synchronization of the firings of several neurons, for example, which mimics an aspect of the response to normal sound stimulation, might be promoted by decreased lateral inhibition. this could in turn enhance the synaptic efficacies through temporal integration via hebbian mechanisms  <cit>  leading to self-sustained tinnitus related cell-assemblies. weisz et al  <cit>  also found an altered spontaneous brain activity pattern in human chronic tinnitus subjects compared to normal hearing controls. this pathological pattern comprised a marked reduction in alpha power  and enhancement in delta  and gamma power  at rest. these abnormalities were especially pronounced in the temporal cortical regions. enhanced power in the slow-wave frequency range  is present in brain areas deprived of input caused by hearing damage in the case of tinnitus. this pattern of brain waves has been associated with neurological damage, for example in the perilesional areas of brain tumors and infarcts  <cit> . a reduction of this abnormal activity can be observed after the resection of such tumors  <cit> , which predicts that in addition to the identification of dysfunctional neural networks, the mapping of abnormal slow wave activity can be used to track changes in the course of recovery or treatment  <cit> . this has been applied to tinnitus, and spontaneous brain activity as well. dohrmann et al  <cit>  manipulated the ongoing oscillatory activity  while leaving audiometric properties unchanged using a neurofeedback therapeutical approach. as an overall measure the tinnitus intensity decreased substantially after training. this reduced tinnitus intensity could also be noted in the follow-up sessions. only patients who successfully modified their brain activity in both trained frequency bands, greatly reduced the intensity of their tinnitus . thus, a normalization of abnormal rhythms in cortical networks can be associated with an alteration in tinnitus perception. the work by dohrmann et al extends the work of weisz et al  <cit>  by showing that changes in the oscillatory activity can lead to perceptual changes. yet this still leaves the question of whether the reverse also holds, i.e. whether perceptual changes also lead to changes of the ongoing oscillatory activity pattern. tinnitus masking and residual inhibition  are two tinnitus measures that can temporarily manipulate the tinnitus sensation. most tinnitus maskers are narrow- or broadband noises. they can relieve the tinnitus sensation during their presentation, yet sometimes masking is also effective in producing a suppression or reduction of tinnitus that extends beyond the duration of the masker. this phenomenon is termed ri  <cit> . masking has been used to study one patient in periods of silence from tinnitus while measuring resting magnetencephalographic  data  <cit> . the power spectra revealed changes in spontaneous brain activity in the auditory cortex regions in the form of a sharp theta peak in the tinnitus condition and a reduction in theta band power when the tinnitus was masked. the authors proposed that to mask the tinnitus, underlying thalamocortical circuits were depolarized, thereby reducing low frequency activity. however, the conditions are hardly comparable, as in one of them a tone was presented while in the other one no sound was presented. additionally, oscillatory  <dig> – <dig>  hz activity was found to decrease in temporal regions during sound stimulation in normal hearing individuals  <cit> . therefore, masking does not seem to be an appropriate measure to study neurophysiological correlates of tinnitus intensity changes. however, during ri the period of interest is always free of an external sound stimulation. thus, ri seems to be more adequate to study periods of reduced tinnitus intensity in chronic tinnitus sufferers, which can then be compared to other stimulation free periods. another advantage of measuring ri is that inter-individual variability can be avoided by exploiting the possibility of comparing neural activity with and without  tinnitus in one patient. a previous study has investigated neuronal processes during ri by recording spontaneous magnetic activity over the left temporal plane of one tinnitus patient. differences in neural activity while perceiving tinnitus and during ri were thereby explored. in this study, an increase in spectral power in the low frequency range from 2– <dig> hz was present during ri  <cit> . recent work by roberts et al  <cit>  measured ri functions in relation to tinnitus spectra and auditory threshold shift. ri was assumed to be related to a desynchronization of neural activity underlying the tinnitus sensation. maskers covering the range of hearing loss in the audiogram produced the best results in ri tests. in the only neuroimaging group study of ri published to date, osaki et al  <cit>  showed increases in regional cerebral blood flow in brodmann areas  <dig> and  <dig> during ri. both brain regions are putatively involved in auditory processing and the result could be interpreted as a transient decrease of hypoactivation or reafferentation. in the present study a period of  ri is compared to a baseline period in which the tinnitus is of usual loudness. changes in spontaneous brain activity are measured . based on our previous work  <cit> , a decrease in amplitude in the slow-wave frequency range is expected during ri in temporal regions. an increase in amplitude in the alpha frequency range is expected in these same regions during ri compared to baseline. changes in other brain areas and frequency bands are explored.

RESULTS
behavioral data
a highly significant main effect for time was found  =  <dig> , p ≤  <dig> ), resulting from an overall reduction of tinnitus intensity post-stimulation, regardless of the stimulation. however, a condition  × time  interaction was found to approach significance  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). with this interaction being in accordance with our hypotheses, post-hoc analyses were conducted. these analyses revealed that even though intensity was significantly reduced under both conditions, this reduction was slightly more pronounced for ri  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , co: t  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; see figure  <dig> depicting single subject data). please note that the mean pre-tinnitus loudness is not  <dig> for every subject. this limitation is due to a decrease in tinnitus loudness over the course of the experiment in some subjects).

meg data: spontaneous brain activity
a condition × time × frequency interaction approached significance  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). as this interaction was in accordance with our hypotheses, further analyses were conducted. in the delta frequency band, an interaction of condition and time was found to approach significance  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). additionally, a main effect for time could be observed  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). this leads to the assumption that the amplitude of the slow frequency range differed from pre to post but not equally for the conditions. we followed up this question by a planned comparison between pre and post separately for ri and co conditions in the delta band in temporal regions. a highly significant  =  <dig> , p ≤  <dig> ) reduction of delta power was observed for ri, however not for co  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). thus, changes in delta can be seen to be specific for the ri condition .

in the alpha frequency band, a main effect for time approached significance  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). no other effects were close to this in terms of approaching significance. as the condition × time interaction was far from being significant  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ), the increase in amplitude can be interpreted as being non-specific. no significant effects were observed in the gamma frequency band  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; f  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ).

correlation
to test whether the observed changes in spontaneous brain activity and the reported tinnitus loudness are linearly associated a spearman's rho correlation coefficient for paired samples was calculated. no significant correlations between behavioral measures  and spontaneous brain activity  were found .

discussion
to our knowledge, this is the first group study on neuromagnetic changes during ri in chronic tinnitus sufferers. single cases, showing changes in brain activity when the tinnitus sensation was altered, have been studied during masking  <cit>  and ri  <cit> . in addition, a pet study on ri revealed such changes  <cit> . herein, changes in spontaneous brain activity occurring during a period of reduced tinnitus were studied. a decrease in amplitude in the slow-wave  frequency range and an increase in the alpha frequency range in the temporal regions were predicted to relate to lowered tinnitus loudness.

behavioral data
the behavioral measures were analyzed in terms of the ability of ri and co to induce reductions in tinnitus loudness from pre- to post-stimulus presentation. generally, both types of stimuli induced significant tinnitus reductions. however, in accordance with the hypotheses, a strong tendency could be observed for ri to be the more potent inhibitor. one factor potentially reducing the differences of the intensity ratings between ri and co is the instruction to focus attention on the tinnitus during periods of silence  <cit>  .

meg data: spontaneous brain activity
changes in slow-wave spontaneous brain activity in temporal regions were more pronounced in the ri than in the co condition. slow-wave spontaneous brain activity decreased from pre- to post-stimulation in the ri, but not in the co condition. in the alpha frequency band, such a condition specific effect could not be found. these findings are partly in accordance with previous works by our group. in a more general sense it is also consistent with findings by de jongh et al  <cit> , who reported a reduction of initially enhanced delta activity in the region around a treated tumor. an amelioration of pathological conditions can thus lead to a normalization of abnormal rhythms present in cortical networks affected by the lesion. contrary to expectation the amplitude in the alpha frequency band was not augmented in a state of reduced tinnitus loudness . also, gamma activity did not show significant changes despite our previous finding implying an important role of gamma in the emergence of the phantom sound  <cit> . one possible explanation for this is that the gamma frequency ranges were defined too broadly and that effects could be specific to even more circumscribed frequency ranges. furthermore, this frequency range may differ inter-individually to some extent eliminating the identification of systematic effects on a group level. to tackle this important issue a within-subject analysis would be necessary. however, due to the low amount of trials per condition the current design is not appropriate this kind of analysis. future studies shortening the masker and post-masking period, concentrating fully on the early  post-masker period will shed more light on this question. however, it is also plausible that – after settling methodological issues  – tinnitus intensity changes are not reflected in local gamma activity but rather depend on the synchronization of a distributed neuronal network similarly to what we have recently shown for tinnitus intrusiveness  <cit> . weisz et al  <cit>  have recently proposed an oscillatory model of tinnitus , in which a conceptual link was established between the three frequency bands  in the context of tinnitus. in this framework, delta activity reflects the general deprivation mediated slowing of activity, whereas gamma reflects the synchronized firing of neurons necessary for the emergence of a conscious sensation. the latter is due to a reduction of inhibitory neuronal activity that is putatively reflected as alpha rhythm. the present study shows that changes in the slow-wave frequency band do not necessarily induce simultaneous and measurable changes in other bands. a plausible reason for this is that the fundamental oscillatory processes that are associated to the perception, i.e. the enhanced gamma, as well as the reduced alpha activity, become self-sustained if the pathological condition persists. a transient reafferentation, as indicated by the delta reduction, will then not suffice to fully break up the maladaptive oscillatory pattern. this finding confirms anecdotal impressions from clinical practice, that hearing aids may reduce the intensity of tinnitus. however, hearing aids – even if used for a long time – are not known to completely eliminate the tinnitus sensation. another explanation why simultaneous changes were observed only in the delta band could be  inherent to the design of the study itself. in order to obtain ratings of intensity, participants were always required to focus their attention on the tinnitus sensation. it is likely that attention was even enhanced post-stimulation, because the participants had to note changes of intensity. this could have induced oscillatory brain activity that counteracts that induced by the stimuli alone. indeed reductions of alpha power as well as gamma enhancements have been frequently reported during tasks of focused attention  <cit> . this fits well with the observation in our present study that alpha activity was reduced post-stimulus, however not differently for the conditions. in future studies a passive ri condition should be examined in order to minimize attention effects and thus, unspecific changes in alpha. ri functions would need to be tested in advance and an estimation of tinnitus loudness during the experiment should be given after the last trial. the assumption that tinnitus loudness and spontaneous brain activity are linearly related was investigated. the observed changes in spontaneous brain activity and the reported tinnitus loudness were not correlated . the strength of the reduction in delta amplitude at the contralateral temporal sources after stimulus presentation did not consistently predict the strength of change in the tinnitus sensation. this non-significant correlation could be easily explained by the only marginal behavioral differences between ri and co conditions. it could also be due to the very small number  of subjects.

limitations
it cannot be excluded that subjects were distracted to some extent while concentrating on their tinnitus. also, placebo effects elicited by the stimuli are difficult to rule out experimentally because with audible presentation of the masking sounds participants are not blind to the type of stimulus and may form specific expectations tied to the type of sound. although ri was induced in the subjects, it might have been rendered deeper and longer-lasting with the use of higher volumes and frequencies and longer durations of stimulation. an even clearer behavioral contrast between ri and co would be preferable to more thoroughly study ri effects on neural processes. furthermore, it is a limiting factor that for some subjects the tinnitus sensation decreased in the course of the experiment, therefore probably reducing the potency of our ri stimuli. it should be emphasized that in this work we defined ri as partial tinnitus reduction. based on our pilot study , we were not able to identify subjects that showed a complete abolishment of the tinnitus sensation for a significant time period. herein, the question of whether ri is a "period without/of reduced tinnitus" or is qualitatively different from not having/having reduced tinnitus, remains unanswered. as is the question of whether changes in the power spectrum actually represent the neurophysiological correlate of tinnitus, or rather develop in response to perceived changes in tinnitus loudness  <cit> . the observed changes in the power spectrum could be a reaction to changes in auditory perception as auditory stimulation triggers changes in auditory cortex responses  <cit> . if tinnitus is viewed as permanent auditory stimulation that is withdrawn for a period during ri, one could come to this conclusion. thus, it seems necessary to investigate whether ri really leads to a transient state of normalization of brain functioning. it is known that tinnitus sufferers have an abnormal pattern of spontaneous brain activity  <cit> . the present study showed that this pathology changes in response to a reduction in tinnitus loudness. thus, it seems reasonable to assume that these changes do represent the neurophysiological correlate of tinnitus. a masking study  <cit>  corroborates this conclusion by showing that the power spectrum of a tinnitus sufferer changed during a reduction in tinnitus loudness with auditory stimulation being present. finally it has to be stated that very extended and deep ri is an overall rare phenomenon , thus raising the question of the representativity of the sample for the entire tinnitus population. that said, the prospect of potentially gaining valuable generalizable insights regarding comparable periods of normal and reduced tinnitus makes the study of ri a worthwhile enterprise. it will however have to be backed up in future by studies focussing on short periods following masker presentation in tinnitus participants with little or virtually no ri.

CONCLUSIONS
the aim of this study – to analyze neural activity during reduced tinnitus loudness without sensory stimulation confounding these measures – was achieved. the determination of whether the observed changes in spontaneous brain activity stem from the reduction of the tinnitus sensation or the sound presentation is thereby simplified. despite limitations, the results of this study suggest that a reduction of the tinnitus perception leads to changes in the oscillatory properties of cortical networks connected to tinnitus. in particular, changes in slow-wave frequencies appear to be ri related. large-scale synchronous neuronal activity as reflected in ongoing spontaneous brain activity could relate to the immediate and lasting tone perception of tinnitus. its instantaneous changes when altering the tinnitus perception as well as the finding of dohrmann et al  <cit> , imply a bidirectional influence. this has important clinical implications, indicating that successful causal treatment approaches would need to permanently interrupt the underlying oscillatory pattern. at this point it is unclear whether and how effects of input based  approaches such as ri could be extended. one possibility would be to try to combine such approaches with input-independent  approaches such as neurofeedback  <cit> , which could potentially uphold effects even during periods without input.

