BACKGROUND
vascular disease remains the major cause of increased morbidity and mortality in patients with diabetes  <cit> . endothelial cell dysfunction is a significant factor contributing to the vascular complications of diabetes  <cit> . hyperglycemia, particularly the fluctuation of glucose levels, causes a significant degree of oxidative stress, decreasing endothelial nitric oxide synthase  expression  <cit> , reducing nitric oxide  bioavailability, and impairing no metabolism  <cit> .

decreased bioavailability of endothelial-derived no contributes to endothelial cell contraction, which is partly dependent on reorganization of the endothelial cell cytoskeleton  <cit> . substantial evidence exists for the involvement of endogenous no production in the regulation of the cytoskeletal f-actin structure via mobilization of intracellular ca2+ by either protein kinase c  or protein kinase g   <cit> .

the actin network plays a major role in determining the mechanical properties of living cells  <cit> . atomic force microscopy  can be used to study cell morphology and the micromechanical properties of both the cell surface and subsurface layers. furthermore, recent evidence indicates that it is possible to assess the deformability of the plasma membrane at the single cell level using afm  <cit> . the combined approaches of afm and laser scanning confocal microscopy  extends the utility of the scanning probe approach for the evaluation of cellular mechanical properties. using immunofluorescent dyes and lscm to dissect the three cytoskeletal elements, elasticity of the cell membrane has been found to be related to distribution of actin and intermediate filaments, with only a minor contribution from microtubules  <cit> .

several studies have investigated the potential relationships between no release and endothelial cell membrane stiffness using afm  <cit> . recently, it was reported that acute and small changes in plasma sodium concentration can lead to a significant increase in endothelial cell membrane stiffness that associated with reduced no release  <cit> , while potassium ions can soften vascular endothelial cells and increase no production  <cit> . however, it has not been definitively proven that endothelial-derived no influences endothelial deformability via actin cytoskeletal reorganization. interestingly, a number of studies have examined alterations in endothelial deformability by afm in various physiological and pathological states  <cit> . however, the effects of stable or fluctuating hyperglycemia on endothelial cell membrane stiffness using afm has received little attention.

in the present study we examined the effects of constant and fluctuating high glucose levels on the release of endothelial-derived no, expression of enos, changes in endothelial cell membrane stiffness and the contribution of filamentous f-actin.

methods
cell culture
human umbilical vein endothelial cells  were obtained from the american type culture collection, plated in  <dig> cm <dig> flasks  and cultured in low glucose  dulbecco’s modified eagles medium  supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum . the flasks were incubated at 37°c in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% co <dig>  after reaching confluence, the cells were treated with  <dig> % trypsin-edta . one ml cell suspensions containing  <dig> cells/ml were re-seeded in 60-mm dishes . the endothelial cells were allowed to attach overnight, and were exposed to the appropriate experimental conditions for seven days. in brief, eight groups of cells were prepared, each receiving the following fresh media every  <dig> h, respectively: 1)control group exposed to continuous low glucose  dmem medium; 2)continuous high glucose  dmem media ; 3) low  and high  glucose media alternating every  <dig> h; 4) continuous low glucose  dmem media containing  <dig>  mm non-selective nos inhibitor ng-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester ; 5) continuous low glucose  dmem media containing  <dig>  mm l-name; 6) continuous low glucose  dmem media containing  <dig> mm l-name; 7) continuous osmotic control, low glucose  dmem media containing  <dig> mm mannitol ; or 8) intermittent osmotic control, low glucose  dmem media containing mannitol .

nitric oxide measurement
no was determined from the nitrite concentration in culture supernatants using the griess reaction, as previously described  <cit> . culture media was replaced every  <dig> h for the seven day experimental period. the harvested media was centrifuged, and the supernatant was stored at −20°c. the supernatant was pooled over seven days, and the measurement of no was performed according to instructions for the griess assay kits . after addition of the griess reagent, absorbance was measured at  <dig> nm using a bio-rad model  <dig> microplate reader. nitrite concentration was determined using the formula:

 odt-odbods-odbx100μmol/l 

where odt was the absorbance of the test solution; odb was the absorbance of a regent blank; ods was the absorbance of the  <dig> μmol/l standard. all experiments were performed in triplicate.

expression of endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
assays were performed using western immunoblot analyses using specific antibodies against enos  and β-actin . β-actin expression was used as a loading control. one ml cell suspension was plated at a density of 105/ml in 60-mm dishes , allowed to attach and cultured under various conditions. cells were subsequently washed with chilled pbs and homogenized in modified ripa buffer  for  <dig> min. cell lysates containing equal amounts of protein were dissolved by adding 5×sds-page sample buffer  followed by heating for  <dig> min.  <dig> μg of total protein was separated on polyacrylamide gels  following electrophoresis, samples were transferred to a pvdf membrane using a  <dig> mm tris buffer containing  <dig> mm glycine and 20% methanol using a bio-rad mini-blot transfer apparatus. the pvdf membranes were blocked with 5%  non-fat milk in  <dig> m pbs containing  <dig> % tween  <dig> for  <dig> h at room temperature, and then incubated in the above antibodies against enos  and β-actin  overnight at 4°c. after washing with pbs/tween , the membranes were incubated in secondary antibody  for  <dig> h and washed. protein bands were detected using chemiluminescent substrate  and developed on film  following a  <dig> min exposure. relative band densities were quantified using densitometry with image j software . data were then normalized to β-actin levels. all western immunoblot experiments were repeated at least in triplicate with separate cell preparations.

actin staining
cell suspensions  were plated on glass coverslips and positioned in  <dig> mm culture dishes. following seven days of incubation in various media, cells were washed with chilled pbs, fixed in  <dig> % formaldehyde solution, permeabilized with triton x- <dig>  and blocked with 1% bsa. to label f-actin, one unit of rhodamine phalloidin  was diluted in 200ul pbs with 1% bsa, and then added to each cover slip. the samples were stained for  <dig> min, and subsequently washed in triplicate with pbs. stained samples were imaged using a zeiss lscm  at excitation  and emission  wavelengths.

afm imaging and measurement
cells were planted on coverslips and cultured under various conditions for seven days. the coverslips, with seeded cells, were washed in triplicate to clear the culture media. following preparation of the samples, an autoprobe cp afm  was operated in contact mode in air to obtain afm images and perform force spectroscopy. stiffness of the endothelial cells was determined using afm techniques as described previously and measured with soft cantilevers, since the area of interaction between the tip and cell was larger and thus mechanically less noisy  <cit> . silicon nitride tips  were used for all afm measurements. the curvature radius of the tips was less than  <dig> nm, and the length, width and thickness of the cantilevers were  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  μm, respectively, with an oscillation frequency of  <dig> khz and a force constant of  <dig>  n/m . the same approach velocity was maintained to detect the endothelial cells.

topographical morphology and deflection images of the surface of huvecs were acquired over an area of 5- <dig> μm <dig>  according to these images, parameters of the endothelial cells were obtained, such as rp-v and ra. the valley-to-peak value  defines the difference between the maximum and minimum values of the z coordinate on the surface of the analytical area. ra denotes the average roughness in the analytical area. all parameters were directly generated by the software ip <dig> . subsequently, endothelial cell membrane stiffness of each chosen point was evaluated using the indentation of the local force-distance curve .

the afm tip was pressed against the cell so that the membrane was indented. cantilever deflection, measured using a laser beam when reflected from the cantilever, permitted force-distance curves of single cells . the slope of such curves was directly related to the force , defined here as stiffness. two different slopes could be identified depending on the depth of indentation. the initial flat slope  reflects the plasma membrane stiffness, including the cortical cytoskeleton  <cit> .

five randomly selected endothelial cells were studied for each experimental treatment. membrane stiffness of each cell was sampled at approximately  <dig> randomly chosen points on the cell center  or peripheral membrane. the total average stiffness was acquired from  <dig> force curves.

statistical analyses
results are expressed as mean ± sd. when the experimental treatments were compared to either the control group, or the group under continuous high glucose exposure, a one-way variance analyses was performed. a value of p< <dig>  was considered statistically significant. the statistical package spss <dig>  was used for all analyses.

RESULTS
release of endothelial-derived no
under both constant and intermittent high glucose levels, endothelial cells released significantly less no into the culture supernatants compared to the control group. increasing concentrations of l-name  similarly decreased endothelial-derived no production. inhibition of no release by l-name was concentration-dependent. there was no significant difference in no production between the cells exposed to constant hyperglycemia compared to those incubated in fluctuating high glucose conditions . constant and intermittent hypertonicity induced by  <dig> mm mannitol did not affect cell no release compared to the control group  .

data shown in the table are means±sd. *, p< <dig> , compared to the control group. #, p < <dig> , compared to the constant high glucose group.

expression of enos
enos protein levels were determined using western immunoblot. as shown in figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  enos expression was decreased significantly by constant and intermittent hyperglycemia, continuous or fluctuating hypertonicity and l-name, compared to the control group. however, the inhibitory effect of intermittent high glucose on expression appeared greater than that of constant high glucose . no significant difference in enos expression was observed between endothelial cells cultured under constant or fluctuating hypertonicity . additional experiments showed that l-name  suppressed enos expression in a concentration-dependent manner .

afm imaging and morphologic parameters
example figures showing topological morphology  and height projections  are shown. scanned images were  <dig> μm ×  <dig> μm  and 40μm×40μm in size , respectively. histograms related to the morphologic characteristics were analyzed , and the morphological parameters, including mean height, differences between the peak region and the valley regions , maximal diameter and average roughness  were acquired and are presented in table  <dig>  differences in mean height and rp-v of endothelial cells exposed to low glucose containing  <dig> mm concentration l-name were significantly lower than control cell values. the remaining morphological data were not statistically different between cell treatments. these results indicated that the shape and volume of endothelial cells were not obviously affected under these experimental conditions allowing comparisons of the cell membrane stiffness to be performed on grossly similar cell populations.

data shown in the table are means±sd. *, p< <dig> , compared to the control group. #, p < <dig> , compared to the constant high glucose group.

endothelial cell membrane stiffness was estimated through the detection of the point-by-point force-distance curves . half of the  <dig> force curves for each group were acquired by measuring the surface of the cellular periphery and the other half in the perinuclear region .

the average stiffness for each group was acquired from the analyses of total  <dig> force-distance curves . compared with control cells, the average membrane stiffness of the cells exposed to constant and fluctuating high glucose was higher, while cell membranes treated with continuous hypertonicity were more elastic. interestingly, the cell membrane response to increasing concentrations of l-name  was characterized by a progressive increase in membrane stiffness. the effect of l-name was concentration-dependent. however, no differences were observed in membrane stiffness, between the cells exposed to the constant or intermittent high glucose.

f-actin localization and quantification of the fluorescence intensity
the f-actin cytoskeleton is a major contributor to the maintenance of cellular integrity and function. f-actin in endothelial cells incubated in the varioust media for seven days was fluorescently stained and examined using lscm . f-actin was clearly evident in all treatment groups with intense and filamentous staining crossing cells from one side to the other. while the structure of f-actin was unaffected by the various treatments, analyses of the fluorescence intensity indicated that expression of f-actin was altered. exposure of cells to stable and fluctuating high glucose significantly increased the fluorescence intensity of f-actin, particularly that in the cytoplasm . results also indicated that the increased f-actin staining induced by l-name was concentration-dependent. however, f-actin was not significantly different between constant and intermittent high glucose groups .

discussion
cellular function is largely determined by its structure. thus, cellular deformability, a mechanical property of the cellular structural organization, varies in a number of physiological processes  and in pathological states   <cit> . recent studies have shown that alterations in endothelial cell membrane stiffness are accompanied with changes in no production  <cit> . for example, a small physiological increase in extracellular sodium directly increases the stiffness of vascular endothelium and decreases no release  <cit> . an acute increase in potassium, within a physiological range, swells and softens endothelial cells and increases the release of no  <cit> . nebivolol, a β1-receptor blocker, decreases membrane stiffness of endothelial cells, which is dependent on the increased content of no outcome and is abrogated by l-name  <cit> .

the above studies, however, have only focused on how experimental conditions altered endothelial cell membrane stiffness while simultaneously affecting no synthesis. thus, attention has not been paid to the exact effects of no release and enos expression on endothelial cell membrane stiffness. therefore, to examine the effect of no on cell membrane stiffness, l-name was used to inhibit endogenous no generation. expression of enos , together with no generation  , was quantified to clarify the relationship between cell membrane stiffness and no metabolism. the data showed that l-name increased endothelial cell membrane stiffness , inhibited no release and suppressed enos protein expression in a concentration-dependent manner suggesting a direct relationship between production of no and the mechanical properties of the cell.

endothelial cells subjected to a diabetic environment, both in vivo and in vitro, exhibit a diminished capacity for nos-induced generation of no  <cit> . consistent with this we observed that both high glucose and l-name similarly impaired enos expression and reduced no production. exposure to high glucose has been reported to impair no metabolism through production of oxidative stress  <cit> . superoxide may interfere with the generation of no by several mechanisms including a decrease in endothelial enos expression mediated by activator protein ap- <dig>  a change in the electrophysiological state of endothelial cells and the availability of tetrahydrobiopterin, an essential cofactor of enos. interestingly hyperglycemia contributes to a switch in enos expression in a time-dependent manner. it was found that enos protein expression was significantly up-regulated  <dig> h following exposure to high glucose concentrations , reaching a peak at 48h   <cit> . pricci et al. also demonstrated that under high glucose conditions , enos expression and nitrite/nitrate levels increase the first day, returning to normal levels at day three and diminishing thereafter  <cit> . consequently, under high glucose conditions, a compensatory increase in enos expression appears at this early stage, thereafter declining gradually as long-term oxidative stress develops. a deleterious effect of intermittent high glucose is also mediated by free radical over-production  <cit> .

in agreement with previous studies, incubation of endothelial cells in constant or intermittent high glucose for seven days decreased not only enos expression , but also no concentration in the culture media . interestingly, there was no significant difference in no production between the cells exposed to constant hyperglycemia and those incubated in fluctuating high glucose conditions . however, intermittent high glucose reduced enos expression more significantly than a constant level of hyperglycemia . this apparent discrepancy may be related to the observation that endothelial cells exposed to intermittent high glucose are more seriously impaired than those exposed to continuous high glucose due to enhanced oxidative stress  <cit> . other reports show that high glucose increases enos protein expression, but ultimately leads to decreased no release  <cit> .

hyperglycemia plays an important role in the etiology of endothelial dysfunction  <cit> . current data suggest that the deformability of endothelial cells detected by afm will be affected in the presence of endothelial dysfunction  <cit> . despite this, few studies have used afm to explore the effects of constant and intermittent high glucose on endothelial cell membrane elasticity. in this study, analysis of  <dig> force-distance curves obtained using afm , showed that increased average membrane stiffness of endothelial cells  accompanied decreased no release and enos expression . simultaneously, no significant difference existed in membrane stiffness and no release between continuous and intermittent high glucose groups . thus, it is suggested that the increased membrane stiffness of endothelial cells may be affected by the change of no release more than that of enos expression.

in addition to the deleterious effects on endothelial no-dependent function, high glucose concomitantly increases extracellular osmolality, which may itself impact cellular membrane stiffness. thus, maintained and intermittent hyperosmolality  was used as an osmotic control for continuous and intermittent high glucose. in the presence of mannitol the release of no  was unaffected while the expression of enos  was slightly decreased. although abnormal levels of osmolality are likely harmful to endothelial cells, the absence of a no releasing effect presumably explains why hypertonicity was not shown to increase cell membrane stiffness . in fact, consistent with previous observations, hypertonicity decreased membrane stiffness  <cit> .

actin is not only an essential component necessary for maintenance of cellular integrity and function , but also undergoes dynamic changes in response to physiological and pathological stresses, including shear stress, vascular pressure and harmful mediators  <cit> . several studies have shown how decreases in no synthesis and enos expression induce the redistribution of actin, especially f-actin  <cit> . no-induced changes in f-actin filaments are proposed to be associated with mobilization of intracellular ca2+ mediated by the cgmp-dependent pathway, which is activated by cgmp-dependent protein kinase g   <cit> . the stronger f-actin polymerization is also observed when endothelial cells are exposed to d-glucose pre-treated aortic smooth muscle cells, while d-manntinol has no effect on endothelial ca2+ signaling  <cit> . tgf-β, a growth factor closely linked to diabetic microvascular complications can stimulate f-actin assembly via activation of nadph oxidase, which is a mechanism implicated in hyperglycemia  <cit> . overwhelming evidence demonstrates that actin redistribution can also regulate no synthesis and enos activity not only through pre-translational mechanisms  <cit> , but also through posttranslational mechanisms  <cit> .

consistent with the aforementioned studies, changes in f-actin relative fluorescence intensity in response to different media  were associated with decreased no production  and decreased expression of enos . treatment of endothelial cells with differing concentrations of l-name, stable and intermittent high glucose enhanced the apparent thickness of the longitudinal f-actin filaments as demonstrated by an increase in the relative fluorescence intensity of f-actin. exposure to maintained and intermittent hyperosmolality did not alter no production nor was, the fluorescence intensity of f-actin significantly different from the control group.

f-actin, as one of the major cytoskeletal components, clusters to form actin filaments, which are bundled and crosslinked by several actin-binding proteins into a network. the actin network plays a major role in determining the mechanical properties of living cells  <cit> . furthermore, evidence suggests that depolymerization/polymerization of f-actin filaments results in a dramatic decline/enhancement in endothelial cell membrane stiffness. for example, studies by cuerrier have demonstrated that laturculin a, an f-actin filament depolymerizing agent, causes a dramatic decline in endothelial cell membrane stiffness  <cit> . the variation in membrane elasticity in the various regions of endothelial cells  is related to the distribution of cytoskeletal elements within these regions  <cit> . in this study, it was demonstrated that the increased average membrane stiffness of endothelial cells treated with stable/intermittently high glucose and l-name was consistent with the change in the corresponding f-actin cytoskeleton . therefore, it is speculated that constant and intermittent high glucose, as well as l-name treatment, may stiffen endothelial cell membranes by an alteration in f-actin expression and arrangement through the described dysfunction of no synthesis.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study demonstrates that constant and fluctuating high glucose levels, as well as the treatment with l-name, enhances average membrane stiffness of intact endothelial cells. alterations in membrane stiffness and structure may be mediated by the increased expression and redistribution of the f-actin cytoskeleton, which are initiated by high glucose-induced or l-name-induced inhibition of enos expression and no synthesis. importantly, cell membrane stiffness, which is associated with the reorganization of f-actin, can be evaluated with afm. thus, afm, a novel scanning probe for the study of cellular mechanical properties, can be applied to the evaluation of endothelial dysfunction under differing pathological conditions.

competing interest
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contribution
cx conceived of the study, participated in the design, carried out all experiments, performed the statistical analysis and drafted the manuscript. fl participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. hj carried out the measurements of endothelial cell membrane stiffness using afm. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

