BACKGROUND
neural stem/progenitor cells  are the self-renewing, multipotent cells that generate the main phenotypes of the nervous system
 <cit> . neural stem/progenitor cells  have been studied extensively with the hope of using them clinically. recent studies have shown that ns/pcs can act as promising and beneficial adjuncts for therapy of neurological disorders including brain trauma or spinal cord injuries, etc. although the functional properties of ns/pcs have been studied extensively, the molecular mechanisms underlying neural stem cell self-renewal, differentiation and migration are not fully understood. to better understand the complex biological regulatory mechanisms of ns/pc will facilitate their clinical application in future.

the discovery of mirnas opens new possibilities in terms of modulation of stem cells lineage commitment and differentiation
 <cit> . as a recently recognized class of small noncoding rna molecules, mirnas are epigenetic modulators of mrna degradation or protein translation. functional studies indicate that mirnas participate in the regulation of a number of cellular processes, including development, proliferation, and differentiation
 <cit> . modulating mirna expression offers new pathways for post-transcriptional gene regulation and stem cell commitment. several mirnas have been implicated in regulating self-renewal of neural stem cells and neuronal fate specification
 <cit> . many studies demonstrated that in vitro transient overexpression or inhibition of brain-specific mirnas in stem cells significantly directed differentiation along neuronal cell lineages
 <cit> . unlike messenger rnas , mirnas do not encode proteins, but rather bind mrnas, regulating their stability and translation into proteins. a single mirna can target hundreds of mrnas resulting in very large effects on the molecular constitution of cells. thus, it is vital to understand the unique functions and targets of mirna.

mir-125b, a brain-enriched mirna, is highly expressed in the central nervous system , including the brain and spinal cord. as a homolog of lin- <dig> , mir-125b is highly conserved from flies to humans 
 <cit> . upon neural differentiation, mir- <dig> as a key player in the molecular cascade that contributes to the irreversible commitment of pluripotent human stem cells to the neural lineage
 <cit> . minh t et al. have also demonstrated that the ectopic expression of mir-125b increases the percentage of differentiated sh-sy5y cells with neurite outgrowth. their report demonstrates that mir-125b is important in regulating neuronal differentiation
 <cit> . in addition, it has also been demonstrated that mir-125b was up-regulated during neural differentiation of embryonic stem  cells and embryo carcinoma  cells. mir- <dig> was identified as being involved in mechanisms governing the repression of self-renewal in embryonic stem cells
 <cit> . taken together, these observations suggest that mir-125b may act as an ancient regulatory switch for neuronal differentiation in stem cells.

in the present study, we systematically investigated the functions of mir-125b in ns/pcs and found new downstream target of mir-125b. we demonstrated the important role of mir-125b in coordinating the proliferation and differentiation of ns/pcs using both knockdown and ectopic expression approaches. we also identified mir-125b promotes migration during the early stages of neuronal differentiation. furthermore, our studies first demonstrated that mir-125b suppresses the expression of nestin by binding to the 3'-utr of its mrnas. as a widely employed marker of multipotent neural stem cells, nestin was involved in a number of cellular processes, such as proliferation, differentiation, migration
 <cit> . our study presented here revealed a previously undescribed link between mir-125b and an essential stem cell regulator nestin, identified it as a key target of mir-125b in ns/pcs.

RESULTS
mir-125b expression increases during neural stem cell differentiation
ns/pcs may give rise to neural and neuronal progenitor cells, it has been demonstrated that the dynamic changes in the expression of mirna occurs during neuronal differentiation. in order to understand the role of mir-125b in the regulation of neuronal differentiation, the expression pattern of mir-125b was performed by real-time pcr. the results showed that the expression pattern of mir-125b was up-regulated in a time-dependent manner with neural differentiation proceeded suggesting that mir-125b may be involved in differentiation of ns/pcs . our results are coincident with previous reports indicating that mir-125b was up-regulated during neural differentiation process
 <cit> .

mir-125b inhibits nestin expression by binding to its 3’-utr
toward understanding the role of mir-125b involved in regulating wide array of cellular process in ns/pcs, it is therefore important to identify its target genes. using the microcosm targets , mir-125b was identified to have a conserved target site in the 3’-utr of nestin gene . this program predicted a putative binding site for mir-125b in the nestin 3’-utr. mir-125b is highly conserved in vertebrates, and its mature nucleotide sequence is 100% identical among several species . although 3’-utr sequences of nestin are not highly conserved in mammals, the putative binding sites for mir-125b in nestin are also found in both human and rat .

to further validated the interaction between mir-125b and the nestin 3’-utr, the luciferase reporter system was used. we constructed vectors containing wild-type or mutant 3’-utr of nestin directly fused to the downstream of the firefly luciferase gene to verify that the putative mir-125b binding site in the 3’-utr of nestin is responsible for regulation by mir-125b . the wild-type or mutant vector of nestin was cotransfected into hela cells with mir-125b mimics, mir-125b inhibitors, mir-125b nc , mir-125b innc . all of them are 2'-o-methyl  modified rna oligonucleotides chemically synthesized by shanghai genepharma co.,ltd, 2'-o-me modification is frequently used to protect oligoribonucleotides from degradation in cultured cells. the transfection efficiency was normalized by co-transfection with renilla reporter vector. when mir-125b mimics were co-transfected with the nestin reporter constructs, luciferase activity was significantly suppressed compared with cotransfection with mir-125b inhibitors, nc and innc. however, mir-125b mimics were unable to suppress luciferase expression with the mutant nestin 3’-utr which the putative binding sites of mir-125b were mutated . considering that there still lies some complementary sequence to mir-125b in the nestin 3'-utr besides the bases we have mutated, the binding force between mir-125b and the nestin 3'-utr was weakened but not eliminated. thus the luciferase expression in the mutated vector group was a little suppressed compared to nc and innc group. furthermore, we constructed the 3'-utr vectors of actb and then cotransfected the vector into hela cells with mir-125b mimics and inhibitors. the results indicated that mir-125b mimics and mir-125b inhibitors had little effect on luciferase expression with the actb 3’-utr. these experiments demonstrated that mir-125b interacts directly with the binding site in nestin 3’-utr to regulate luciferase reporter expression. taken together, these findings indicated that nestin is a direct downstream target for mir-125b in ns/pcs.

subsequently, we transfected mir-125b mimics, mir-125b inhibitor, nc and innc in ns/pcs to evaluate whether nestin mrna and protein levels are directly affected by the activation of mir-125b. three days post transfection, the nestin mrna and protein level were analyzed by real-time pcr and western blot . transfection with mir-125b mimics led to down-regulation of nestin mrna and protein in ns/pc cells compared with nc, whereas treatment with mir-125b inhibitor induced the expression of nestin increase in ns/pc cells compared with innc. taken together, these experiments support the hypothesis that nestin is a direct target of mir-125b and that mir-125b activation in ns/pcs elicits a decrease of nestin protein.

mir-125b inhibits ns/pcs proliferation
in an attempt to investigate whether mir-125b influences the proliferation of ns/pcs, we performed brdu labeling on rat ns/pcs after transfection of mir-125b mimics, mir-125b inhibitor, nc and innc. considering the tightly packed cells of a neurosphere are difficult to transfect, the neurospheres were mildly trypsinized into single cells and then seeded in polyornithine-laminin coated 24-well plate. when cells reached 70% confluence, the mir-125b mimics, mir-125b inhibitor, nc and innc was transfected into the cells. the transfection efficiency was observed under the fluorescent microscope. transfection of ns/pcs with a fam-labeled mir-125b mimics indicated the high efficiency of transfection after  <dig> hours . we also evaluated transfection efficiency by detecting the relative expression of mir-125b. as expected, the intracellular level of mir-125b was elevated by transfection of mir-125b mimics, and was decreased by the transfection of mir-125b inhibitors, showing that the cellular level of mir-125b could be controlled by the transfection of mir-125b mimics and mir-125b inhibitors . therefore we used brdu labeling to investigate the role of mir-125b in cell proliferation, brdu was added  <dig> hours prior to stem cell harvesting and then stained with an anti-brdu antibody. immunostainings for brdu show that the up-regulation of mir-125b inhibited the proliferation of ns/pcs .

mir-125b accelerates neural differentiation of ns/pcs
we next examined whether mir-125b influences the differentiation of ns/pcs. the role of mir-125b in promoting the differentiation of ns/pcs was demonstrated further by staining for neuronal markers. following transfected with mir-125b mimics, mir-125b inhibitors, nc, innc, ns/pcs were cultured in differentiation conditions for  <dig> h. a significant decrease in the number of nestin-positive cells, sox2-positive cells and vimentin-positive cells was found in ns/pcs transfected with mir-125b mimics compared to control group . on the other hand, the percentage of tuj1-positive cells and map2-positive cells in ns/pcs transfected with mir-125b mimics were significantly higher than control group . the results indicated that mir-125b over-expression enhances rate of neuron differentiation, by contrast, knockdown of mir-125b decreases rate of neuron differentiation compared to the control. the results of real-time pcr assays were well consistent with the results of immunofluorescence indicating that overexpression of mir-125b can independently increase the expression of neuronal marker tuj <dig> and map- <dig> but decrease the expression of nestin, sox <dig> and vimentin .

mir-125b promotes the migration of ns/pcs
we used transwell migration assay to compare the in vitro migratory capacities of ns/pcs among groups transfected with mir-125b mimics, mir-125b inhibitor, nc, innc. migration assays were performed after 72h transfection. the percentage of migrated cells was normalized to that of control cells. the results indicated that overexpression of mir-125b led to a increase in cell migration whereas knockdown of mir-125b led to a reduction in cell migration compared to control group in ns/pcs .

inactivation of nestin not only reduces cell proliferation but promotes neural differentiation and migration in ns/pcs
consistent with previous reports,we detected the relative expression of nestin mrna decreased during neuronal differentiation of ns/pcs in our studies . we considered the possibility of these biological changes induced by mir-125b may be due to the down-regulation of nestin. for this purpose, we knocked down nestin by rnai and assayed the effect of nestin knockdown on cell proliferation, differentiation and migration in ns/pcs . the results indicated that knockdown of nestin reduced cell proliferation and promoted neural differentiation and migration in ns/pcs. the sirna transfected ns/pcs showed a similar biological behavior as observed in the cells transfected with mir-125b mimics. taken together, our data suggested that mir-125b regulates neural stem cell proliferation, differentiation and migration through targeting nestin expression.

mir-125b regulate ns/pcs activities by targeting nestin
in order to further validate the function of mir-125b in ns/pcs activities via direct regulating nestin, we transfected ns/pcs with mir-125b mimics and the nestin overexpressed plasmid  simultaneously. the plasmid nes-640-gfp was demonstrated to have a longer half-life and more prominent protein levels in cells, which was kindly provided by john e. erikssona  . we demonstrated that exogenously expressed nestin could rescue the effect on ns/pcs proliferation, differentiation and migration resulting by mir-125b mimics . furthermore, we determined to test whether depletion of nestin may weakened the role of mir-125b inhibitors in ns/pcs. when nestin was knocked down by sirna, the stimulus effect on cell proliferation and the inhibitory effect on differentiation and migration which mir-125b inhibitors bring about was weakened . hence, our data support the idea that nestin as a downstream target of mir-125b was implicated in ns/pcs activities, such as proliferation, differentiation and migration.

discussion
it is well known that ns/pcs contribute to the neurogenesis of the central nervous system. during central nervous system development in vertebrates, neural stem cell fate are strictly controlled under regional and temporal manners
 <cit> . besides the discovery of ns/pcs in the embryo, recent studies have substantially demonstrated that ns/pcs continue to reside in the adult nervous system such as hippocampus, the subventricular zone , and in some non-neurogenic regions, including spinal cord
 <cit> . ns/pcs persist throughout adult life in nervous system in order to replace the mature cells that are lost to turnover, injury, or disease. in response to cns injuries, ns/pcs can migrate to areas of injury and differentiate into neuronal and glial cell types, thus are likely to contribute to the repair of damaged tissue. therefore, unraveling the mechanisms of cellular processes in ns/pcs will provide insights into both basic neurosciences and clinical applications of stem cell-based cell replacement therapies.

although it is well established that ns/pcs have the potential to cure many diseases, the molecular basis of this process, particularly the role of mirnas, remains largely unknown. mirnas are a class of small rna regulators that are involved in numerous cellular processes, including development, proliferation, differentiation, and plasticity. emerging evidence has shown that the process of neural stem cell self-renewal, fate specification and migration can be regulated by mirna
 <cit> . as mentioned above, there is growing evidence to suggest a role for mir-125b during neuronal differentiation. in our study we first quantified the relative expression levels of mir-125b during neural differentiation. it is likely that the distinct temporal expression patterns of mir-125b reflect its specific roles in coordinating gene expression profiles that characterize neural cell fate determination. real-time pcr analyses indicated that mir-125b is significantly up-regulated during the differentiation of ns/pcs. our study presented here revealed that the inhibition of nestin expression by mir-125b provides double insurance to inhibit ns/pcs proliferation when mir-125b expression is elevated upon differentiation. moreover, our results suggested that mir-125b promote migration during the early differentiation of ns/pcs.

the functions of animal mirnas may be elucidated through their targeted genes. to gain a better understanding the role of mir-125b involved in regulating wide array of cellular processes in ns/pcs, it is necessary to identify its target genes. a single mirna can recognize hundreds of targets. however, one or two of these target genes may be more important targets in specific cellular context
 <cit> . data from computational analyses suggest that nestin may be regulated by mir-125b. as a widely employed marker of multipotent ns/pcs, nestin is important for the proper survival and self-renewal of ns/pcs. numerous in vivo and in vitro studies now rely on nestin expression to track the proliferation, migration and differentiation of ns/pcs
 <cit> . computer analysis predicted that mir-125b had partial sequence complementarity within the 3’-utr region of the nestin mrna. using a luciferase assay, we showed that mir-125b directly target nestin through binding a specific site in its 3’-utr in ns/pcs. since mirnas have been shown to regulate gene expression through both translational attenuation and mrna degradation. both real-time pcr and western blot data suggests that mir-125b could repress nestin expression at both the mrna and protein levels via directly binding to its 3'-utr. in line with previous report, we detected the expression of nestin is high in ns/pcs but it is reduced dramatically upon differentiation. in contrast, the level of mir-125b is increased significantly upon differentiation. in this case, nestin is preferentially expressed at high levels when the targeting mirna expression is low. the expression of this target is down-regulated as mir-125b accumulates. taken together, we identified nestin as a target of mir-125b in ns/pcs by using a bioinformatics approach and experimental validation.

it has previously been reported that mir-125b is a positive regulator of differentiation of human neural progenitor rencell vm  cells
 <cit> , but the underlying mechanism of how it regulates proliferation is not known. accumulating evidence has indicated that nestin may actively functions in cell growth or proliferation of different types of neural stem cells. the specific interfering role of nestin sirnas was in vitro identified on cell growth of c <dig> astrocytoma cells, suggesting that sirna-induced suppression of central neural system tumor cell growth
 <cit> . to support the hypothesis that the effect of mir-125b on cellular process is mediated largely through nestin, we also knocked down nestin expression in ns/pcs using its sequence-spcific sirna. by using brdu incorporation assays, we demonstrated that overexpression of mir-125b led to dramatically reduced ns/pcs proliferation in line with the results of nestin sirna-treated cells, indicating that mir-125b inhibit ns/pcs proliferation by targeting nestin.

using immunostaining for the neural marker, we evaluated the effect of mir-125b on neural differentiation potential of ns/pcs. overexpression of mir-125b resulted in the percentage of tuj <dig> and map- <dig> positive cells increased, whereas that of nestin-positive cells decreased. there was no difference in the percentage of gfap positive cells among all groups . this could be explained by the fact that most ns/pcs were also expressed glial marker gfap. in the meantime, decrease of nestin by rnai strikingly accelerated the neural differentiation process, suggesting that mir-125b promoted differentiation might be mediated by nestin. also, we provided direct evidence that mir-125b is a positive regulator of migration during early neuronal differentiation of ns/pcs. the results are in good agreement with previous findings demonstrating that exogenous mir-125b expression increased migration of ishikawa cells and abrogating expression of mir-125b suppressed migration of an3ca cells in vitro
 <cit> . previous results implied that nestin might serve as a scaffold regulating the activity of the cdk5/p <dig> signaling complex
 <cit> . cdk <dig> is involved in the processes of neuronal differentiation and migration
 <cit> . given that knockdown of nestin was sufficient to activate cdk <dig> anctivity, mir-125b promote neural differentiation and migration might via activate cdk <dig> activity during early neuronal differentiation of ns/pcs. a recent report by donghyun park et al. has shown that the neural stem cells which derived from nestin knockout mice showed dramatically reduced self-renewal ability but no overt defects in cell proliferation or differentiation
 <cit> . we speculated the discrepancy between our study and their study lies in the ns/pcs isolated from the embryo at different development stages and different tissues. in spite of the results of their study were inconsistent with our results, it can be interpreted as the nestin have multiple functions at different developmental stages or in different tissues.

in conclusion, these results support the conclusion that mir-125b is implicated in regulating its downstream target genes, nestin, which play a crucial role in ns/pcs proliferation, differentiation and migration. in addition, our study does not exclude the possibility that additional target genes may also play a role in mir-125b function in ns/pcs. cultured ns/pcs hold considerable promise both in terms of their application to a wide variety of research paradigms and in the development of potential therapeutic modalities
 <cit> . several important breakthroughs during recent years have raised a hope that stem cell-based therapies could be used to restore function and integrity after acute brain injury and other disorders of the central nervous system. a better understanding of the role exerted by mir-125b in ns/pcs will contribute to offer promising prospects for their increasing application in the development of new cellular therapies in humans.

CONCLUSIONS
our data showed the involvement of mir-125b in the coordinated regulation of proliferation, differentiation and migration in ns/pcs. the work also indicated that mir-125b mediated silencing of nestin may be involved in regulating ns/pcs cell proliferation, differentiation and migration.

