BACKGROUND
metallothioneins  constitute a superfamily of genetically polymorphic cysteine -rich polypeptides that bind, with high affinity, closed-shell metal ions such as zn2+, cd2+, cu+ and others  <cit> . in many organisms they play multiple roles. by serving as principal cellular stores for zn2+ and cu+ they warrant the supply of these essential trace elements in growth and rescue processes and, by their high sequestration power, they shield cell components from deleterious bonding by highly reactive metals such as cd2+ and overabundant zn2+ and cu+  <cit> . in addition, they are also thought to serve as quenchers of free radicals  <cit> . in most animal species examined different mt isoforms show poor or no appreciable differentiation and specialization in their functions and metal-binding preferences  <cit> , although variations in metal selectivity between mt domains exist in some cases  <cit> . as a consequence, the metal composition of most native metal-mt complexes is very often remarkably promiscuous  <cit> . occasionally, apparent metal specificity results from a disproportional oversupply of a certain metal ion, due to particular physiological conditions such as metabolic trace element disorders  <cit>  or cellular overload due to metal exposure  <cit> . in such cases, this metal ion occupies all the binding sites of an mt molecule which would otherwise form heterometallic complexes. however, true metal specificity requires an exclusive binding preference for a certain metal to an mt peptide due to its innate structural configuration.

understanding how mts and other metalloproteins achieved metal specificity through evolution is a key question in the study of their structure/function relationship  <cit> . among molluscs, pulmonate snails provide an optimal system with which to study the determinants of metal mt specificity in metazoans. molluscs comprise a range of economically, medically and ecologically significant species and represent one of the most successful animal phyla, having been able to colonize nearly every habitat on earth  <cit> . some gastropod molluscs - particularly from the subclass of pulmonate snails - feature mt isoforms that can be isolated from their tissues as homometallic complexes with either cd2+ or cu+  <cit> . hence, one isoform isolated from cd-exposed roman snails  exhibited an exclusive metal complement of six equivalents of cd2+ per mol of protein  <cit> , whereas another isoform from the same species contained  <dig> equivalents of cu+  <cit> . it has been proposed that these two pulmonate mt isoforms serve metal specific tasks related to cadmium detoxification  <cit>  or homeostatic copper regulation  <cit> . only recently, a third mt isoform, recovered as a mixed cd2+- and cu+-containing complex has been detected in a terrestrial pulmonate but, due to its low abundance, this isoform is probably less important to the snail's metal metabolism  <cit> .

so far, all pulmonate mt isoforms have been obtained as native metal-mt complexes purified from snail tissues, where they are primarily involved in the metabolism of the metal ion species bound to the respective isoform  <cit> . therefore, it cannot yet be discerned if their specific metal occupation is the result of a rigid control of metal availability, an isoform expression programming in the hosting cells and tissues or of structural differences of the respective peptides determining the coordinative options for the different metal ions. the aim of the present investigation was, therefore, to use the metal-specific snail mts as model molecules and to test which of the above determinants contributes to the metal specificity in the snail mt system. to this end, the two metal-specific h. pomatia  mt isogenes  were expressed in two different heterologous environments - bacteria and yeast - in order to test their metal binding and functional capacities independent of their native environments. hpcdmt and hpcumt were recombinantly synthesized in escherichia coli in the presence of zinc, cadmium and copper and the features of the formed metal complexes compared by optical, chiroptical and mass spectrometric analyses; both isoforms were compared for their functional competence in yeast mt-knockout cells. furthermore, cell- and tissue-specific expression of the two mt isogenes in the snail was scrutinized by in situ hybridization techniques and their expression regulation pattern was assessed by real-time polymerase chain reaction . finally, the phylogenetic radiation of the gastropod mt family cluster inside the mollusc phylum was assessed and evaluated. overall, our data provide an unprecedented analysis of the mechanisms determining, at different levels, the specificity of functions of paralogous mts, suggesting clues to how these could have been achieved through evolution.

RESULTS
analysis of recombinant hpcdmt and hpcumt metal complexes reveals sequence-determined specialization of metal binding
recombinant expression of hpcdmt and hpcumt in metal-exposed e. coli cells was expected to reveal their in vivo binding ability for zinc, cadmium and copper, independent of which is the natively coordinated metal ion.

binding of zn2+ and cd2+ by hpcdmt
mass spectrometric analysis documents that recombinant synthesis of hpcdmt in e. coli cultured in cd2+ or zn2+-enriched media led to the production of only a single species with a fixed content of either six equivalents of cadmium or zinc . the two metal complexes - cd6-hpcdmt and zn6-hpcdmt - display optical spectra with steep rises of absorbance below  <dig> nm and below  <dig> nm which is typical of tetrahedral bonding of both metal ions to multiple thiolate ligands . the metal-to-sulphur linkages also manifest themselves by the intense positive and negative circular dichroism  bands associated with the absorption envelopes . these signals arise in part from the dissymmetric excitonic interactions of the sulphur-based transitions in pairs of doubly coordinated metal-connecting cysteine residues , thereby signifying the collective bonding of cd2+ or zn2+ in oligonuclear metal thiolate complexes  <cit> . the spectral features of the recombinant cd6-hpcdmt product are indistinguishable from those of the native cd6-hpcdmt previously isolated from the tissue of cd-exposed roman snails  <cit> . they also reappear when, at neutral ph, the full complement of six equivalents of cd2+ is added in vitro to the metal-free protein apo-hpcdmt  <cit>  or when zn2+ is replaced in recombinant zn6-hpcdmt by exposure to the much more firmly binding cd2+ . thus, in both in vivo and in vitro, the structure of the protein product of the hpcdmt gene is seen to direct bonding of cd2+ in a single energetically favoured complex fitting its supposed role of shielding the snail tissue from this highly toxic metal ion  <cit> .

binding of cu+ by hpcumt
the recombinant expression of hpcumt in e. coli cultures grown in cu2+-enriched medium led to the formation of homometallic cu12-hpcumt as an essentially single molecular species , equivalent to the native complex purified earlier from snail tissue  <cit> . the absorption spectra display a progressive rise below  <dig> nm with a broad shoulder centred at  <dig> nm  and in cd positive and negative ellipticity bands . these features match qualitatively and quantitatively those seen in mammalian cu12-mt prepared in vitro by adding  <dig> equivalents of the acetonitrile complex of cu+ to native mt from rabbit and are attributable to the formation of oligonuclear cu+ thiolate complexes in trigonal coordination geometry  <cit> . a molecular species with the same composition and spectral properties was attained in vitro by saturating at acidic ph the recombinant, metal-free, apo-hpcumt peptide with cu+ using clo <dig> as a titrating agent. as previously observed  <cit> , this homometallic recombinant product is sensitive to atmospheric o <dig>  the recombinant complex was formed as a single product only when the bacteria were grown under low aeration conditions  <cit> . at normal oxygenation the same culture produced a heterometallic mixture of several cu,zn-hpcumt species ranging from m <dig> to m12-hpcumt  and with spectroscopic features clearly different from those of cu12-hpcumt. in vitro addition of cu+ to these species in the form of clo <dig>  also failed to transform these products into the homometallic single form.

complexes of hpcdmt and hpcumt with non-cognate metal partners
in contrast to the single, well-defined mt species resulting from the recombinant expression of the hpcdmt and hpcumt genes in cultures enriched with their cognate metal partners, only poorly defined products were obtained when the partners were interchanged . thus, expression of the hpcdmt gene in the presence of copper resulted in mixtures of heterometallic zn, cu-hpcdmt species of varying metal-to-protein stoichiometry, when grown under normal and low aeration conditions. in the first case, their metal complement varied from three to seven equivalents and in the second from eight to  <dig> equivalents . the cd spectra of the mixtures  displayed signals typical of oligonuclear cu+-thiolate bonding but varied in shape and amplitudes in different preparations.

the recombinant synthesis of hpcumt in cd2+-enriched cultures led to mixtures of a number of cd-hpcumt species with a cd content ranging from six to more than nine equivalents and also including a sulphide-containing cd9s-hpcumt complex . the cd spectra of these mixtures  displayed spectropolarimetric features arising at less than  <dig> nm from oligonuclear cd-thiolate complexes and close to  <dig> nm from sulphide bonding to the cd-thiolate clusters  <cit> . in a parallel way, the production of hpcumt in zinc -enriched media yielded mixtures of zn-containing species ranging from zn <dig> to zn7-hpcumt, with the different forms varying in abundance and in different preparations . the cd spectra were indicative of zn-thiolate coordination but differed widely in intensity .

therefore, these two mts behave in accordance with their high metal specificity when recombinantly synthesized by bacteria grown in cultures enriched with the non-cognate metal. the hpcdmt isoform thus rendered several mixed zn, cu-mt complexes of different stoichiometries when biosynthesized in a cu-rich medium. following an equivalent behaviour, the hpcumt isoform produced a mixture of species of different stoichiometry when synthesized by bacteria grown on zn- or cd-supplemented media. the classification of mts according to the metal-binding behaviour shown when recombinantly synthesized in cultures enriched with different metals and the correspondence of this classification with other 'metal-specificity' criteria, have been fully reviewed  <cit> .

stability of the cd6-hpcdmt and cu12-hpcumt complexes is documented by their metal exchange inertness
in order to study the lability/inertness of the recombinantly synthesized cd6-hpcdmt and cu12-hpcumt species and their propensity to exchange their preferentially bound metal ions, an equimolar mixture of these two complexes was allowed to stand for  <dig> h at 25°c . the invariant electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry  spectra recorded just after mixing and  <dig> h later demonstrate that the integrity and individuality of these two species was maintained for a long period of time, which confirms that both metal-hpmt complexes possess an exceptionally high stability and exhibit a persistence attributable to their metal binding specificity.

transformation of hpcdmt and hpcumt in yeast mt-knockout cells confirms metal-specific roles
in order to advance from metal-specific folding to metal-specific function, the particular performance of the two snail mt isoforms was compared by complementation studies in another heterologous system. hence, yeast cells deficient in their endogenous mts  were transformed with complimentary dnas  coding for hpcdmt, hpcumt, mouse mt <dig>  yeast cup <dig> and yeast crs <dig> and their growth was examined for cu2+ and cd2+ tolerance. when these cells were grown at increasing cu2+ concentrations in the medium , the highest copper tolerance was observed for the strain transformed with yeast cup <dig>  followed by the strain transformed with the hpcumt cdna. the strain transformed with hpcdmt cdna gave no evidence of tolerating copper at all.

in marked contrast, when the cells were grown in media with increasing concentrations of cd2+, tolerance was greatest in the strain transformed with the endogenous yeast crs <dig> which reflects the known preference of this yeast mt for divalent metal ions  <cit> . the second best was the strain transformed with the cdna for hpcdmt showing a cd2+ detoxification capacity that was also much better than that of the cells transformed with the cdna coding for the mouse mt <dig> isoform, which natively binds either zn2+, cd2+ or cu+. the strain carrying cdna for hpcumt showed almost the same high sensitivity to cd2+ as the mt-null knockout cells .

these results show that the two snail mt isoforms also assume metal-specific roles in a heterologous eukaryotic environment , in accordance with their metal-specific binding preferences revealed by their synthesis in recombinant prokaryotic systems. significantly, the total equivalence between the features of the metal-mt complexes synthesized in these two hosts  has recently been demonstrated for both cadmium and copper, using the cup <dig> mt as a model system  <cit> .

in pulmonate snails, cdmt and cumt isoforms are products of cell-specific expression
in the midgut gland of the snail helix pomatia, the cd-specific isoform  is synthesized in all cell types of this organ  and is also produced in the epithelial cells of foot, gut and kidney  <cit> . in contrast, the messenger rna  coding for hpcumt is located only in one cell type, the so-called rhogocytes , which are present in the midgut gland, and in many other organs, and have been shown to be the sites of hemocyanin synthesis  <cit> . consequently, both metal-specific mt isoforms can be recovered natively from the snail midgut gland .

pulmonate mt isoform genes display metal-specific transcription patterns
the pattern of metal-specific transcriptional induction of mt isogenes was examined in two pulmonate species: in h. pomatia, the subject of this work, and in cantareus aspersus because, in this species, a third and so far unknown mt isogene  has been reported  <cit> . the product of this gene also seems to occur in other pulmonate snails, as first reported in this work . the effect of metal supplementation in the feed of the snails upon transcription was evaluated by measurement of the mrna copy number. for both species, the expression of the cdmt genes was highly responsive to cadmium exposure . while cd2+ increased the number of transcripts of the cdmt genes in both species at concentrations as low as  <dig>  μmol cd2+/g dry weight , no statistically significant enhancement was observed in h. pomatia for a more than a 10-times higher amount of zn2+ . in cu2+ a significant increase of the mrna copies of the hpcdmt gene was seen only at an effective concentration of  <dig>  μmol/g dry weight in the feed . in contrast to the cdmt genes, no significant metal-dependent enhancement of mrna copy number - at least at the metal concentrations assayed - was observed for the cumt and cd/cumt genes of the two species . these induction patterns are totally in accordance with the constitutive expression of the cumt gene in rhogocytes  <cit> , whereas the much higher inducible expression of the cdmt genes in epithelial cells supports the view that the product of this gene plays a role in cd2+ sequestration and detoxification  <cit> . in addition, cdmt may also serve other biological functions, very likely in the form of the zn2+ complex for h. pomatia, as suggested and discussed elsewhere  <cit> .

hpcdmt and hpcumt as prototypes of isoform families which have evolved metal specificity in pulmonate snails by modulation of non-cysteine amino acid positions
hpcdmt and hpcumt can be considered as prototypes of a series of orthologous genes also present, except from h. pomatia, in other pulmonate snails. within molluscs, gastropods and pulmonate snails, in particular, have evolved three mt gene subfamilies, two of them comprising isoforms with a homometallic composition  <cit>  and distinct metal binding behaviour and functional specificities for either cd2+ or cu+ . figure  <dig> shows an alignment of the, so far identified, mt sequences from pulmonate gastropods, including the secondarily aquatic species biomphalaria glabrata. throughout, two of the three mt isoforms are alignable with and can thus be assimilated to the known h. pomatia isoforms hpcdmt and hpcumt  <cit> . the third sequence, the cd/cumt isoform first observed in the terrestrial garden snail , has been recovered from native sources as a simultaneously cu+ and cd2+-containing complex  <cit>  and has been identified in other species too . however, this isogene is transcribed at low constitutive levels, as it is not inducible by metals at all  and thus hardly detectable at the protein level. it may, therefore, be only of circumstantial importance for the metal metabolism in its host. however, its discovery is critical for the understanding of the diversification of mts in this group of organisms.

the three isoform types share strictly conserved cys positions in their primary structure, confirming the fundamental importance of the sulphur atoms provided by these residues for metal complex and metal thiolate cluster formation, irrespective of the metal species involved. besides cys, a few other amino acid positions, either on the n-terminal tail of the peptides or in the direct neighbourhood of cys residues, show conserved positions through the members of the three isoform subfamilies . in contrast, there is significant variability across the three isoform types for the non-cysteine amino acid residues interspersed between the conserved positions. this suggests that the different metal specificities of the isoforms were achieved by gene duplication and subsequent speciation by evolutionary modulation of these non-coordinating amino acid positions. moreover, the alignment pattern shows that the similarity between the members of the cumt and the cd/cumt isoform families is clearly higher than that observed between those and the cdmt isoforms .

*protein blast calculation  for testing similarities between the three pulmonate mt isoform subfamilies, exemplified by cdmt, cumt and cd/cumt from h. pomatia, c. aspersus and b. glabrata.

a nucleotide-based neighbour-joining tree shows that pulmonate mt isoform subfamilies are assembled in three distinct branches and are thus clearly distinguishable from all other mollusc forms represented by the group of bivalvia . this suggests that the differentiation into these isoforms has been an evolutionary process which, within molluscs, remained restricted essentially to pulmonate snails. the protein distance analysis tree  confirms the close relationship between the cumt and cd/cumt isoforms , which apparently evolved from a common ancestor that gave rise to the differentiation of the cu-specific and the less metal-specific cd/cumt gene subfamilies, clearly segregated from the cdmt gene subfamily. on the other hand, the three pulmonate mt subfamilies share a common root with all other gastropod mts .

discussion
in mts, metal binding and metal exchange reactions are mainly governed by the coordination chemistry of thiolate bonding with closed-shell metal ions such as zn2+, cd2+, cu+  <cit> . to be more precise, the relative order of in vitro metal binding affinities of apo-mt peptides, as well as the order of displacement capacity of each heavy metal ion within a metal-mt complex  > cu ~ ag > cd > pb > co > zn), follow the rules established for metal-thiolate and metal-sulphide low-molecular mass complexes  <cit> . however, the assumption that these 'inorganic chemistry' rules are the unique responsible of the metal-mt complex properties would lead to the conclusion that mt polypeptides sharing the same number and position of cys residues would exhibit equivalent metal binding behaviour. however, this is essentially untrue, as firmly demonstrated in this work for the snail mt system. mt metal specificity is a subject of vivid, current debate  <cit> , as to a larger or lesser extent, all mts show a degree of metal specificity in native and/or in vivo environments. in this case, metal specificity is understood to be the set of determinants that eventually leads a given mt peptide to natively discriminate among metal ions, thus allowing the formation of particular metal complexes and the performance of the biological function for which they were selected. to date, major factors claimed to explain metal-mt specificity in live systems are protein sequence optimization, metal ion availability and/or metal-responsive transcription programming  <cit> .

the structural features of the resulting mt complexes with different metal ion species arise from the equilibrium between kinetic and thermodynamic requirements  <cit> , so that they converge to a stoichiometric ratio that reflects their energetically most stable state  <cit> . hence, the observation by esi-ms of metal-mt species synthesized in in-vivo environments, either native or recombinant, allows one to read the propensity of the respective peptides to form metal complexes that are uniquely defined from a stoichiometric and thermodynamic point of view  <cit> . in combination with spectroscopic studies, this leads to a clear appraisal of the distinctness of a mt metal specificity, as exemplified in the present work. it can, therefore, be concluded that the homometallic and unique composition of the complexes formed by hpcdmt and hpcumt with their cognate metal species upon isolation from recombinant cultures  reflects the innate metal specificity of the two isoforms, rather than being the result of an occasional association with metal ions governed by their intracellular or environmental availability. this is confirmed by the poor metal-binding behaviour of the same isoforms confronted with their non-cognate metal ions  and by the inertness of the two complexes, cd6-hpcdmt and cu12-hpcumt, to exchange metal ions . such metal ion exchange processes have repeatedly been reported in mts  <cit>  and would be reasonable to expect  <cit> .

the complete sequential identity of cys residues and the high degree of conserved positions for other amino acids shared among the three isoform families  suggest, along with their nearly equal size, that metal-specific differentiation of pulmonate snail mts must have been initiated by gene duplication events, followed by modulatory speciation of amino acid residues located between the cysteine positions. gene duplication seems to be a common mechanism driving the evolutionary differentiation of mt isoform in animals and is documented for mts of drosophila melanogaster, among others  <cit> , and the mussel crassostrea gigas  <cit> . once duplicated, such genes are free to independently generate mutations, upon which selective forces can then act towards evolution of specific features  <cit> . the example of pulmonate snail mts also proves that the evolutionary variation of non-cysteine residues can impose a metal-specific character on to the coordination chemistry of a mt peptide. at present, it is not known how this is achieved at a structural level. however, it must be supposed that, due to their particular position in the sequence and chemical nature of their side-chains, non-cysteine amino acids constrain the sulphur ligands provided by the conserved cys positions to assume only one of several theoretically possible spatial coordination foldings. determination of the three dimensional structure of the cd6-hpcdmt and cu12-hpcumt complexes is actually in progress which may unveil the detailed structural basis of the metal specificity of the two hpmt isoforms.

cell-specific expression may also contribute to enhancing distinct metal-related functionality  <cit> . roman snails, for example, synthesize hpcumt exclusively in rhogocytes , the modified cells of mesodermal origin found in virtually all connective tissues of mollusc organs  <cit> . since they are also the sites of hemocyanin synthesis  <cit> , it was suggested that hpcumt functions as a cu+ reservoir/donor for the nascent hemocyanin  <cit> . the constitutive expression of hpcumt  and the exclusive preference of this isoform for cu+  support this presumed function. the supposed incorporation of cu+ into the structure of hemocyanin must occur under reducing conditions, which is also consistent with the high susceptibility of native cu12-hpcumt complexes to oxidization  <cit>  and the fact that homometallic cu12-hpcumt synthesis is only achieved in low-aerated recombinant cultures . the apparent connection between the tasks of cu-specific mt isoforms and their presence in organisms with cu-depending hemocyanins is reminiscent of the situation reported for decapod crustaceans  <cit> . in these animals, concentrations of cu-mt complexes fluctuate with the metabolic state and the hemocyanin levels during the moulting cycle  <cit> . cu-specific mts are also observed in organisms of other kingdoms, especially in fungi  <cit> , where their role may be connected to the synthesis of the cu-containing enzyme tyrosinase, as in neurospora crassa  <cit> .

after exposure of roman snails to cd2+, virtually all of this metal in the digestive tissues was bound to hpcdmt  in a similar manner as for cdmt isoforms of other snail species  <cit> . consistently, in the roman snail, hpcdmt is produced in digestive and excretory tissues  <cit>  , where the corresponding gene is selectively upregulated by cd2+ exposure . this suggests that absorption of toxic cd2+ from the surrounding substrate via the alimentary tract may constitute a particular physiological challenge, exacerbated by the evolutionary transition of gastropods to terrestrial life  <cit> . moreover, the sensitivity to cd2+ of important cu-dominated metabolic pathways  <cit>  and zn-dependent enzymes  <cit>  could have been the basis of the generation of a specific mt isoform devoted to cd2+ detoxification in these animals. our data also demonstrate the ready formation of homometallic complexes of hpcdmt with zn2+, which may be a consequence of the comparable coordination preferences of these two d <dig> metal ions. the much weaker bonding of zn2+  <cit>  to this isoform, however, does not prevent the peptide from functioning as a most effective cd2+ sequestration agent. in the presence of zn2+ and the absence of cd2+, the hpcdmt isoform is expressed only at low basal concentrations  and, as in the case of mammalian mts  <cit> , is thought to serve other functions  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
overall, the present study, together with the extensive body of evidence provided by our previous work, suggests that the pair of the metal-specific h. pomatia mt isoforms  can be regarded as the prototype of a series of paralogous forms present in pulmonate gastropods. in these organisms, divergent evolution by gene duplication, with subsequent modulation of non-cysteine amino acid positions and a cell specific occurrence and gene expression regulation, has led to the complete separation of their metal-binding preference, cell-specific occurrence, expression regulation and functionality. this resulted in genuine cdmts becoming inducible forms specializing in the global protection of the organism from the non-essential toxic element cd and in genuine cumts becoming constitutive forms supplying the essential element cu. our findings provide experimental evidence and possible answers to how metallotproteins in general, and mts specifically, were able to achieve partial or complete specificity in their metal binding behaviour and functionality.

