BACKGROUND
seedling development in higher plants initiates with the process of germination which takes place by first absorbing water from the soil under appropriate environmental conditions, in a process called imbibition and ends with the protrusion of the radicle and elongation of the embryonic axis  <cit> . cell metabolism resumes rapidly by initially mobilizing lipids, transcripts and protein compounds synthesized during seed development and stored in the dry seed. eventually cell division starts, dna and protein synthesis take place and new enzymes and cellular components are made  <cit> . during soybean  seedling development the radicle emerges from the swollen seed elongating towards the soil where the primary root is developed. then the hypocotyl develops growing towards the surface pulling out the cotyledons  <cit> . emergence occurs when the cotyledons reach the surface over the soil.

seed germination is a complex adaptive trait of higher plants controlled by a large number of genes and environmental factors  <cit> . many molecular and physiological studies have been carried out to identify genes and compounds with important roles during seed germination in arabidopsis  <cit> , brassica  <cit> , medicago  <cit>  and many other plant species. however, the genetic mechanisms restricted to this important physiological process, as well as their regulation and control, require elucidation  <cit> .

the cotyledons contain the nutrients and food reserves that supply the needs of the seedlings during germination and emergence until autotrophic growth commences  <cit> . shortly after emergence the hooked shaped hypocotyl straightens out and the cotyledons undergo a physiological transition from mainly a nutrient and food reserve tissue  to an active photosynthetic  tissue. within the cotyledonary cell during this transition, lipids are initially metabolized in the lipid bodies and fatty acids are translocated to glyoxysomes  <cit> . these specialized peroxisomes assist in breaking down fatty acids by β-oxidation which are then converted to succinate in a series of enzymatic reactions known as the glyoxylate cycle  <cit> . succinate is then processed in the mitochondria throughout the tricarboxylic acid  cycle and eventually converted to carbohydrate. once the lipids are metabolized and the cotyledons undergo greening, the number of glyoxysomes decreases and leaf peroxisomes become abundant to participate with chloroplasts and mitochondria in the process of photorespiration. the cotyledonary physiological transition is a complex process that must be under strict gene control and regulation. to be able to describe and understand the genetic mechanisms involved in the functional transition as well as their regulation and control systems it is essential to first define the global gene expression pattern and its modulation throughout development during this process.

global gene expression studies such as transcriptome, proteome and metabolome analysis have proven to be excellent tools to dissect plant physiological mechanisms and discover new elements of relevant biological importance  <cit> . gene expression resources in soybean have been described  <cit>  and utilized to deepen our understanding and knowledge of relevant biological processes including somatic embryogenesis  <cit> , response to pathogen challenge  <cit> , elevated carbon atmospheric conditions  <cit> , and gene identification in mutant lines  <cit> . recently, a new set of 70-mer oligos representing the soybean est collection was defined and synthesized . these oligos were designed to represent the most possible 3' end portion of the corresponding cdna to be able to distinguish gene family members due to the higher sequence variability within this region.

in this study, we defined the global transcript abundance profile of the functional transition of the cotyledonary tissue throughout seedling development, providing precise identification of the genetic elements that participate in this physiological process, particularly the ones related with the glyoxylate cycle. for this purpose, we defined  <dig> different developmental stages  starting with the imbibed seed, covering germination and continue with radicle protrusion, hypocotyl elongation, emergence, and development of the unifoliolate . we identified some of the specific participants of the glyoxylate cycle in soybean cotyledons that are involved throughout seedling development and confirm the fundamental role of these metabolic pathways during the functional transition from nutrient and food reserve to photosynthetic activity. several other genes with known functions were also identified as key participants as well as unknown genetic elements that have the potential to contribute significantly during soybean seedling development and the cotyledonary functional transition.

RESULTS
to identify differential transcript abundance during the functional transition of the cotyledon during seedling development, data obtained from scans of  <dig> oligo chips obtained for each of  <dig> time-point comparisons  was quantified, uploaded into genespring  <dig>  , and then transformed, filtered and normalized . time was defined as the only parameter to be taken into account for analysis and  <dig> different conditions were defined: one for each time point comparison relative to the imbibed seed . normalized data was further filtered by expression level for quality control to eliminate genes in the array with no values throughout the time study. out of  <dig>  genes represented in the soybean oligo array  <dig>  genes  produced a signal in at least  <dig> out of the  <dig> conditions defined . a welch analysis of variance  of these genes in  <dig> samples  with a p-value cut off  <dig> , a false discovery rate  of  <dig>  and between  <dig>  and  <dig> fold expression change in at least  <dig> out of  <dig> conditions, defined a gene collection of  <dig>  genes with statistically significant data  that was further used for cluster analysis by k-means and functional classification of individual members using gene ontologies . all the results obtained have been deposited in the ncbi gene expression omnibus  database as accession number gse <dig> and the 70-mer oligo array platform containing  <dig>  features as accession number gpl <dig> 

gene classification by gene ontologies
to gain insight of the genetic and biological events involved in the functional transition of the cotyledonary cell, we used the available gene ontologies  to classify under different functional categories the  <dig>  genes with statistically significant data obtained in our study. following the gene ontologies information, we first assigned the biological process classification associated with specific genes. this category includes biological processes comprising broad biological goals like metabolism, cell growth and cell death. then genes were classified by cellular component which includes sub-cellular structures, locations and macromolecular complexes. finally, genes were classified by molecular function which refers to the task performed by individual gene products  <cit> . for a total of  <dig> genes, a blastx hit was produced along with the assigned hit description however the corresponding gene ontology information was not officially assigned at the time of the study. therefore we assigned our own classification following the plant gene ontologies guidelines  <cit> . a summary of the classification of all the genes included in this collection is presented in table  <dig>  interestingly  <dig> % of genes with statistically significant data had no annotations either because the blast x did not produce any hits below 10e- <dig>  or because the hit was sub-classified into expressed, hypothetical, putative, unknown or unnamed protein; the rest of the genes were classified under biological process  <dig> %, cellular component  <dig> % and molecular function  <dig> %  .

cluster analysis by k-means
to better visualize the global gene transcription profile in the cotyledon during germination and to group genes that share similar profiles, we clustered the statistically significant genes into  <dig> sets according to their expression profiles throughout the different developmental stages using k-means . this particular algorithm randomly divides genes into a user-defined number of clusters minimizing intra-cluster variability. genes grouped within one set share a relatively similar expression profile however it is possible to find quantitative and qualitative expression differences among members of the same set. the more similar the expression profile is within a group of genes the more likely for those genes to be co-participants in the process of achieving a common biological function.

gene activity during functional transition of the cotyledon
although each particular set obtained by cluster analysis represents a different group of genes with similar expression profiles, we can observe that sets  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> contain genes whose expression profile displays up regulation during the first  <dig> to  <dig> stages, and variable levels of expression during the last  <dig> stages defined. the products of over-expressed genes during these initial stages may play a fundamental role in achieving the required functions of the cotyledon during the onset of seedling growth and specifically during the functional transition. genes whose products participate in protein biosynthesis are especially abundant in this group   along with several transcription factors, regulators, elongation factors as well as ribosomal and aminoacid-metabolism genes. the data obtained clearly indicates high protein metabolism activity during the first stages of seedling development through the functional transition, and low activity during the later stages when the main function of these tissues is photosynthesis. also a high number of genes were found within the subcategory of electron transport and protein and nuclei acid metabolism.

close examination of the identified genes in these groups allowed us to define genes that have been previously associated with seedling development in different plant species. for instance, we found several chloroplast precursors like ferredoxin-nadp reductase root isozyme, several cytochrome p <dig> components and cystatin. cystatins are ubiquitous plant cysteine peptidase inhibitors involved in the endogenous regulation of protein turnover, programmed cell death and in defence mechanisms  <cit> . cystatins have been associated with germination in several plant systems like cowpea  <cit> , barley  <cit> , chinese cabbage and transgenic arabidopsis where they appear to participate in the control of seed germination by regulating cysteine peptidase activity  <cit> . our data shows a steady over expression pattern during stages  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> reduction during stage  <dig> and under-expression during stages  <dig> and  <dig> 

in set  <dig>  we can find genes like calnexin, ribonucleotide reductase r <dig>  kunitz trypsin inhibitor and putative bhlh transcription factor . the presence of transcripts from enzymes like the ribonucleotide reductase r <dig>  and several dna repair and dna binding proteins agrees with the concept that dna synthesis starts soon after seed imbibition  <cit>  and is also complemented by the presence of multiple transcription factors like the putative bhlh transcription factor that has been reported to be the entry point for phytochrome regulation of the plant circadian clock and initiating one branch of the cytochrome-induced gene expression cascade  <cit> . calnexin, is an endoplasmic reticulum trans-membrane molecular chaperone that selectively associates in a transient fashion with newly synthesized glycoproteins  <cit> . expression of the calnexin is activated during late embryo development and germination in arabidopsis , showing the highest expression at  <dig> day after imbibition  <cit> . our data shows that in soybean cotyledons, calnexin is over-expressed relative to the imbibed seed during the first  <dig> stages of germination with the highest peak at stage  <dig>  to then become under-expressed during the last two stages . the kunitz trypsin inhibitor gene family contains at least  <dig> members, with qualitative and quantitative expression patterns programmed strictly by different and unique combinations of cis control elements per family member during the soybean life cycle  <cit> . these proteinase inhibitors function as storage proteins regulators of endogenous proteinases therefore playing an important role in regulating the mobilization of storage proteins during germination. we found that the kunitz trypsin inhibitor in the soybean cotyledon cell was steadily up regulated during stages  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> while down regulated during stages  <dig> and  <dig>  the corresponding est clones to calnexin and kunitz trypsin inhibitor  were used in an rna blot hybridization experiment. the expression profiles obtained both by oligo microarray and rna blot hybridization analysis were closely similar .

a set number assigned from cluster analysis by k-means

b x/ <dig> indicates expression ratio of specific stage x  to stage  <dig> . n = 8

c clones validated by rna gel blot analysis

d clones validated by rna gel blot analysis and qrtpcr

some other gene expression profiles initially show activity during the stages of the functional transition and continue to be active throughout the green stages. genes with this particular profile are more likely to participate in the different physiological processes relevant to these developmental stages. some of the genes found within this set are: β-amylase, putative protein phosphatase-2c, β-conglycinin alpha subunit, glucosyltransferase- <dig>  abc transporter family members, and seed maturation proteins pm <dig> and pm <dig> 

the β-amylase gene has been previously characterized in maize in association with seed germination where high expression was observed after day  <dig> reaching peaks at days 5– <dig> and maintained high levels through days 7– <dig>  <cit> . our data shows that the soybean β-amylase gene in the cotyledon  is down regulated during stages  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  and up regulated during stages  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  the β-conglycinin is one of the major seed storage globulins in soybean. the  <dig> subunits of β-conglycinin  are rapidly degraded after seed imbibition generating new β-conglycinin cross-reactive polypeptides. after six days of germination the newly produced β-conglycinin polypeptides are also hydrolyzed  <cit> . these observations are supported by our data in that the gene for β-conglycinin shows low levels of expression  during the initial stages of germination  and an increase in expression during stages  <dig> and  <dig> . it has been postulated  <cit>  that the newly produced β-conglycinin polypeptides may play a role in the photosynthetic activity of the cotyledon during the late stages of germination. the corresponding est clones to β-amylase and β-conglycinin  were selected, purified and used as radio-labeled probes in an rna blot that contained total rna from the imbibed seed  and the remaining six different stages from one of the biological replicates previously used. these rna blots produced similar expression profiles to the ones observed by oligo microarray analysis .

specific elements of the glyoxylate pathway involved in the functional transition
an interesting group of genes found with an expression profile that shows to be relevant during soybean seedling development is a set of genes that directly or indirectly participate in the glyoxylate cycle. the glyoxylate cycle has been associated with the mobilization and utilization of lipids during germination in several plant species characterized by oil-rich seeds  <cit> . initially lipases in oil bodies start the process of fat utilization by carrying out the hydrolytic fission of triacylglycerol  to free fatty acids and glycerol . in castor bean two lipases have been identified, one is acidic and accumulates during the first two days of germination and the other one is alkaline accumulating during days 3– <dig>  <cit> . we found six different genes that codify for lipases but only one specific lipase gene  that has been associated with tag lipase activity. the expression profile of this gene fluctuates between high levels of expression during the initial phases of germination reaching higher peaks during the functional transition and a significant reduction of expression during the last two stages defined . the other lipases found in our study are mitochondrial, plastid or associated with the endomembrane system. lipoxygenase has been proposed to be involved in reserve lipid mobilization during soybean germination and although high levels have been detected during this period, recent studies suggest that lipoxygenase is not directly involved in lipid mobilization and its function is still unclear  <cit> . we found five different lipoxygenase genes  with similar expression profiles and higher levels of expression during the functional transitions . we also found a lipoxygenase gene whose expression profile showed down regulation during the entire study.

our data shows that specific genes codifying for enzymes from the glyoxylate pathway like malate dehydrogenase , citrate synthase , aconitate hydratase , isocitrate lyase , malate synthase , formate dehydrogenase , oxalyl-coa decarboxylase  and glyoxylate carboligase  are up regulated at some point during the first four stages of soybean seedling development and down regulated during the last two stages defined  correlating with the cotyledonary functional transition.

the malate dehydrogenase  is one of the key enzymes in the glyoxylate cycle in charge of converting malate to oxaloacetate  and has been associated with elevated expression during germination in oilseed plants  <cit> . we found in our collection of genes with statistical significant data  , six different mdh genes with different expression profiles: one is cytosolic , two are mitochondrial , one is glyoxysomal , one is from chloroplast  and one is registered as an atp binding mdh . due to the nature of the soybean oligo array we can clearly distinguish the individual expression profiles of each one of these genes and define the specific isoform that has a relevant role at a particular point during our study. out of the six mdh genes found, only the atp binding mdh gene  was consistently down regulated throughout the study, implying that this particular isoform might not be as relevant during early seedling development, while the other five mdh genes reached peaks of high levels of expression during the functional transition stages. the cytosolic mdh gene , is up regulated in all of the stages defined and presents the highest levels of expression among all the six found during the cotyledonary functional transition . the glyoxysomal mdh gene , is up regulated during the first stages with higher peaks at stages  <dig> and  <dig>  at stage  <dig> the expression levels of this particular mdh are reduced by about 50% relative to stage  <dig>  a significant reduction in levels of expression was observed during the green stages of cotyledon development during seedling development . the expression profiles of the two mitochondrial isoform genes are very similar, showing up regulation during the first  <dig> stages  and a significant reduction during the last two . however, the reduced levels of expression in the green stages were still higher than the ones observed in the imbibed seed. the mitochondrial mdh is associated with the tca cycle. the chloroplast mdh gene , showed a steady increase in expression from imbibition to stage  <dig>  a slight reduction during stage  <dig> and down regulation during stages  <dig> and  <dig> 

citrate synthase  also named as citrate lyase, is one of the key enzymes of the glyoxylate cycle  in charge of producing citrate from acetyl coa and oxaloacetate  <cit> . in our study we found five genes  with elevated levels of expression during the initial phases of germination and low levels during the photosynthetic phase. only one of these genes  is referenced as a glyoxysomal precursor showing up regulation during stages  <dig> and  <dig> and different levels of down regulation in the rest of the stages defined . we were unable to identify the cs related with the tca cycle in the mitochondrion.

aconitate hydratase  is in charge of producing isocitrate from citrate . two different ah enzymes have been associated with the process of germination in several oil-seed plants. one is mitochondrial and involved the tca cycle while the other one is cytosolic participating in the glyoxylate cycle  <cit> . there are three different genes  with statistically significant data that codify for ah in our study. as with some of the other enzymes from the glyoxylate cycle found in this study, the ah expression profiles of these three genes in the soybean cotyledon start with up regulation during the first stages of germination and down regulation after the functional transition during the green phases.

isocitrate lyase  produces succinate and glyoxylate from isocitrate . it has been used in immunological assays to demonstrate the inter-conversion of peroxisomes to glyoxysomes and vice versa in pumpkin cotyledons during germination and senescence  <cit> . increased levels of expression have been documented during germination in glyoxysomes while low levels of expression have been observed in peroxisomes during cotyledonary greening and senescence  <cit> . we found two icl genes  showing almost identical expression profiles. both genes show up regulation during the entire time study however, reduced levels of expression in one order of magnitude were observed after completion of the cotyledonary functional transition .

malate synthase  activity have been shown to increase co-ordinately  with patterns of lipid breakdown  during germination in different plant species, and has been used as a marker for glyoxysomal activity  <cit> . we found three different glyoxysomal ms isoform genes  with similar expression profiles that start with up regulation during the initial phases of germination, down regulation right after the cotyledonary functional transition and during the photosynthetic phase .

several other enzymes related with the glyoxylate cycle are fdh, ocd and gxc. we found one specific element for each of these enzymes in our collection of genes with statistically significant data: clone id: gm-r1021- <dig> for fdh; clone id: gm-r1089- <dig> for ocd and clone id: gm-c1062- <dig> for gxc. the gene for fdh shows low levels of expression relative to the imbibed seed during the first stages of seedling development, high levels of expression at the onset of the functional transition and during the photosynthetic phase . the expression profile of the gene for ocd on the other hand shows down regulation throughout the entire study indicating that this particular branch of the cycle may not be required in the soybean cotyledon during the functional transition in the process of seedling development. finally we found that the expression profile of the gxc gene our study is up regulated in all stages with a reduction of expression during the green phase .

we also observed transcript accumulation from genes that are involved in peroxisomal activity as glycolate oxidase  , glutamate aminotransferase  and catalase   along with others that participate in the process of photorespiration like rubisco  and phosphoglycerate kinase . the expression profiles of these genes show different levels of up regulation throughout most of the stages defined indicating peroxisomal activity in the soybean cotyledon during seedling development .

highly active genes throughout seedling development
on the other hand, consistently over expressed genes throughout the entire time study in relation to the imbibed seed are mainly found in sets  <dig> and  <dig> from cluster analysis. these are genes whose expression was reduced in the imbibed seed and increased with the onset of germination, remaining over-expressed throughout the study. within set  <dig>  metabolism of nuclei acids, electron transport and protein biosynthesis are the functional sub-classes with higher number of genes . several transcription factors can be found within this group like: transcription factor homolog btf3-like protein, transcription factor lim <dig>  transcription factor rau <dig>  transcription regulatory protein snf <dig> and transcription repressor rom <dig> . also genes involved in lipid metabolism like probable lipid transfer protein m <dig> precursor, peroxiredoxin, polygalacturonase beta chain precursor, alfa-carboxyltransferase precursor, tubulin a- <dig> and b chain, and clathrin coat assembly like protein are present within this group. similarly several photosynthetic genes like rub <dig> conjugating enzyme and rubisco-associated protein, cytochromes  and phytochrome a, can also be found within this set of genes.

some of these gene products have been associated with the process of germination in different species and for some of them their functions have been studied. for example, peroxiredoxins are thiol-requiring antioxidants that serve as general cellular reductants that are tightly regulated during seed development, seed imbibition and early germination  <cit> . peroxiredoxins may play a role in protecting the growing embryo from reactive oxygen species arising as by products of respiration during imbibition and germination  <cit> . we identified one peroxiredoxin gene  in the soybean cotyledon that shows over-expression throughout our study with particularly high peaks during stages  <dig> and  <dig> . in tomato, polygalacturonase is believed to play an important function in weakening of the endosperm tissue opposite to the radical tip allowing radicle protrusion; mrna abundance is low during seed development, increased during imbibition and highly abundant in seeds that have completed germination  <cit> . our data suggests that the gene for polygalacturonase  in soybean cotyledons is up regulated during seedling development with the highest peak at stage  <dig> and the lowest at the end of this process . we also found several members of the tubulin gene family within this group and particularly one  with higher levels of expression during the functional transition. tubulins have been associated with cell division and enlargement aspects of the cell cycle accumulating during early stages of germination depending on the action of giberellic acid in arabidopsis  <cit> . clathrin coated vesicles  play an important role in transport of storage proteins during seed development, and appeared to be enriched in pea cotyledons during germination  <cit> . our data shows high expression of the clathrin coat assembly like gene  during stages  <dig> and  <dig>  indicating possible accumulation of cv's that are involved in protein transport.

set  <dig> is characterized by genes that were highly over-expressed throughout the entire time study. some relevant genes found within this group are: actin  <dig>  aux/iaa protein, auxin down regulated adr <dig> and ads 11- <dig>  auxin-binding protein abp <dig>  auxin-induced protein 22c, auxin-induced protein aux <dig> and aux <dig>  chlorophyll a/b-binding protein , chloroplast atp synthase, plastocyanin precursor, beta-tubulin, and rubisco small chain precursor.

chorophyll a/b binding  proteins are synthesized in the cytoplasm and transported into the chloroplast where they bind chlorophyll a and b and carotenoid pigments to form pigment/protein complexes. these complexes transfer light energy to photosystem reaction centres and mediate thylakoid membrane appression. cab mrna levels have been reported to fluctuate in the soybean embryo during seed development and maturation as well as in the cotyledons during germination; their expression is negatively regulated by abscisic acid  <cit> . our data shows up regulation of several cab genes within the cotyledon cell with increasing levels from stage  <dig> to  <dig> and then a small reduction at stage  <dig>  one of the corresponding est clone for cab  was used as a probe in an rna blot analysis containing total rna samples from all the stages in one of the biological replicates. a similar profile compared with the one from the oligo microarray analysis was obtained . additionally, specific primers flanking the 70-mer oligo used in the array were designed and used in a qrt-pcr reaction  starting with total rna from the same biological replicate used for the rna blot hybridization analysis. the results from the qrt-pcr validated both the oligo microarrray data as well as the northern data .

the phytohormone auxin down regulates the expression of a group of genes known as the auxin down regulated  genes of which there are distinctly different families by genomic sequence. adr genes also respond to light differentially and are organ/tissue specific. adr  <dig> and adr  <dig> mrna cytoplasmic levels are low in the presence of auxin, while in the presence of light adr  <dig> is up regulated and adr  <dig> is down-regulated  <cit> . the majority of the adr genes in our study were grouped in set  <dig> , however the adr 12- <dig> profile was classified in set  <dig> showing under-expression during stages  <dig> and  <dig> and different levels of over-expression during stages  <dig> through  <dig> . the corresponding est clones for auxin down regulated adr  <dig>  adr  <dig> and adr 12- <dig>  were purified, sequenced and used as radio-labeled probes in an rna blot that contained total rna from the imbibed seed  and the remaining six different stages  from one of the biological replicates previously used. the results showed similar expression profiles to the corresponding ones observed by oligo microarray analysis . in addition, specific primers flanking the 70-mer oligo used in the array for the adr12- <dig> gene were designed and used in a qrt-pcr reaction  starting with total rna from the same biological replicate used for the rna blot hybridization analysis. the results from the qrt-pcr validated the data obtained by the other two independent methods .

down regulated genes throughout seedling development
genes that were under-expressed during the entire time study are those genes that were up-regulated in the imbibed seed  and their expression was reduced throughout all the subsequent stages during seedling development. these genes are mainly found in sets  <dig> and  <dig> .

some of the genes found in set  <dig> are: wound induced protein, late-embryogenesis abundant protein, glutathione s-transferase gst  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  histone h <dig>  and h <dig> , alpha' subunit of beta-conglycinin, dehydration responsive element binding protein, seed maturation proteins pm <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  soybean seed maturation polypeptides, and several members of the flavonoid pathway like chalcone reductase, chalcone synthase chs  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  cinnamate 4-hydroxylase, naringenin-chalcone synthase and isoflavone reductase homolog  <dig>  in soybean isoflavone genes are expressed at different levels throughout development in tissues such as seeds and roots, while in other tissues they are further induced in response to elicitor treatment or pathogen attack  <cit> . accumulation of isoflavone transcripts has been also associated with cotyledon development during seed maturation  <cit>  as well as tissue-culture induced somatic embryo development  <cit> . our data shows that during early seedling development accumulation of isoflavone transcripts is reduced in relation to the imbibed seed cotyledons. finally, the seed maturation proteins are synthesized during the late stage of seed maturation and have been correlated with desiccation tolerance, aba content or transition to seedling growth; they tend to highly accumulate in dry and mature soybean seeds degrading rapidly at the early stage of seed germination  <cit> .

data validation by rna blot hybridization analysis and qrt-pcr
based on the oligo microarray data obtained in our study along with literature evidence of involvement in the process of early seedling development in plants, several gene candidates were chosen  to confirm their transcript abundance profile throughout the six developmental time points defined in comparison to the imbibed seed  by rna blot hybridization analysis. unknown genes were also selected based on their similarity to the expression profiles of the previously chosen genes. for this purpose individual est clones corresponding to the oligo sequence used in the microarray study were hand picked form the est collection available, purified, confirmed by sequence analysis, radioactively labeled and used as probes on an rna blot containing purified total rna from the seven stages of one biological replicate used for this study . figure  <dig>  shows results of the rna gel blot hybridization using the chlorophyll a/b binding protein, auxin down regulated adr 12- <dig>  adr  <dig> and adr  <dig> probes along with the values and expression profile obtained from the oligo microarray data. similar data was obtained for the rest of the clones registered in table  <dig> .

for qrt-pcr, primers were designed to amplify exclusively the oligo sequences found by microarray data and confirmed by rna gel blot analysis. the two clones chosen were the auxin down regulated adr12- <dig> and the chlorophyll a/b binding protein. the qrt-pcr results for these two genes indicated that transcript abundance profiles were consistent with the oligo microarray results as well as the rna gel blot hybridizations .

discussion
a soybean 70-mer oligo array containing  <dig>  features was used to study the modulation of the global transcript profile of soybean cotyledons at  <dig> different time points relative to the imbibed seed. our time study covered the cotyledon functional transition from nutrient storage to photosynthesis during seedling development. one of the major advantages of using an oligo array of this nature is that it allows to clearly discriminate the expression levels in terms of transcript abundance of different gene family members, enzymatic isoforms and protein subunits. this is due to the fact that each 70-mer oligo has been carefully designed to represent the high sequence variability found at the most possible 3'end region of cdna clones of the soybean est collection. the results of our study define which specific gene family member, enzymatic isoform or protein subunit is likely to be a co-participant of this particular biological process providing an important tool, not only for gene discovery but also to postulate possible mechanisms of expression regulation and control.

after lowess normalization, filtering by expression level and a welch anova analysis we found that the transcript abundance profile of  <dig>  genes in the soybean cotyledons was significantly modulated when compared to the transcript profile observed within the imbibed seed at least in one of the time point measurements taken during seedling development . in arabidopsis the transcriptome of the imbibed seed is composed of mrnas stored during seed development as well as the neosynthesized transcripts during water absortion  <cit> . in our study, the transcript profiles from stages 2– <dig> were compared to the already imbibed seed . classification by gene ontologies and cluster analysis by k-means of over and under expressed genes provided a broader view of gene expression and modulation in the soybean cotyledons during this process and more specifically during the cotyledonary functional transition from nutrient storage to photosynthesis. the already identified and characterized genes reported in the literature, validate and support our data while the unidentified genes represent excellent candidates for discovering new elements of significant importance involved in soybean seedling development. because organisms have adopted a strategy of expressing batteries of genes under common regulatory mechanisms, the individual transcripts in the clusters presented are most likely regulated and controlled in a coordinate manner. all the results obtained have been deposited in the ncbi gene expression omnibus  database as accession number gse <dig> 

oligo microarray data validation
our data provided a collection of  <dig>  genes with statistically significant data with a p-value cut off of  <dig>  and a  <dig>  false discovery rate . detailed examination of the genes found and their expression profiles allowed us to identify several genes that had been already associated with the process of seedling development in soybeans and other plant species as well as many undiscovered soybean genes. rna gel blot analysis of ten known genes and three unknowns  correlated with the general expression profile obtained by microarray analysis data. although the general expression profile was comparable by the two techniques, the actual quantitative values were in some instances dissimilar. this can be explained by two main reasons: first, the signal obtained by using a full length est clone as a probe for rna gel blot analysis captures the expression levels of family members or genes with close homologies while the microarray data analysis only represents the expression values of a particular gene family member, enzymatic isoform or protein subunit, represented by the 70-mer oligo designed. second, the oligo microarray analysis compiles data from  <dig> different point measurements  , while in the rna blot gel analysis, we only have one point measure from one biological replicate. therefore, it is possible to find small discrepancies in the quantitative values obtained by using the two different methods. an alternative way to more precisely validate quantitatively the oligo microarray data was to design specific primers to amplify exclusively the oligo sequence used in the microarray study, and set up a qrt-pcr experiment. data obtained by this method correlated with the data obtained by oligo microarray analysis since we were able to amplify specifically the same 70-mer oligo sequence used in the array, providing an excellent validation tool. we can still observe some point measurements discrepancies due to the fact that only one biological replicate was used for the qrt-pcr experiment.

role of the glyoxylate cycle during the functional transition
the functional transition of the soybean cotyledon initiates when the dry seed  is imbibed in water followed by a series of dramatic morphological and physiological changes. after imbibition is complete the soybean cotyledons increase their size by  <dig> to  <dig> times fold. then, protrusion of the hypocotyl occurs followed by emergence, transition to photosynthetic activity  and senescence  <cit> . cotyledons are exposed to environmental changes such as water content, light exposure, temperature and nutrient concentrations. at the cellular level, the primary storage reserve in soybeans is in the form of triacylglycerol  that needs to be mobilized and utilized to support plant growth and development. it has been demonstrated in arabidopsis that significant amounts of carbohydrates derived from stored lipids are required for post-germinative seedling development  <cit> . our data shows that in soybean cotyledons a specific gene for lipase  initially catalyses the release of fatty acids  from tag stored within oil bodies . the fatty acids produced are activated to acyl-coa esters and enter the glyoxysome. this single membrane organelle is a specialized form of peroxisomes where the acyl-coa molecules are broken down to acetyl-coa via the β-oxidation spiral. the acetyl-coa then serves as a substrate for the subsequent reactions of the glyoxylate cycle which is an adapted form of the respiratory tricarboxylic acid cycle. succinate is produced, transformed to malate in the mitochondrion and exported to the cytoplasm. then, it is converted to carbohydrate which is translocated and used in the growing parts of the plant  <cit> .

accumulation of mrna levels of enzymes involved in the glyoxylate cycle during seed germination and post-germinative development has been previously reported in brassica napus  <cit>  and arabidopsis  <cit> . during the first stages of soybean seedling development and throughout the cotyledonary functional transition we found that genes corresponding to the specific isoforms of the key enzymes of the glyoxylate cycle  show high levels of expression . after greening, the expression profile of all of these genes show a significant reduction in their levels of expression. these observations support the idea that the glyoxylate cycle is particularly active during the four initial stages of soybean germination and inactive during the photorespiratory phases.

typically during the initial phases of germination the cotyledons are yellow, the chloroplasts are not fully developed and leaf peroxisomes are less abundant. once the lipids are metabolized the cotyledons undergo greening to a point where the glyoxysomal enzymes decline while the ones characteristic of leaf peroxisomes become predominant . our data strongly supports the concept of a conversion from glyoxysomes to leaf peroxisomes during the functional transition of the cotyledonary cell. after greening the cotyledons undergo senescence and several studies have demonstrated that leaf peroxisomal activity disappears and glyoxysomal activity resumes  <cit> . we postulate that initially there is a predominant population of glyoxysomes that carry out lipid mobilization and utilization to produce carbohydrates necessary for the survival of the plant. our data indicates that peroxisomes are also present during these initial phases by examination of the soybean specific gene expression profiles of typical enzymes associated with peroxisome activity like glycolate oxidase , glutamate aminotransferase  and catalase  . based on this information is reasonable to believe that throughout the functional transition of the cotyledonary cell in soybeans there is a co-existence of glyoxysomes and peroxisomes with their respective battery of enzymes. also during this period our data suggests that chloroplasts are assembled and photosynthetic elements become abundant.

after greening of the cotyledon the glyoxysomal activity is highly reduced and the photorespiratory phase of the cotyledonary cell is favored . during this time, the phosphoglycolate produced in the chloroplast through the calvin cycle is mobilized to the peroxisome in the form of glycolate where is oxidized to glyoxylate in a reaction that yields hydrogen peroxide. glycine is finally synthesized and transferred to the mitochondrion, converted to serine and returned to the chloroplast in the form of glycerate after several metabolic reactions within the peroxisome. because photorespiration is an inevitable accompaniment of photosynthesis in most plants leaf peroxisomes are large and abundant in photosynthetic tissues. the toxic hydrogen peroxide produced is broken down to water and oxygen by the action of catalase  an enzyme that is as a marker for peroxisome activity .

along with genes involved in the glyoxylate cycle and in support of our hypothesis we also found genes with similar expression profiles involved in chloroplast assembly and function. for instance, chloroplast inner membrane import protein tic <dig>  chloroplast outer envelope protein  <dig>  chloroplastic outer envelope membrane protein , coproporphyrinogen oxidase, plastidic atp/adp transporter, putative plastid glucose  <dig> phosphate/phosphate translocator and  <dig> more chloroplast-associated genes. apparently this group of genes associated by common chloroplast functions contains a significant number of genes that share a similar expression profiles. this observation suggests that this group of genes may play a co-ordinated role with the genes previously described during the onset of germination and throughout the functional transition. it's important to note also that there is a significant number of chloroplast-related genes with completely different expression profiles, suggesting alternative control and regulation processes and therefore different functions.

more interestingly, we found more than  <dig> specific soybean genes  with unknown function and no homology with any other plant species genes in the data base that have a similar expression profile to the genes previously described in the glyoxylate pathway. furthermore the glyoxylate cycle has been also associated with chlorophyll breakdown, opening the possibility of further unknown elements associated with this pathway in plants  <cit> . we believe that these soybean unknown genes represent a valuable source to discover and characterize new genes that most likely play an important biological role during the processes of cell division, lipid mobilization through the glyoxylate cycle and chloroplast assembly during seedling development and the functional transition. these genes also have the potential to be key elements in the regulatory and control mechanisms associated with these metabolic processes.

general view of gene expression in cotyledons throughout seedling development
although the identity of all the participants in the complex program involved during soybean seedling development and the cotyledonary functional transition is still unknown, here we present an assemblage of individual statistically significant elements including signals, regulators, inducers and precursors that may be key participants during this developmental phase in soybeans. for instance, auxins must play a critical role in cotyledon gene expression, since they are thought to regulate and influence diverse whole-plant responses such as tropisms, apical dominance, root initiation, and at the cellular level, mechanisms such as cell extension, division and differentiation. auxins have been proven to up or down regulate numerous genes  <cit> . the auxin down regulated genes adr <dig>  adr <dig> and adr <dig> not only depend on auxin concentrations but also on plant developmental stage and on the organ/tissue involved  <cit> . while adr <dig>  adr <dig> and ads11- <dig> are over expressed during the entire time study , adr12- <dig> starts with very low levels of expression during stages  <dig> and  <dig> to then become up-regulated during stages 4– <dig> . although the function of these auxin down regulated genes is still unknown it is interesting to find that different auxin responsive elements function in an independent manner from each other in the cotyledon during this developmental process.

we also identified particular protein subunits that could play an important function during soybean seedling development. for instance, the soybean β-conglycinin protein contains  <dig> different subunits known as: α, α' and β. the larger subunits α and α' are rapidly degraded after imbibition of the seed producing new active polypeptides and after  <dig> days of growth the β subunit is also hydrolyzed  <cit> . wilson et al. <cit>  proposed that the newly synthesized polypeptides might be involved in the photosynthetic function of the soybean cotyledon however the authors could not defined which subunits were involved. our results show that the transcripts for the three subunits are down regulated during the first  <dig> stages of soybean germination which is consistent with the decreasing amounts of β-conglycinin found after imbibition. however, the α' subunit shows over-expression during the final two stages  defined here as the green photosynthetic stages  . based on these observations we can speculate that the hydrolysis product of the α' subunit could be the actual β-conglycinin subunit that wilson et al. <cit>  proposed to be involved during photosynthetic activity of the soybean cotyledon due to its high activity during the photosynthetic stages.

several expression profiles of particular transcription factors were also found in all different clusters, making them good candidates to follow up and investigate their possible role in regulating gene transcription of some of the relevant elements associated with soybean cotyledons during seedling development and the functional transition. similarly regulators, precursors, inducers and hormone related genes can be found in these sets and therefore could be associated with seedling development-relevant functions in the cotyledon. a total of  <dig> genes expressed in the soybean cotyledon and divided into the  <dig> sets obtained by cluster analysis are genes that have no homology to any other genes in the data base. we want to emphasize the importance of these genes as powerful starting points for researchers to study, investigate and discover novel unique and soybean specific cloned genes that can play a fundamental role during the biological mechanisms and processes occurring in the soybean cotyledon during seedling development and the functional transition.

CONCLUSIONS
our data demonstrates that the global transcript profile of the soybean cotyledon during seedling development is extremely active, highly regulated and dynamic. we were also able to discriminate the expression profiles of individual gene family members, enzymatic isoforms and protein subunits and group them accordingly to their involvement in different functional activities relevant to seedling development and the cotyledonary functional transition in soybean. this means that we identified the individual specific soybean genes that play an important role during seedling development and discriminate them from the similar ones that are inactive and therefore irrelevant for this physiological process. this information is a powerful tool for future studies to better understand regulation and control mechanisms involved in soybean seedling development. initially, we observed down regulation of genes that were important for carrying the cellular functions required for previous developmental processes and were not required for germination, for instance, seed maturation and dehydration. simultaneously, we can see high gene expression activity for genes involved in the processes of cell division, de novo synthesis of dna and proteins, as well as chloroplast assembly and function. the transcript profiles also delineate the cellular mobilization of stored lipids via the glyoxylate cycle and the transition to primarily peroxisomal function. the clear correlation between the expression profiles of elements of the glyoxylate pathway with the developmental stages defined for the functional transition indicate that these elements play an essential role during this physiological process. our data suggests that in the soybean cotyledon a very complex and synchronized system of control and regulation of several metabolic pathways is essential to carry out the necessary functions during seedling development and provides a novel set of cloned cdna sequences with unknown function and high correlation with the cotyledonary functional transition.

