BACKGROUND
many insect species in a diversity of hexapod orders are known to harbor obligate endosymbiotic bacteria  <cit> . representing an extreme, members of the hemipteran suborder auchenorrhyncha  exhibit an apparent “hunger for symbionts”  <cit> . buchner’s  <cit>  observations and the extensive light-microscopic surveys of his student, müller  <cit> , documented the presence of at least one symbiont in  <dig> of the  <dig> auchenorrhyncha species examined; most host species harbored at least two morphologically distinct bacterial symbionts, and some harbored as many as six symbionts  <cit> . müller also observed diversity in the morphology and location of the organs  that house the endosymbionts within the insect hosts. buchner  <cit>  provided insight into the complexity of these endosymbiotic associations and arrangements in his summary of müller’s work, as follows: “in order to present them and to understand them statistically, it is necessary to use letters to designate the forms and organs that proved to be different. thus one speaks of a-, b-, c-, d-, e-symbionts and of a-organs, b-organs, and so forth. sometimes there are so many that it is necessary to use greek letters.” . while müller’s findings led buchner to declare that auchenorrhyncha is a “fairyland of symbioses”  <cit> , the true diversity of endosymbiotic associations and arrangements in this insect lineage is likely even greater, as müller surveyed less than 1% of the over  <dig>  described species  <cit>  of auchenorrhyncha.

auchenorrhyncha-bacteria symbioses remained virtually unexplored for the fifty years following müller’s surveys. however, the development and widespread application of molecular techniques have reinvigorated the study of these endosymbiotic bacteria, which cannot be cultured outside of their hosts due to significant reductions in the bacterial genomes  <cit> . using a pcr assay , moran et al.  <cit>  detected a bacterial endosymbiont in  <dig> auchenorrhyncha species representing all four included superfamilies . that study detected a bacterium from the phylum bacteroidetes in most auchenorrhyncha surveyed, and the resulting bacterial phylogeny based on 16s sequences was concordant with the phylogeny of the host insects. furthermore, observation of bacterial morphology using fluorescent in-situ hybridization  and localization of the endosymbiont to a bacteriome  matched müller’s description and illustrations of the “a-symbiont”. consistent with müller’s theory, moran et al.  <cit>  hypothesized that this endosymbiont, sulcia muelleri, descended from a bacterium that infected a common ancestor of auchenorrhyncha at least  <dig> million years ago, and through vertical transmission has codiversified with most auchenorrhyncha lineages.

several recent investigations identified additional obligate bacterial endosymbionts that co-occur with sulcia in cicadomorpha  hosts: baumannia cicadellinicola  in leafhoppers  in cicadas , and zinderia insecticola  in spittlebugs . genome sequencing of each of these pairs of endosymbionts  revealed a pattern of genome reduction implicating the bacterial endosymbionts as nutrient provisioners to their insect hosts: genes that are retained in the bacterial genomes are those that encode essential nutrients absent in the host insects’ diet of plant sap  <cit> . these studies also demonstrated a remarkable convergence in that the genomes of the co-occurring endosymbiont pairs have co-evolved to be metabolically complementary  <cit> . for example, in leafhoppers, the endosymbiont sulcia retains genes for the synthesis of eight  essential amino acids whereas baumannia retains genes for the remaining two; in cicadas, sulcia retains genes for eight amino acids whereas hodgkinia retains genes for the remaining two; in spittlebugs, sulcia retains genes for seven amino acids whereas zinderia retains genes for the remaining three  <cit> .

less is known about the bacterial endosymbionts of fulgoroidea . bressan et al.  <cit>  identified the novel gammaproteobacterium purcelliella pentastirinorum in seven species of cixiidae . sulcia was present in all seven of these planthopper species, and fish observations showed that sulcia and purcelliella were segregated in separate bacteriomes within their host insects. gonella et al.  <cit>  identified the novel betaproteobacterium vidania fulgoroideae, along with sulcia, in seven cixiid species ; however, they were unable to localize vidania to a bacteriome. several studies investigated symbionts of various economically important planthopper species in the family delphacidae , documenting the presence of the bacterium wolbachia  <cit>  and a “yeast-like symbiont”  <cit> . sulcia was not detected in those delphacid species, suggesting the loss of this obligate endosymbiont in some planthopper lineages, consistent with müller  <cit>  and moran et al.  <cit> .

given these relatively few studies using molecular techniques, much remains to be learned about bacterial endosymbionts of fulgoroidea . müller’s  <cit>  surveys of  <dig> species of fulgoroidea documented a diversity of symbionts comparable to that found in cicadomorpha hosts. specifically, in addition to sulcia , müller observed another bacterium in many fulgoroid species that he termed the “x-symbiont”, hypothesizing that this bacterium infected the common ancestor of fulgoroidea and codiversified with its hosts in most planthopper lineages. he also documented additional symbionts that he hypothesized were more recent associations that have codiversified with various lineages within the superfamily.

here we present the initial findings of an ongoing pcr-based survey of planthopper-associated endosymbiotic bacteria to identify symbionts that have a long-term history of codiversification with various lineages of fulgoroidea. we attempt to identify these endosymbionts by 1) surveying insect species representing most  recognized planthopper families, 2) performing phylogenetic reconstructions of the resulting bacterial dna sequences, 3) comparing the bacterial phylogeny with the phylogeny of the planthopper hosts , and 4) surveying the same insect taxa for the co-occurrence of sulcia with any recovered endosymbiont.

RESULTS
pcr screen and bacterial phylogeny
initial screening of bacteria from a subset of the  <dig> sampled planthoppers yielded high quality 16s rdna sequences. blast searches in genbank showed highest similarity of these sequences to 16s sequences from diverse bacterial lineages in multiple phyla . a preliminary phylogenetic reconstruction of these data  indicated that the sequences falling within the phylum betaproteobacteria may be an endosymbiont because their recovered relationships were concordant with some well supported relationships within the planthopper phylogeny . we therefore focused on amplifying this betaproteobacterial 16s from the remaining planthopper specimens. sequences we obtained from bacteria falling within the alphaproteobacteria and the gammaproteobacteria are not presented here, as they are currently under further investigation to determine whether they represent additional planthopper-associated bacterial endosymbionts.

betaproteobacterial 16s sequences were obtained from  <dig> of the  <dig> sampled planthopper species. most of the sequences were approximately 1200–1400 bp long, although for some, only a shorter region of approximately 600–700 bp could be sequenced. pairwise distances of planthopper betaproteobacterial sequences averaged  <dig> %  under the maximum likelihood model of substitution specified by modeltest results. the 16s sequence generated from the single exemplar of derbidae was significantly divergent from the remaining planthopper sequences; pairwise distances excluding this sequence averaged  <dig> % .

to test for co-occurrence of sulcia with the betaproteobacterium, we attempted to amplify sulcia 16s from the  <dig> planthoppers from which we sequenced the betaproteobacterium; we obtained sulcia sequences from  <dig> of these planthopper species. most sulcia 16s sequences were approximately 1300–1400 bp long ; pairwise distances of generated sulcia sequences averaged  <dig> % .

the topology resulting from the maximum likelihood  analysis of the complete bacterial dataset  is shown in figure 1; bayesian inference  analysis yielded an almost identical topology . betaproteobacteria and bacteroidetes were each recovered as strongly supported monophyletic lineages. within betaproteobacteria, the clade associated with fulgoroidea hosts was recovered as monophyletic, and included vidania  placed near sequences generated from exemplars of cixiidae. relationships recovered within this fulgoroidea-associated betaproteobacterial clade were concordant with the phylogeny of their insect hosts  <cit> , including the recovery of several monophyletic lineages: cixiidae + delphacidae, kinnaridae + meenoplidae, and fulgoridae + dictyopharidae.

within bacteroidetes, the auchenorrhyncha-associated sulcia were recovered as a strongly supported monophyletic clade, within which was a monophyletic fulgoroidea-associated sulcia lineage. relationships among the fulgoroidea-associated sulcia were generally concordant with the phylogeny of their planthopper hosts; disagreements in some placements are unsurprising given the low degree of sulcia sequence variation as evidenced by many exceedingly short branches . although previous studies  <cit>  suggested the loss of sulcia in some species of delphacidae, we detected this endosymbiont in two  species surveyed .

planthopper phylogeny
the 18s and 28s rdna genes were amplified in three contiguous, overlapping fragments of approximately 600–700 bp each. the protein coding genes histone  <dig> , wingless , and cytochrome oxidase i  were each amplified as single fragments, with approximate lengths of 360 bp, 350 bp, and 900 bp, respectively. after ambiguously aligned regions of 18s and 28s were excluded, a combined dataset of approximately 5000 bp was obtained for each of the  <dig> fulgoroidea exemplars from which the betaproteobacterial endosymbionts were sequenced.

phylogenetic analyses of these fulgoroidea species via both partitioned ml analysis and mixed-model bi analysis resulted in a single topology , which was consistent with previous reconstructions  <cit>  in several aspects: the recovery of the monophyletic lineages cixiidae + delphacidae, kinnaridae + meenoplidae, eurybrachidae + lophopidae, and fulgoridae + dictyopharidae . however, the relative branching order of planthopper families was somewhat unusual in that the families eurybrachidae, lophopidae, tettigometridae, flatidae, and nogodinidae were placed at more intermediate levels of the topology, relative to the positions of fulgoridae and dictyopharidae. because we suspected that this result might represent an artifact of the limited taxonomic sampling in the present dataset, which we suspected could influence results of codiversification tests, unpartitioned ml searches were performed . these results yielded a topology more consistent with urban & cryan  <cit>  in that the families eurybrachidae, lophopidae, tettigometridae, flatidae, and nogodinidae were recovered as monophyletic and placed sister to fulgoridae + dictyopharidae. therefore, two sets of codiversification tests were conducted , using the two alternative host planthopper phylogenies .

phylogenetic reconstructions of the  <dig> exemplars of fulgoroidea from which sulcia was obtained showed the same pattern described above concerning results obtained using partitioned ml/bi analyses versus unpartitioned ml analysis. therefore, two sets of codiversification tests between sulcia and host phylogenies were conducted using the two alternative host planthopper phylogenies.

tests of codiversification
tests of codiversification between the fulgoroidea-associated betaproteobacterial phylogeny and each of the two alternative insect-host phylogenies were conducted using treemap and parafit. results obtained using treemap significantly rejected similarity between the bacterial and host trees due to chance alone when the partitioned ml/bi host tree was tested  and when the unpartitioned host tree was tested . results obtained using parafit significantly rejected the global null hypothesis that the two trees are similar due to chance alone when the partitioned ml/bi host tree was tested  and when the unpartitioned host tree was tested .

tests of codiversification comparing the fulgoroidea-associated sulcia phylogeny and each of the two alternative insect-host phylogenies using treemap significantly rejected similarity due to chance alone when the partitioned ml/bi host tree was tested  and when the unpartitioned host tree was tested . results obtained using parafit significantly rejected the global null hypothesis that the two trees are similar due to chance alone when the partitioned ml/bi host tree was tested  and when the unpartitioned host tree was tested .

tests of codiversification were also conducted comparing the planthopper sulcia and betaproteobacterial phylogenies for the  <dig> taxa from which both were amplifed. treemap results significantly rejected similarity due to chance alone  as did parafit results .

discussion
two ancient bacterial endosymbionts have coevolved with the planthoppers
our results support the hypothesis that the betaproteobacterium vidania, first described by gonella et al.  <cit>  from four species of cixiidae, is an ancient bacterial endosymbiont that infected the common ancestor of the superfamily fulgoroidea and has since codiversified with its host insects  and with the co-occurring bacterial endosymbiont sulcia. this conclusion is based on 1) the detection of vidania in  <dig> species sampled from  <dig> of the  <dig> planthopper families tested, 2) the concordance of the vidania phylogeny with the phylogeny of their planthopper hosts as supported by statistical tests of codiversification, 3) the co-occurrence of sulcia and vidania in  <dig> of the  <dig> screened planthoppers, and 4) the concordance of the sulcia phylogeny with the phylogeny of their planthopper hosts as supported by statistical tests of codiversification.

as suggested by the relative branch lengths of vidania and sulcia , the 16s rdna of fulgoroidea-associated vidania is evolving at a faster rate than that of fulgoroidea-associated sulcia. pairwise distances of fulgoroidea-associated vidania sequences averaged  <dig> % ; removing the exemplar of derbidae, recomputed pairwise distances averaged  <dig> % . pairwise distances of fulgoroidea-associated sulcia sequences averaged  <dig> % . this corresponds to a rate of evolution in vidania 16s that is  <dig>  times faster than that of sulcia , comparable to that observed by takiya et al.  <cit>  in two cicadellidae-associated endosymbionts .

interestingly, the vidania clade was placed  as sister to the tick-associated microorganism  rather than as sister to the cercopoidea-associated endosymbiont zinderia insecticola, suggesting independence of these two bacterial infections within auchenorrhyncha. furthermore, it appears that the bacterial lineage giving rise to the tremblaya endosymbionts of mealybugs is rather distantly related to vidania, as each is more closely related to a free-living bacterium than to each other.

moran et al.  <cit>  surveyed for the presence of sulcia in exemplars of five planthopper families, detecting the bacteria in two ; we detected sulcia in exemplars of seven additional families of fulgoroidea . regarding sulcia associations within the family delphacidae, our findings are largely consistent with müller’s  <cit>  hypothesis that this endosymbiont was present in the more ancient delphacid lineages but was subsequently lost in younger delphacid lineages. the two delphacid species in which we detected sulcia are from the subfamily ugyopinae, which is placed among the oldest lineages within the phylogeny of delphacidae  <cit> .

hypothesized age and function of the vidania endosymbiont
the earliest planthoppers known in the fossil record, all representing extinct families, are from the jurassic and permian periods . the oldest known fossils for extant planthopper families  are ~ <dig> million years old  <cit> ; diversification of cixiidae is hypothesized to have occurred as early as ~ <dig> mya . based on these data, we hypothesize that the vidania association with planthoppers is at least  <dig> million years old and may be as old as  <dig> million years.

given that the majority of insect-associated, obligate bacterial endosymbionts play a role in provisioning nutrients to their hosts , we hypothesize that vidania is similarly involved in synthesizing and provisioning nutrients absent in phloem sap, the diet of the majority of planthopper species  <cit> . however, differences in the physical positions of bacteriomes in cicadomorpha and fulgoroidea  <cit>  suggest that fulgoroidea-associated vidania and sulcia may not exhibit the extreme metabolic complementarity seen in cicadomorpha-associated endosymbionts. that is, in cicadomorpha, bacteriomes are bilaterally symmetrical and multiple endosymbionts co-occur in the same, or adjacent, bacteriomes. subsequent molecular studies support these observations  <cit> , and suggest that the metabolic complementarity observed between cicadomorpha-associated sulcia and the companion endosymbiont is made possible by their close physical proximity which enables cross-feeding of metabolites  <cit> . in fulgoroidea, however, müller  <cit>  observed that the relative positions of bacteriomes was strikingly more complex and variable than in cicadomorpha; in fulgoroidea hosts, each endosymbiont is segregated in its own bacteriome , and these bacteriomes are not necessarily adjacent. in fact, he observed that the relative positions of these bacteriomes vary both among and within planthopper families. given these positional differences, the genomes of fulgoroidea-associated sulcia and vidania may prove to exhibit some degree of metabolic redundancy, presuming vidania is involved in nutrient provisioning.

solving for x: is vidania müller’s x-symbiont?
in addition to documenting the presence/absence of particular endosymbionts within exemplars of various planthopper families, müller’s work  <cit>  illustrated the morphology of the endosymbiotic bacteria and of the bacteriomes housing them. reaching a definitive conclusion as to whether vidania is in fact müller’s x-symbiont will require application of fish analyses to visualize vidania morphology, localize vidania to a bacteriome, and visualize the morphology of the bacteriome. gonella et al.  <cit>  were unable to localize vidania to a bacteriome, and our fish analyses are currently underway. based on findings presented here, we hypothesize vidania is müller’s x-symbiont, given the consistency of our findings with those of müller . we detected vidania in exemplars of  <dig> of  <dig> planthopper families surveyed, including most families in which this endosymbiont was observed by müller, as well as in one additional family not tested by müller. consistent with müller’s hypothesis for the x-symbiont, our phylogenetic reconstructions and tests of codiversification indicate that vidania has codiversified with its planthopper hosts. also consistent with müller’s observations of the x-symbiont occurring with the a-symbiont, we observed vidania to co-occur with sulcia, with results of statistical tests supporting the hypothesis of codiversification between planthopper sulcia and vidania.

x = endosymbiont detected; o = endosymbiont not detected; / = family not tested.

we were unable to detect vidania in three families in which müller detected the x-symbiont. of the  <dig> planthoppers surveyed, we detected vidania in  <dig>  and of these, detected the co-occurrence of sulcia in  <dig> taxa. mapping of these presence/absence results onto the hypothesized phylogeny of fulgoroidea  suggests a minimum of  <dig> losses of vidania and  <dig> losses of sulcia may have occurred within the diversification of the planthopper superfamily . however, we speculate that our results do not represent true endosymbiont losses, but instead, may be due to methodological difficulties associated either with quality/quantity of endosymbiont dna present in the surveyed specimens , or with pcr amplification. further investigation of these taxa using more recently collected specimens and more specific pcr primers is currently underway.

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the betaproteobacterium vidania is an ancient endosymbiont that infected a common ancestor of the planthopper superfamily fulgoroidea at least  <dig> million years ago, and since that time, has codiversified with most lineages of planthoppers and with the sulcia endosymbiont. the consistency of these findings with the observations and hypotheses of müller  <cit>  suggests that vidania is müller’s x-symbiont; fish analyses are currently underway to examine the morphology of vidania to compare with müller’s depictions of the x-symbiont’s morphology. although the zinderia endosymbiont of spittlebugs also arises from the phylum betaproteobacteria, our findings suggest that these represent two independent bacterial infections within auchenorrhyncha. the functional role played by vidania in the biology of its planthopper hosts may involve nutrient-provisioning, although this remains to be tested. because planthoppers house their multiple bacterial endosymbionts differently than do other lineages of insects within auchenorrhyncha, further study of planthopper endosymbioses promises to provide important insight into how bacterial symbioses are managed by the animals that serve as hosts.

