BACKGROUND
daylight saving time  is commonly used worldwide and affects millions of people annually. it equals to one-hour time zone crossing eastward in the spring and westward in the fall. in the european union, dst currently begins on the last sunday of march, when the clocks are turned forwards by one hour, and ends on the last sunday of october, when the clocks are turned backwards by one hour. the rationale for dst is to improve the match between the daylight hours with the activity peaks of a population. fall transition out of dst increases the available daylight in the morning by one hour. spring transition into dst leads to an increase of the available daylight in the evening. in our previous studies, we found that transition into daylight saving time may disrupt the rest-activity cycle in healthy adults  <cit> . herein, our aim was to assess the daily rest-activity cycles together with night-time sleep at transitions out of and into daylight saving time in healthy adults. our goal was to find out whether the changes induced by transition into dst were similar in fall and spring.

RESULTS
fall: before versus after transition
the movement and fragmentation index  was increased in all the participants after the transition . sleep efficiency  and relative amplitude  were reduced in all except one participant after transition.

spring: before versus after transition
the movement and fragmentation index  was increased after transition . sleep efficiency was not reduced significantly after the spring transition.

fall before versus spring before
to see whether there was any difference in the baseline conditions, we compared the scores before the two transitions. there was none.

sleep and rest-activity cycles in relation to mes and gss
for the participants, the mean  mes was  <dig>   and the mean  gss was  <dig>  . adjustments to transitions out of and into daylight saving time were not accurate or complete four days afterwards . the spring transition was more harmful for the more evening type of persons, as the intra-daily stability was reduced more  among those with a lower mes. on fall such effect was not seen. both transitions were more harmful for those persons having greater seasonal changes in mood and behavior. after the fall transition, the movement and fragmentation index was increased more  among those with a higher gss.

discussion
our main finding was that transitions into and out of daylight saving time disrupted night-time sleep. the movement and fragmentation index was increased significantly after both transitions, on average by 54% in fall and 37% in spring. there is a small reservation while using movement and fragmentation index as it still is slightly unclear parameter  <cit> . however our experience is that movement and fragmentation index reflects well the quality of sleep. unexpectedly, sleep efficiency was reduced after the transition out of dst only. the durations of slow-wave sleep stages tends to decrease and those of rapid-eye-movement sleep to increase during winter  <cit> . transitions out of dst may affect sleep efficiency more than those into dst due to these underlying changes in sleep stages.

moreover, the relative amplitude of the daily rest-activity cycles was decreased after the transition out of dst, not after the transition into dst. this may bear relevance to the circadian pacemaker whose function is affected by physical exercise and sleep stages  <cit> . shortage of daylight in the morning during winter challenges the regulation of the circadian clockwork and keeps favoring its natural propensity for phase delays. this shortfall can be overcome by the increased responsiveness to light exposure  <cit>  but may not be counteracted effectively enough among individuals predisposed to depressive disorder  <cit> . we found herein that individuals having higher global seasonality scores had more disruptions in their rest-activity cycles after the transitions. they may thus be more predisposed to such changes in general but in particular under conditions which challenge the circadian pacemaker, e.g. after shift work schedules or time zone crossings.

we found that the transition out of dst was more detrimental to individuals with the preference to morning activities. also kantermann et al. noticed in their recent study that the timing of activity does not adjust to the dst imposition in spring, especially in late chronotypes  <cit> . this was unexpected, since the fall transition brings one more hour light to the mornings. however, this option to have earlier light exposure may not materialize at all or not be enough to maintain the daily rest-activity cycle and night-time sleep undisturbed. to visualize, the sunrise to sunset times were 8: <dig> to 17: <dig> prior to the transition, and 7: <dig> to 16: <dig> one day and 7: <dig> to 16: <dig> two days after the transition.

in contrast, the transition into dst affected more those with the preference to evening activities. this may have been due to the longer exposure to light in the evening which is known to delay the phase position of the circadian rhythms and their subsidiary rest-activity cycles. to visualize, the sunrise to sunset times were 6: <dig> to 18: <dig> prior the transition, and 7: <dig> to 19: <dig> one day and 7: <dig> to 19: <dig> two days after the transition.

our findings herein on healthy individuals now show that night-time sleep and the rest-activity cycles are compromised after dst transitions. earlier, it has been demonstrated that even moderate changes in the timing of the sleep-wake cycle may have profound effects on subsequent mood in healthy young persons  <cit> . the impact of these twice-a-year transitions on night-time sleep and the daily rest-activity cycles may be more detrimental among patients with mood disorders or circadian rhythm sleep disorders. therefore, our findings need replication and extension on bigger as well as clinical samples.

both animal and human studies have demonstrated that the principal clock can be reset with light exposure. light exposure in the morning  advances the phase position of circadian rhythms, whereas light exposure in the evening  delays the phase position  <cit> . the principal clock generating the endogenous rhythms is located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the anterior hypothalamus in the brain  <cit> . light-dark transitions are the most important time-giver for this clock. optimal sleep quality is achieved when the desired sleep time is aligned with the timing of the endogenous circadian rhythm of sleep and wake propensity  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
transitions out of and into daylight saving time enhance night-time restlessness and compromise the quality of sleep. they may thereby affect mood in a negative way and be a concern for individuals with mood disorder in particular.

