BACKGROUND
age-related macular degeneration  is a degenerative disease in the eye, which causes irreversible blindness in elderly and is one of the major causes of blindness in developed countries  <cit> . drusen and choroidal neovascularization  are the two pathological hallmarks of amd, of which drusen accumulates in the subretinal pigment epithelium  space and cnv is characterized by new angiogensis from choroidal blood vessels which break through bruch's membrane  and rpe layer and is often associated with subretinal hemorrhage  <cit> . recent studies suggest that beta-amyloid  peptide, a major molecular signature in the brain of alzheimer's disease, might play an important role in the pathogenesis of amd  <cit> . aβ aggregates have been identified as one of the major components in drusen as well as in rpe cells in the retina of amd  <cit> . similarly to the brain, several groups of investigators including us also demonstrate perivascular deposition of aβ in the retina in human cnv as well as different lines of alzheimer's-related transgenic mice  <cit> . importantly, immunotherapy that targets aβ significantly attenuated retinal lesions and improved retinal function in an amd mouse model  <cit> . moreover, growing evidence has indicated smoking  <cit> , extensive sun light exposure  <cit> , and ageing  <cit>  as important risk factors for amd. cile is detrimental to the brm, rpe, photoreceptor and other retinal structures due to induction of the reactive oxygen species and inflammatory response  <cit> . cile induced drusen formation or stimulated cnv through upregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor  as well as induction of oxidative stress in rodent models  <cit> .

nevertheless, the molecular basis of the pathogenesis of amd, particularly about the role of aβ deposition in the development of rpe lesions and cnv, remains elusive. in this study we examined the effects of constitutional expression of aβ deposits on retinal lesions induced by cile in the appswe/ps <dig> bigenic mouse model of alzheimer's disease, and found that cile significantly increased aβ deposition linked with amd-like retinopathies in the transgenic mice. by contrast, there were no significant changes in the retina of either non-transgenic mice received equal light exposure or age-matched transgenic control.

RESULTS
cyclic intensive light exposure induces abnormal pigment deposition in rpe, cnv and degenerative changes in the retina of appswe/ps <dig> bigenic mice
to evaluate the effect of cile on the retina of mice, the fundus was examined before and after cile based on fundus photographs. apparently, increased pigment deposits and shrunken vessels were detected in appswe/ps bigenic mice after cile, particularly in these after 6-month cile compared with age-matched control or non-tg mice after the exposure . nevertheless, neither yellowish retinal deposits/drusen nor retinal hemorrhage was found in the fundus photos from both bigenic and non-tg mice. these observations are in agreement with conventional light microscopic analysis following h&e staining on retinal cross sections . there is no conspicuous difference in the architecture of the retina between a non-tg  and an age-matched bigenic control  mouse. by contrast, a series of remarkable degenerative changes are visible in the retina in all the animals from the groups of bigenic mice following cile  compared with the control . significant loss of the outer nuclear layer /photoreceptors is visible following 3-month cile , the entire outer plexiform layer  and onl/photoreceptor outer segment  layer are barely remaining after 6-month cile , which is consistent with the thickness loss as confirmed by thickness measurement . importantly, abnormal pigment deposition, i.e., hypopigmentation  or hyperpigmentation which appears in association with rpe proliferation as indicated by the hypertrophic appearance of rpe cells in the retina in the bigenic mice after 6-month cile . moreover, cile-induced cnv is usually shown here as the disruption of the bruch's membrane  due to invasion of new vessels that enclose red blood cells from choroicapillaris  . quantification of newly generated vessels shows 75% of the mice  with about  <dig>  ±  <dig>  evident new vessels per cross retinal section in the group with 6-month cile, but no new vessel was detected in the other groups at all . in addition, no typical drusen structures were found in these mice.

to evaluate the cile-induced pathological lesions in the retina further, we performed transmission electron microscopy to examine the ultrastructure in the retina. a representative micrograph demonstrates typical normal ultrastructure of the outer retina in the 12-month old non-tg mice . there is no obvious difference in the general ultrastructure as well as the rpe-brm-cc complex between non-tg and age-matched appswe/ps <dig> bigenic controls . conversely, intracellular vacuoles along with membranous debris , small basal laminar deposits , and thickened brm  are commonly seen in the rpe layer in the group of bigenic mice that received 6-month cile. noticeably, shrunken and disrupted architecture of basal infoldings of rpe is also detected in most eyes from these animals as well . in some cases, loss of the continuity of brm elastic layer , outer collagenous layer deposition , and infiltration of microglia  around the brm-cc complex are evident as previously demonstrated  <cit> . importantly, cile also induces invasion of choroicapillaris into the rpe layer resulting in formation of neovessels, which usually demonstrate as vascular buds as shown in figures 2i and 2j.

cyclic intensive light exposure-induced retinal lesions are associated with accumulation of β-amyloid deposits in the rpe of appswe/ps <dig> bigenic mice
previous studies have demonstrated a link between accumulation of aβ deposits and retinal degenerative changes in age-related macular degeneration  <cit> . both app and aβ deposits have also been found in the retina of appswe/ps <dig> bigenic mouse , we therefore investigated whether cile-induced retinal lesions are directly associated with retinal accumulation of aβ. as shown previously  <cit> , immunohistochemistry following labeling with a specific antibody 22c <dig> against for three major isoforms of human app, reveals robust immunoreactivity in the retinal cross sections in the appswe/ps <dig> bigenic mice with 6-month cile , whereas only moderate app staining and a relatively low background is found in the age-matched controls and non-tg mice . as speculated, increased app abundance in the retina is also followed by an increase in accumulation of aβ deposits with cile in the rpe as visualized by immunofluorescence microscopy following staining with 6e <dig> antibody , which predominantly recognizes aβ peptides in the current staining protocol as described  <cit> , though 6e <dig> can bind to other app fragments containing aβ1- <dig> epitope. pathological deposition of aβ in the rpe shares very similar pattern to aβ plaques in the brain, appearing diffusive , vasculature-associated  and/or with a condensed core  as shown by confocal z-stack microscopy. quantification of aβ immunoreactivity on the rpe flatmounts demonstrate a significant induction of aβ deposits by cile .

since cile as well as accumulation of aβ either intra- or extra-cellular has been linked with oxidative stress and subsequent cell damage  <cit> , we next examined the relationship between cile and the general architectural integrity of rpe. accordingly, rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin was used to stain f-actin, a membrane protein that is directly relevant to the cell-cell junctions and is commonly used for assessment of junctions of cells and rpe integrity. fluorescence microscopy demonstrates well-organized typical hexagonal shape of rpe cells in the control , but disrupted staining pattern in mice that were treated with cile . similar defect in f-actin staining is also obvious in the aβ-immunoreactive regions . quantification of f-actin-unstained area shows a significant increase in loss of rpe integrity with cile .

cyclic intensive light exposure provokes neuroinflammatory response in the rpe layer in appswe/ps <dig> bigenic mice
our previous study demonstrated a link of aβ deposition with exaggerated neuroinflammatory response in the retina of an alzheimer's mouse  <cit> . as cile significantly enhances accumulation of aβ in the rpe layer, we further examined whether there is a corresponding change in the inflammatory process. following immune-labeling with an antibody against iba- <dig>  a molecular marker for microglia, in the rpe flatmounts, fluorescence microscopy demonstrates notably increased immunoreactivity of iba- <dig> in the rpe/choroid complex from the two groups of bigenic mice received cile compared with these age-matched controls . in addition to more cells that were stained by iba- <dig>  there was also a change in appearance in which iba- <dig> immunoreactive cells exhibited a hypertropic appearance with much more and longer processes in the flatmounts of cile treated mice . quantification of iba-1-positive cells and total length of iba-1-positive dendrites in examined areas indicates a significant increase in the number of microglia and the length of their dendritic processes , suggesting an exacerbated inflammatory response with provoked activation of microglia in the rpe in the appswe/ps bigenic mice after cile.

upregulation of vegf in the rpe-choroid is related with neovascularization in the retina in appswe/ps <dig> bigenic mice following cyclic intensive light exposure
vegf has been considered as a major player in angiogenesis and an important mediator in the pathogenesis of "wet" amd  <cit> . to examine whether neovascularization in the outer retina induced by the cile was on account of abnormal induction of vegf, immunohistochemistry using a specific antibody against vegf was performed on retinal cross sections and examined by microscopy following abc-mediated aec staining. when a very low basal level of vegf signal is detected in the outer retina region from 12-month old non-tg mice , a lightly higher level of vegf immunoreactivity is visible in the appswe/ps <dig> bigenic littermates . by contrast, robust staining is obvious in the 6-month cile group . quantification of the staining results shows statistical significance of an increase in vegf immunoreactivity in the 6-month group of cile relative to the non-tg as well as bigenic controls. an identical trend of vegf expression is confirmed by western blots .

excessive light exposure-induced retinal lesions are associated with the functional deficits in appswe/ps <dig> bigenic mice
to investigate the possibility of functional deficits as a result of cile-induced retinal lesions, all three groups of mice were tested by scotopic erg recording before euthanasia. figure  <dig> illustrates both scotopic rod responses and maximum amplitudes after flash from three tested groups of mice. while no obvious change in a wave can be identified among the three groups of tested mice as the amplitudes stayed at a very low level of background, the rod response shows a conspicuous reduction in the amplitudes of b wave in both groups of mice received 3- or 6-month ciles in contrast with control mice , a striking decrease is also detected in the maximum amplitudes flash-triggered b waves in the two groups of treated mice compared with control . quantification of both scotopic rod response and the flash-triggered maximum amplitudes of b wave confirms the statistically significant reduction with the time of cile. but the latency periods of b wave remain relatively stable in both rod and flash-induced maximum response among the three tested groups, as the implicit time stays almost unchanged in all the groups.

discussion
studies have demonstrated abnormal light exposure as one of important pathogenic factors for retinopathies  <cit> , particularly for inflammatory lesions and rpe degeneration  <cit>  in the retina. here we show that intensive light exposure exacerbates retinal degeneration with significantly exaggerated local neuroinflammatory response along with robust accumulation of aβ deposits and cnv in the compartment of outer retina in an alzheimer's transgenic mouse model. although neither a typical drusen structure nor lipofuscin buildup has been identified in the model, these pathological changes are directly associated with remarkable functional deficits demonstrated by erg recordings and well mimicked the retinopathies in amd in human. in addition being known as a very important player in alzheimer's disease  <cit> , aβ aggregates have been identified as a component of the drusen in amd  <cit> . reports from several research groups including us has evidenced deposition of aβ aggregates in the retina in alzheimer's transgenic mice  <cit> , however, the data presented here are the first demonstration of not only an enhancement of aβ aggregates by phototoxicity in the retina but also a strong link between aβ deposition and cnv along with disrupted rpe integrity in the outer retina. although a variety of animal models have been developed for the study of amd, they still have their limitation to precisely recapitulate both pathological features and functional deficits of this common visual disorder. increasing evidence has indicated an important role of aβ in angiogenesis through induction of vegf in alzheimer's brain  <cit> . interestingly, aβ deposition was also associated with both drusenoid deposits and cnv found in the outer retina in a human apolipoprotein e <dig>  knockin mouse line fed with high fat cholesterol-rich diet  <cit>  as well as other alzheimer's transgenic mouse lines that result in human aβ accumulation in both brain and retina . furthermore, anti-aβ immunotherapy protected against loss of rpe and functional performance in the apoe <dig> knockin mouse challenged by high fat cholesterol-rich diet  <cit> . taken together, our findings further corroborate the notion about an important role of aβ in the pathogenesis of amd, particularly in relevance for signal transduction of cnv. in this regard, our study also suggests that an alzheimer's transgenic mouse model with overexpression of human aβ deposits in the retina might be a valuable animal model for amd, when combined with other risk factors such as intensive light exposures for amd.

our study also revealed significant exacerbation of neuroinflammatory response in the outer retina of appswe/ps <dig> bigenic mice resulting from cile, which is in agreement with previous findings about activation of microglia in association with photoreceptor degeneration induced by intensive light exposure  <cit> . retinal infiltration of microglia could be the crucial player to mediate the loss of photoreceptors and adjacent retinal neurons  <cit> , since anti-inflammatory strategies can efficiently against this type of phototoxicity to the retina  <cit> . importantly, aβ has shown directly activating microglia both in vivo and in vitro  <cit> . it is therefore possible that intensive light exposure-induced retinopathies might occur through the aβ approach. indeed, we also detected a moderate level of app induction in the outer retina in non-tg mice following cile , though the level of aβ is still relatively low . in comparison with non-tg mice, in fact, 6-month cile has significantly removed photoreceptors along with adjacent outer plexiform layers  thereby physically disabled the retinal response to light stimuli as demonstrated in erg recording . nevertheless, retinal infiltration of microglia may be mediated through microglia-muller cell interaction in the retina  <cit> . further studies are therefore warranted to further uncover the molecular basis of light-induced aβ accumulation and related photoreceptor degeneration.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our observations demonstrate degenerative changes in the outer retina with accumulation of aβ deposits, cnv and dramatically exaggerated neuroinflammatory response in the appswe/ps <dig> bigenic mouse challenged by cile. these results suggest that an alzheimer's transgenic animal model with accumulation of aβ deposits might be an alternative animal model for amd, if combined with other confounding factors for amd.

