BACKGROUND
a number of studies investigated patterns of divergence between closely related, sympatric species and identified so-called 'islands of speciation' in the genome, where the divergence was particularly strong  <cit> . these highly differentiated genomic islands might emerge due to divergent selection acting on the two species  <cit> . divergent genomic regions cannot only be observed between species, but also between populations within species. humans are the least differentiated of the extant primate species  <cit>  and most genetic variation is found in populations rather than between populations  <cit> . levels of population differentiation are determined both by demographic factors such as genetic drift and gene flow, which can increase or respectively decrease population differentiation  <cit> , and by selective processes, which can also promote  or lower  differentiation  <cit> . while it is usually believed that demographic forces globally act on the whole genome, it has been shown that pure neutral processes can affect allele frequencies at specific loci during range expansions  <cit> , and increase allele frequencies in newly colonised areas  <cit> . this allelic surfing phenomenon depends on local demographic patterns  <cit>  but can be also be enhanced by spatial bottlenecks  <cit> .

in the genomics era, large-scale human datasets such as the hapmap project  <cit> , the human genome diversity panel , or recently the  <dig>  genomes project  <cit>  can be analysed to reconstruct the demographic history of populations or to find signatures of selection on the genome. rosenberg et al.  <cit>  investigated the genetic relationship of human populations and found that populations from the same continent share more ancestry than random populations . coop et al.  <cit>  found most evidence for selection between continental groups suggesting that these are ancient adaptations that potentially occurred during the colonisation of continents. there are rather few examples for very local patterns of selection in humans . recently, hernandez et al.  <cit>  argued that reduced diversity and increased population differentiation in exons could partly result from background selection rather than from selective sweeps, but alternative forms of adaptation, such as selection on standing variation or on multiple beneficial alleles could contribute to population differentiation .

in this study we aimed at identifying regions in the human genome with elevated or decreased levels of population differentiation potentially indicative of past episodes of selection. we used the hgdp-ceph human genome diversity panel  <cit>  including  <dig>  snps typed in  <dig> populations to reliably infer population differentiation. indeed, whereas the hapmap  <cit>  or the  <dig>  genome  <cit>  panels provide more detailed genomic information than the hgdp snp panel, they have been tested in far fewer populations making them actually less powerful for detecting outlier snps. we used a novel method to identify loci with unusual fst values that takes into account hierarchical structure of human populations  <cit> . using the significance of individual snp fst values as observations, we used a hmm to identify genomic regions with average, high or low population differentiation hidden states. based on a large set of populations, we thus provide an extensive map of significantly differentiated genomic islands, whose properties such as size, location in the genome, recombination rates or overlap with genic regions, were assessed to collect evidence for the respective effects of selection and neutral demographic processes.

RESULTS
selection test
by simulating the joint null distribution of fst and heterozygosity between populations  under both a finite island model   <cit>  and a hierarchical island model   <cit> , we obtained the significance of snp-specific fsts under these two models . we find as many as  <dig> % of all snps with significant p-values at the 1% level under a fim, while this proportion reduces to  <dig> % under a him. the excess of significant loci observed under the fim likely includes many false positives, due to the unrealistic assumption of even levels of differentiation between all pairs of populations  <cit> . indeed, the fst distribution simulated under the him much better fits the observed distribution of fst values than that simulated under the fim . we thus do not find much evidence of selection under the him, but neither fst nor their associated p-values are randomly distributed along chromosomes . it implies that there are genomic regions with generally elevated or decreased levels of population differentiation, which we have tried to identify using a model-free hmm approach. to this aim, fst p-values were first transformed into z-values, also called normal scores, as observations for the hmm. z-values are expected to follow a normal distribution under a proper null model, and interestingly, this is only true for z-values obtained under the him, while z-values computed under the fim have a right-skewed distribution . the shape of these distributions thus gives us further evidence that the him better fits the data than a fim, since we expect that most snps are actually neutral. given the unrealistic assumption of the fim and its associated non-normal distribution of the z-values, all results presented below will be based on the him only.

genomic islands
we used a two-step hmm approach to identify regions in the genome with significant population differentiation than average . we first broadly defined genomic regions with generally increased or decreased population differentiation using standard hmm algorithms. in a second step we controlled the false discovery rate  of snps and retained only those regions that contained at least one snp with a genome-wide fdr of  <dig>  . hereafter, we shall call high-differentiation islands  those genomic regions with significantly high levels of population differentiation, and low-differentiation islands  those regions with significant low levels of population differentiation.

under the him we detected  <dig> hdis as well as  <dig> ldis .

properties of islands with significant levels of population differentiation as detected by the hmm approach

we find that the number of hdis per chromosomes correlates with the number of snps , but the number of ldis does not . chromosomes  <dig> and x appear to have a higher density of regions with ldis than the other chromosomes , which, for the x chromosome, is not due to the overall higher observed level of differentiation since our him test controls for that . the average heterozygosity in hdis  is significantly below the genome-wide average of  <dig>  , whereas ldis present a significantly higher heterozygosity of  <dig>  .

previous outlier detection studies sometimes refrained from simultaneously analysing the autosomes and the x-chromosome at once, since demographic histories between autosomal and sex-chromosomes differ  <cit> . in our case, each chromosome was analysed separately, and individual snp loci were analysed based on their transformed p-value instead of their absolute fst value, allowing for a comparison of chromosomes with different average fst. note however that the largest hdi is located on the x-chromosome, in the low-recombination centromeric region between positions  <dig>  and  <dig>  mb.

fdr snps in hdis are found mainly differentiated between africans vs. non-africans , and less between americans vs. non-americans , eurasians vs. non-eurasians , or east asians vs. non-east asians . more precisely, many fdr snps have high ancestral frequencies in africa and low frequencies everywhere else.

finally, it is worth noting that at odds with genomic islands results, the analysis of individual snps with significant population differentiation do not show any enrichment for genic or non-synonymous snps, leaving us with no direct evidence for selection at this level.

genic regions
we find that hdis are enriched for genic regions. indeed,  <dig> % of high-differentiation regions overlap with at least one gene, which is significantly more than expected based on the size and the number of regions . contrastingly, ldis are not enriched for genic regions, even though  <dig> % of them overlap with at least one gene . in keeping with these results, hdis are significantly enriched for genic snps , while ldis are significantly depleted for genic snps . interestingly, both hdis and ldis are significantly enriched for non-synonymous snps, which have a slightly significant higher fst than other snps in hdis , and a significantly lower average fst than other snps in ldis . we define here non-genic islands as those that do not overlap with any genic region . the average distance of non-genic islands to the closest gene is less than  <dig> kb, which is not closer than expected . remarkably, all ldis as well as all but  <dig> hdis overlap with transcription factor binding sites, which is significantly more than expected by chance for hdis , but not for ldis , suggesting that non-genic hdis might still be under some functional constraints.

fisher exact test for enrichment or depletion of genic and non-synonymous snps in genomic islands defined by the selection test or by the hmm approach

a subset of snps that are significant in the selection test at the 1% level

b subset of snps that belong to the high-differentiation or low-differentiation state as identified by the viterbi algorithm in the first step of the hmm approach

c subset of snps that are assigned to the high-differentiation or low-differentiation state under a genome-wide fdr =  <dig>  in the second step of the hmm approach

d subset of snps that are located within hdis or ldis

+ enrichment of snp category in snp class

- under-representation of snp category in snp class

we find that both hdis and ldis have a significant lower recombination rate than the rest of the genome . since we find that the average size of non-genic islands is only about half the size of genic islands, we used an ancova to determine the association between the size of islands and local recombination rate, controlling for their genic or non-genic state. we find that hdi size is negatively related to recombination rate in genic hdis  as well as in non-genic hdis . however, the regression slope is significantly steeper in non-genic than in genic hdis , which suggests that recombination is more efficient in eroding hdis in non-genic regions, potentially due to an absence of selective constraints in these regions. contrastingly, island sizes are negatively correlated with recombination rate in genic ldis , but not in non-genic ldis  and the regression slopes of genic and non-genic ldis are not significantly different . note also that hdis overlap less with recombination hotspots than expected by chance , unlike ldis . there are hotspots separating  <dig> out of  <dig> pairs of hdis that are within  <dig> kb of each other, supporting the view that the hmm detected distinct signals of selection close to each other. we then tested for an enrichment or depletion of genes that overlap with hdis or ldis in biological processes using the panther gene ontology database  <cit> . after bonferroni correction, only two biological processes  are enriched for genes in hdis, and a single process  is enriched for genes located in ldis.

discussion
a limited role for selection in humans
using a hierarchical island model  to describe patterns of differentiation within and between human continental groups, we identified snps from the hgdp panel that presented unusual levels of population differentiation. the slight excess  of significant snps under the him suggests a limited role for adaptive or balancing selection in the human genome, in agreement with a recent analysis of the  <dig>  genome project  <cit> . note that this excess could also be due to our inability to take into account the exact details of past human history  <cit> , but it is important to underline that outlier loci are not randomly distributed along chromosomes, which motivated us to use a hmm to detect islands of high or low differentiation . the fact that the joint distribution of fst and hbp generated under the him much better fits the observed distribution than that obtained under the fim  suggests that the him captures key aspects of human demography and that the identified outlier loci are more likely to be enriched for true signal of selection. the choice of the right demographic model thus appears crucial for the proper identification of selection signals.

the action of neutral and selective processes in the genome
several features of outlier snps and differentiation islands point towards the action of selection: i) hdis are enriched for both genic and non-synonymous snps, ii) non-synonymous snps are more differentiated than other snps within hdis, consistent with directional selection, and non-synonymous snps are less differentiated than synonymous snps within ldis, consistent with purifying selection , iii) non-synonymous snps are enriched in ldis, compatible with balancing selection at a few snps and the accumulation of neutral mutations at other nearby sites, iv) ldis are generally smaller than hdis, in agreement with balancing selection giving more time for recombination to erode ldis and fast selective sweeps creating large hdis, v) the negative correlation between hdi size and recombination rate is stronger for genic than for non-genic hdis, consistent with recent positive selection on genes and vi) hdis overlap more often with genes than expected by chance, and there is a significant excess of transcription factor binding sites in hdis. note, however, that the hmm has more power to highlight regions with low recombination rates , where neighbouring snps are more likely to have similar fst values .

some other features of the islands are better explained by past demography than by selection, like i) levels of heterozygosity in ldis that are comparable with genome-wide levels, unlike what would be predicted by balancing or background selection, ii) most high-fst snps with low fdr that are mainly differentiated between africa and non-africa, and between america and non-america, which is compatible with the action of surfing after spatial bottlenecks , or iii)  <dig> % of ldis and  <dig> % of hdis do not overlap with any annotated functional gene. interestingly, these non-genic islands  are about two times shorter than islands overlapping with genes, which is consistent with the assumption that they are neutral and therefore more easily eroded by recombination. but note that most of the non-genic islands overlap with transcription factor binding sites, which are, however, less constrained than genic regions  <cit> .

it thus appears likely that genomic islands with unusual levels of differentiation have been shaped both demographic and selective events, which still appear very challenging to disentangle without a higher density of markers and populations.

recently selected biological processes
we find evidence for local adaptation to food sources and nutrition as the biological processes of 'lipid and fatty acid binding' and 'glycogen metabolism' are enriched for genes located in hdis. this result is in line with earlier studies showing that diet differs between populations and should present strong selective pressures  <cit> . interestingly the process of 'oncogenesis' is enriched for genes in ldis. this process includes genes that normally regulate cell growth and differentiation  <cit>  and cancer/testis genes that seem to be under rapid diversifying selection between human and chimpanzees, especially on the x-chromosome  <cit> . the x-chromosome is enriched for ldis, supporting the interpretation that cancer/testis genes are under diversifying selection in humans, leading to balanced polymorphisms. on the other hand, we might have more power for the detection of ldis on the x-chromosome due to its higher level of differentiation as compared to the autosomes. however, chromosome  <dig> has a level of population differentiation that is comparable to that of the other autosomes, but is also enriched for ldis. a literature search did not reveal any neutral explanation for the high prevalence of ldis on chromosome  <dig> leaving the possibility that chromosome  <dig> is enriched for targets of balancing selection.

comparison with other genome scan studies
hdis contain several candidate genes for local adaptation identified in previous studies, such as trpv <dig>  <cit> , aspm  <cit> , prodynorphin , the duffy blood group locus involved in malaria resistance , or the ectodysplasin a receptor . additionally, hdis overlap with genes linked to skin pigmentation including the melanocortin  <dig> receptor gene , kitlg  <cit> , slc24a <dig>  <cit> , tyrosinase-related protein  <dig> gene , and oca <dig>  <cit> . ldis also overlap with genes that were previously shown to be under balancing selection such as hla-c  <cit>  and dystrophin . while hdis are more sensitive towards local adaptation, ldis may fail to highlight genes that are under balancing selection in only a few populations. more generally, we tested the overlap of hdis and ldis with regions identified as being under positive and balancing selection in previous genome scans . we actually find a clear overlap between hdis and regions under positive selection detected with methods based on levels of population subdivision  <cit> , analyses of the site frequency spectrum  <cit> , or tests relying on patterns of ld and haplotype variability  <cit> . interestingly, hdis do not overlap with studies that aimed at detecting old episodes of selection based on the ratio of polymorphism relative to divergence among species  <cit> , which suggests that we detect genomic islands that have appeared more recently, after the out-of-africa event 50- <dig> ky ago  <cit> . however, the fact that some genomic regions are detected with several selection tests does not really demonstrate the action of selection, but rather that the identified signal is strong enough to be picked up by various methods. it is also worth noting that several candidate regions for balancing selection identified in previous studies did not overlap with ldis , potentially because balancing selection events are rare in the human genome and very hard to detect  <cit> , in agreement with the fact that we detect less ldis than hdis. the difficulty to detect balancing selection is further illustrated by the low concordance between the  <dig> previous studies aiming at detecting balancing selection, where only  <dig> % of all identified candidate regions were detected in more than one study.

future hmm approaches could be extended to the analysis of next-generation sequencing data instead of a limited number of linked markers. with deeper coverage and the inclusion of additional populations allowing precise estimation of levels of population differentiation, the  <dig>  genomes project  <cit>  could provide a unique and very powerful tool to refine the delineation of islands of differentiation.

CONCLUSIONS
the proper detection of loci with unusual levels of population differentiation requires an appropriate model of human genetic structure, such as the him model used here. while we find little direct evidence of selection at the level of individual snps, the identification of genomic islands of differentiation under an hmm approach pooling information over linked snps reveals more powerful. we find that several properties of genomic islands overlapping with gene regions are difficult to explain without the action of selection, but that past demographic events such as gene surfing are probably involved in their occurrence in non-genic regions.

