BACKGROUND
the mammalian startle reflex is a fast motor response that is elicited if a tactile, vestibular or acoustic stimulus has a sudden onset and exceeds a certain intensity threshold  <cit>  . the reflex involves a fast flexor muscle contraction  by which it can be distinguished from the orienting and defense reflexes  <cit> . the startle reflex can only be elicited by stimuli with certain acoustic parameters. for example, in rats, acoustic startle requires a stimulus to reach an intensity of 80- <dig> db above the hearing threshold within about  <dig> ms of its onset  <cit> . the primary reflex is mediated by an oligo-synaptic reflex arc that involves the cochlea root nucleus, the caudal pontine reticular nucleus and spinal motoneurons  <cit> . over the last four decades the startle reflex arc has become a prime model system for the study of the neuronal basis of sensory-motor integration  <cit> , emotional processing  <cit>  and the influence of genes on behaviour  <cit> . however, in spite of the extended research effort on the startle reflex, its evolutionary function remains unknown. initially it has been argued that its function is to interrupt ongoing behaviour patterns  <cit>  while more recent accounts suggest that it protects the organism from a sudden physical impact  <cit> . it has also been suggested that it facilitates a flight response  <cit> , but there are no experimental studies on the connection between startling and fleeing in mammals. in previous studies, animals were not given the opportunity to spatially avoid the startle stimulus and remove themselves from sound exposure so that the relationship between startle and flight responses is not well understood. furthermore, the startle reflex is commonly used as a measure of emotional processing  <cit>  since the startle magnitude itself is often modified as result of conditioned fear  <cit>   formed by linking an initially neutral cs with an unconditioned aversive stimulus ). however, it is unknown whether startling noise itself can act as an us in a fear conditioning paradigm.

information on sensitisation and habituation processes related to startle are only available for parameters that are directly associated with the reflex itself i.e. response latencies and startle amplitudes   <cit> . the dual process theory of habituation  <cit>  suggests that a stimulus should induce a habituating as well as a sensitisation component in the nervous system. habituation constitutes a decreased response to repeated stimulation while response sensitisation represents the opposite process i.e. increased responsiveness as a result of repeated stimulation  <cit> . in the startle reflex, the magnitude of the startle itself  is subject to habituation while sensitisation is present in the shortening of the response latency to the startle stimulus  <cit> . however, no study has investigated whether repeated startling causes habituation or sensitisation processes in subsequent behaviour patterns like spatial avoidance or flight. in our study we address this question.

an understanding of long-term effects of the startle responses is important in the context of evolutionary and ecological questions and in the investigation of unexpected reactions to noise. the potential for exposure to repeated startling stimuli for wild animals has increased considerably through the introduction of anthropogenic noise. the effects of noise can range from habitat exclusion  <cit>  to changes in the vocal parameters of communication sounds  <cit>  to extreme behavioural responses leading to death as in mass strandings of beaked whales induced by military sonar  <cit> . understanding the underlying mechanisms why mammals exhibit such responses is one of the highest priorities when trying to mitigate its effects  <cit> . in this study, we investigated the effects of repeated exposure to startle-eliciting stimuli on the occurrence of subsequent longer-term avoidance behaviour and fear conditioning.

RESULTS
experiment 1
in the first experiment, we exposed seven captive grey seals  to underwater noise pulses of  <dig> db re  <dig> μpa  while they were retrieving a fish from an underwater feeder. the feeder ensured that the animals were highly motivated to stay close to the loudspeaker since this was the location where they could retrieve fish. these startle pulses were  <dig> ms long with rise and fall times of  <dig> ms and exceeded the animal's hearing threshold by approximately  <dig> db. the startle sound was always paired with a weaker , non-startling pre-sound  played  <dig> s before the startle stimulus to investigate whether the startle pulse can act as an unconditioned stimulus and the pre-sound as the conditioned stimulus in a fear conditioning paradigm. this lead time of  <dig> s was chosen to prevent pre-pulse inhibition of the startle response which is the phenomenon of a reduced startle magnitude if a non-startling sound precedes the startle pulse by 30- <dig> ms  <cit> . in the first experiment, five of seven seals showed clear signs of a startle response  while two did not. the animals that startled included  <dig> juvenile male,  <dig> juvenile females and  <dig> mature female. all animals that startled also showed a distinct sensitisation in subsequent avoidance behaviour, culminating in sustained avoidance of the exposure site . we use the term 'subsequent avoidance behaviour' to refer to avoidance behaviours which followed sound exposure. avoidance behaviour was quantified by a variety of response variables including time spent close to feeding station , time spent on land , occurrence of flight behaviour followed by a jump out of the pool and prevention of fish retrieval. sensitisation refers to 'response sensitisation' i.e. the fact that repeated stimulus presentation leads to increased responsiveness  <cit> . the sensitisation process in subsequent avoidance behaviour becomes obvious by the decreasing time the animals spent close to the feeding station and the rapid increase in the time they hauled out on land after several playback sessions .

a general linear model  was calculated in jmp  <dig>  to investigate the response variables 'time spent close to feeder' and 'haulout time' in further detail . the model was calculated over the data set for the  <dig> animals that startled in experiment  <dig>  playback session number was included as an ordinal variable  while 'treatment', 'individual' and the interaction term 'treatment × individual' were included as categorical variables . "treatment" included three levels  while "individual" included  <dig> levels i.e. the identity of the five seals. the model for the time spent close to the feeding station for the animals that sensitised was highly significant explaining 60% of the variance . the factor with the strongest influence, determined by the f-value , was treatment  followed by playback session number . the interaction term of individual and treatment was not significant showing that all individuals responded in a similar way to the startling sound. the significant influence of playback session number indicates that the behaviour of each animal changed over the course of the experiment. in conjunction with the graphical evidence from  this demonstrates that animals sensitised to exposure to the startle pulse. the model for haulout time was also highly significant  and showed that treatment was by far the most important factor . the second most important factor was playback session number which showed that animals changed haulout behaviour over time. in all playbacks from session  <dig> the animals spent most time hauled out on land rarely entering the pool . in later playback sessions, these responses were also caused by the pre-sound alone indicating that the pre-sound had acquired aversive properties as found in the conditioned stimulus in fear conditioning paradigms  <cit>  . furthermore, from playback sessions  <dig> onwards avoidance of sound exposure turned into a more generic place avoidance which was exhibited even during the 'no sound control' treatment .

results of the glm for the time spent close to the feeder and the time hauled out calculated over  <dig> animals that showed clear signs of startle reflex elicitation in experiment  <dig>  the term 'treatment' refers to the sound exposure treatment, i.e. exposure to the startle pulse, the pre-sound only or the no sound control.

in seals that startled, the sound pulse also prevented fish retrieval and increasingly caused an immediate rapid flight response which was followed by an erratic jump out of the pool indicating sensitisation to the startle pulse . after several pairings the pre-sound caused similar responses and reliably induced flight responses and prevented fish retrieval from the 6th playback session onwards. in contrast, seals that did not startle did not show sensitisation in any of the parameters but fish retrieval was less likely to be prevented in later playback sessions . in the two seals that did not startle, the percentage of prevented fish retrieval decreased continuously indicating that animals habituated to sound exposure. the "pre-sound only" treatment did not interrupt foraging behaviour in animals that did not show signs of startle reflex elicitation. flight responses never occurred during the no sound control and all seals were successful in retrieving the fish during all control sessions.

the likelihood of sound exposure causing a flight response was modelled for animals that startled using a logistic regression framework . this was done to test for response sensitisation and model the change in the likelihood of aversive responses as a result of repeated exposure. the dependant variable  was given by the occurrence  or absence  of the respective event for each playback bout and each individual. the independent variables were given by the number of playback bouts for the two treatments . the final model was based on the combined binomial data for both treatments and included the single term 'playback bout by treatment' as independent variable. the model was based on  <dig> data points . the regression model for exposure to the startle pulse showed a sharp increase in the likelihood of flight responses after a few playback sessions . the regression for the pre-sound only treatment showed a similar but delayed trend indicating that classical conditioning had formed a link between the pre-sound and the startle pulse after several more pairings . the odds ratio estimates revealed that with each additional playback session the occurrence of a flight response became  <dig>  and  <dig>  times more likely as in the previous session for the startle pulse and pre-sound respectively .

parameter estimates for the logistic regression models fitted to the data from experiment  <dig> . the odds ratio gives the increase in the odds of the respective event occurring with each additional playback bout and playback session.

the likelihood of food retrieval being interrupted showed an inverse pattern for the seals that showed signs of startle compared to those that did not. a sharp increase in the probability of foraging behaviour being interrupted was seen in animals that startled . the model for the "pre-sound only" treatment for the animals that startled showed a similar but delayed increase in the likelihood of interruption of foraging . this is also reflected by the odds ratios which showed that prevention of foraging behaviour became  <dig>   and  <dig>   times more likely with each consecutive playback session

in summary, animals that startled developed an increasing reluctance to approach the feeding station and also exhibited behavioural responses generally associated with anxiety  <cit> . such anxiety-related behaviour patterns include 'inhibition of ongoing behaviour' , avoidance of the source of danger  and 'scanning'. the latter was commonly observed when animals were hauled out on land with only the eyes in the water performing frequent erratic head turns  but it was not further quantified here.

experiment 2: startle thresholds
since we only observed distinctive startle responses  in some of the seals but not in all of them we conducted a second experiment using a step-wise procedure to determine the startle threshold for all animals . this second experiment revealed that all animals that startled and sensitised in the previous experiment had startle thresholds  between  <dig> and  <dig> db re  <dig> μpa with a mean value across all  <dig> animals of  <dig> db re  <dig> μpa. the mean value of  <dig> db re  <dig> μpa reflects a sensation level of approximately  <dig> db above the hearing threshold . we were unable to determine a startle threshold for the two animals that habituated in the first experiment as even the maximum level tested  did not elicit a startle response.

human homo sapiens
rat rattus norvegicus
mouse mus musculus
grey seal halichoerus grypus
mean:  <dig> db

 <dig> db re  <dig> μ pa  <cit> 
54/ <dig> db re  <dig> μ pa <cit> 
* value derived from data in paper

** value directly reported in original publication

experiment 3: is it the startle reflex that causes sensitisation?
in a third experiment, we tested whether elicitation of the startle reflex arc is required to induce flight responses and subsequent avoidance behaviour or if any sound with a high sound pressure level is sufficient to elicit the same type of response. we first exposed two naive seals to playbacks of longer non-startling signals of acoustic energy and maximum sound pressure level equal to that of the startle stimuli from the first experiment . however, these stimuli had longer rise times and were therefore unable to elicit the startle reflex  <cit> . then we exposed them to the startle-eliciting sounds. the animals showed habituation to sounds of equal energy as the startle stimulus but with a longer rise time of  <dig> ms, whereas they sensitised in the subsequent test using the startle-eliciting stimulus with a  <dig> ms rise time . linear regressions were calculated for each individual. regressions revealed that repeated exposure to short rise time pulses resulted in increased haulout behaviour . in contrast, haulout behaviour only occurred rarely when animals were exposed to long rise time, non-startling sound pulses. similarly, exposure to short rise time  pulses resulted in a reduction of time spent close to the feeder over the course of the  <dig> playback sessions . exposure to long rise times showed the opposite pattern with one individual spending significantly more time close to the feeder in later playback sessions . thus, eliciting the startle reflex was required for causing increased responsiveness in later playback sessions and therefore inducing sensitisation of the avoidance responses.

discussion
this is the first demonstration that the startle reflex leads to sensitisation of an extreme avoidance response which constitutes a rare example of a sustained sensitisation process tied to a simple reflex. sensitisation in the sense of an increased responsiveness to the stimulus was found in a variety of response variables i.e. increased haulout time and reduced time spent close to the feeder in later playback sessions. similarly, the likelihood of flight responses occurring increased rapidly in later playback sessions which is another example of response sensitisation. treatment with long rise time stimuli on the other hand led to a waning of avoidance responses indicating habituation in experiment  <dig>  this shows that it was the startle reflex and not the defense reflex that caused sensitisation of flight behaviour. long rise time, high intensity stimuli can elicit the defence reflex  <cit> , which has been interpreted as part of the fight and flight reaction of animals  <cit> . however, using such stimuli, the animals showed a quick habituation  of avoidance behaviour and decreasing frequency of flight responses. these results are also consistent with our earlier study that tested grey seal avoidance behaviour in response to non-startling, longer duration sound types in which seals were found to habituate rapidly i.e. flight responses waned, animals spent increasing amounts of time close to the feeder and never hauled out during the experiment  <cit> . three of the test subjects that sensitised in experiment  <dig> where also used in our previous study in which they habituated to all stimuli i.e. avoidance behaviour waned. thus, while the defence reflex might be involved in initial flight responses, in our study only elicitation of the startle reflex resulted in sensitisation of avoidance responses and increased the likelihood of flight responses.

a comparison of the startle threshold from this study with previous studies showed that the startle threshold expressed in units of sensation levels  is similar to the sensation level required to induce startle in rats  <cit>  and humans  <cit>  . thus, the startle threshold may be fairly universal and conserved among mammals in spite of specific adaptations to aquatic hearing in seals . the two seals that did not show sensitisation in subsequent avoidance behaviour in experiment  <dig> also never showed an observable startle response, not even at the highest tested received level of  <dig> db re  <dig> μpa  this suggests that elicitation of the startle reflex was necessary to evoke sensitisation of avoidance responses in these animals. we suspect that the two non-startling animals had impaired hearing since they were among the oldest animals tested and because in mice the sound pressure level required to elicit a startle response increases with hearing loss  <cit> . while the exact threshold in mammals depends not only on the received level of the sound but also on stimulus duration and rise time  <cit> , the sensation level value typically lies at about  <dig> db above the hearing threshold if rise times of about  <dig> ms are used and the duration is kept constant . this sensation level remains similar to the original level even when age-related hearing loss sets in . one study on mice  <cit>  found a lower startle threshold  but used stimuli with an almost instantaneous rise time which is known to lower the required intensity threshold for a startle response. the majority of the animals tested in our study were females. even though the only male that we tested also sensitised, it would be interesting to explore sex differences in these responses in more detail. in mice, males have higher startle magnitudes and more pronounced long-term habituation of startle magnitudes than females  <cit> . gonadal hormones such as estradiol- and dihydrotestosterone on the other hand can cause a decrease in startle magnitude in rats with gonadectomy  <cit> . however, it is important to note that it is unclear whether the magnitude of the startle reflex  is in any way related to the aversive follow-up response  observed in our experiments. furthermore, startle modulation as a result of sex or hormonal differences is unlikely to explain the lack of observable startle responses found in two of the females that habituated.

the behavioural responses observed in experiment  <dig> and  <dig> are remarkably similar to those observed in studies that involved electric stimulation of the brain. repeated electrical stimulation of the amygdala or the defence circuitry in the superior colliculus leads to long-term sensitisation resulting in anxiogenic-type consequences and pronounced flight response to subsequent stressors  <cit> . similarly, stimulation of the acoustic pathway in the inferior colliculus at increasing intensities first leads to freezing and then ultimately to escape behaviour  <cit>  and sensitisation  <cit> . although the primary startle pathway is thought to be mediated by the cochlea nucleus which projects into the pontine reticular formation  <cit> , the latter structure also receives indirect acoustic input from the inferior colliculus  <cit> . furthermore, previous studies have shown that the magnitude of the startle reflex can be increased by fear-inducing experiences  <cit>  and startle has long been used as an indicator of fear  <cit>  and emotional state  <cit> . our data showed that a startle stimulus can act as an unconditioned stimulus in a fear conditioning paradigm, as also suggested by an ethically questionable experiment on one human baby  <cit> . thus, the startle reflex is not only influenced by emotional state  <cit>  but repeated exposure to startling stimuli appears to cause fear. this indicates the presence of an afferent input from the startle pathway to brain areas related to emotional processing such as the amygdala and shows that the mammalian startle reflex evolved most likely in the context of general predator avoidance. interestingly, the projection from the startle pathway to the amygdala  <cit>  and its effects has received little research attention while the efferent connection from the amygdala to the startle pathway is of great significance in major research efforts using fear-potentiated startle as an indicator of fear conditioning through other stimuli and as a measure of emotional valence of such stimuli  <cit> .

the startle reflex is commonly used as a measure for emotional processing in studies on human anxiety disorders  <cit> . patients with panic disorder, post-traumatic-stress disorder  or obsessive compulsory disorder  generally show elevated baseline startle magnitudes  <cit> . our study indicates that repeated startling influences emotional processing. thus, the potential role of repeated startle elicitation in the development of post-traumatic stress disorder should be considered. the main behavioural categories thought to characterize post-traumatic stress disorder  in animal models are "conditioned behaviours"  and "sensitised behaviours"   <cit> . in our study, we found evidence for both "conditioned"  and "sensitised behaviour"  as a result of exposure to repeated startling stimuli. while the severity of the behaviour patterns observed in this study is probably less strong than in the ptsd model, our data show that long-term exposure of humans to pulsed noise should be critically evaluated.

we think it is likely that the original function of the startle reflex is associated with increasing an animal's propensity for flight as required in a predator avoidance scenario  <cit> . if the biological function of the startle reflex was primarily associated with injury prevention through increased muscle tonus  <cit>  we would have expected an absence of flight and avoidance responses as a result of startle elicitation. many startling sounds indicate serious threats caused by predators. these include sounds of breaking tree branches, falling rocks or the sudden impact noise of a predator attacking a conspecific. a sensitisation to startle sounds as observed in our study would be beneficial not only by enabling a rapid predator avoidance response but also by preventing an animal from moving into an area with an increased threat level where startling sounds are encountered repeatedly. interestingly, animals may also exploit the startle reflex to manipulate conspecific, prey or predator behaviour. for instance, cod were found to produce potentially startle eliciting clicks before prey capture attempts by seals  <cit> . bottlenose dolphins produce high-intensity jaw pops as a threat display during courtship which could potentially startle conspecifics  <cit> . future research will be needed to address the question whether basic reflexes like the startle have shaped the evolution of communication signals.

in contrast to most neuro-physiological studies, the animals we tested here were captured from a wild population, where they had spent time in their natural habitat prior to the experiments. they also belonged to a taxon that is not closely related to any of the standard model systems. our reason to choose the grey seal as a test species was partly a concern over observed detrimental responses of marine mammals to noise pollution. there are many anthropogenic noise sources in use that can cause startle responses. gun shots and some industrial noise are examples in air. however, most pulsed noise caused by human activity can be found in the marine environment such as in underwater explosions, pile-driving activities, acoustic deterrent devices, sonar pulses and seismic air guns. marine mammals have been found to abandon areas of high noise pollution  <cit>  and even strand as an extreme behavioural avoidance response to military sonar  <cit> . while the role of the startle reflex in these reactions needs further study, it is notable that sonar sounds often have a very rapid onset and high source level. our results showed that a simple oligo-synaptic reflex arc is responsible for extreme avoidance responses to sudden-onset, pulsed sounds. thus, impact ratings of anthropogenic noise sources in air and in water should be re-evaluated and rise times of loud noise pulses should be increased to mitigate their effects on humans and animals alike.

CONCLUSIONS
acoustic stimulation of the startle reflex pathways leads to sensitisation of extreme avoidance behaviour and induces sustained flight response in mammals. hence, sensitisation of longer-term follow-up behaviour can be caused by repeated stimulation of a simple oligo-synaptic reflex arc. furthermore, startling stimuli are capable of inducing fear conditioning. this shows the startle may not only be a measure of emotion  but might influence the emotional state of an animal itself. the primary function of the startle reflex circuitry therefore seems to be associated with predator avoidance behaviour through induction of rapid flight responses. startle-eliciting noise pulses have the potential to cause severe effects on long-term behaviour, individual fitness and longevity of individuals in wild animal populations. for anthropogenic noise sources we could mitigate against such effects by increasing stimulus rise times. repeated long-term exposure of humans to short rise time pulsed noise also may be problematic and acoustic startle should be considered as a potentially contributing factor in the context of post-traumatic stress disorder.

