BACKGROUND
multiple neurodegenerative and vascular central nervous system  diseases are characterized by motor deficits. for many of these diseases, no satisfactory neuroprotective or neuroregenerative therapies are available thus far. therefore, the development of appropriate animal models for cns motor disorders and the adequate evaluation of novel therapies in these animal models is an active field of preclinical research. in addition to the emerging non-invasive molecular and anatomical imaging techniques to visualize and quantify deficits and recovery in these disorders, behavioral testing is frequently the primary experimental readout to assess therapeutic effects. for this reason, sensitive, reproducible, time-efficient and easily applicable behavioral tests for existing or newly generated animal models are warranted. the present study has focused on animal models for three different motor disorders: the 6-hydroxydopamine  rat models of parkinson's disease , a transgenic rat model of huntington's disease  and a photothrombotic cortical lesion model of stroke.

pd is the most common neurodegenerative movement disorder whose hallmark feature is an extensive and progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the pars compacta of the substantia nigra  <cit> . among the most widely used and longest established animal models of pd are the dopaminergic neuron lesion models employing 6-hydroxydopamine   <cit> . of these, the unilateral infusion of 6-hydoxydopamine  in the basal ganglia at the level of the striatum or ascending dopaminergic fibers leads to unilateral dopaminergic cell death and to motor deficits in the side of the body contralateral to the lesion  <cit> .

next to toxin-induced hd animal models such as the administration of  <dig> -pyridinedicarboxylic acid , transgenic mouse and rat models have been developed  <cit> . in the present study we use a transgenic rat model with a mutated huntingtin gene containing  <dig> cag repeats  <cit> .

thirdly, several animal models have been designed to mimic human stroke as closely as possible in order to test possible reparative effects and neuroprotective therapies  <cit> . here, we use a model of focal ischemia by the systemic injection of a photoactive dye  in combination with visible light irradiation of the sensorimotor cortex. as with the 6-ohda model, this lesion is usually applied to only one brain hemisphere leading to left-right motor imbalances in the lesioned animal.

the catwalk method is an automated and computerized gait-analysis technique that allows objective quantification of multiple static and dynamic gait parameters. this method has previously been evaluated for use in animal models of pain  <cit> , sciatic nerve injury  <cit>  and arthritis  <cit> , but not yet in animal models of cns based movement disorders. therefore, the aim of the study is to evaluate the suitability and sensitivity of the catwalk method for behavioral characterization of different animal models of pd, hd and stroke.

RESULTS
a. 6-ohda model
a single dose of 6-ohda  was administered for the mfb group, two doses were tested for the str injections . experimental groups were tested behaviorally in the cylinder test and using the catwalk method according to fig.  <dig>  fig. 2a-c, show the histological confirmation of lesion size at  <dig> weeks post-injection after immunostaining of tyrosine hydroxylase  positive dopaminergic fibers in the striatum. the loss of dopaminergic fibers in the caudate putamen was quantified stereologically via the cavalieri method, and expressed as a percentage of total caudate putamen volume . the lesion size varied between  <dig> %  in the mfb group,  <dig> %  in the str high group and  <dig> %  in the str low group. sham operated rats showed no loss in th immunoreactivity .

the cylinder test confirmed the lesioning behaviorally. lesioned animals of the str high and mfb groups showed a deficit in usage of the paw contralateral to the lesion both at  <dig> days and  <dig> weeks post-injection . this deficit was smaller in the str low group and was statistically significant only for the early time point. using the means and variances of the paw usage in the different groups, we determined that the minimal sample size required to detect significant differences  was n =  <dig> for the str low group and n <  <dig> for the  <dig> other 6-ohda lesion groups.

gait analysis parameters collected by the catwalk system were first analyzed in the group showing the greatest extent of lesion, the mfb group. significant contralateral  vs. ipsilateral  differences were observed in the forepaws for the parameter 'intensity' at both time points . in the corresponding sham group, the 'intensity' parameter showed no significant contralateral-ipsilateral differences. using the means and variances of the pawprint intensity imbalance measured for the mfb lesion group, we determined that the minimal sample size required to detect significant effects is n =  <dig>  other parameters showed no significant differences between paws contralateral to the lesion compared to paws ipsilateral to the lesion, with the exception of the parameter 'max area' , and contact %  . no significant contralateral-ipsilateral differences were observed in the hindpaws in the mfb group.

in the experimental groups injected with 6-ohda in the striatum, 'intensity' was significantly different between contralateral and ipsilateral forepaws starting at week  <dig> post-injection for the str high 6-ohda group and at  <dig> weeks for the str low 6-ohda group . intensity  as well as max area  were also significantly different for hindpaws  in the str high 6-ohda group . sample size analysis using means and variances of pawprint intensity imbalance for these experimental groups yielded minimal sample sizes of n = 4- <dig>  in the group having received a sham injection in the striatum, the 'intensity' parameter showed no significant contralateral-ipsilateral differences although variability was high . no other parameters showed significant contralateral-ipsilateral differences , and locomotor speed was not different between lesion and sham animals .

b. rat transgenic model for huntington's disease
motor coordination and balance of 2- and  <dig> months old tghd and wt rats were measured using the rotarod test. throughout the study, there was no significant between-group difference in the latency to fall off the rotarod at all  <dig> speeds and ages tested , consistent with the asymptomatic description given in previous studies  <cit> .

however, when gait abnormalities measured by the catwalk method were assessed monthly, 2-month-old homozygous tghd rats showed a significant increase in the swing speed of the hindpaws and right forepaw as compared to their wild-type littermates , while the duration of paw contact was significantly decreased . locomotor speed was also significantly higher for  <dig> month old tghd rats compared to controls . although other parameters did not reach statistical significance, this trend  was also seen in an increase in stand index   and a decrease in swing  . however, the differences in speed disappeared at the later time points investigated .

in addition, with increasing age, 3- and 4-month-old tghd rats started to develop a deviating gait pattern, in which they placed the right forepaw under a smaller angle, i.e. more to the inside, than wild-type rats . this deviating gait pattern normalized at the age of  <dig> months. no significant differences in paw angle were detected between the different time points investigated within each group.

c. photothrombotic stroke model
as stroke model, we induced focal ischemia by the systemic injection of a photoactive dye  in combination with visible light irradiation of the sensorimotor cortex. a representative cresyl violet staining, revealing the stroke location of all photothrombotic rats is shown in fig. 6a. all these animals were tested for their motor behavior and usage of the paws via the rotarod test, cylinder test and the catwalk. the cylinder test showed a significant deficit in the usage of the forepaws contralateral to the lesion site  <dig> h after surgery . furthermore the results of the rotarod test suggested a discrepancy in usage, equilibrium and motor coordination of the stroke animals compared to the controls although no significance was reached .  <dig> day after surgery the animals were tested on the catwalk. differences were found in intensity of the contralateral hindlimbs compared to the ipsilateral hindlimbs . linked to these results a significant difference was also observed in the print area, print width and max area parameters. all these parameters showed lower values for the contralateral hindlimbs in comparison to the ipsilateral hindlimbs . these differences were not present in the forepaws. no contralateral-ipsilateral asymmetry was observed in the sham operated animals, and locomotor speed was not different between lesion and sham animals .

discussion
in this study we measured locomotor deficits in rat models of pd, hd and stroke using a novel automated gait analysis test, the catwalk method, and compared the results to deficits recorded using established behavioral motor tests. to the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first to evaluate these rat models of neurological disorders using an automated gait analysis concurrently measuring static and dynamic gait parameters.

the quantitative gait analysis used in the present study, the catwalk method, provides both static gait parameters as well as time-based information and a pressure parameter, in contrast to a conventional gait analysis test, such as the analysis of footprints obtained by allowing rodents to walk with inked paws along a sheet of paper, which provides information about static gait  <cit> . the 6-ohda rat model for pd recapitulates one of the main features of pd, namely the loss of midbrain dopaminergic neurons. the loss of dopaminergic innervation of the caudate putamen leading to reduced activity of the basal ganglia thalamocortical motor circuit and motor deficits has been well characterized both in the rat 6-ohda model as well as in the human disease  <cit> . one of the most sensitive rodent behavioral tests available to assess midbrain dopaminergic cell loss is the amphetamine induced rotation test; however a pharmacological challenge is necessary to induce the behavioral readout  <cit> . it has proved challenging in the field to develop behavioral readouts for dopaminergic cell loss without pharmacological challenge  <cit> . the 'cylinder' test  can be used to observe contralateral-ipsilateral motor imbalances in the forelimbs in unilaterally 6-ohda lesioned animals without pharmacological challenge  <cit> , as is confirmed in our experimental groups where the degree of impairment correlates to the degree of lesion . this contralateral-ipsilateral imbalance is also observed in the gait analysis, as the intensity of the lesioned forepaw is significantly lower compared to the non-lesioned paw, indicating that the 6-ohda lesioned animals preferably use the non-lesioned paws to support their body weight. the amplitude of the intensity imbalance was consistent with the severity and type of lesion. indeed, strongest measures were observed for the group showing the largest lesion, the mfb lesion group. in this group, strong paw intensity deficits were seen at  <dig> week post-lesion. on the contrary, striatal injections which yielded lower levels of dopaminergic fiber loss showed lower pawprint intensity deficits compared to the mfb group. a recent study has similarly analyzed 6-ohda lesioned rats using the catwalk gait analysis  <cit> , including experimental groups with mild bilateral 6-ohda lesions in the striatum combined with subthalamic nucleus stimulations. because vlamings et al.  <cit>  performed bilateral lesions and our major observation is a contralateral-ipsilateral imbalance in pawprint intensity, it is difficult to draw parallels between both studies. we nevertheless observed that the contralateral-ipsilateral imbalances were bigger in the forepaws compared to the hindpaws, similar to differences of effects of forepaw vs hindpaw as observed by vlamings et al.  <cit> .

interestingly, despite the availability of multiple parameters from the catwalk analysis, the only parameter which consistently yielded results corresponding to a unilateral motor deficit was the intensity parameter measured for the forepaws. this parameter is highly analogous to the paw usage parameter monitored in the cylinder test and we can therefore conclude that information obtained from motor behavior assessment of hemiparkinsonian rats using the catwalk test is comparable to that obtained by the cylinder test.

we have also monitored the onset and early progression of hd-like symptoms related to all motor systems affected in hd in a transgenic rat model of hd. in line with previous studies in this tghd rat and in a knock-in mouse model of hd  <cit> , gait analysis revealed a hyperkinetic profile early on in the pre-symptomatic stage. whereas previous studies used the accelerod or open field monitoring  <cit> , we have demonstrated by the aid of the catwalk that the hyperkinetic profile in 2-month-old transgenic rats is more specifically reflected by increased swing speed and decreased paw contact of quasi all limbs, and lasts until the age of  <dig> months; the latter in accordance with a previous report  <cit> . 2-month-old transgenic rats also showed increased locomotor speed , in line with previously described negative correlation between locomotor speed and stance duration  <cit> . this early hyperkinetic profile was not observed on the rotarod test used as a reference test in this study, allowing us to conclude that the catwalk method is more sensitive in measuring behavioural deficits in these animals than the rotarod test   <cit> . whether alternative behavioural tests, of which some perform better than the rotartod, e.g. the balance beam tasks, will also detect this hyperkinetic profile needs to be further studied .

consistent with observations in humans, in which even years before the onset of overt motor symptoms such as chorea, subtle motor deficits are present   <cit> , we also noticed in 3- and 4-month-old tghd rats a deviant gait pattern, in which they placed the right forepaw more to the inside than wts . no significant differences in paw angle were observed between the time points of both groups.

aberrations in paw placement have so far only been described in symptomatic mice transgenic for hd and in 3-np-treated mice  <cit> . specifically, r6/ <dig> transgenic mice at 13- <dig> weeks of age exhibited a gait that lacked a normal, uniform, alternating right-left step pattern with inside paw placement of all limbs, although within 3-np-treated mice, the paw placement angle of the hind limbs was more open  <cit> . the unilateral onset of this paw angle placement phenotype in the tghd rats may be explained by reports suggesting that asymmetric striatal degeneration due to ventricle enlargement is not uncommon  <cit> . whether the paw angle measured using the catwalk is indeed an early marker for motor deficits needs to be clarified in further longitudinal designs.

thirdly, we used the catwalk method to quantify disturbances in gait in rats with a unilateral photothrombotic lesion in the parietal sensorimotor cortex compared to sham operated animals. as for the tg hd animals, the rotarod test which we used as a reference test proved to be insensitive since only a fraction of the lesioned rats fell off the machine . as expected by the anatomofunctional location of the infarct, the rats showed a deficit in usage of the forepaw contralateral to the lesion  <dig> h after surgery as seen with the cylinder test. however, this test is not suitable for the detection of impairments in the hindpaws. in contrast, the gait analysis with the catwalk method demonstrated a significant difference in the usage of the contralateral vs. ipsilateral hindlimbs. this was expressed by the 'intensity', 'print area', 'print width' and 'max area' parameters . all these parameters showed that the lesioned animals put a higher pressure on the non-affected ipsilateral hindpaw than the contralateral hindpaw. this imbalance is likely due to a compensation of the animal to spare the affected paw and enforce the paw with non-injured motoric excitation. these results confirm data where cortical ablation lesions impaired the performances of the rats on a beam walking task caused by hindlimb deficits  <cit> . our data therefore clearly demonstrate the advantage of using automated gait analysis for the study of cortically lesioned rats.

although the present study has focused on gait analysis in rats, extension to mouse models is in principle possible. for example, robust effects on stride length during continuous locomotion following pyramidotomy of the cortical tract in adult mice have been observed  <cit> . also, unsteady gait with strongly reduced paw print area for both fore- and hindpaws and reduced base of support for the hindpaws have been measured in a mouse model for refsum disease  <cit> . further research will be required to delineate gait deficits in mouse models of pd, hd or stroke.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we measured for the first time gait deficits in rat models of pd, hd and stroke using an automated quantitative gait analysis test and compared the results to motor deficits observed in reference tests. in the unilateral 6-ohda lesion model for pd, the deficits in gait essentially confirmed results obtained by the cylinder test. however, in the hd model and the stroke model the catwalk analysis proved more sensitive than the rotarod test and also added new and more detailed information on specific gait parameters. the automated quantitative gait analysis test may thus be a useful tool to study both motor impairment and recovery associated with various neurological motor disorders.

