BACKGROUND
gene expression in kinetoplastids  takes a peculiar form, quite unlike the system of promoter and terminator signals typical of other eukaryotes. expression of several, contiguous loci occurs simultaneously through polycistronic transcription  <cit>  and regulation of individual genes is largely post-transcriptional  <cit> . within this context, an unusually large proportion of kinetoplastid genes is arranged in tandem gene arrays and includes transporter proteins  <cit> , surface antigens  <cit>  and the spliced-leader sequence responsible for cleavage of the polycistronic pre-mrna  <cit> . this study addresses the evolution of α- and β-tubulin arrays in the parasitic kinetoplastids, trypanosoma spp. and leishmania spp., with a comparative genomic approach. these unicellular flagellates are responsible for various human diseases around the world, namely african sleeping sickness, leishmaniasis and chagas' disease.

tubulin is a fundamental constituent of kinetoplastid cytoskeletons, cell division machinery and motile organelles  <cit> . there is a large family of tubulin proteins but the α/β heterodimer is the essential building material for the microtubular cytoskeleton  <cit> . trypanosomatid parasites possess an extensive array of cytoplasmic, mitotic and flagellar microtubules and recent evidence suggests that tubulin expression varies greatly during the life cycles of trypanosoma and leishmania spp., possibly as the relative demand for these structures fluctuates  <cit> . indeed, in certain species, different isoforms of tubulin may have specific expression profiles related to the parasitic life cycle; for example, l. mexicana has a β-tubulin isoform unique to the amastigote stage found within human macrophages  <cit> .

kinetoplastid gene expression is based on polycistronic transcription, followed by 5' trans-splicing of pre-mrna and 3' poly-adenylation to form mature transcripts  <cit> . a variety of structural motifs in untranscribed regions have been shown to regulate mrna levels post-transcriptionally by affecting trans-splicing, rna-binding capability and transcript stability  <cit> . genes do not generally possess individual promoters and therefore, cannot be up-regulated through transcriptional initiation. instead, where high transcript levels are required, genes may be duplicated to form tandem gene arrays, which are co-transcribed. such dosage effects may explain why tubulin genes, and other genes, such as the paraflagellar rod proteins  <cit> , are arrayed. however, it also seems possible for specific isoforms to be differentially expressed through regulation of particular repeats within the array, or of additional, non-arrayed  loci elsewhere in the genome  <cit> .

in yeast, equal concentrations of α and β tubulin are required for normal cellular function  <cit> . assuming that such coordination is desirable in trypanosomatids, the precise arrangement of tubulin genes could be crucial. recently completed genome sequences have exposed the full extent of tandem gene arrays in trypanosoma brucei  <cit>  and leishmania major  <cit>  and these are illustrated in figure  <dig>  tubulin gene arrays have long been known and used to understand gene regulation in these organisms. trypanosoma spp. possess a single array of alternating α- and β-tubulin genes  <cit>  ), while leishmania spp. possess separate α-tubulin and β-tubulin arrays on different chromosomes  <cit>  ). the tandem repetition of these two character states suggests that they are independent solutions to a common need. given that an alternating array is the more intuitive means of maintaining transcriptional parity between the α and β heterodimeric tubulins, quite how and why such a fundamental genomic rearrangement occurred in one or both lineages requires explanation.

this study examined the genomic architecture of tubulin tandem arrays in a range of kinetoplastids and combined this with bioinformatic analyses of various genome sequences to identify the origin of the two character states found in trypanosoma spp. and leishmania spp. it included representatives of the three non-parasitic clades within the kinetoplastida, the 'bodonids', which together comprise the natural outgroup of trypanosomatids  <cit> . a phylogeny for tubulin genomic architecture was created to ask several questions: first, can the relatedness of tubulin loci be traced through comparison of their genomic positions; second, what is the polarity of the character transition, i.e., is one alternating array or two monotypic arrays the derived state; and third, if one state is derived, what is the model for the genomic rearrangement.

RESULTS
overview
the genomic arrangement of tubulin genes among kinetoplastids was examined in three stages. first, comparison of the completed genome sequences for t. brucei and l. major established the relationships between the distinct tubulin loci in these two organisms. second, specific and degenerate polymerase chain reaction  primers, able to amplify the intergenic sequence  between any combination of α- and β-tubulin genes in tandem were designed from sequence alignments spanning the entire kinetoplastida. these primers were used for molecular screening of various species, including the non-parasitic bodonids. third, bioinformatic screening of draft genome sequences for tubulin loci in several other species allowed their character states to be confirmed. the characters identified by the second and third parts are described in table  <dig> and were mapped on to an evolutionary tree to infer the ancestral state prior to the origins of trypanosoma and leishmania, and thereby, determine the phylogeny of tubulin tandem gene arrays.

comparison of gene order in t. brucei and l. major genome sequences
the gene order surrounding the alternating array in t. brucei was conserved on chromosome  <dig> of l. major. a string of calpain-like genes, upstream in t. brucei, was contiguous with coatamer β-subunit and rnase-like genes, which were downstream in t. brucei ). thus, while there was a homoeologous position for the alternating array in l. major, there was no trace of tubulin, or the adjacent histone gene array found in t. brucei.

there was also colinearity around the location of the l. major arrays. the α-tubulin array on chromosome  <dig> was flanked by an n-acetyl transferase subunit gene and a long-chain fatty acid coa ligase gene, as well as other hypothetical loci. these genes are adjacent on chromosome  <dig> in t. brucei ), and hypothetical genes in syntenic positions showed sequence homology. likewise for the β-tubulin array; two hypothetical genes that flank the array in l. major  showed high blast scores to contiguous genes on chromsome <dig> in t. brucei: tb <dig> . <dig>  and tb <dig> . <dig>  respectively. the position of the singleton β-tubulin locus on chromosome  <dig> in l. major was partially conserved in t. brucei. the upstream gene order in l. major was recapitulated in the subtelomeric region of chromosome  <dig> in t. brucei; however, there was no tubulin locus and no conserved synteny downstream, suggesting that the tubulin locus corresponds to a strand break-point ). no homoeologous position was identified in the t. brucei genome for the chromosome  <dig> β-tubulin locus in l. major.

sequencing of tubulin arrays in further kinetoplastida
insect-parasitizing trypansomatids and non-parasitic bodonids were screened for tandem tubulin genes using specific and degenerate pcr, to provide outgroup comparisons to character states in trypanosoma and leishmania. products that were amplified and sequenced from kinetoplastids without genome projects are shown in table 1; these were non-coding igs for the most part, although fragments of tubulin coding sequence  were present at either end to enable positive identification of gene order. l. mexicana, and c. fasciculata both possessed monotypic arrays and igs from both α- and β-tubulin arrays were at least partially homologous with those from the existing leishmania sequences. a monotypic α-tubulin gene array is also documented in leptomonas seymouri, which is a close relative of leishmania  <cit> , . there was no evidence of alternating arrays in any of these species. three stercorarian trypanosomes, t. grayi, t. pestanai and t. cyclops, each possessed alternating arrays, with no evidence for monotypic arrays. while there are some gross similarities in base composition and polypurine strings, the igss from these species and t. cruzi did not align. alternating arrays were also identified in the endosymbiont-bearing crithidia deanei and another insect-parasitizing trypanosomatid, the aposymbiotic herpetomonas megaseliae. primers designed to amplify monotypic arrays produced bands for these two species when visualised on electrophoretic gels, but these were weak and inconsistent. once sequenced, such bands from c. deanei were shown to result from mis-priming downstream from tubulin loci.

a variety of degenerate primer combinations generated products when applied to the non-trypanosomatid kinetoplastids, b. saltans, parabodo caudatus and n. designis. when applied at relatively low annealing temperatures , this tended to permit priming at several sites, including on the wrong tubulin. however, this partial specificity was sufficient to amplify fragments of tubulin, which were then used to design secondary primers. these successfully generated specific products that confirmed the presence of alternating arrays in all three species. when sequenced, those products that had previously indicated monotypic arrays were shown to be igs from the same alternating arrays and therefore, the result of mis-priming. igss from the three species could not be aligned.

the igss between tubulin repeats varied greatly in size and content, over relatively short evolutionary distances. igss within leishmania aligned but showed substantial length variation, owing to repetitive dna motifs. beyond this, there was no sequence homology among igss of any array type. there were no obvious sequence motifs shared by igss, although figure  <dig> shows that polypyrimidine and polypurine strings, as well as microsatellites, were very common.

arrangement of tubulin genes in trypanosoma genome sequences
mining the t. congolense genome sequence produced two contigs that include alternating arrays of α- and β-tubulin genes, as in t. brucei; these can be retrieved from genedb using the identifiers congo819f <dig> q1k and congo_endsn14h <dig> p1k respectively. the nucleotide sequence for the locus directly upstream of the array in t. brucei  was used to search t. congolense unassembled reads. homologous sequences were identified and tiled together to complete the t. congolense homolog to the upstream locus; this showed 67% identity to the t. brucei gene. tiling downstream from this gene showed that the homolog to tb <dig> . <dig> is  <dig> bp upstream of an α-tubulin and then a further β-tubulin; it also demonstrated that igss following α- and β-tubulin copies are  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp in length respectively and do not align. copies of each igs were identical except for minor length differences in repetitive regions.

two contigs confirmed that the situation is very similar in t. vivax. the first, retrievable from genedb with the identifier tviv499h <dig> p1k, comprised an α-tubulin gene and homologs to loci directly upstream of the array in t. brucei, with conserved synteny. the second, identified by tviv1885f <dig> p1k, included six tubulin genes in an alternating array. the igss again formed two classes following α- and β-tubulin duplicates and were 332– <dig> bp and 492– <dig> bp in length respectively. there was some length variation between repeats due to repetitive elements within the igss.

no array is evident from the current release of the t. cruzi genome sequence  <cit> . however, it is known that an alternating α-β array exists  <cit> , and sequence data independently deposited in genbank comprises β- and α-tubulin genes in tandem . otherwise, the genome sequence contained three contigs that include tubulin. the first  showed a single β-tubulin and three other loci; together, they were colinear with chromosome  <dig> in t. brucei, and indicate that this single β-tubulin gene occupies a homoeologous position to the alternating array . given that an alternating arrangement is known to exist in t. cruzi, and is not represented elsewhere, this contig is interpreted as the location of the alternating array in t. cruzi. since the array may start and end with a β-tubulin duplicate, the single β-tubulin locus could represent a 'collapsed' array. the second contig  was a duplicate of the first, although the β-tubulin is annotated as a pseudogene and apparently lacks  <dig> bp from the 3' end. the third contig  included a lone α-tubulin without any contextual information. in summary, these three trypanosoma genome sequences concurred with the arrangement in t. brucei, showing an α-β alternating array, with conservation of surrounding gene order. igss following the two isotypes were always dissimilar, but each class of cds and internal igs were consistently concerted. there was no evidence for further tubulin loci.

arrangement of tubulin genes in leishmania genome sequences
the above analysis suggested that the trypanosoma tubulin sequences were found only in a single alternating array. the situation in leishmania spp. is more complex with multiple β-tubulin loci. the current release of the l. infantum genome sequence includes homologs to each l. major tubulin locus . searching with blast located two α-tubulin genes in tandem on contig 2963; comparison of the  <dig> bp igs with l. major confirmed that it shows  <dig> % homology to the α-array on chromosome  <dig>  similarly, tandem β-tubulin genes on contig  <dig> had an igs of  <dig> bp, which were  <dig> % homologous to those on chromosome  <dig> in l. major. contig  <dig> included a single β-tubulin and upstream loci that showed conserved synteny with chromosome  <dig>  the 5' untranscribed region  of this single β-tubulin gene showed partial homology with the β-array  but the 3'utr was unique. finally, contig  <dig> included a single β-tubulin gene with unique 5' and 3'utrs that were 96% identical to those around the chromosome  <dig> locus in l. major.

at the time of writing, the draft genome sequence of l. braziliensis was available as a preliminary, automated assembly. this included partial α- and β-tubulin genes in approximately homoeologous positions to those in l. major. however, these genes did not comprise complete coding sequences and many of the surrounding loci present in l. major were not present in the draft assembly. in fact, the presence of homologs to each l. major locus was confirmed by manually assembling these loci in l. braziliensis by tiling reads together, using the last  <dig> bp of each read to locate the next. three distinct 3' utrs were identified by searching the read catalogue with the c-terminus of the l. major β-tubulin gene.

tiling downstream from the first of these distinct sequences produced the n-terminus of another β-tubulin gene. this indicated the presence of  a tandem pair of β-tubulin duplicates. it was not possible to confirm this by tiling inwards from flanking loci due to sequence gaps on both sides. the igs between these duplicates was  <dig> bp in length and showed sequence homology with the l. major β-β tubulin array igs throughout its length .

the second distinct 3'utr identified by blast also appeared to tile into another β-tubulin gene but, on closer inspection, this resulted from a section of repetitive dna on either side of the tubulin that caused one to tile back into the n-terminus. in fact, this utr corresponded to the chromosome  <dig> locus, which was confirmed by searching the read catalogue for the locus upstream of the chromosome  <dig> β-tubulin gene in l. major . tiling downstream from this identified a putative ortholog to lmjf <dig>  in l. braziliensis.

the third distinct utr did not tile into another β-tubulin gene but a homolog to histone deacetylase gene, which was downstream of the chromosome  <dig> β-tubulin in l. major. after locating a homolog to the upstream locus in l. major  and tiling downstream, the 5'utr of a β-tubulin gene was identified; this confirmed the presence of an ortholog to the chromosome  <dig> locus. tandem α-tubulin genes were identified with blast and shown to occupy a homoeologous position to the array in l. major, based on conserved synteny of surrounding loci. in summary, all three leishmania genome sequences supported the presence of one α-tubulin locus on chromosome  <dig> and three distinct β-tubulin loci; two singletons are found on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  and an arrayed locus on chromosome  <dig>  in all three species the three β-tubulin loci were flanked by distinct untranscribed regions, except the 5' utrs of the chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> loci, which were partially homologous.

phylogeny of tubulin genomic architecture
phylogenetic estimation using 18s rrna sequences produced a resolved and robust topology, with high bootstrap values at most nodes; the topology is consistent with previous reconstructions using this marker  <cit> . the rrna phylogeny is shown in figure  <dig>  the genomic architecture in each species is shown alongside, as well as sequence motifs identified in intergenic sequences. the figure demonstrates that the monotypic arrays in leishmania spp., c. fasciculata and l. seymouri are the derived condition and have evolved from an ancestor bearing an alternating array. this derivation occurred once and has been maintained in all leishmania species inspected here. conversely, all trypanosoma spp. have maintained an alternating arrangement. alternating arrays in all three non-trypanosomatid clades  suggests that this transition has only occurred once in the kinetoplastida.

discussion
through a combination of molecular screening of various kinetoplastid genomes and bioinformatic screening of trypanosomatid genome sequences, the genomic organisation of tubulin genes in these protists has been identified. the alternating tubulin array in t. brucei and the distinct, monotypic arrays in l. major are representative of their respective genera and mutually exclusive, i.e., they are not modified states of a common ancestral character. rather, two results confirm that the monotypic arrays of leishmania spp. and their close relatives  represent a fundamental rearrangement of tubulin genes, formed de novo in novel genomic locations. first, the presence of alternating arrays in all three clades of non-parasitic kinetoplastids indicates that this was the character state in the ancestral trypanosomatid. second, gene order comparisons demonstrate that, while the chromosomal locations of tubulin arrays are reciprocally conserved, the alternating array has been entirely abolished in l. major and t. brucei has no orthologs to the monotypic arrays.

an important feature of this transition is that the alternating locus has been replaced by several novel loci without any obvious links, other than the tubulin sequence itself, between the ancestral and derived character states. comparative genomics is beginning to generate a consensus on the evolution of genomic structure, with a distinction drawn between chromosomal rearrangements that cause disruptions in macrosynteny and may affect karyotype, and smaller, segmental duplications, inversions and transpositions, , which all disrupt microsynteny  <cit> . these events are taxonomically widespread and responsible for the creation of novel genes  <cit> ; segmental duplication and subsequent gene loss largely determines gene order evolution in comparisons of yeast genomes  <cit>  and in primates  <cit> , while gene order in drosophila spp. is greatly affected by paracentric inversions  <cit> . in addition to these mechanisms, selfish elements have been frequently implicated in the translocation of genomic dna, for example in most plants  <cit>  and in trypanosomes  <cit> .

in this case coding sequences have moved to new locations that otherwise retain colinearity between t. brucei and l. major. the mechanism of translocation is unclear since nothing else that may have transposed simultaneously has survived, i.e., no neighbouring genes of the ancestral locus are seen at the derived loci to provide evidence for their source. the presence of 'calpain-like' proteins upstream of the alternating locus in t. brucei might suggest that this locus could 'hitch-hike' to new locations as a result of ectopic recombination between members of the calpain-like gene family; but the absence of calpain-like proteins adjacent to any derived loci precludes this. breakpoints have been identified in otherwise excellent synteny between trypanosomatid genomes  <cit> ; it emerged that breakpoints coincide with retrotransposon hotspots, suggesting that changes to gene order are mediated by selfish elements known from these organisms. a non-autonomous retroelement  sequence  <cit>  does occur at the end of the alternating array in t. brucei, but this seemed to be associated with the movement of a contiguous array of histone h <dig> genes rather than the tubulin genes, as the rime and histones were not found in other species where gene order was otherwise conserved. the two singleton loci in leishmania did occur at the extreme 5' end of subtelomeric regions, where retrotransposons are frequently found  <cit> , but beyond this there is no evidence for the role of selfish elements. the relationships of tubulin loci to strand-switches may provide evidence of previous chromosomal rearrangements, or place tubulin loci in regions of frequent rearrangement. the α-β array is  <dig> kb downstream of the nearest strand-switch. in l. major, the α-α array and chromosome  <dig> β-tubulin are only  <dig> kb from a strand-switch, but for the β-β array and chromosome  <dig> β-tubulin, the distances are  <dig> kb and  <dig> kb respectively  <cit> . hence, the significance of chromosomal rearrangements may yet become clear, but the proximity of strand-switches does not currently look unusual, as they are relatively frequent in these genomes.

hence, the physical mechanism responsible for new tubulin loci is unclear. clearly, segmental duplications caused tubulin genes to be translocated from the ancestral locus around the genome; this must have created some kind of transitional structure in which both original and novel loci coexisted, before the ancestral locus was abolished. a future study should seek evidence in appropriate non-parasitic relatives of leishmania, such as herpetomonas spp.,crithidia spp. and phytomonas spp.; these organisms are the closest relatives to leishmania still retaining alternating arrays; they could provide a transitional state between alternating and monotypic character states, if they possess other tubulin loci, perhaps additional arrays or lone genes, and if the gene order around these additional features could be related to loci in trypanosoma. in other words, these organisms may retain elements of the ancestral, transitional character states in a manner expressly not seen in leishmania. genome structures diverge faster than genome sequences due to a higher rate of segmental duplication  <cit> ; this suggests that most duplications are removed through purifying selection but also that there are regular opportunities for new loci. the issue here is, regardless of how tubulin loci were duplicated, why the selective environment changed from purifying to promoting their establishment.

given the likely difficulties ensuing from a monomer production imbalance in a polymer/dimer polymerisation equation it is understandable that cells have developed transcriptional and post-transcriptional controls to regulate equivalent amounts of α and β tubulin  <cit> . coupled with the fact that the trypanosome requires large amounts of tubulin dimer, the t. brucei arrangement of a large number of alternating genes provides a very reasonable solution in an organism lacking transcriptional controls. thus, what drivers might cause leishmania to discard this structure? the first move appears to have been to separate the α and β tubulin loci into new sites. if large and essentially equivalent gene numbers are maintained at these sites and transcriptional passage is similar then this might appear to offer little disadvantage to the organism. at this time, we suggest that the alternating isoforms were separated to allow differential expression, and perhaps unilateral changes in regulation, of α- or β-tubulin or both. within the context of polycistronic transcription, this would be the benefit of physical transposition, but the need that this transition fulfilled is not known.

certainly, the evolution of differential expression cannot be related to the evolution of new life stages, since the major lifecycle difference influencing the cytoskeleton between t. brucei and l. major is that the latter produces an amastigote form that lacks a motile flagellum. however, an amastigote is also formed by t. cruzi, which has conserved the single array; furthermore, it is clear that the monotypic arrays evolved before the amastigote phase in leishmania . equally, the derivation of monotypic arrays cannot be related to the evolution of additional, singleton loci on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> in leishmania spp.  <cit> , since these too evolved in leishmania, after the monotypic arrays. separation of the tubulin isoforms may have facilitated novel β-tubulin loci but it cannot have been derived from the same fundamental causes.

CONCLUSIONS
the restructuring of tubulin repertoire in trypanosomatids is an example of a very stable system being rapidly and entirely replaced by a novel derivation. the evolutionary causes of the replacement of an alternating α-β tubulin tandem array by separate, monotypic arrays probably reflects new expression regimes that became apparent in the lineage leading to leishmania, and segmental transpositions that gave the opportunity to craft new loci. the role of transposition in the evolution of tubulin repertoire may itself reflect a ubiquitous constraint in kinetoplastids, and the reason why tubulin tandem arrays exist at all, the absence of individual gene promoters. the arrangement of tubulin genes in arrays ensures high expression levels in the context of polycistronic transcription, but prevents the divergence of non-coding regions and functional specialisation, probably due to repeated crossing-over between duplicate alleles and, consequentially, concerted evolution  <cit> . setting aside the exact reasons why new tubulin loci were established, transposition events in the ancestor of leishmania may have been essential to overcome the historical constraint inherited from non-parasitic kinetoplastids, and facilitate the evolution of novel expression patterns. furthermore, it was observed here that genomic environments around tubulin loci, past and present, are widely conserved across species while tubulin genes themselves are not. this suggests that, once transposed, these new loci supplanted the original locus, leading to its rapid eradication.

