BACKGROUND
clathrin is a heteromeric protein composed of heavy chain subunits that can self-assemble into a polyhedral array on membranes. the most thoroughly characterized form of clathrin comprises light chain subunits, which are unstructured until bound to heavy chains
 <cit> . clathrin was described nearly 40 years ago
 <cit>  and since then the clathrin heavy chain  has been identified in all eukaryotes
 <cit> , while the clathrin light chain  subunit has proved more difficult to identify in distant eukaryotic species
 <cit> .

clathrin-mediated vesicular trafficking is the most highly characterized mechanism by which proteins and lipids are transported between membrane-bound organelles, being responsible for a large proportion of import from the plasma membrane  and transport from the trans-golgi network  towards the endosomal system
 <cit> . the amino acid sequence of chc is highly conserved from yeasts to humans, with the majority of variations representing conservative replacements or infrequent gaps, usually of less than three residues. the strong pressure to preserve the primary structure of chc likely reflects the highly extended interleg contacts required for assembly, as well as the large number of interactions with other proteins involved in cargo sorting and the regulation of membrane coat formation
 <cit> .

endocytosis is essential for eukaryotic cell survival as a basic mechanism of ingesting macromolecules and has been thoroughly characterized in mammalian and yeast cells. internalized molecules are later degraded in the endosomal-lysosomal system and provide important precursors for several key metabolic pathways
 <cit> . among parasitic protozoa, endocytosis is also important for evading host immune defenses and to support the intense proliferation of specific life cycle stages
 <cit> . a particularly good example of these parasitic protozoa are trypanosomatids, a group that includes pathogenic parasites, such as trypanosoma brucei, t. cruzi and different leishmania species, which are all associated with severe diseases in humans.

except for a previous study demonstrating endocytosis of ferritin via coated vesicles in crithidia fasciculata <cit> , endocytosis in trypanosomatids has been reported predominantly in t. brucei and also in t. cruzi and leishmania <cit> . in most trypanosomatids endocytic activity is polarized and restricted to the flagellar pocket membrane
 <cit> . in t. brucei, endocytic activity has also been shown to vary across the different developmental stages of the parasite
 <cit> .

endocytic mechanisms have been studied most extensively in t. brucei, where clathrin-mediated endocytosis is the major route for endocytosis
 <cit> . clathrin was found in t. brucei at endocytic vesicles and post-golgi elements, suggesting that it serves a similar range of functions to those found in higher eukaryotes
 <cit> . suppression of clathrin expression in t. brucei using rna interference results in rapid lethality in the bloodstream stage, the developmental form most active for endocytosis
 <cit> . nevertheless, the events leading up to endocytosis  in t. cruzi, the causative agent of chagas disease in latin america, are still poorly understood. a major obstacle occurs because these two trypanosoma species exhibit markedly different life cycles, and the developmental forms that can be maintained easily in the laboratory are distinct , making direct comparisons difficult. furthermore, analysis of endocytic activity in t. cruzi is far more complex because the epimastigote form of this parasite exhibits a second endocytic portal, the cytostome/cytopharynx complex
 <cit> .

morphological observations by transmission electron microscopy have previously identified coated vesicles budding off from both the flagellar pocket and a region adjacent to the tgn in t. cruzi epimastigotes and trypomastigotes
 <cit> . subcellular localization of clathrin has been examined in t. cruzi epimastigotes by immunofluorescence, however, using a heterologous antibody against bovine clathrin. immunolabeling was observed clustered at the anterior region of cells, where the flagellar pocket and the single golgi complex are located
 <cit> .

in this study, we have performed a thorough analysis of the chc and clc genes of t. cruzi, characterizing their expression and localization in different developmental forms of the parasite , using both polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies produced against t. cruzi recombinant proteins. our data indicate that clathrin heavy and light chains are expressed in t. cruzi and that they localize to the flagellar pocket and golgi complex region.

RESULTS
tcclc and tcchc: in silico gene identification and domain analysis
a hypothetical gene for t. cruzi clathrin light chain was identified in the tritrypdb database . this gene is 648 bp long, maps between nucleotides  <dig>  and  <dig>  on chromosome  <dig> of t. cruzi and encodes a hypothetical protein  of  <dig> amino acids . a comparison of amino acid sequence alignments revealed that tcclc is conserved in trypanosomatids , with maximal identities between  <dig> to 45% . the percentage identity was 32–34% for more divergent organisms, such as h. sapiens and s. cerevisae, but the length of these alignments was smaller .
trypanosoma cruzi 
clc , indicating the percentage of sequence identity and similarity 


t. cruzi
t. cruzi marinkellei
t. brucei
l. donovani
l. mexicana
l. major
h. sapiens
s. cerevisae
a <cit> .

sequence length : number of amino acids in the aligned sequences.

the t. cruzi clathrin heavy chain gene has already been identified in the tritrypdb database . this gene is  <dig>  bp long, maps between nucleotides  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> on chromosome  <dig> of t. cruzi and encodes a clathrin heavy chain protein  of  <dig>  amino acids . a comparison of amino acid sequence alignments revealed that tcchc is highly conserved in trypanosomatids , with maximal identities between  <dig> and 98%.

analysis of the tcclc gene using the pfam database revealed that the encoded protein contains a clathrin light chain domain located between amino acids  <dig> and  <dig>  while the tcchc-encoded protein contains a clathrin heavy chain linker , clathrin-h-link domains  and several repeats found in clathrin and in vacuolar protein sorting-associated  proteins .

tcclc and tcchc expression in trypanosoma cruzi
a polypeptide of approximately  <dig>  kda, encoded by the entire t. cruzi clc gene, was used to obtain a mouse antiserum. when assessed by western blotting, this antiserum reacted with a polypeptide of approximately 30 kda in whole cell lysates obtained at different stages of the t. cruzi life cycle .

a polypeptide of approximately 40 kda, encoded by the n-terminal sequence of the t. cruzi chc gene, was used to obtain polyclonal and monoclonal  antibodies. when lysates obtained at different stages of the t. cruzi life cycle were probed with this monoclonal antibody by western blotting, a polypeptide of approximately 190 kda was detected corresponding to endogenous tcchc . the antibody also detected the gst-tcchc fusion protein  expressed in e. coli . as expected, the monoclonal antibody did not detect proteins from normal e. coli extracts .

differential expression of both tcchc and tcclc was observed during the t. cruzi life cycle as determined by comparing tcchc and tcclc levels at different developmental stages  with that of the corresponding actin loading control . both tcchc and tcclc were expressed to a lesser extent in trypomastigotes and to a greater extent in amastigotes.

subcellular localization of tcclc and tcchc in trypanosoma cruzi
confocal microscopy was used to visualize the cellular distribution of clathrin heavy  and light  chains in t. cruzi, using the tcchc monoclonal antibody  and the tcclc antiserum . these antibodies recognized the proteins in all developmental forms tested. intense immunolabeling was detected adjacent to the kinetoplast, in a cell region where the flagellar pocket and golgi complex are located.

as mentioned above, incubation of t. cruzi with an antiserum against tcclc resulted in positive immunolabeling in a region adjacent to the kinetoplast. accordingly, this same pattern of localization was observed in tcclc/ac-transfected t. cruzi epimastigotes immunolabeled with an anti-protein a antibody . furthermore, tcclc colocalized with tcchc at the anterior region of wild type epimastigotes, where the flagellar pocket and the single golgi complex are located .

in tcrab7-gfp transfected t. cruzi epimastigotes, immunolabeling with antiserum against tcclc partially colocalized with the golgi marker tcrab7-gfp
 <cit>  indicating that tcclc may also localize to the flagellar pocket . to confirm this hypothesis, wild-type epimastigotes were incubated with alexa fluor  <dig> conjugated albumin, a protein that is ingested through the flagellar pocket. as expected, tcclc colocalized with albumin at the flagellar pocket region , but not with albumin loaded into endocytic vesicles at the posterior cell region. finally, tcchc did not colocalize with alexa fluor 633-conjugated transferrin, a protein that is predominantly ingested via uncoated vesicles at the cytostome/cytopharynx complex and which accumulates in reservosomes .

the tcclc antiserum was also used to determine the subcellular localization of endogenous tcclc in wild-type t. cruzi epimastigotes by transmission electron microscopy. ultrastructural analysis revealed immunolabeling at the flagellar pocket membrane , further confirming the results obtained by confocal microscopy.

discussion
our data represent the first attempt to analyze clathrin expression and subcellular localization in the american trypanosome t. cruzi using homologous reagents. an in silico search detected a hypothetical clathrin light chain protein  encoded by the t. cruzi genome. this protein has a clathrin light chain domain, which mediates interaction with the clathrin heavy chain and regulates stabilization of clathrin coat trimerization in mammalian cells
 <cit> . amino acid sequence alignments revealed that tcclc is conserved in trypanosomatids.

the presence of a clathrin light chain gene and expression of the encoded protein  have not previously been demonstrated in t. cruzi. in this study, we raised an antiserum against tcclc which has an expected molecular mass of  <dig>  kda . however, in western blot assays the antiserum recognized a polypeptide of approximately 30 kda in whole protein extracts of different t. cruzi developmental forms. a possible explanation is that the n-terminal  <dig> residues of tcclc, which are rich in proline and glycine, account for the anomalous electrophoretic mobility during sds-page and consequently result in estimated molecular weights that range from  <dig> to 36 kda
 <cit> .

a clathrin heavy chain gene is present in the t. cruzi genome
 <cit> . amino acid sequence alignments revealed that the encoded protein  is highly conserved in trypanosomatids. tcchc has a clathrin heavy chain linker domain with an alpha-alpha superhelical structure
 <cit> . the clathrin-h-link domain is short and often appears directly downstream from the clathrin heavy-chain linker
 <cit> . clathrin and vps repeat regions are approximately  <dig> amino acids long, composed of multiple alpha helical repeats and occur in the arm regions of the clathrin heavy chain
 <cit> , as well as in vps proteins
 <cit> .

both clathrin light and heavy chains are present in the t. cruzi genome and are differentially expressed in the major developmental forms of this parasite. the low expression level observed in t. cruzi trypomastigotes may be related to the low endocytic activity observed for this stage
 <cit> , as opposed to the high endocytic activity found in t. brucei bloodstream trypomastigotes
 <cit> .

we raised monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies against the conserved n-terminal region of t. cruzi clathrin heavy chain. these homologous antibodies are more specific than those previously produced using clathrin isolated from bovine brain
 <cit> , which may constitute a pool of clathrin heavy and light chains. our immunofluorescence assays demonstrated colocalization of clc and chc in a region adjacent to the kinetoplast of trypanosomatids, at the flagellar pocket/golgi region. some of these proteins localized to the golgi complex, as demonstrated by partial colocalization with tcrab <dig>  a golgi marker for t. cruzi <cit> . accordingly, a previous study showed that t. brucei clc is present at the flagellar pocket membrane, golgi complex and endosomal compartments
 <cit> .

evidence for clathrin-mediated endocytosis in t. cruzi amastigotes is provided by the positive immunolabeling for clathrin at the cell region where the small flagellum emerges. immunolabeling was also found at the posterior region of trypomastigote forms, where both the flagellar pocket and golgi complex are located. a previous study has shown that although transferrin can bind to the flagellar pocket membrane of trypomastigote forms, it is not endocytosed
 <cit> . therefore, it seems that clathrin in t. cruzi trypomastigotes may predominantly be involved in vesicle formation at the tgn.

tcchc/tcclc positive immunolabeling at the flagellar pocket region in t. cruzi epimastigotes indicates the occurrence of clathrin-mediated endocytosis at this site. it has previously been shown that in t. cruzi 80% of transferrin endocytosis occurs through the cytostome
 <cit> , while albumin endocytosis occurs at the flagellar pocket via coated vesicles
 <cit> . accordingly, it has been shown that transferrin uptake in t. cruzi is impaired following the disruption of cytostome-associated cytoskeletal elements and the stability of membrane cholesterol, but not by the disruption of clathrin-dependent endocytosis
 <cit> . taken together, our findings from endocytosis assays, which show colocalization of clathrin  with albumin but not with transferrin in t. cruzi epimastigotes, strongly suggest that in this developmental form clathrin-mediated endocytosis occurs at the flagellar pocket and that clathrin-independent endocytosis occurs at the cytostome/cytopharynx complex.

CONCLUSIONS
expression of clathrin heavy and light chains was demonstrated in trypanosoma cruzi using homologous antibodies. both proteins localized to the flagellar pocket and golgi complex region of different developmental forms of this parasite . our data also indicate that in t. cruzi clathrin-mediated endocytosis occurs at the flagellar pocket, while clathrin-independent endocytosis occurs at the cytostome/cytopharynx complex. further studies are under way to identify clathrin-associated proteins and the role these proteins play in the biology of this protozoan.

