BACKGROUND
introduction
staphylococcus aureus is an important human pathogen that causes several diseases ranging from superficial skin infections to life-threatening diseases such as osteomyelitis and endocarditis. s. aureus is capable of infecting a wide range of tissues in humans because of the large number of virulence factors and the complex regulatory networks that control them  <cit> . in addition, s. aureus is increasingly resistant to multiple antibiotics thus becoming a growing threat to public health. there is an urgent need to understand the complex regulatory networks used by s. aureus to cause disease. regulatory networks are attractive therapeutic targets for future treatment of antibiotic resistant infections.

modulator of sara 
one of the important global regulators of virulence in s. aureus is the staphylococcal accessory regulator   <cit> . sara regulates over  <dig> genes in s. aureus several of which are associated with virulence  <cit> . sara plays an important role in disease  <cit> . sara itself is regulated by several loci that modulate its function. we recently identified a novel gene, msa, that modulate the function of sara  <cit> . we showed that msa is essential for full expression of sara and that mutation of msa affected the expression of several virulence factors in both sara-dependent and sara-independent manners  <cit> . microarray analyses of the msa mutant show that msa has a global effect on genes in s. aureus . these studies indicate that msa is an important locus in s. aureus and that the characterization of the msa protein would be very useful in understanding staphylococcal regulatory networks.

computational tools
several bioinformatics tools have been developed to predict the structure and functional properties of bio molecules. these tools use a wide variety of algorithms to predict the properties of proteins at different levels  <cit> . the accuracy of these bioinformatics tools has been improving; however, each tool has its own advantages and disadvantages. a particular algorithm has its own characteristic specificity, sensitivity, robustness, computational cost, etc. these characteristics can be tested against benchmarks of known datasets . in order to make the most accurate predictions, several methods should be used to build a consensus.

the aim of this work is to predict the structure and functional properties of the msa protein of s. aureus to the highest possible accuracy. our prediction results show that the msa is a putative integral membrane protein with three probable transmembrane regions. we also predict that the msa contains phosphorylation sites in the loop regions . the 3-d structure analysis of the msa also predicts the presence of putative binding sites. thus, based on this computational analysis, and previous experimental data  <cit>  we hypothesise that msa might play a role in signal transduction. the fact that msa has no known homolog means that it would be a novel signal transducer.

RESULTS
primary sequence analysis
the conceptually translated msa protein is made of  <dig> amino acids with a predicted molecular weight of  <dig>  kda and an isoelectric point  of  <dig> . the gravy index value  <dig>  shows that msa is probably an insoluble protein. the codon adaptation index  value predicts the msa as a highly expressed protein. this is consistent with experimental results described previously by our group  <cit> .

homology and similarity
the msa is highly conserved among the different strains of s. aureus . even though there were several variations in the nucleotide sequences, we observed good conservation at the amino acid level. multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis of both nucleotide sequences  and protein sequences  from different strains show that they are identical. the only two exceptions were strains rf <dig> and mrsa <dig> which showed slight variations in the msa sequences. in rf <dig>  the protein sequence  was 97% similar to the msa sequence from n <dig> while in mrsa <dig>  the protein sequence  was 98% similar to the msa from n <dig>  the phylogeny of the msa protein closely resembled that of the phylogeny of these organisms as determined by multi locus sequence typing   <cit> . the position and effect of mutations in the msa protein sequence of the strains mrsa <dig> and rf <dig> are discussed in the "3-d structure prediction and analysis" section.

our similarity search results against several sequence and structure databases, using different blast programs, showed that there were no significant closely related homologs for the msa protein, except for one in s. epidermidis. even though there were no significant  homolog for msa, blast also listed several membrane proteins with remote similarities  only to the first few amino acids of the msa protein .

localization predictions
all the tools used to predict the cellular location of the protein indicated that msa is a putative membrane protein. this prompted us to examine the sequence for presence of signal peptide and potential cleavage sites in the msa protein sequence. seven out of eight signal peptide prediction tools indicated the presence of a potential signal peptide in the msa protein . the majority of the programs also predicted an n-terminal cleavage site between the amino acid  <dig> and  <dig> 

* predicted as an eukaryotic signal peptide

topology predictions
we performed topology analysis on the msa sequence using several prediction programs that yielded widely discrepant results . even though most programs failed to recognize the signal peptide, a consensus topology emerged . the predicted topology of the msa is in-out with three putative transmembrane segments . the n-terminal is predicted as present in the cytoplasmic side of the membrane while the c-terminal is predicted as outside the membrane. our consensus topology also passed the positive-inside rule and charge bias test  <cit> , with a charge bias of + <dig> towards the inside of the membrane.

tms, transmembrane segments

* analysis with several signal peptide prediction tools indicate that this tms is a putative signal peptide

** probability not significant

tms, transmembrane segment

* probability not significant

secondary structure prediction results indicated the presence of four distinct helical regions . one helical region corresponds to the cytoplasmic helix while the other three correspond to the integral membrane helices. these results are consistent with the predicted topology.

domains/patterns/motifs
we searched for the presence of domains, patterns and motifs in the msa protein sequence, to gain insight into its functions and structure. the smart results showed the presence of all the structural domains that we earlier identified using topology prediction programs and signal peptide prediction programs, viz. an n-terminal signal peptide and three transmembrane regions. in addition, smart also predicted the presence of a preatp-grasp domain  from the scop database. even though this result had an e-value of  <dig> , it was interesting because the predicted domain is a putative binding domain and falls in the predicted cytoplasmic region of msa . our pattern search in the msa protein sequence, using different programs against the prosite database, gave similar results , showing the presence of three putative phosphorylation sites . all of the predicted sites were found in the exposed regions of the msa. analysis of the location of these putative phosphorylation sites showed that two of the putative phosphorylation sites are outside the membrane while one of them is predicted in the cytoplasmic region. we also observed that these putative phosphorylation sites are highly conserved among different strains of s. aureus. this suggests that msa might be phosphorylated by kinases in the cytoplasm as well as kinases on the outside of the membrane . these predictions further suggest that msa might function as a signal transducer and provides important targets for mutagenesis experiments to test this hypothesis.

numbers denote residue position in the msa protein sequence

membrane bound receptors are important components of signal transduction in all living systems. the major class of receptors in eukaryotes contain seven transmembrane segments . prokaryotes use  <dig> tm class receptors also, however, a recent study showed that prokaryotes carry novel receptor classes that have transmembrane segments ranging from one to eight  <cit> . the msa protein sequence did not have significant homology with any of the known receptors and experimental studies are underway to evaluate its function as a signal transducer.

3-d structure prediction and analysis
homology based tertiary structure prediction for the msa protein failed, because of the lack of homologous structures. we used fold recognition based structure prediction server phyre to model the tertiary structure of the msa protein. visualization and analysis of the predicted structure using swiss-pdb viewer  showed that the predicted structure correlated with the other predicted structural features of msa in terms of the number and positions of the transmembrane helices . we refined the predicted structure by fixing side chains, fixing problematic loops, removal of amino acid clashes  and energy minimization. the refinements did not yield any drastic change in the initial predicted structure. this was confirmed by visually inspecting the structure and verifying the backbone structure using ramachandran plot  and computing the total energy difference between the initial model and the refined model.

we analysed the predicted tertiary structure for clefts and binding sites using profunc server and found putative binding sites in the cytoplasmic region between the second and the third transmembrane helices . we also used pinup to predict putative interface residues in the similar region . another binding site prediction server q-sitefinder also predicted similar binding site and binding site residues .

profunc also predicted a "nest" near the putative phosphorylation site  which was predicted outside the membrane  <cit> . the msa has all the conserved residues that make up the predicted "nest". the predicted "nest" in msa shows features of an anion-binding site. such "nests" are characteristic functional motifs, which are found in atp- or gtp binding proteins.

multiple sequence alignment of the msa protein sequence from  <dig> different strains of s. aureus revealed  <dig> mutations in strain rf <dig> and seven mutations in strain mrsa <dig> relative to consensus. mutations at amino acid positions  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were found in both mrsa <dig> and rf <dig> strains. none of these mutations were found in the predicted phosphorylation sites, predicted signal peptide sites or in the predicted anion-binding "nest". but many of the mutations were found both in the integral membrane segments as well as in the other parts of the loop regions. only one out of the  <dig> mutations had the replacement , while others were substitutions , in the strain rf <dig>  in the strain mrsa <dig>  two out of seven mutations were replacements, while others were substitutions. mrsa strain had three mutations in the predicted pre-atp grasp domain, out of which one had an amino acid replacement. rf <dig> strain had only one amino acid substitution in the pre-atp grasp domain. this indicates that the predicted functional sites are constrained from mutation.

CONCLUSIONS
we predict that msa is a membrane protein with a cleavable n-terminal signal peptide sequence, followed by three integral transmembrane regions. the msa is also predicted to have an in-out topology with at least two putative phosphorylation sites, one outside the membrane and one in the cytoplasmic region. a putative binding site is also predicted in the cytoplasmic region of msa. based on these predictions we put forward a model for the msa protein . this model also prompted us to hypothesise that msa might function as a novel signal transducer between the environment and the cytoplasm. this model will be used to design and execute experiments to confirm the functions and topology of msa and further our understanding of its role in the pathogenesis of s. aureus.

