BACKGROUND
the primate cerebral cortex constitutes a vast communication network of ipsilateral and contralateral corticocortical connections. although fewer in number, contralateral projection neurons, which course through the corpus callosum and the anterior commissure, have elaborate dendritic trees  <cit> , and are critical for functional integration of the hemispheres .

there is general agreement that commissural projections originate mostly from the homotopic area, and to a lesser extent from neighboring areas , and involve predominantly neurons in supragranular layers . it has been suggested that geographic distance is a determinant of the existence and relative laminar origin of ipsilateral corticocortical connections  <cit> . in an alternative hypothesis, the pattern of connections depends on the cortical type of the linked areas  <cit> . categorical types of cortices can be determined by the number of cortical layers, thickness of layer iv, and density of neurons and other cellular markers  <cit> . within this scheme, ipsilateral projections emanate from layers ii-iii when issued from areas with more layers, or denser layer iv, in comparison with the area of termination. in the reverse direction, projection neurons originate predominantly in layers v-vi. this hypothesis has received support in the ipsilateral connections of prefrontal areas with each other  <cit> , and with distant sensory and association areas  <cit> .

here we tested whether geographic proximity or cortical type best explains the pattern of commissural projections linking prefrontal cortices. the prefrontal cortex is an ideal model system to investigate patterns of commissural projections because it has distinct lateral, orbitofrontal and medial sectors, which vary by distance, structural type, and pattern of ipsilateral interconnections  <cit> . for example, 'limbic' areas in posterior orbitofrontal and medial prefrontal regions have fewer layers and lower cell density than lateral prefrontal areas, which are eulaminate  <cit> . accordingly, when limbic areas issue ipsilateral projections to eulaminate areas they do so overwhelmingly from layers v-vi . in the reverse direction projections originate mostly in layers ii-iii  <cit> .

previous studies on patterns of commissural projections relied mostly on qualitative data, and focused on lateral prefrontal areas, or sensory and association cortices, all of which are eulaminate . here we exploited the robust and consistent differences in the topography and laminar origin of ipsilateral projections arising from structurally distinct prefrontal areas, and used quantitative data to address the following questions: are neighboring areas, or areas of similar structural type, more likely to be connected across the commissures than other areas? are the robust laminar differences interconnecting different ipsilateral prefrontal areas also reflected in the commissural projections of these cortices?

RESULTS
injection sites
evidence was provided from  <dig> cases, and a total of  <dig> prefrontal sites, which included cases with single injections of wga-hrp and cases with injections of several distinct fluorescent dyes placed in orbital , medial , and lateral  prefrontal areas, as depicted in a composite diagram of the surfaces of the prefrontal cortex in figure  <dig>  further information about the injection sites is included in additional file  <dig> 

comparison of the global topography of ipsilateral and contralateral projections
the overall number of projection neurons on the contralateral side was considerably lower than on the ipsilateral side , accounting for just 28% of ipsilateral labeled neurons . single injections of tracer at each site labeled many cortical neurons in several ipsilateral areas , as well as neurons in many of the same areas on the contralateral side . in addition to this wide distribution of contralateral labeling, there were strong and significant correlations between the relative density patterns of ipsilateral and contralateral projections for all injection sites , except for injections in area  <dig>  that resulted in slightly higher probability values . this demonstrated that the areal distribution and density pattern of contralateral projections overlapped with a substantial subset of projections in the same areas on the ipsilateral hemisphere, despite the much lower absolute density of contralateral projection neurons. detailed data showing the normalized density of projection neurons in different prefrontal areas, as well as the total number of projection neurons for each injection site are included in table  <dig> .

the general similarity of ipsilateral and contralateral projection patterns was confirmed by an nmds analysis, arranging injection sites by the relative similarity of their afferent connection patterns . the depicted fit of areal similarities in two dimensions was high, representing 97% of the variance for the ipsilateral patterns , and 83% of the variance for contralateral patterns . on the basis of ipsilateral projection origins, prefrontal cortices were separated into two principal clusters, of mainly mediodorsal areas on the left, and mainly basoventral areas on the right-hand side . area  <dig> is situated in an intermediate position between mediodorsal and basoventral areas, and similarly occupied an intermediate position, particularly for ipsilateral projections, suggesting similarity with both mediodorsal and basoventral cortices. within the main groups, the afferent projection patterns of areas varied systematically. specifically, changes in projection patterns appeared to follow a parallel one-dimensional gradient in both groups. the patterns of contralateral projection origins showed a very similar picture, suggesting that the general organization of ipsilateral and contralateral projections follows similar principles .

comparison of the regional and areal topography of ipsilateral and contralateral projections
when cortices were grouped by region, several trends emerged. medial areas received the most widespread projections on the ipsilateral side , followed by orbitofrontal , and lateral prefrontal cortices with comparatively more restricted projections . the more widespread ipsilateral projections of posterior medial prefrontal and orbitofrontal 'limbic' areas, in comparison with lateral prefrontal areas, are consistent with previous findings . the differences noted on the ipsilateral side were also reflected in the number of areas with at least some labeled neurons on the contralateral side, with orbitofrontal areas leading , medial following , and lateral cortices trailing . the correlation in the areal pattern of projections between ipsilateral and contralateral areas did not reveal substantial regional variations. this finding reflects the overall high correlation in the areal pattern of ipsilateral and contralateral projections, described above.

in contrast to the generally high correlation in the topography of bilateral projections, there was considerable variation in the ratio of the absolute density of contralateral to ipsilateral labeled neurons among injection sites . medial prefrontal sites as a group had the highest ratio , followed by the orbitofrontal , and lateral sites , indicating regional trends . figure  <dig> shows examples of the distribution of ipsilateral and contralateral projection neurons in prefrontal areas in cases with orbitofrontal injections , and figure  <dig> in cases with medial , and lateral injections . details of the relative density of projection neurons in different prefrontal areas for each injection site are presented in table  <dig> .

pattern in the topography of contralateral projections
we used two approaches to investigate whether there was a systematic pattern in the topography of contralateral projections. first, we investigated if contralateral projections were most prevalent with the homotopic area of the injection site in the opposite hemisphere, as well as with the corresponding neighboring areas. it has been suggested that neighboring areas are connected at a higher frequency than distant areas in the ipsilateral hemisphere  <cit> . for the present analysis, each area with projection neurons was given a distance rating based on the number of areal borders intervening between it and the homotopic area of the injection site. thus, for the homotopic area the distance was  <dig>  for an area sharing a border with the homotopic area it was  <dig>  and for more distant areas the numbers were progressively higher.

most contralateral projection neurons were found in the homotopic areas  and their immediate neighbors . since the number of immediate neighbors was larger than that of the homotopic areas , the frequency was shifted towards the next-neighbor origins, and projection neurons originated with decreasing frequency from contralateral cortices that were further away . a similar pattern was seen when the relative frequency of projections was considered . moreover, in terms of relative projection density, the densest contralateral projections also emanated from the immediate neighbors of the homotopic areas, showing a strong negative correlation between areal border distance and density of contralateral projections  <  <dig> ; fig. 7b). in all cases, the contralateral homotopic area included a significant number of projection neurons, and in most these included the densest contralateral projections . in a minority of cases , however, the densest projections emanated from heterotopic areas .

heterotopic projections also originated from comparatively distant areas, including some that were separated by as many as  <dig> borders from the homotopic area. for example, projection neurons in substantial numbers were directed to orbitofrontal area opro from the medially and dorsally situated areas  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . similarly, relatively high numbers of projection neurons from area  <dig> on the medial surface were directed to orbitofrontal area  <dig> , and the orbitofrontal area opro projected to medial area  <dig> , as did orbital area  <dig> to medial area  <dig> .

what underlies the pattern of relatively dense projections in contralateral areas situated at a considerable distance from the homotopic area of the ipsilateral injection site? the second analysis addressed this question by considering the relationship of the structural type of pairs of connected cortices. this analysis was motivated by our previous findings that cortical type is highly correlated with the laminar pattern of ipsilateral corticocortical connections  <cit> . structural type describes areas mainly by the number of identifiable layers and their relative neuronal density  <cit> . for this analysis the many distinct architectonic areas can be grouped into a few structural types, as shown graphically for all prefrontal areas in figure  <dig>  similar to a previous study  <cit> , we placed areas in one of five categories, the same number as the maximum number of borders between areas noted in the analysis of border distance . the cortical type categories ranged from  <dig> , to  <dig> . the five levels of cortical type were as follows:  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig> ; and  <dig> . in categories 3– <dig> the cortical type is eulaminate, but the density of layer iv increases from categories  <dig> to  <dig>  for each pair of connected cortices we computed a value for Δ . the value of Δ for projection neurons in areas of the same type was  <dig> , and so on. type differences were treated as ordinal measures, in the same way as border distances.

the analysis showed that the great majority of projection neurons arose from areas that were of the same  or very similar  architectonic type as the injection site, while comparatively few projections possessed absolute Δ values greater than  <dig> . moreover, the densest projections had associated Δ values of  <dig>  and the density of all contralateral projections strongly related to the type similarity of contralateral origin and ipsilateral target area  <  <dig> ; fig. 7d). in all cases, relatively robust projections linking areas at a considerable distance  could be explained by the similar structural relationship of the linked areas, that is, absolute type difference, |Δ|. areas of similar type may be functionally similar as well  <cit> , such as dorsal and ventral area  <dig>  however, functional similarity cannot fully explain these findings, since some areas belonging to the same type have distinct functional attributes, such as anterior cingulate areas, and posterior orbitofrontal areas .

comparison of the laminar origin of ipsilateral and contralateral projections
there were marked differences in the laminar distribution of ipsilateral and contralateral projection neurons, as shown by their average origin in superficial and deep cortical layers . as already presented in earlier studies  <cit> , ipsilateral projection neurons had a broad distribution based on graded laminar patterns of projections on the ipsilateral side. we previously demonstrated that the percentage of projection neurons in superficial and deep layers of ipsilateral connections varied systematically with Δ, that is, the structural type difference between origin and target area  <cit> . for matched contralateral areas, however, we now found a preponderance of projection neurons in the upper layers . figure  <dig> shows the contrasted patterns of the relative frequency of projection neurons in all cases and areas in layers ii-iii, which resembles a gaussian curve for the ipsilateral side , but shows a marked bias for layers ii-iii on the contralateral side . however, even within this restricted range of origins, the patterns were still significantly correlated with the differences in architectonic type between the area of the projection target and the area of origin, i.e., Δ . thus, the type difference between a given cortical origin and its contralateral target shaped the relative number of projection neurons arising from superficial and deep layers. a similar analysis relating laminar origin of contralateral projection neurons with geographic proximity to the homotopic area showed no correlation ρ = - <dig> ; p >  <dig> ; fig. 10b). the comparison of the laminar distribution of ipsilateral and contralateral projections was consistent across cases, as shown in examples from individual cases , and described in detail in additional file  <dig> .

discussion
patterns of contralateral projections to prefrontal cortices were highly correlated with the ipsilateral, both in topography and relative density. although sparser in overall density than the ipsilateral, widespread commissural projections reached all prefrontal areas studied, differing regionally in density: medial prefrontal areas received the densest projections, followed by orbitofrontal, and then lateral prefrontal areas. our findings suggest that the number of areas issuing commissural projections to prefrontal cortices surpasses the sensory areas , or even neighboring premotor areas  <cit> .

global comparison of prefrontal projections suggested that the organization of ipsilateral and contralateral projections follows very similar rules. thus, mediodorsal and basoventral prefrontal cortices segregated into two groups, both by their ipsilateral and contralateral projection patterns. moreover, individual prefrontal areas were distinguished by their characteristic afferent projections, which were similar for ipsilateral and contralateral inputs.

our finding that prefrontal projections group into two main clusters by their projections is consistent with previous studies on ipsilateral prefrontal projections . the somewhat different appearance of the scaling and cluster diagrams in the previous and present studies is likely due to methodological differences. for example, the previous studies were based on evaluation of qualitative data from the published literature which were obtained using several different approaches  <cit> . in contrast, our analysis was based on a uniform approach by one laboratory, using quantitative data. finally, the previous studies were based on the map of walker  <cit> , whereas the present study used the map of barbas and pandya  <cit> , as modified from the map of walker.

determinants of topography, density, and laminar origin of commissural projections
previous studies have indicated that commissural projections of a given area are densest in the homotopic area, and, in addition, arise from several neighboring areas which also issue ipsilateral projections to the same area . our results are generally consistent with these findings, as demonstrated by a geographic neighbor analysis of projections. however, the relationship of the cortical type of linked areas  was an even better indicator for the topography, density, and laminar origin of commissural projections. it should be noted that geographic distance correlates with similarity in structural type, since areas having similar structure are frequently neighbors . however, the existence and density of projections found at a considerable distance from the injection site, in either hemisphere, is consistent with the rules of the 'structural model'  <cit> , but not a 'distance model'  <cit> . this result supports a broader application of the structural model for understanding organizing features of corticocortical connections  <cit> .

there is evidence that commissural projections originate mostly from layer iii in sensory , inferior parietal, prefrontal, and temporal cortices . the deep layers participate in the commissural system to a lesser extent, though they may have a bigger role in some premotor areas  <cit> , and in rodents .

studies based on qualitative comparisons of ipsilateral and contralateral projections showed similar laminar distributions, with minor variations in different areas or species . most previous comparisons, however, were conducted on eulaminate areas. the present study was based on a broad spectrum of prefrontal cortices which show marked differences in the laminar pattern of their ipsilateral projections. specifically, ipsilateral projections emanate mostly from layers v-vi of caudal medial or orbitofrontal  areas, when their destination is a eulaminate cortex. in contrast, projections in the reverse direction originate mostly from layers ii-iii  <cit> . the contrasted pattern in the laminar origin of projections in limbic prefrontal cortices provided a striking example of differences across the hemispheres, demonstrating a predominant origin in layers v-vi on the ipsilateral side, but mostly from layer iii on the contralateral side. on the other hand, differences in the laminar origin of projections in eulaminate prefrontal areas of the two hemispheres were subtle, consistent with previous findings .

the pattern of commissural projections emerges in development
the preponderance of contralateral projection neurons in layer iii can be traced to the late development of this system. even though the corpus callosum emerges between embryonic days e60- <dig> in rhesus monkeys, at a time when only cortical layers v and vi are present  <cit> , the establishment of callosal projections in prefrontal cortices occurs considerably later, between embryonic days e <dig> and e <dig>  <cit> , at a time when the superficial layers are undergoing rapid growth . the development of this projection system late in gestation is also seen in other areas and other mammalian species . moreover, in reeler mice, where layers develop in the reverse order  <cit> , callosal neurons are accordingly malpositioned in the deep layers, but, as in normal mice, they have the same morphology of medium-sized pyramidal neurons which develop late in ontogeny  <cit> . further, rats irradiated late in gestation, and acallosal mice show reduction of the supragranular layers and in the size of the corpus callosum  <cit> .

notwithstanding the preponderance of commissural projection neurons in layer iii, we still could detect a significant gradient of regional variation in their laminar origin, suggesting that cortical structure is a powerful determinant of the pattern of contralateral as well as ipsilateral corticocortical connections . this evidence raises the question of how differences in structure emerge, and by extension, how systematic patterns of connections arise.

variation in structure among prefrontal areas is consistent with differences in the timing of their development  <cit> . there is evidence that cognitive abilities that rely on the orbitofrontal cortex develop earlier than those dependent on lateral prefrontal areas  <cit> . importantly, in rhesus monkeys the upper layers of limbic area  <dig> complete their development before the same layers in area  <dig>  which, in turn, are completed before the upper layers of area  <dig>  <cit> . these temporal differences in development explain the lower density of the upper layers in area  <dig>  than in area  <dig>  which, in turn, is lower than in area  <dig>  <cit> . since projections arise as different layers are generated, a punctuated course of development of prefrontal areas could provide a mechanism for the graded laminar distribution of projections that we showed for ipsilateral connections  <cit>  and for contralateral projections here. moreover, axons from topographically distant prefrontal areas belonging to the same structural type share the same position within the corpus callosum, suggesting that they develop at the same time  <cit> . finally, functional studies indicate that neurons participating in the tangential organization of the cortex and which develop at the same time have correlated firing patterns and likely become connected .

implications for normal function and neuropathology
processing across the commissures may be critical for prefrontal areas, which rely on selecting relevant information and suppressing irrelevant information to guide behavior. evidence of direct involvement of prefrontal commissural projections emerged from physiologic studies in behaving non-human primates performing cognitive tasks within the visual domain. thus, in macaque monkeys with posterior commissurectomy that prevented the inferior temporal cortex of one hemisphere from receiving bottom-up input from the opposite visual field, single neurons in the inferior temporal cortex in the 'blind' hemisphere responded selectively to task-related stimuli  <cit> . visual information relevant to the task at hand apparently followed a circuitous route from the contralateral inferior temporal cortex to the contralateral prefrontal cortex, across the corpus callosum to the opposite prefrontal cortex, and then to the inferior temporal cortex on the side of single cell recording  <cit> .

commissural projections likely have a variety of effects at the site of termination, though most commissural axons arise from excitatory pyramidal neurons , and synapse on spines, which are enriched in pyramidal neurons  <cit> . the extent of contribution of inhibitory mechanisms across the commissures is not clear, though a small number of callosal axons synapse with gabaergic dendrites in rats  <cit> , and a small but significant number of callosal axons originate from inhibitory interneurons . at the functional level, there is evidence of disynaptic inhibition across the corpus callosum , as well as monosynaptic activation of basket neurons in layers iii and iv  <cit> . moreover, there is evidence that callosal projection neurons are modulated by dopamine  <cit> , a neurotransmitter system affecting behavior in prefrontal cortex . interestingly, congenitally acallosal mice are hyperactive, and, unlike normal mice, have a tendency to stay off the walls, a behavior associated with a decrease in a metabolic indicator in frontal cortex  <cit> .

the predominance of contralateral projections in layer iii may be traced to the late development of the callosal system, which also has a protracted course of myelination  <cit> . consequently, the commissural system may be affected in disorders that have their root late in development. in schizophrenia, for example, there is evidence of ineffective transmission of information across the hemispheres for cognitive tasks . in addition, the corpus callosum is preferentially affected with age and in alzheimer's disease  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the organization of ipsilateral and contralateral prefrontal projection systems is remarkably similar in terms of topography and relative density of projections. the two systems vary in absolute density, with contralateral projections constituting about a third of the ipsilateral. in addition, ipsilateral projections stem from layers ii-iii and v-vi, whereas contralateral projections have a narrow range of laminar origins, involving mostly layer iii. in both systems there is a tight correlation of projection origins with the structural similarity of the linked areas. this correlation emerges even though the laminar origins of projections in the two hemispheres differ considerably. overall, structural similarity is a better predictor of existence/absence, relative density, and laminar origin of contralateral projections than border distance of the linked areas.

the organization of ipsilateral and contralateral connections is likely established by punctuated developmental events in structurally and functionally diverse prefrontal cortices. the preponderance of commissural projections from layer iii is consistent with the late development of this system, and is likely affected preferentially in diseases that have their root late in development. contralateral projections in the prefrontal cortical system are richer in topographic origin than in sensory or motor systems. these extensive contralateral projections may be associated with the executive functions of the prefrontal cortex in the selection and synthesis of diverse signals in behavior.

