BACKGROUND
bacterial genes are organised into co-transcribed operons sharing a common promoter, with coding sequences present within operons frequently producing polypeptides of related function
 <cit> . the genomes of nematodes and trypanosomes also exhibit polycistronic transcription of gene clusters
 <cit> , though most eukaryotic genes are generally considered to be monocistronic, each with its own promoter and transcription terminator
 <cit> . this implies that eukaryotic genes do not have to be in close proximity to be co-expressed, and that their organization within a genome could be random. however, it appears that genes having similar and/or coordinated expression are often clustered
 <cit> : the genes comprising the vertebrate β-globin cluster are organised according to the timing of their expression during development
 <cit>  with members of the mammalian homeobox transcriptional regulator loci arranged according to their spatial pattern of expression along developmental axes
 <cit> . additionally, in all crown-group eukaryotes  there is a significant tendency for genes from the same metabolic pathway to cluster
 <cit> . this suggests that higher order genome organisation is linked to expression patterns.

gene clusters have been described in fungi for phenotypes as varied as nutrient use, mating type and pathogenicity
 <cit> . further, genes for production of a broad range of secondary metabolites are located adjacent to one another; additionally a pathway-specific regulatory gene is often embedded within these clusters. the existence in budding yeast of a higher-order organization of genes across chromosomes is constrained by transcriptional regulation, with the target genes of most transcription factors positionally clustered within chromosomes
 <cit> . the molecular mechanisms underpinning co-expression are not understood, though incidences seem to fall into two categories acting:  on a relatively local scale and dependant on in cis promoters in the immediate vicinity, and  over broad genomic spans, possibly involving in trans chromatin state and positioning within the nucleus
 <cit> . price et al. <cit>  have hypothesized that as the amount of regulatory information required to specify an optimal expression pattern increases, evolving the optimal expression profile separately for each gene becomes more difficult, whilst creating an operon does not. hence, co-expression in eukaryotes could reduce stochastic differences in gene expression and also synchronise fluctuations, or noise, in the levels of components of pathways and complexes
 <cit> .

the filamentous fungus fusarium graminearum is a major cause of blight in cereal crops, resulting in heavy losses to grain yield and quality, which can be exacerbated by the contamination of grain with various mycotoxins that pose a serious threat to food and feed safety
 <cit> . these secondary metabolites - not essential for survival – have been shown in a few cases to be synthesized by gene clusters. for example, the tri-gene cluster contains up to  <dig> genes coding for proteins involved in production of harmful b-type trichothecene deoxynivalenol  and its acetylated derivatives
 <cit> . in saccharomyces cerevisiae, clustering of essential genes increases the robustness of populations to mutation, and may provide a significant selective force shaping meiotic crossover distribution
 <cit> . little or no recombination is observed over long sections  across f. graminearum chromosomes, followed by much shorter regions displaying considerably higher than average recombination rates
 <cit> . this contrasts strikingly with s. cerevisiae where high densities of crossing over are often present within just a few kilobases
 <cit>  compared with the several hundred kb in fusarium. here, the impact of this pattern of recombination in f. graminearum on the composition of co-expressed gene clusters was investigated, in conjunction with the genomic locations and protein-domain composition of the genes controlling the transcriptional process.

RESULTS
the f. graminearum genes encoding proteins associated with the transcriptional process were identified by protein family detection and profile matching : of the  <dig>  protein entries comprising the f. graminearum genome
 <cit> ,  <dig> were linked to transcription . sequences orthologous to these  <dig> taps were obtained from  <dig> complete eukaryotic genomes through sequence searching , and placed into one of five categories derived from the tap reference set functional annotations, namely basal transcription factors and cofactors , rna polymerase subunits , dna binding , chromatin remodelling and histone modification factors  and others .

the tap classes  were split into four taxonomic groups according to whether homologous genes were found only in f. graminearum , only in pezizomycotina  genomes, only in fungal genomes , or widely detected within the eukaryotic genomes .

the phylogenetic distribution of the tap orthologues displays a high correspondence with their tap class : one-third of the f. graminearum taps encoding dna-binding proteins are only observed within the species , and nearly a half  just have orthologues in filamentous fungi . this contrasts with the four other categories, where nearly 60% of the b- and p-taps have orthologues in all the eukaryotic genomes analyzed.

chromosomal distribution of tap functional classes
the association between the degree of f. graminearum tap conservation across eukaryotes and the recombination rate of the chromosomal region the tap lies within was examined by delineating the genome into four groups by recombination rate 
 <cit> : these groups ranged in value from no or very low  to very high  recombination rates. tap classes b, c and p are under-represented amongst genes in regions of very high recombination rate, contrasting with their significant enrichment in areas of low or no recombination . this under-representation is also seen with dna-binding taps  having homologues in metazoan genomes , as none are seen in areas of high or very high recombination . however, the percentage of d-taps increases in areas of high recombination as the clades become taxonomically less diverse i.e. twice the proportion of fusarium-specific d-taps lie in these regions compared with those that have homologues in the fungal species examined . these observations imply that proteins highly conserved, and associated with the transcriptional process, reside within areas of minimal recombination.

condition dependence of tap gene expression
an analysis of transcriptome data was undertaken to define tap expression patterns and co-expressed gene clusters under a variety of environmental conditions. several microarray gene expression data sets were selected: three spanning the f. graminearum lifecycle  and one a comparison of mycelium growth under nutrient rich and two different nutrient limiting conditions  . overall,  <dig>  of the  <dig>  genes represented on the array  were identified as differentially expressed within at least one data set , of which over two-thirds were observed to be differentially expressed only in one experiment . similarly, one-third of the dna-binding taps -  <dig>  of the  <dig> represented on the array - were found to be differentially expressed , again with the majority  in only one experiment . these analyses suggest there is an abundance of condition-specific control of fusarium transcript levels. within each of the four experiments, on average 15% of expressed non-taps, compared with  <dig> % of expressed taps show differential expression; additionally, of all the differentially expressed dna-binding taps, none exhibit altered expression levels in all four experiments i.e. the intersection of all four sets of these genes is zero .

gene expression patterns for probesets differentially expressed during the time course experiments were merged on the basis of similar temporal behaviours to create co-expression groups. this procedure compared subsequent timepoints with the earliest timepoint, to ascertain whether the expression level of the probeset was either stably  or transiently  altered. for example in fg <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> display stable increased  and decreased  levels, respectively, with  <dig> and  <dig> exhibiting transient elevated  and reduced  levels . all other changes in behaviour are indicated by a tilde . in the co-expression groups observed in the fg <dig>  fg <dig> and fg <dig> microarray experiments, stable alterations in transcript levels predominate over transient ones.

genomic clustering of co-expressed genes and taps
target genes of transcription factors are positionally clustered within budding yeast chromosomes
 <cit> , and in filamentous fungi there are secondary metabolite gene clusters known to be co-regulated . to examine whether the genes present in the co-expression groups defined from the fusarium transcriptomics experiments  also exhibit close proximity within the genome, several clustering methods were employed .

global tests of clustering of co-expressed genes amongst all genes on the genome would not reveal densely packed, localized clusters in a background of sparsely distributed co-expressed genes, i.e. they would not necessarily distinguish localised organisation in a noisy background. to look for initial evidence of such clusters, the distance  between consecutive pairs of co-expressed genes was measured within each of the  <dig> co-expression groups . in  <dig> of the  <dig> co-expression groups, significantly more genes were observed to be in close proximity  than expected if they were randomly distributed . this is consistent with the existence of localized clusters, but does not distinguish between tightly packed co-expressed clusters or dispersed proximal pairs of co-expressed genes.

the manner of localized clustering in gene order within the co-expression groups was further investigated by examining the expression patterns of genes in the vicinity of each differentially expressed tap . for each differentially expressed tap, the number of genes within the same co-expression group was counted for a variable window size of  <dig> to  <dig>  i.e.  <dig> to  <dig> genes on each side of the tap . fisher’s exact test was used to determine significance of enrichment of group members for a given window size, and resulted in the detection of seven tap-centred clusters . five of the tap-centred clusters  were observed in co-expression groups exhibiting non-random genomic distributions . tc <dig> contains a gene encoding a polyketide synthase  and it has been suggested that the sequences surrounding this pks gene form a co-regulated group
 <cit> . furthermore, the members of tc <dig> show increasing expression during progression from vegetative mycelia to mature perithecia  reflecting an elevation in pigment synthesis during sexual development. three out of the five genes present in the f. graminearum mating-type locus
 <cit>  were shown to comprise a co-expressed cluster , with this cluster containing an additional adjacent gene. members of tc <dig> exhibit decreased levels of expression in nitrogen-minimal conditions and are highly homologous to the budding yeast mal <dig> locus
 <cit>  which also contains a maltase, a zn2cys <dig> dna-binding factor and a maltose permease.

the presence of localized clusters  independent of the presence of a proximal co-expressed tap was investigated using the positional gene enrichment  tool
 <cit>  . seventeen lcs were identified as significantly enriched for co-expressed genes . four were identified as tap-containing  as described above. two further classes of cluster were observed: ones where there were no intervening genes that were not members of the same co-expression group , and having an average size of five genes. the other cluster type showed much less compactness with an average size of  <dig> genes, of which around a third were members of the co-expression cluster. several of these clusters contain sequences encoding nonribosomal peptide synthetases  – enzymes producing a wide range of mycotoxins and linked to fusarium pathogenicity
 <cit> .

putative protein functions for unannotated, co-expressed genes lying in tcs and lcs were derived from sequence and protein domain homology, and linking the results of these searches to gene ontology entries . most of the  <dig> non-tap genes appear to play a role in secondary metabolism , with 42% and 22% associated with metabolic and biosynthetic processes, respectively . hence, most of the co-expressed genes exhibiting positional clustering appear to encode proteins associated with secondary metabolism, indicating that co-regulation of gene clusters is primarily associated with controlling the biosynthesis of mycotoxins or other metabolites.

the percentage of these genes annotated with each term is shown.

defining global transcriptional regulators
co-regulation of pezizomycotina gene clusters encoding components of secondary metabolism pathways is partly coordinated through ‘narrow’- and ‘broad’-domain transcription factors
 <cit> , proteins primarily containing either zn2cys <dig> or cys2his <dig> amino acid motifs, respectively. in fg <dig> there is an enrichment of genes expressed that code for proteins containing bzip, gata and cys2his <dig> dna-binding domains : significantly more cys2his2-containing genes are expressed than would be expected given the overall proportion of dna-binding taps expressed ). conversely, a significant depletion in the expression of ‘narrow’-domain zn2cys <dig> transcription factors is observed .

the identification of genes controlling transcription of the members of co-expression groups was facilitated by kumar et al. <cit> : they reported the presence of  <dig> dna-motifs located in upstream promoter regions of f. graminearum genes and conserved in fusarium genomes. the enrichment of these dna-motifs was tested in a region  <dig> bp upstream of the transcriptional start site of the genes in each co-expression group. of the  <dig> motifs,  <dig> were enriched in at least one co-expression group . these enriched motifs could act as binding sites for global transcriptional regulators, i.e. transcription factors controlling the expression levels of a significant proportion of co-expressed genes . to classify the dna-binding domains present within these putative transcriptional regulators, s. cerevisiae motifs were searched and significant matches determined. f. graminearum proteins with significant homology to the associated budding yeast dna-binding proteins were considered as global regulators .

putative f. graminearum dna-binding proteins were assigned to  <dig> enriched motifs : two-thirds of these  <dig> sequences contain either cys2his <dig> or helix-loop-helix domains . this deviation in the distribution of dna-binding domains  amongst the global regulators from the background distribution of dbds was found to be highly significant . d-tap-encoding genes present in co-expression groups and containing motifs potentially bound by global regulators in the upstream promoter region  show different dbd-distributions from these top-tier  regulators. these second-tier regulators identified in fg <dig> and fg <dig> have similar dbd-distributions to all d-taps in the genome. in contrast, those in the fg <dig> infection experiment predominantly contain cys2his <dig> and bzip domains.

the gene identifier of the putative regulator  along with its dbd-composition , and the number and details of co-expression groups enriched for an associated dna-motif are shown.

son et al. <cit>  performed a systematic analysis of seven phenotypes of mutants in f. graminearum transcription factors. the dbds present in these transcription factors was obtained from the hmm searches of the f. graminearum genome . comparison of the dbd-distributions with the background revealed enrichment of cys2his <dig> and a depletion of zn2cys <dig> domains : 40% of the top-tier regulators contain cys2his <dig> domains, with only 6% containing zn2cys <dig> domains – an order of magnitude reduction compared with the background. this pattern of increased abundance in cys2his2-containing proteins is also observed with the phenotype-associated transcription factors , with an average of 30% containing this dbd contrasting with a background level of 16%. pairwise similarities in the dbds present in global, second-tier and ptfs were visualized by hierarchical clustering of these correlations . these analyses showed that fg <dig> and fg <dig> second-tier regulators, along with those regulating stress responses, are highly similar to the background distribution. the fg <dig> second-tier regulators and the global regulators appear to cluster together due to the high and low levels of taps containing cys2his <dig> and zn2cys <dig> domains, respectively. the dbd patterns amongst the ptfs exhibit a less pronounced deviation from the background but seem to form a distinct cluster of six phenotype groups with a more diverse range of dbds.

discussion
gene function and phylogenetic conservation were found to be related constraints on gene positioning at the whole genome level in fusarium. rates of recombination were associated with levels of protein sequence conservation: conserved tap categories - basal transcription factors and cofactors, rna polymerase subunits, and chromatin remodelling/histone modification factors - are predominantly found in regions of very low or no recombination, possibly reflecting their fundamental role in the transcriptional process. however, highly diverged dna-binding proteins  are more often present in regions of high recombination. this organisation of transcription factors may increase the rate of adaptive evolution in fusarium by more readily allowing the formation of transcriptional networks with superior adaptation to the habitat of the fungus.

genome-wide searches for positionally-clustered genes revealed several categories: compact groups, with some containing putative transcriptional regulators, and more dispersed groups with co-expressed members lying amongst non-coexpressed genes. this pattern of clustering is consistent with that described in other eukaryotic genomes and indicates a diversity of mechanisms for co-regulation
 <cit> . the aurofusarin gene cluster was detected  around the tap aurr1/gip <dig> which encodes a regulator required for cluster transcription
 <cit> , and the butenolide gene cluster containing a cytochrome p <dig>  around a gene encoding a zn2cys <dig> zinc-finger protein thought to regulate this cluster
 <cit> . deoxynivalenol  mycotoxin production only occurs during the infection of barley ears, and six of the fourteen tri genes are upregulated in fg1: four lie within the tri8-tri <dig> gene cluster
 <cit>  and two are disparate tri genes
 <cit> , precluding their identification as a single gene cluster. the remaining members of this biosynthetic pathway do not exhibit significant differences in transcript levels, possibly reflecting the role of post-transcriptional mechanisms in controlling don synthesis. furthermore, reyes-dominguez et al. <cit>  show that chromatin modification plays a significant role in the regulation of the tightly-linked genes involved with mycelium pigment  and don biosynthesis. together, these observations imply that fusarium gene clusters are subject to multiple levels of co-ordinated regulation.

a hallmark of secondary metabolism genes – in contrast to genes involved in primary metabolism – is that they are clustered in fungal genomes
 <cit> . systematic annotation of genes within the tap-centred and localized clusters  shows a number with homology to polyketide synthases, non-ribosomal peptide synthetases and other types of enzymes that synthesize mycotoxins. present in the tap-centred cluster containing the polyketide synthase gene pks <dig>  is a sequence encoding a zn2cys <dig> zinc-finger protein; this local transcription factor controls the production of novel fusarielins
 <cit> . tc <dig> is a putative, novel co-regulated gene cluster, and its components could comprise a biosynthetic cluster: a transport protein , a zn2cys <dig> dna-binding factor , and putative modifying enzymes . the majority of localised clusters have members with homologues either in fusarium or other filamentous fungi only, and is suggestive of biosynthetic pathways producing fusarium-specific mycotoxins. the close proximity of the genes encoding both enzymatic and regulatory functions, and comprising these positional clusters, may provide an evolutionary mechanism that facilitates adaption to a wide variety of environments.

the majority of differentially expressed tap genes encode dna-binding proteins , consistent with a role of such sequences in controlling developmental programs and responses to environmental fluctuations. d-tap differential expression was found to be predominantly condition-specific , suggesting that different sets of transcription factors orchestrate various regulatory events. interestingly, on average within each transcriptomics experiment, an order of magnitude more non-taps than taps exhibited differential expression , and consistent with the frequency of motifs identified in the promoter regions of functionally related genes
 <cit> . this suggests that individual taps may control the expression of multiple genes.

a comparison with two yeasts showed conservation of transcription factors, their binding sites and the target genes regulated by these factors with fusarium pathways known to respond to stress conditions or phosphate metabolism
 <cit> . these observations were extended to identify the types of dna-binding domains  present in the putative transcriptional regulators defined from the co-expression groups. most global regulators contain either cys2his <dig> or hlh domains and may control expression across a number of conditions. additionally, a cys2his <dig> zinc-finger protein encoded within the trichothecene gene cluster  has been shown to act as a global transcriptional regulator
 <cit> . this increase of cys2his <dig> and depletion of zn2cys <dig> domains is also seen with transcription factors which when individually deleted produce mutant strains with a variety of phenotypes; however, the classes of dbds present in these proteins are more complex, possibly reflecting greater diversity in the biological processes studied.

two distinct patterns of dbds are observed within the second-tier regulators. the barley ear infection  secondary regulators are enriched for transcription factors containing a bzip domain, and their classes are similar in distribution to those of the top-tier regulators. this may indicate more elaborate transcriptional networks are employed during host infection as the bzip containing transcription factor zeb <dig> can act as a local regulator: the zearalenone biosynthesis gene cluster consists of four members, three of which are regulated transcriptionally by the fourth - zeb <dig> <cit> . the secondary regulators identified in nutrient-deprived conditions  and differentiation from mycelia to perithecia  contain zn2cys <dig> domains predominately. their dbd class distributions are highly correlated with those of the transcription factors linked to the stress response and the background distribution of d-taps; this suggests they may regulate directly the transcription of genes participating in the response to various stimuli and sexual development.

mccord and bulyk
 <cit>  observed in yeast that bzip, cys2his <dig> and hlh-containing global regulators are enriched in regulatory hubs, contrasting with local zn2cys6-containing transcription factors that are depleted, and implying this global/local nature of a regulator is a feature of its structural class. hence, top-tier regulators could contain dbds  able to bind more degenerate dna sequences and so control the transcription of many genes, whereas the zn2cys <dig> domain may only recognize highly-specific dna binding sites ensuring restricted regulation of a gene cluster. this use of different classes of dna-binding proteins at certain levels within a transcriptional network, could thus allow the evolutionary diversification of mycotoxin production through the gain or loss of sequences from biosynthesis gene clusters
 <cit> . these resultant phylogenetic distributions may provide further insights into the role, organization and regulation of gene clusters in fusarium and other emerging fungal threats
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
proteins associated with the basal functions of transcription e.g. rna synthesis, are encoded by genes lying in areas of the fusarium genome with little or no recombination, contrasting with those performing roles in controlling gene activation. systematic searches for gene clusters revealed compact groups usually containing dna-binding proteins and more dispersed types; however, both seem to contain an abundance of genes whose products could partake in pathways synthesizing secondary metabolites, suggesting that this gene proximity is important to mycotoxin production.

garber et al. <cit>  propose that in animals, transcription factors exhibit a multilayered architecture: pioneer factors initiate remodelling of the epigenome, allowing broad binders to prime lineage-specific genes, with dynamic factors facilitating the activation of environment-specific genes. this layering - though in a much less complex and more compressed manner - is observed with the transcription networks/co-expression groups studied in this analysis; global regulators  could play an analogous role to pioneer and broad binders , with factors predominately containing the zn2cys <dig> dbd  activating small subsets of genes functioning in metabolism and development .

