BACKGROUND
for a complete understanding of the evolution of vertebrates, jawless fishes  occupy crucial positions as the most early-branching lineages, which diverged more than  <dig> million years ago from the gnathostome  lineage  <cit> . their phylogenetic relationships with gnathostomes serve as a crucial scaffold on which one can map phenotypic and genotypic changes  <cit> . more importantly, genome expansions, known as 'two-round whole genome duplications ', took place around the divergences of these lineages  <cit> .

it has recently been shown that the 2r-wgds occurred in the stem lineage leading to vertebrates after the splits of the cephalochordate and urochordate lineages  <cit>  before the chondrichthyan lineage branched off  <cit> . recently, a scenario in which both wgds occurred before the cyclostome-gnathostome split was suggested  <cit> . however, there are many gene families that do not conform to the expected tree topology in phylogeny reconstructions. often phylogenetic studies recover basal divergences and exclusive groupings of lamprey sequences with long branches . this feature, observed commonly among different gene families, has also been interpreted as in support of lamprey lineage-specific genome duplication  <cit> . it would appear that methodological biases add to the difficulty in reconstructing the molecular phylogenies, originating from possible peculiar features of lamprey sequences, which might be preventing proper reconstructions of gene family trees.

to reveal possible peculiar features of lamprey protein-coding sequences, we focused on the potassium voltage-gated channel, shaker-related subfamily   <cit> . members of this gene family are mostly single-exon genes. thus, they are particularly ideal candidate genes for this type of analysis involving partial genome sequences that are available for the sea lamprey  and the elephant shark . in tetrapods, the kcna family comprises eight genes, six of which form two tri-gene clusters that were established by tandem duplications followed by a chromosomal duplication   <cit> . this chromosomal duplication is thought to be part of the 2r-wgds  <cit> . it is of interest to assess orthology of lamprey genes based on the available genome assembly in this already established evolutionary framework of the kcna gene family.

in this study, we identified kcna genes from partial genome sequences of the sea lamprey and the elephant shark, and investigated their phylogeny and sequence properties. we observed exclusive clustering of lamprey sequences with long branches as in figure 1a. the supported tree topology did not fit any of possible scenarios supported by the evolutionary pattern of the kcna gene family documented previously. notably, our analyses on kcna and other genes revealed peculiar codon usage bias and amino acid composition unique to the sea lamprey.

RESULTS
identification of sea lamprey and elephant shark kcna genes
seven full-length or nearly full-length kcna protein-coding sequences were identified in the sea lamprey  whole genome assembly. we also identified six in the elephant shark , one in ciona savignyi and one in purple urchin . for ciona intestinalis, in addition to one previously reported kcna homolog , one more kcna protein sequence was found in genbank . apart from the seven aforementioned kcna genes, six and three fragments of kcna genes  were also discovered in the sea lamprey and elephant shark genome, respectively . these remain partial probably because of incomplete genome sequencing, and they were therefore excluded from the subsequent analyses. our search in ncbi dbest, an expressed sequence tag  archive, identified no sequences encoding kcna proteins for species in petromyzontiformes , myxiniformes  and chondrichthyes .

molecular phylogenetic analysis: an overview
phylogenetic trees were constructed with the maximum-likelihood  method and bayesian inference for  <dig> kcna sequences, including all of the newly identified putative kcna sequences mentioned above . we used human homologs of closely related potassium channel subfamilies as an outgroup. the sea lamprey pmkcnaβ gene was not included because it was partial and thus largely reduced the number of aligned sites available for tree construction. although the best tree topologies produced by these two methods differed to some extent, all the identified sequences appeared to be genuine kcna homologs as they formed a cluster with already reported kcna genes with high statistical support .

the tree focusing on the vertebrate kcna genes was reconstructed with the ml  and bayesian inference methods . this analysis included six sea lamprey kcna genes and complete or nearly complete sets of kcna sequences of three tetrapods , one non-teleost actinopterygian fish , and one cartilaginous fish , and employed sea urchin and sea squirt homologs as an outgroup . the sea lamprey pmkcnaν was excluded because of its extremely divergent sequence among the deuterostome kcna genes . maximum-likelihood and bayesian inference supported tree topologies similar to that of a previous study, in terms of relationships between gnathostome kcna subgroups  <cit> . in this tree, monophylies of all individual gnathostome kcna subgroups  were strongly supported . however, instead of grouping kcna <dig> and - <dig>  which was suggested by the previously proposed evolutionary history of the kcna clusters  <cit> , a sister group relationship between kcna <dig> and kcna1- <dig> was supported by the ml tree . this might be due to the accelerated evolution of kcna <dig> after the split between kcna <dig> and - <dig>  <cit>  and shorter alignment  used in this analysis than in the previous one   <cit> .

all elephant shark kcna genes were relatively robustly placed in the phylogenetic trees , in accordance with its phylogenetic position in the species tree. in contrast, none of the sea lamprey kcna genes was unambiguously assigned to any of the jawed vertebrate kcna subgroups . although sister relationships between pmkcnaα/β and kcna <dig> as well as between pmkcnaδ/ε/ζ and kcna <dig> were recovered by both methods, statistical support for these relationships were not high . maximum-likelihood and bayesian inference methods with different models, e.g, jtt+Γ <dig>  jtt+i+Γ4+f and lg+i+Γ <dig>  lg+i+Γ4+f produced similar results .

timings of gene duplications in the kcna gene family
the timing of kcna cluster duplication relative to the wgds was investigated by comparing the probabilities of scenario i and ii , and probabilistic counts of gene duplications . of the seven sea lamprey kcna genes, three  had higher probabilities for scenario ii than for scenario i. one gene  produced comparable probabilities between scenario i and ii, and the remaining three genes  had higher probabilities for scenario i . this approach did not provide unequivocal support for either of scenario i or ii. probabilistic counts of gene duplications  resulted in nbef ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and naft from  <dig>  to  <dig> . except for pmkcnaγ, nbef showed higher values than naft for all the sea lamprey kcna genes surveyed .

 <dig> potassium voltage-gated channel, shaker-related gene  from sea lamprey.

 <dig> see figure 4a for details of scenarios i and ii and methods for the count of gene duplications before  and after  the cyclostome-gnathostome split.

amino acid composition of kcna genes
to scrutinize sources of ambiguity in lamprey gene phylogeny, amino acid compositions in kcna genes were investigated using correspondence analysis  to identify factors underlying the cross-species variances among the data . ca summarizes multi-dimensional variables among a dataset into a lower number of variables and thereby facilitates the identification of major sources of variations that explain most of the variance among the data. through this approach, we identified two major axes that account for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of total variance of amino acid composition in reliably aligned regions, respectively. sea lamprey resided far from the jawed vertebrates along both axes . two compact clusters were observed within gnathostomes, with the first being exclusively composed of mammals and the other of non-mammalian gnathostomes . an analysis based on the full length of kcna sequences with the same set of species produced similar results .

we performed the ca of amino acid compositions in genome-wide sequences data of  <dig> vertebrate species . the identified first two axes accounted for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of total variance, respectively. whereas teleost fishes were located with tetrapods along the first axis , mammals and chicken were distinguishable from the other vertebrates along the second axis  . contrary to the elephant shark signature that was similar to those of osteichthyes, the sea lamprey was located at an extremely distant position away from the cluster of other species along both axes . gc-content has been shown to be the major determinant of amino acid composition and codon usage bias, for example, in bacteria  <cit>  and nematodes  <cit> . thus, we plotted the first factor of ca of amino acid composition  against the average gc-content of third positions in protein-coding regions  of the corresponding coding nucleotide sequence data . a strong correlation was observed between these two factors .

synonymous codon usage of kcna genes
we also focused on possible peculiarity in nucleotide sequences of the lamprey. the overall codon usage bias of each sea lamprey gene was estimated with effective number of codons index   <cit>  as measure . the higher enc values represent greater degree of deviation from the assumption of unbiased codon usage. while sea lamprey genes showed a broad range of enc, most genes had gc <dig> that ranged from 50% to 90% . the plot of enc and gc <dig> showed that the distribution of enc values was close to the expected values, if no translational selection  are acting upon the sequence . in the factor map crossing the first two axes  of within-group correspondence analysis  of codon usage  <cit> , lamprey genes generally displayed a uniform pattern of codon usage . the first factor of the within-group correspondence analysis  was strongly correlated with gc <dig> values of sea lamprey genes . no correlation was observed between the second factor of wca and gc <dig> . in all of the above plots, the seven sea lamprey kcna genes were broadly scattered within the distribution of all genes, indicating that there were no special features unique to the kcna gene family.

to compare codon usage biases across species, the enc was calculated using the available sea lamprey coding sequence dataset as well as  <dig> other representative vertebrates . the lowest value of enc  was observed for sea lamprey , followed by stickleback  and tetraodon nigroviridis . the enc values were highly correlated with genome-wide average coding nucleotide gc levels . the genome-wide gc <dig> is also strongly correlated with average coding gc levels across the species studied . to compare the codon usage pattern of the sea lamprey with those of other vertebrate species, correspondence analysis of codon usage was performed. in the factorial map of the wca of codon usage, with the first two axes accounting for 84% and 8% of total variance respectively, the sea lamprey was clearly located apart from other vertebrates along the first axis, but not second axis . a strong correlation was found between the first factor of ca and gc <dig> values in all vertebrates surveyed here . correspondence analysis of relative synonymous codon usage  generated similar results to wca . furthermore, the overall codon usage in the available sea lamprey coding sequence dataset and genome-wide coding nucleotide sequences for other species were tabulated . sea lamprey displayed a similar pattern of preference in codon usage to those of other species. however, for most amino acids it showed either the highest or the lowest frequencies for the preferred and non-preferred codons. overall, the sea lamprey tends to have higher frequencies for gc-rich codons and lower frequencies for gc-poor ones compared to other species .

discussion
gene repertoires in early vertebrates
although the genome assemblies for sea lamprey and elephant shark are incomplete, the numbers of kcna genes identified in the present study  are close to the number of kcna paralogs in bony vertebrates . previously, grus and zhang assessed the coverage of the available sea lamprey genome assembly, and suggested that at least one exon per multi-exon gene should be identifiable in the current lamprey genome assembly  <cit> . however, the possibility of missing a kcna gene cannot be ruled out given the single-exon nature of members of this gene family. since the elephant shark genome was so far sequenced only with  <dig> -fold coverage, more genes, such as kcna <dig> and - <dig>  may still remain to be discovered.

timing of whole genome duplications
we observed the ambiguity of the phylogenetic positions of the sea lamprey kcna genes in conventional best tree searches  as well as in the likelihood-based tree topology tests that resulted in multiple tree topologies with similar likelihood values . in terms of the timing of the duplication of two kcna clusters, phylogeny-based probabilistic analysis did not provide strong evidence, although probabilistic counts of individual gene duplications slightly favored the scenario with the cluster duplication before the cyclostome-gnathostome split . the currently available sea lamprey genome assembly does not contain any intact kcna gene cluster, probably because of its fragmental nature. if lampreys possess two intact kcna tri-gene clusters, that would be robust support for the cluster duplication before the split between cyclostomes and gnathostomes. addition of more sequences for different cyclostome lineages  might also provide more evidence.

unique characters of sea lamprey genes: genome-wide phenomena?
we detected a peculiar amino acid composition in the sea lamprey kcna genes . notably, this trend is not confined to the kcna gene family: the peculiar protein-coding sequence properties, namely gc <dig>  codon usage and amino acid composition seem to be genome-wide features .

in bacteria  <cit>  and nematodes  <cit> , the global gc-content is the major factor governing variations in amino acid composition of their genes. based on our analysis, this appears to apply to vertebrates including the sea lamprey as well: the relative positions of species along the first factor of the correspondence analysis  of amino acid composition were strongly correlated with their gc <dig> values rather than the evolutionary distances among them . other factors than gc-content apparently seem to contribute to the difference in amino acid compositions, since the first factor of the ca only accounted for ~63% of the total variance in amino acid composition .

sea lamprey genes show a strong correlation between codon usage bias, measured by enc, and gc <dig> , and its distribution suggests only weak selection on the codon usage in the sea lamprey genome . in contrast, gc <dig> only accounted for ~1/ <dig> of total variance of codon usage pattern among sea lamprey genes , indicating that the codon usage patterns of sea lamprey genes are further affected by other factors. variation of codon usage bias between vertebrate species was also mainly due to the gc-content as indicated by a strong correlation between enc and gc <dig> and between the first factor of the ca of codon usage pattern and gc <dig> . above all, the sea lamprey exhibited an exceptionally high degree of codon usage bias among the vertebrates analyzed in the present study as it displayed the most extreme gc <dig> by far . it is unknown whether the deviated amino acid composition and codon usage bias in the sea lamprey represents an ancient feature of the common vertebrate ancestor or is a derived feature acquired uniquely in the lamprey lineage. to address this question, it will be necessary to collect data from other lamprey species  and hagfishes.

what is the biological significance of gc partitioning between coding and non-coding regions?
the peculiarity of the codon usage in the sea lamprey relative to that of other vertebrates draws a parallel in its variation among drosophila species. an exceptionally low level of codon usage bias was observed in drosophila willistoni compared to eleven other drosophila species, which is related to the exceptionally low coding gc-content in this species  <cit> . based on the estimate of the divergence time between d. willistoni and the melanogster/obscura groups, this change is estimated to have occurred within 45- <dig> million years  <cit> . in this case, changes in population size, mutational bias and trna abundance have been proposed as causal factors . these factors might also be associated with the peculiar codon usage in the sea lamprey.

one possible discrepancy in these biases between the sea lamprey and other vertebrates is the inherent nature of gc <dig>  in vertebrates other than the lamprey, gc <dig>  mentioned above as a source of biases in codon usage and amino acid composition , is correlated with global genomic gc-content  <cit> . in lampreys, however, genomic sequences generally exhibit moderate gc-content of 40-50%  <cit> , while gc-content in protein-coding regions, measured by gc <dig> , is extremely high   <cit> . similarly, genomic supercontigs containing sea lamprey kcna genes identified in the present study had 41~51% of genomic gc-content , while gc <dig> of the kcna genes ranged from  <dig> to 95%. the intra-genomic partitioning in gc-content between protein-coding and non-coding regions, seen also in the aforementioned drosophila species, has not been reported before for any other vertebrate than the sea lamprey.

in principle, an employment of amino acid sequences in phylogenetic analyses is thought to buffer against the unfavorable effect caused by lineage-specific changes in gc-content and codon usage. however, our findings suggest that comparative sequence analyses with conventional methods involving lampreys at the amino acid level as well as at the nucleotide level can be misleading. the lineage-specific sequence properties that would affect most lamprey genes can cause the typically, but possibly incorrectly, recovered tree topology where lamprey sequences cluster at the basal branch of a vertebrate gene tree . to accommodate the lineage-specific alteration of amino acid substitution models, we employed a phylogenetic tree inference method allowing a 'non-homogeneous' model  <cit> . this attempt resulted in a tree topology with more inconsistent relationships even inside gnathostome kcna subgroups and did not lead to improvement for this particular gene family . the possible causation between the lamprey lineage-specific sequence properties and their ambiguous phylogenetic positions should be verified with more sampling of gene families based on complete genomic sequences for this group of species.

CONCLUSIONS
our molecular phylogenetic analysis on the kcna gene family resulted in low resolution of lamprey gene phylogeny. we identified lamprey's deviated amino acid composition and codon usage pattern from those of jawed vertebrates. it is possible that these are associated with the exceptionally high gc-content in protein-coding regions and frequently observed ambiguous molecular phylogeny of lamprey genes.

