BACKGROUND
wolbachia pipientis is a maternally inherited endosymbiotic bacterium that infects a wide range of nematodes and arthropods. it is responsible for the induction of several forms of reproductive manipulation in its arthropod hosts, all of which favour infected females at the expense of their uninfected counterparts. cytoplasmic incompatibility, classically seen in its unidirectional form in crosses between uninfected females and infected males where there is high embryo mortality, provides a powerful insect population invasion capacity. recently, the presence of wolbachia has been associated with the inhibition of viral  <cit>  filarial nematode  <cit>  and plasmodium  <cit>  pathogens. in addition, wolbachia is capable of inducing the production of anti-oxidant enzymes and reactive oxygen species   <cit> , innate immune effectors  <cit>  as well as increasing haemocyte densities  <cit> . however the molecular nature of the interactions between this symbiotic bacterium and the insect immune system are not well characterized. if wolbachia is to be used optimally in applied strategies to disrupt pathogen transmission in mosquitoes and other pest insects, it is important to gain a better understanding of what wolbachia molecules are involved in eliciting insect immune responses, and whether responses to these molecules differ between naturally wolbachia-infected and uninfected hosts.

wolbachia and its products have been shown to evoke strong innate immune responses in mammals and are very important in establishing and augmenting inflammatory pathogenesis of the diseases caused by filarial nematodes  <cit> . in particular the wolbachia surface protein  has been shown to elicit innate immune induction via tlr <dig> and tlr <dig> activation in both humans and mice  <cit>  and to inhibit apoptosis in neutrophils through inhibition of caspase- <dig> activity  <cit> .

in this study we investigated whether wsp can also induce innate immune responses in insects, using mosquito cell lines originating from both naturally wolbachia-uninfected and wolbachia-infected mosquito species. an additional aim was to identify pamps  that can elicit strong immune responses in mosquitoes, which could be useful for novel disease control strategies; thus in order to avoid the complications of possible strain-host co-adaptations, we have initially used wsp derived from a nematode wolbachia rather than from an insect-derived wolbachia strain. 

RESULTS
 wsp is a strong innate immune response elicitor in an. gambiae cells.
in the an. gambiae cells, the antimicrobial peptide-encoding genes cecropin  <dig>  and gambicin  showed elevated levels of transcription in the presence of wsp compared to negative controls   <cit>  and responded in a dosage dependent fashion, when different concentrations of wsp up to 5μg/ml were used . their mrna levels were increased in the presence of wsp to similar degrees and statistically significant differences were observed for all wsp quantities used. in contrast, defensin  <dig>  which has been shown to be primarily active against gram-positive bacteria  <cit> , showed only a small degree of upregulation that was not statistically significant. increased concentrations of wsp also increased the transcription levels of complement-like gene tep <dig>  anopheles plasmodium-responsive leucine-rich repeat  <dig>  and fibrinogen  <dig>  . in comparison to the amps, tep <dig> and apl <dig> showed a higher induction level with respectively  <dig> and 5-fold peaks. significant upregulation was also seen at a concentration of 5μg/ml of wsp for all three genes . this data suggests that in this naturally wolbachia-uninfected mosquito species, wsp is capable of inducing the transcription of innate immune factors such as amps, complement-like proteins and fibrinogen genes, all of which are involved in anti-parasitic responses in an. gambiae. 

wsp is a mild innate immune response elicitor in ae. albopictus cells
we next examined whether wsp has the same capacity to elicit an immune response in a species that naturally harbours wolbachia. uninfected ae. albopictus aa <dig> cells  <cit>  were challenged with wsp and transcription level of immunity genes monitored as for the an gambiae cell line. all genes tested showed elevation in mrna levels with increased wsp concentration up to 5μg/ml , but these were less pronounced when compared to the 4a3a cell line. statistically significant upregulation was seen only for cec and tep when 5μg/ml wsp was used .

only early phase induction is seen after wsp challenge in both cell lines
innate immune response activation is commonly divided into early phase response  and late phase response , and so far we have shown that wsp can be a strong pamp at this early phase response . to determine the dynamics of this immune response, both cell lines were stimulated with 5μg/ml and monitored at  <dig>   <dig> and 24h post challenge. in the 4a3a cell line all innate immune transcription is shut down at 9h post infection. for only cec <dig> and gamb a mild induction  at 24hr post challenge was detected, however this induction was not statistically significant . in the case of aa23t cell line immune activation is decreased back to basal levels at 9hr post infection and no late phase induction was detected.

the ae. albopictus cells are capable of mounting a strong immune response
to exclude the possibility that the differences observed between these cell lines may be due to an impaired immune response in the particular ae. albopictus line used, the responses of both cell lines to bacterial challenge and their capacity to clear a live bacterial infection was tested. both cell lines were challenged with a mixture of heat-killed escherichia coli and enterococcus faecalis, and relative transcription monitored from 3-24h as above. in the 4a3a cell line peak immune induction of both def <dig> and tep <dig> was seen at 6h rather than 3h, which for defd and tep in aa23t line already showed strong transcription levels. when looking at the peak levels of upregulation, in aa23t cell line defd and tep levels reach  <dig>  and 3-fold respectively, while def <dig> and tep <dig> show 3- <dig> -fold levels in the 4a3a cell line . to test for the capacity of each cell line to clear an e. coli infection, live e. coli- tetr was added to 3h conditioned cell culture. cell medium was collected at  <dig> and 9h post e. coli addition, diluted in lb-tet medium and plated on lb-tet plates. colony forming units  where counted for several dilutions for each condition. the aa23t cells at 3h post-e coli addition had cleared 99% of bacteria from the culture medium in comparison with only 14% of bacteria cleared in 4a3a cell culture when compared to the same amount of bacteria incubated in cell-free  medium.

discussion
obtaining a better understanding of wolbachia-host immune interactions in insects is particularly important at the current time given the recently described effects of wolbachia in inhibiting the development or dissemination of several very important mosquito-borne human pathogens. this study shows that, as previously observed using mammalian cells, the wolbachia wsp protein is a potent innate immune elicitor in insects. the responses between the two mosquito cell lines to wsp challenge are mechanistically similar: 1) they are dosage dependent, increasing with increasing amounts of wsp up to 5μg/ml; 2) peak induction is seen at 5μg/ml, while higher concentrations sometimes reduce the mrna levels; and 3) the immune gene transcription was at a maximum at 3h post challenge  and do not show late phase induction. the major difference is the level of upregulation between the two species: detected peak induction of  <dig> to 5-fold in the naturally wolbachia-uninfected cell line compared to just 2-fold induction in the naturally infected one. tolerance effects due to previous natural wolbachia exposure have been described  <cit>  and seem likely to be contributing to the differences observed between these cell lines in their response to wsp. the control experiments also show that aa23t can show strong induction of immune gene transcription and can effectively clear a bacterial infection. thus the differences seen between wsp-associated immune induction between these cell lines are not due to impaired immune responses in aa23t.

in this experimental set-up the wsp protein will be extracellular, and although wolbachia itself is mostly located within intracellular vacuoles in insects, bacterial protein will be released into the hemocele, for example through regular cellular turnover / apoptosis. this mirrors the situation in humans where wsp elicits antibody responses in lymphatic filariasis patients despite wolbachia itself being located inside vacuoles within the filarial nematodes  <cit> . in the insect hemocele wsp has the potential to elicit innate immune responses from hemocyte immune cells, and the same applies in these cell lines.

further studies of insect immune responses to wsp may include the examination of levels of immune response to intracellular wsp, using transformation / transfection studies . furthermore, the possibility of different levels of immune response to wsp derived from various insect wolbachia strains can be examined, particularly in the case of the ae. albopictus cells which are derived from a naturally wolbachia-infected species and could thus show varying degrees of tolerance to different wsp molecules. these basic biology questions are also relevant to the important applied aim of identifying potent pamps that might be incorporated in transgenic strategies to ‘prime’ the mosquito immune system, and thus impair pathogen transmission. the dirofilaria wolbachia-derived wsp used here appears to hold potential in this respect, since it induces the upregulation of genes  that are directly involved in plasmodium killing in anopheles mosquitoes.

CONCLUSIONS
similarly to mammals, the major surface protein of the endosymbiotic bacteria wolbachia  can induce strong innate immune responses in insects at the transcriptomic level. antimicrobial peptides as well as important immune effector genes are up-regulated when recombinant wsp is used to challenge mosquito cell lines. interestingly the response between a naturally-uninfected mosquito and a naturally -infected mosquito is qualitatively similar but quantitatively distinct. the wolbachia naïve host is capable of mounting a very strong upregulation to wsp as opposed to the wolbachia cleared host suggesting that tolerance effects due to previous wolbachia exposure may be contributing to this particular phenotype. 

