BACKGROUND
only two of c. <dig> extant bat species use a true walking gait when manoeuvring on the ground – the lesser short-tailed bat mystacina tuberculata of nz, and the common vampire bat desmodus rotundus of central and south america  <cit> . mystacina tuberculata  is the sole surviving member of mystacinidae, which is the only living mammalian family endemic to nz, although its distribution once included australia  <cit> . a second nz species of mystacina  has become extinct c. <dig>  <cit> . exactly when and from where mystacinids first colonized nz is not yet clear, but early miocene mystacinid fossils have recently been found in nz  <cit>  and middle cenozoic australia has been proposed as their probable source  <cit> . desmodus rotundus is a member of the central and south american family phyllostomidae. mystacinids and phyllostomids fall within the gondwanan bat superfamily noctilionoidea, but molecular divergence dates indicate that the two families diverged 41– <dig> ma  <cit> , and terrestrial locomotion appears to have evolved independently in mystacina and desmodus.

today, mystacina tuberculata populations are restricted to extensive areas of old-growth indigenous nz forests dominated by podocarpus, dacrydium, agathis and nothofagus spp  <cit> . this bat spends more time on the ground than any other: up to 40% of its foraging time  <cit>  is spent scurrying with rodent-like agility over tree branches and the forest floor using its broad, backwards-facing feet and thick-skinned wrists as points of contact with the substrate. when foraging under leaf litter, humus or snow, it folds its long ears and often disappears completely, re-emerging only sporadically  <cit> .

as long-recognized , m. tuberculata's consummate terrestrial habits are reflected in numerous adaptations in its postcranial skeleton including specializations of the wing, foot, leg, spine, and pectoral and pelvic girdles. when moving terrestrially, its wings are furled tightly in a protective leathery sheath-like portion of the plagiopatagium. its reduced pro- and uropatagia enable free movement of its fore and hindlimbs respectively  <cit> . unique secondary talons at the base of the thumb and toe claws of m. tuberculata increase grip on the substrate, as does a system of adhesive, gecko-like grooves in its soft, deeply-wrinkled pedal soles  <cit> . mystacina tuberculata is an important pollinator of nz's endemic parasitic wood rose, dactylanthus taylorii, the world's only known ground-flowering plant to be pollinated by a bat  <cit> .

previous hypotheses for the evolution of terrestriality in bats
it has previously been assumed that the specialized terrestrial habits of mystacinids evolved in nz following their isolation there, just as flightlessness evolved rapidly and independently many times in island birds of nz and elsewhere . in the case of mystacinids, a lack of native terrestrial mammalian predators in nz has been hypothesised to have facilitated evolution of terrestriality . in the case of desmodus rotundus, by contrast, the absence of mammalian nocturnal predators and/or competitors is not regarded as the driving force behind evolution of terrestrial locomotion; instead, it has been suggested that a running gait confers an energetic benefit and hence selective advantage by enabling desmodus to chase prey that flee in the middle of a feeding event  <cit> .

until now there has been little opportunity to test hypotheses for the evolution of terrestrial locomotion in mystacinids. recently, however, postcranial remains of an australian early miocene mystacinid have been recovered from the riversleigh world heritage area , northwestern queensland. in this paper we describe the distal humerus of this bat and examine the likely functional attributes of its elbow based on comparison with morphology of this joint and associated musculature in mystacina tuberculata. we discuss the implications of our findings for the temporal and geographical origins of habitual terrestriality in mystacinids.

RESULTS
elbow morphology and implications for locomotion in mystacina tuberculata
the morphology of the elbow in bats has long been recognized as a rich source of information, both systematic  <cit>  and functional  <cit> . in particular, the morphology of the distal humerus has been widely used to infer flight mode and terrestrial capability in extinct and extant bats. in mystacina species, the humeral capitulum is non-spherical  and its articular surface is mostly aligned with the shaft . this results in a relatively rigid humeroradial articulation that allows motion only in the anteroposterior plane, and is associated with relatively fast, direct flight  <cit> .

however, the medial process  of m. tuberculata is significantly broader than that of most fast-flying bats, and its separation from the trochlea and deep scars for muscle attachment suggest a relatively large muscle mass and hence the capacity for relatively more manoeuvrable flight  <cit> . thus, humeral morphology in m. tuberculata appears to represent a trade-off between the demands for fast, direct flight and manoeuvrability. this is congruent with the suggestion of webb et al.  <cit>  that the wing morphology of m. tuberculata represents a compromise between different adaptive pressures: i.e. slow, manoeuvrable foraging flight within dense forest, and fast, direct commuting flight between forest patches.

unlike birds, bats use all four limbs for terrestrial locomotion  <cit> . not surprisingly, chiropteran elbow morphology has previously been correlated with terrestrial agility as well as flight mode; extensive articulation between the trochlea and the radius characterizes not only bats that are fast, direct fliers but also those that are relatively agile on the ground . however, this is not the case in bats that use a true walking gait, namely species of desmodus and mystacina. desmodus rotundus retains  a spherical central capitulum and large medial muscle mass enabling considerable rotational  movement in the elbow joint . mystacina tuberculata, on the other hand, shares with molossids, for example, a more derived precise and restrictive bony articulation between the humerus and radius , but combines this with the specialized muscle morphology described below. the very different morphological and myological constraints on the elbow joint in species of desmodus and mystacina is consistent with independent evolution of a quadrupedal walking gait in these two lineages as proposed by riskin et al.  <cit> .

the humerus of m. tuberculata is additionally characterized by a conspicuously laterally inclined humeroradial articulation . this humeral specialization results in a distinctive movement of the radius during walking because it causes the radius to move in a laterally-directed arc. video footage  <cit>  and treadmill frames  of terrestrial locomotion by m. tuberculata confirm this observation. the humerus is held closely adducted and parallel with the long axis of the body, and the radius moves in a plane away from the humerus and body, never actually coming to lie beneath the body as it does in most quadrupedal mammals. the characteristic lateral inclination of the trochlea directs the radius laterally during the stride and pushes the body sideways and forward, resulting in a scuttling rather than striding movement. with the body held close to the substrate, this style of locomotion is well suited to moving in confined places, and presumably also for digging through and under leaf litter.

the distal spinous process of m. tuberculata is characteristically elongate and represents the distalmost extremity of the humerus. the direction of flexor muscle action differs depending on the position of the radius because the distal position of the spinous process shifts the flexors from the centre of rotation. when the elbow is flexed, the distal spinous process forms a wide angle with the radius so that the distance between the process and the distal wing is greater. consequently, the mechanical advantage accrued by the muscles for flexing the hand is also greater it is possible that during terrestrial locomotion  the greater distance and moment arm improves flexion power of the muscles operating the distal carpus which remains flexed. this is congruent with the general tendency for the extensor and flexor muscles of the chiropteran hand to act as inelastic cords that automatically move the manus with movements of the forearm in flight  <cit> .

myology and functional morphology of the humerus of mystacina
myological examination of the forelimb of mystacina tuberculata reveals that the morphology of the humerus reflects specializations in muscular morphology and presumably therefore muscle action. dissection of the elbow of m. tuberculata  shows that the characteristic deep supraepicondylar groove proximal to the lateral epicondyle  is occupied by the tendon of the large m. extensor carpi radialis longus . this muscle originates in a strap-like tendon from the posterolateral rim of the groove. the tendon extends across the lateral surface of the humerus and attaches to the tubercle on the lateral side of the distal humerus, directly proximal and slightly posteromedial to the deep tendon groove. as such, the ecrl tendon inserts markedly medially. a wide portion of the ecrl tendon is lodged within the humeral groove; anterior to the groove, the body of this tendon houses a sesamoid. the tendon leaves the groove through the characteristic cleft before entering a conspicuously large muscle. the flexor muscles of the carpus and digits and the pronator teres muscle originate on the medial rim of the distal spinous process. their medial origin is displaced distally, which results in a considerable distance between the flexor muscle origins and the radius, resulting in a larger moment arm for the flexor muscles.

the ecrl position, with its tendon housed in the conspicuous lateral supraepicondylar humeral groove, is unique among bats. the origin of the ecrl winds around the lateral side of the humerus and attaches to the posteromedial tubercle; thus, the origin of the ecrl is more medial than in other bats which may give the muscle slightly more leverage on the humerus. the ecrl inserts on the dorsal base of the first metacarpal and anterodorsal base of the second metacarpal which it directly extends  <cit>  and acts indirectly to extend the entire distal part of the wing  <cit> . because the ecrl is conspicuously large in m. tuberculata compared to that of other bats , its action should result in a powerful concomitant extension of the first and second metacarpal. the direction of this motion appears to be tightly constrained because of confinement of the tendon's origin in the deep humeral groove.

one possible function of this powerful arrangement could be to facilitate take-off. mystacina tuberculata launches into the air from the ground by leaping from a quadrupedal stance rather than flapping its wings  <cit>  thereby necessitating some levering action of the limbs. the powerful extending action of the ecrl on the first and second metacarpal, mediated by the pulley-like arrangement on the groove, would push both metacarpals towards the ground and lever the bat's body into the air. a similar launching action is used by desmodus rotundus which flexes its elongated thumbs to push off from the ground  <cit> . notably, in m. tuberculata the proximal third of the second metacarpal is covered by padded toughened skin . this type of skin also occurs on the dorsal carpal area – the surface on which mystacina walks – suggesting that the broad, flattened proximal second metacarpal is also frequently in contact with the substrate. however, because the metacarpals are normally carried flexed and off the ground when mystacina walks  <cit> , it suggests an alternative locomotor role for metacarpal ii, probably in launching.

humeral morphology in an early miocene australian mystacinid
australian mystacinids are known from craniodental fossils from deposits ranging in age from  <dig> to  <dig> ma  in south australia, queensland and the northern territory  <cit> . two partial fossil humeri  from early miocene  sediments in the riversleigh wha, northwestern queensland  are the first postcranial remains referable to an australian mystacinid. collectively, the morphology, size, provenance and depositional association of the fossil humeri indicate that they are specifically referable to the early miocene mystacinid icarops aenae, known otherwise from dentaries and upper and lower teeth from the riversleigh wha .

the fossil humeri have been identified as mystacinid because they exhibit the following suite of derived features shared only with m. tuberculata and the recently extinct nz m. robusta : distal articular surface more or less aligned with shaft of humerus and inclined laterally with respect to the long axis of shaft; non-spherical central capitulum; long distal spinous process well separated from the trochlea; broad separation between central and lateral capitulum; prominent  trochlea; deep radial fossa; and deep, wide groove, and well-developed tubercle, proximal to the lateral epicondyle. they differ from mystacina species in the following less-derived features: distal articular surface slightly less inclined laterally with respect to the long axis of the shaft resulting from the greater distal extent of the lateral capitulum and epicondyle; and supraepicondylar groove and associated tubercle proximal to the lateral epicondyle slightly less developed. they differ additionally from m. robusta in being approximately 20% smaller. the tip of the spinous process is broken off in both australian fossil humeri; this tip appears to be more curved towards the trochlea and the medial profile more convex in m. robusta than in m. tuberculata.

the presence of a lateral supraepicondylar groove much like that in m. tuberculata suggests that the ecrl was similarly arranged in i. aenae. it can therefore be expected that i. aenae had similar capacities of powerful metacarpal extension. if this arrangement is related to levering the animal off the ground, as we suggest here, it would be a strong indication of terrestriality in i. aenae. furthermore, although the tip of the spinous process is missing in both icarops humeri, the position of its base indicates a medial position of carpal flexor muscles and pronator teres that corresponds to that seen in m. tuberculata. thus, carpal flexion patterns in i. aenae were similar to those of m. tuberculata. lastly, the lateral inclination of the humeroradial articulation, although less pronounced, is similar to that of m. robusta so that adaptation for a scuttling walk seems probable. in summary, the humeral morphology of i. aenae is strongly suggestive of at least facultatively efficient terrestrial locomotion.

discussion
origin of mystacinids and their dispersal to new zealand
mystacinidae is a member of the superfamily noctilionoidea, the only one of the four currently recognised extant bat superfamilies that appears to have a gondwanan origin . molecular divergence dates suggest that mystacinids diverged from other noctilionoids sometime between  <dig> and  <dig> ma . a gap in the australian land mammal record from  <dig> to  <dig> ma  <cit>  means that the early history of mystacinids in australia is unknown, but the fossil record documents their presence as part of the indigenous fauna for at least  <dig> million years from  <dig> to  <dig> ma. the oldest icarops fossils are currently from the  <dig> ma magnetostratigraphically-dated ditjimanka local fauna  of lake palankarinna, south australia  <cit> . although they are generally more plesiomorphic than quaternary mystacinids, icarops taxa also exhibit dental apomorphies of their own, suggesting that the australian icarops and nz mystacina lineages diverged at least  <dig> ma  <cit> . mystacinids are also known from the early miocene  st bathans fauna of central otago, south island, nz  <cit>  but as yet cannot be referred to either lineage.

if the molecular phylogenies and divergence dates for mystacinids are correct, and the highly derived humeral morphology shared by icarops and mystacina spp does reflect specialized terrestrial locomotory ability, this represents strong evidence that habitual terrestriality evolved in mystacinids sometime between  <dig> and  <dig> ma .

the fossil record sheds little light on whether or not nz might have been colonized before australia by noctilionoids, but australia's oligo-miocene mystacinids are closely related to those of nz and are less derived, which may be an indication that australia was the source of nz's mystacinids  <cit> . nz began rifting from gondwana c. <dig> ma  <cit>  but separation from eastern australia of the  zealandia continental fragment was not complete until formation of the cato trough near present new caledonia c. <dig> ma  <cit> , with a distance of c. <dig> km now separating the nz part of zealandia from the australian mainland. isolated, wind-assisted dispersals by bats from australia to nz have been recorded during historic times  <cit> , and the ancestor of nz's only other surviving endemic mammal, the vespertilionid bat chalinolobus tuberculatus, probably made this crossing less than  <dig> ma  <cit> . there are no records of bat dispersals in the opposite direction, against the westerly winds that have prevailed since establishment of the antarctic circumpolar current c. <dig> ma  <cit> . for nz birds, a similar pattern of colonisation from australia and rarity of "reverse traffic" is well-documented .

palaeoecology and extinction of australian mystacinids
our data suggest that the terrestrial habits of mystacinids, at least as expressed in specializations of the humerus, were established before isolation of the lineage in nz – in australia and in a time and place well-populated by terrestrial nocturnal predators. the latter included rat- to cat-sized marsupial carnivores such as dasyures , cat- to leopard-sized marsupial lions , cat- to dog-sized thylacinids, dog-sized carnivorous/omnivorous kangaroos , mouse- to cat-sized bandicoots  and large predatory bats such as megadermatids, as well as hawks, terrestrial crocodiles, lizards and snakes .

in nz, too, at least one group of small terrestrial mammals was present until at least the early miocene, overlapping temporally and geographically with mystacinids , and so provides further evidence that the evolution of terrestriality in mystacinids did not arise in the absence of non-volant mammals in nz.

although it is likely that terrestrial foraging by extant m. tuberculata makes it vulnerable to introduced mammalian predators , there is as yet limited available data on the actual risk of terrestriality. indeed, lloyd  <cit>  has argued that although some individuals may be caught while on the ground, mystacinids would not be easy prey – they are cryptic, fast moving, with acute hearing and sense of smell, and can quickly take flight  <cit> . based on the evidence presented here, it seems reasonable to assume that icarops aenae was similar to m. tuberculata in these respects. the slightly less-developed morphological humeral specializations in at least i. aenae, one of four known australian mystacinid species, suggest that the terrestrial habits of mystacinids may have further developed in nz in the absence of terrestrial mammals but in the presence of falcons, moreporks and laughing owls which were significant predators  <cit> .

in nz, mystacina's terrestrial foraging behaviour has been correlated with its exceptionally broad omnivorous diet  <cit>  that is broader than that of any bat recorded and includes nectar, flowers and fruit as well as flying and terrestrial invertebrates including spiders, centipedes and weta orthopterans  <cit> . an omnivorous diet in australian miocene mystacinids, and in particular i. aenae, has been been deduced on the basis of craniodental features  <cit> . for example, the dilambdodont molars of mystacina species and i. aenae are typical of insect-eating bats, while their anterior teeth indicate adaptations for both frugivory and nectarivory  <cit> . like other chiropteran frugivores, mystacina tuberculata and i. aenae have a greater allocation of tooth area at the anterior end of the tooth row  than in more insectivorous and carnivorous species. they also share a reduced number of lower incisors, a fused mandibular symphysis and large canines, features that act together to support a quickly-moving, extensible tongue in nectar-feeding bats  <cit> .

mystacina tuberculata roosts singly or communally in tree hollows, but also uses its teeth to burrow into fallen trees to excavate complex roosts  <cit> . it is also known to have inhabited caves along with m. robusta at times during the last  <dig>  <dig> years  <cit> . large populations occur only in extensive  areas of old-growth indigenous forests dominated by species of podocarpus, dacrydium, agathis and nothofagus and containing many large trees suitable for such roosts , numerous epiphytes and deep leaf-litter  <cit> . the palaeohabitat of icarops aenae appears to have been similar:  <dig> ma the riversleigh forests in which it foraged were c. <dig> degrees further south than the present fossil sites. the australian climate was cooler and wetter with extensive cover of gondwanan forests dominated by species of nothofagus , podocarps, araucarians, myrtaceans and casuarinaceans  <cit> .

what caused the extinction of mystacinids in australia is not clear but available evidence suggests that it was probably loss of suitable forest habitat resulting from climate change. australian tertiary mystacinids range in age from c. <dig> to  <dig> ma  <cit> , but they are absent from the diverse bat faunas of riversleigh's early late miocene encore lf  and early pliocene rackham's roost lf   <cit> . by the late miocene, mystacinids seem to have disappeared from australia  <cit> , perhaps as a result of cooling temperatures and reduced rainfall which began in the mid to late miocene. this climatic change resulted in gradual replacement of wet gondwanan-type forests by relatively drier forests, woodlands and, by mid pliocene time, grasslands over much of the continent. closed forests retreated to the coastal margins of australia and it is possible that mystacinids survived there during the late miocene but they are not known from plio-pleistocene bat faunas in those areas including, for example, the early pliocene hamilton, chinchilla and bluff downs lfs and the pliocene big sink lfs, nor from the mount etna, texas, bucchan, victoria fossil and mammoth cave assemblages  <cit> . increasingly rapid cycles of climate change resulted in pronounced post-miocene rainforest contraction and expansion, resulting in further biodiversity loss: the mystacinidae is one of  <dig> mammal families lost from australian rainforests  since the early to middle miocene  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
australian oligo-miocene fossils suggest that the specialized terrestrial locomotion of mystacinids did not develop in nz in the absence of ground-dwelling mammalian predators and competitors, but that facultatively-terrestrial behaviour in gondwanan mystacinids may represent an exaptation for exploiting a predator-"free" nocturnal terrestrial niche in nz. mystacinids appear to have had a long history as omnivores on gondwanan forest floors where mammalian predators and potential prey were plentiful  <cit> .

in nz, mystacinids found refuge in cool wet rainforests, surviving there for at least  <dig> ma . the slightly less-developed morphological humeral specializations in at least i. aenae suggest that the terrestrial behaviours of mystacinids may have further developed in nz, though in the presence of avian predators and at least one lineage of now-extinct non-volant mammals.

our data suggest that the evolution of terrestrial behaviour in mystacinids may have been driven by selective advantage or energetic benefit, as has been proposed for the vampire desmodus rotundus  <cit> . there is little doubt that the exceptionally diverse diet of m. tuberculata has been facilitated by its extraordinary terrestrial foraging and burrowing behaviour  <cit> . australia's icarops aenae also appears to have been diversely omnivorous  <cit> . an opportunistic approach to feeding may have conferred a selective advantage for bats inhabiting the high latitude forests of early cenozoic gondwana as well as their survival during later glaciation events in nz. on-going studies of the seasonal foraging ecology and energy budget of m. tuberculata  may provide further clues about the driving forces underlying terrestriality in mystacinids, as well as any likely trade-off between aerial and non-aerial locomotion in bats that walk.

in new zealand, during the last  <dig> yrs since the arrival of people  <cit> , forest cover has been reduced from  <dig> to 23%, and  <dig> alien mammal species have become established  <cit> . these major ecological changes have affected mystacina species directly by increasing predation and competition and indirectly by transforming remnant forest ecosystems  <cit> . these pressures led to the extinction of m. robusta within the last  <dig> years and a precipitous decline in the population of m. tuberculata from an estimated  <dig>  million  to c. <dig>  <dig> today  <cit> . in the case of m. robusta, mainland populations appear to have declined rapidly following introduction of pacific rats  by polynesians  <cit> , although the last known populations on big south cape island and adjoining solomon and pukaweka islands were exterminated following the accidental introduction of ships rats  in  <dig>  <cit> .

for australia, there is no direct evidence of any mammalian extinctions coinciding with its first colonization by murids c. <dig> ma  <cit> , although there is speculation that the demise of the extinct frugivorous-omnivorous marsupial ektopodontid and numbigilgid lineages may have resulted  <cit> . the available fossil record suggests, however, it is unlikely that mystacinids survived in australia long enough to overlap with rodents.

in the pacific and globally, bats have reached most oceanic islands, the insectivorous hoary bat lasiurus cinereus of the americas, for example, having colonised the galápagos and hawaiian islands  <cit> . unlike in birds, where flightlessness has evolved independently many times in island taxa, such as in pacific rails  <cit> , there remains no evidence of loss of flight in any extinct or extant bat.

