BACKGROUND
the firmicutes  are a diverse group of gram-positive bacteria that includes a large number of species that produce lactic acid, acetone, butanol, and ethanol through fermentation of a variety of carbon sources. many of these bacteria were originally isolated from the plant environments such as garden soil, fruits, and vegetables  <cit> . among them, clostridium acetobutylicum is one of the best-studied clostridia and was used to develop an industrial fermentation process for producing solvents  <cit> . this strain is known to utilize a broad range of monosaccharides, disaccharides, starches, and other substrates such as whey and xylan  <cit> .

xylan and xyloglucan, the major hemicellulose components of plant cell walls, are two of the most abundant polysaccharides in nature and play an important role in supplying carbon and energy to a variety of organisms  <cit> . depolymerization of xylan and xyloglucan produces β- and α-xylosides, respectively, that are transported into the cell and further degraded into d-xylose  <cit> . d-xylose is finally transformed to the common metabolic intermediate xylulose 5-phosphate. genetics and regulation of the xylanolytic machinery have been studied in some model species of bacilli class, such as bacillus subtilis  <cit>  and lactococcus lactis  <cit> , but so far not in clostridia.

in bacteria, the transformation of d-xylose to xylulose 5-p is catalyzed via consecutive isomerization to d-xylulose and phosphorylation reactions . this two-step biochemical pathway appears to be conserved in both non-xylanolytic bacteria  and xylanolytic bacteria such as b. subtilis  <cit> . in b. subtilis, the genes involved in the xylose and xyloside utilization pathway are clustered into two operons, xylab and xyntb . their expression is negatively regulated at the transcriptional level by the regulator xylr  <cit> . due to the lack of a xylose uptake system, b. subtilis is unable to grow with xylose as a sole carbon source  <cit> .

several clostridium species have been shown to metabolize d-xylose by early studies and our preliminary analysis  <cit> . however, the initial genomic survey of c. acetobutylicum atcc  <dig> identified only the gene encoding xylulokinase in the xylose pathway, whereas the ortholog of the xyla gene encoding xylose isomerase was not found  <cit> . although several genes of xyloside metabolism are annotated in public databases , some of these annotations are imprecise and have not been consistently projected across all the sequenced clostridia. moreover, our current knowledge of transcriptional regulation of xylose utilization pathway in gram-positive bacteria was limited to bacillus spp. this prompted us to perform a detailed analysis of xylose utilization and its regulatory mechanisms in the species of bacilli and clostridia classes by combining comparative genomic analyses with genetic and biochemical techniques.

in this study, we used a subsystems-based comparative genomic analysis  <cit>  to explore the xylose and xyloside utilization machinery in the firmicutes species with completely sequenced genomes. a novel xylose isomerase  that is not homologous to previously characterized xyla, was identified in several clostridia species . in c. acetobutylicum the xylose utilization pathway also includes a xylulokinase , a xylose proton-symporter , and a transcriptional regulator . the predicted functions of these genes in c. acetobutylicum were experimentally confirmed through a combination of genetic and biochemical techniques. we conclusively showed that the identified gene xyla-ii encodes a fully functional xylose isomerase that catalyze the transformation of d-xylose to d-xylulose. in addition, we have also tentatively identified several other genes likely associated with the utilization of β- or α-xyloside.

many of these genes occurred in operons that formed a predicted regulon controlled by xylr. comparative analysis of upstream regions of the xylose and xyloside utilization genes allowed identification of candidate dna motifs for various groups of xylr regulators and reconstruction of xylr regulons. a novel xylr-binding dna motif, which is exceptionally distinct from the dna motif known for bacillus xylr, was identified in three clostridiales species and experimentally validated in c. acetobutylicum by an electrophoretic mobility shift assay .

RESULTS
 comparative genomics of xylose and xyloside utilization in firmicutes
the subsystems-based approach was used to assess metabolic potential of firmicutes species with completely sequenced genomes in utilization of xylose and its oligomeric precursors. for the twenty-four species that possess the xylose pathway genes, we reconstructed the xylose and xyloside utilization pathway and analyzed its regulatory mechanisms. the detailed results of this analysis are captured in the seed subsystem available on line and in additional file  <dig>  the key results are illustrated in figure  <dig> and table  <dig> and contain both previously known and novel features predicted using the genome context analysis. some of these features are briefly highlighted below where we focus mostly on novel findings and conjectures.

a predicted functional assignments that were experimentally verified in c. acetobutylicum are marked by bold type and underlined.

xylr regulon
the transcriptional factor xylr belongs to rok  protein family and has an n-terminal dna-binding domain and a c-terminal sugar kinase-like domain  <cit> . based on homology supported by chromosomal clustering with xylose pathway genes, we identified xylr orthologs in most genomes of firmicutes . although xylr has been characterized in bacillus spp. as a repressor of the xyl operon encoding xylose pathway genes  <cit> , the annotations of xylr homologs in public databases are incomplete and imprecise due to the presence of functionally divergent paralogs and limited experimental data on their characterization. for example, xylr is assigned to four genes in c. acetobutylicum genome  in the public databases . only cac <dig> was deemed to xylose regulator in this study, because it displayed a closest homology with the characterized xylr from b. subtilis . moreover, the close orthologs of cac <dig> in clostridium beijerinckii and alkaliphilus metalliredigens  are clustered on the chromosome with xylose pathway genes .

the phylogenetic tree was constructed for  <dig> representative xylr proteins from firmicutes including two paralogs in lactobacillus brevis, where at least  <dig> branches were observed on the phylogenetic tree of xylr proteins . the lowest pairwise sequence similarity between different groups of xylr proteins was 21% . xylr from c. acetobutylicum was in the same group with orthologous proteins from c. beijerinckii, and a. metalliredigens. this group of clostridial xylr proteins stands alone from xylr orthologs in other clostridium such as c. phytofermentans and c. difficile.

although the xylr regulons in bacilli/clostridia have been analyzed previously  <cit> , a rapidly growing number of complete genomes in these classes allowed significant improvement of the accuracy of xylr-binding dna motifs and expansion of xylr regulons. analysis of upstream regions of xylr-controlled genes and their orthologs in xylr-encoding genomes resulted in identification of the group-specific xylr-binding dna motifs that were used to search for additional candidate

xylr-binding sites in the analyzed groups of genomes . the obtained consensus sequences for xylr-binding sites in the bacillaceae genomes  were in accordance with that experimentally determined for b. subtilis xylr  <cit> . predicted dna motifs of xylr regulators from other groups on the tree were partially similar to that from the bacillaceae. however, the group  <dig> of xylr regulators from c. acetobutylicum, c. beijerinckii, and a. metalliredigens has an exceptionally different dna recognition motif, a 25-bp inverted repeat with consensus sequence 5'-acttattaaannnnntttaaaaagt-3' .

the identified candidate dna-binding sites of different groups of xylr regulators were detected in the promoter regions of most xylose utilization genes in firmicutes . the most conserved part of the xylr regulon includes the xylose pathway genes xyla and xylb and transporter genes xylfgh or xylt. the xylr regulon members also include the genes involved in uptake and degradation of α-, and β-xylosides. in addition, the presence of xylr-binding sites upstream of the xylr gene in many species suggests possible autoregulation of its expression. hence, assignment of the gene xylr  is further supported by sharing upstream xylr-binding sites with xylose pathway genes. remarkably, a xylr-binding site in the c. acetobutylicum and several other clostridium genomes was detected upstream of a hypothetical gene encoding a novel non-orthologous variant of xylose isomerase characterized in this work .

orthologs of xylr regulator were not found in several species of firmicutes possessing a complete version of the xylose utilization pathway, i.e., moorella thermoacetica and l. lactis. in the first species, a hypothetical laci-type transcriptional factor  was inferred based on chromosomal clustering with the xylose pathway genes . the xylose operon in l. lactis is known to be controlled by an arac-type regulator   <cit> . since there are only few genomes encoding these two types of xylose regulator, their dna recognition motifs could not be determined accurately. overall, alternative transcriptional regulators of xylose metabolism appear to be present in various species of firmicutes.

xyloside uptake and degradation
the analysis of operons and regulons associated with xylose and xyloside utilization subsystem allowed us to accurately annotate and map some previously uncharacterized components of xyloside utilization machinery in firmicutes. most genes encoding β- and α-xylosidases  appear to be clustered on the chromosome and/or co-regulated with the xylose pathway genes .

based on the genome context analysis, we predicted the involvement of three types of transporters, xynt, xynabc, and xynpts, in the xyloside uptake . xynt belongs to the mfs  transporter family. the xynt gene was identified as a member of the xylr regulon in c. acetobutylicum  and several lactobacillales and bacillales . it is also positionally clustered with xylosidase and xylose pathway genes . an alternative system of xyloside transport via a committed abc cassette was predicted for oceanobacillus iheyensis  and several other species. the xynabc transport system is homologous to an oligosaccharide abc transporter from the streptococcus mutans . the functional prediction is supported by chromosomal clustering and by sharing upstream xylr-binding sites with xylosidase and other xyl genes . a novel xyloside transporter from the phosphotransferase  system family was predicted for enterococcus faecalis and c. difficile. the gene cluster encoding this xynpts system  is a candidate member of the predicted xylr regulons and co-localized with α-xylosidase gene  in both species , suggesting involvement of xynpts in uptake of α-xyloside.

xylose transport
the abc-type xylose transporter xylfgh was originally described in e. coli  <cit> . an orthologous xylose abc transporter was found in the genomic context of the xylose utilization genes in several clostridiales, thermoanaerobacterales, and bacillales species . another xylose transporter belonging to the mfs transporter family, xylt, was described in bacillus megaterium  <cit>  and l. brevis  <cit> . its orthologs in several species of bacilli/clostridia have been annotated as xylose proton-symporter in the public databases . in this study xylt was tentatively identified in more species such as c. beijerinckii. this functional assignment is supported by the conserved co-localization on the chromosome and by predicted co-regulation  with other xyl genes .

xylose pathway
xylose isomerase  is required for the first reaction of xylose utilization, converting d-xylose into d-xylulose. this enzyme, a product of the xyla gene, was characterized in detail in l. lactis  <cit> , and its orthologs are present in many bacteria including b. subtilis. however, analysis of the xylose utilization subsystem showed that this gene is missing in c. acetobutylicum and caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus that have other components of the xylose utilization pathway. based on genomic and functional context analysis , we have tentatively identified a candidate gene for an alternative xylose isomerase , which is not homologous to xyla from b. subtilis and other firmicutes . xyla-ii belongs to the fucose isomerase fuci family , with a weak ~14% similarity to fuci from e. coli  <cit> . the xyla-ii gene in c. acetobutylicum  and c. beijerinckii  is clustered with xylb and preceded by candidate xylr-binding sites , whereas c. phytofermentans has a separate xyla-ii gene preceded by a candidate xylr site.

xylulokinase , xylb, is required for the phosphorylation of d-xylulose yielding d-xylulose 5-p, a key intermediate in the pentose phosphate pathway of the central carbon metabolism. xylb, originally characterized in e. coli  <cit> , is the invariant component of the xylose pathway . however, accurate functional assignment of sugar kinase genes such as xylb is not easy due to the presence of functionally divergent paralogs. for example, both cac <dig> and cac <dig> in c. acetobutylicum genome are annotated as xylulokinase in genbank based on homology. here only cac <dig> and its orthologs were identified as xylb based on the genome context evidence as follows: chromosomal clustering with xylose utilization genes and assignment to the xylr regulon .

in summary, the subsystem reconstruction and the genome context analysis in  <dig> genomes of firmicutes allowed us to predict the candidate genes for a novel xylose isomerase and a xylulokinase as well as for previously uncharacterized xylose and xyloside transporters and xylose regulator . the regulon analysis led to tentative identification of different types of dna motifs that correspond to the binding sites of transcriptional regulator xylr. in the second part of this study, we have performed experimental validation of the predicted functions of xyla-ii, xylb, xylt, and xylr genes as well as the identified xylr-binding sites in c. acetobutylicum.

 experimental validation
mutagenesis corroborates predicted xylose pathway genes
to validate the role of the inferred xylose pathway genes in c. acetobutylicum, we disrupted the respective genes by inserting an intron  and tested the ability of these mutants to grow on xylose as the sole carbon source. inactivation of the gene encoding putative xylose isomerase  or xylulokinase  abolished the growth of the resulting strains on xylose  whereas their growth on glucose was not impaired . the mutants did not consume any xylose after a 80-h incubation in the minimal medium containing  <dig> g l- <dig> of xylose . therefore, the phenotypes of c. acetobutylicum mutants were consistent with the predictions of the bioinformatics analysis and confirmed the predicted physiological roles of xyla-ii and xylb in utilization of xylose.

heterologous-host complementation supports functional assignments of predicted xylose pathway genes
to test whether the identified genes are not only required but also sufficient to perform the predicted functions, we carried out genetic complementation experiments. plasmid constructs containing c. acetobutylicum genes xyla-ii and xylb were introduced into e. coli k- <dig> mutants deficient in xylose isomerase  or xylulokinase . the resulting strains were tested for the ability of xylose utilization using macconkey agar supplemented with xylose as a carbon source . expression of the c. acetobutylicum xyla-ii gene completely restored the ability of e. coli Δxyla mutant to utilize xylose. similarly, expression of xylb from c. acetobutylicum successfully complemented the xylulokinase deficiency and restored the ability of e. coli Δxylb mutant in xylose utilization . on the other hand, expression of the gene cac <dig>  which is also annotated as xylulokinase in genbank, had no appreciable effect on the impaired xylose utilization of Δxylb mutant . our results indicate that xyla-ii and xylb of c. acetobutylicum encode active enzymes functionally equivalent to xylose isomerase and xylulokinase, respectively.

in vitro activity of the novel xylose isomerase and xylulokinase
to extend the genetic findings and provide biochemical evidence to the proposed gene assignments, we used the recombinant xyla-ii and xylb from c. acetobutylicum, which were overexpressed in e. coli with the n-terminal his <dig> tag and purified using ni-nta affinity chromatography, to test for xylose isomerase and xylulokinase activities, respectively. expected enzymatic activities of both proteins were verified using the specific assays described in materials and methods. the specific activity of the c. acetobutylicum xyla-ii was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μmol mg- <dig> min- <dig>  which is comparable with the respective values reported for the enzyme from e. coli   <cit>  while lower than that for bacillus licheniformis xyla   <cit> . the c. acetobutylicum xylb displayed a xylulokinase activity, although the specific activity value  is significantly lower than that of e. coli xylb   <cit> . therefore, the biochemical activity assays provided an independent verification of the predicted enzymatic activities of xyla-ii and xylb from c. acetobutylicum.

experimental assessment of the predicted xylose transporter gene
to test the role of the inferred xylose transporter gene in c. acetobutylicum, we disrupted the gene cac <dig>  by inserting an intron  and assessed the effect of its inactivation on cell growth and xylose consumption. a significant impairment of cell growth on xylose was observed for Δxylt mutant compared to the wild-type strain  whereas their growth on glucose was not affected . in the medium containing  <dig> g l- <dig> of xylose, specific growth rate of Δxylt mutant  was more than three-fold lower than that of wild-type strain . after a 20-h incubation on  <dig> g l- <dig> of xylose, about 50% of xylose was consumed by the wild-type strain, whereas the Δxylt mutant consumed less than 8% of xylose . the difference between the growth curves was smaller at high concentrations of xylose . these observations suggest that xylt contributes to the uptake of xylose in c. acetobutylicum. the obtained results also revealed that in addition to xylt, c. acetobutylicum must have another, hitherto-unknown transport system for xylose uptake.

an additional verification of the xylose transporter gene was obtained using the genetic complementation experiment. a plasmid construct containing c. acetobutylicum xylt gene was introduced into e. coli k- <dig> Δxyle mutant that lacks xylose proton-symporter while still has the abc transporter system for xylose . the specific growth rate of this engineered strain  was higher than that of the control strain carrying an empty vector plasmid  when both strains were grown in the minimal medium containing  <dig> g l- <dig> of xylose . concomitantly, expression of c. acetobutylicum xylt led to an acceleration in xylose consumption , indicating that the xylt gene product is able to transport xylose. overall, the cumulative evidence generated in the two different types of experiments described above provided strong support for the tentative gene assignment of the xylose transporter in c. acetobutylicum.

experimental testing of xylose regulator binding to predicted dna targets
the ability of xylr protein to specifically bind to the predicted dna sites was tested by emsa using the purified recombinant xylr protein from c. acetobutylicum. the predicted xylr-binding sites in c. acetobutylicum and several other species represent a distinct dna motif from that known for bacillus xylr . three predicted target dna fragments from the upstream regions of c. acetobutylicum xyla-ii, xylb, and xylr genes, respectively, were used in emsa. a substantial shift of the dna band was observed in all three cases upon incubation of xylr protein with the target dna fragments . a typical protein concentration dependence of dna-binding is illustrated in additional file  <dig> showing increasing intensity of the shifted dna band in the presence of increasing amounts of the xylr protein. the shift of the dna band for all three target sites was essentially complete at xylr concentration above  <dig>  μm. the band shift was suppressed in the presence of 400-fold excess unlabeled dna fragments but not in the presence of non-specific competitor, salmon sperm dna . no binding was observed for the negative control dna segment without xylr-binding dna motif . these observations provided an experimental confirmation of the target xylr-binding sites and xylr-regulated genes tentatively identified by comparative genomic techniques .

discussion
the comparative genomics analysis and metabolic reconstruction of the xyloside and xylose metabolic subsystem across a broad range of firmicutes, including c. acetobutylicum and related species from bacilli and clostridia classes, revealed a remarkable pattern of conservation and variation. the role of this subsystem in utilizing exogenous sources of xylose, and its overall topology  including uptake and degradation of xyloside, xylose transport, and the biochemical conversion of xylose to xylulose 5-p, is preserved in all of the analyzed species. however, nearly all these aspects of its implementation are associated with significant variations such as:  existence of alternative transcriptional regulators and regulatory dna signals;  presence or absence of xyloside utilization machinery and variations therein;  alternative mechanisms of xylose uptake; and  nonorthologous gene displacement for a key enzymatic step of the xylose catabolism, xylose isomerase .

based on the subsystem reconstruction and the genome context analysis, we have identified a novel xylose isomerase, xyla-ii that is not homologous to previously characterized xyla. moreover, the gene encoding xylulokinase, xylb, was unambiguously identified in all of the analyzed firmicutes species. these functional predictions were experimentally validated in c. acetobutylicum by a combination of genetic and biochemical techniques. the observed low specific activity of xyla-ii and xylb from c. acetobutylicum is consistent with the relatively slow growth on xylose, suggesting that these two enzymatic reactions may be rate-limiting steps of xylose utilization in this organism. it is interesting that unlike in c. acetobutylicum and c. saccharolyticus where xyla-ii is the only xylose isomerase, both xyla-i and xyla-ii are present in c. beijerinckii and c. phytofermentans. the exact interpretation of the observed functional redundancy in these two organisms requires further investigation.

the genes encoding xylose proton-symporter, xylt, were tentatively identified in several genomes of firmicutes based on analysis of conserved operons and regulons. this prediction was experimentally assessed by mutagenesis of the inferred gene in c. acetobutylicum and by genetic complementation in e. coli. the results allow us to conclude that xylt is involved in xylose transport in c. acetobutylicum, although there may be additional, unknown mechanism for xylose transport. despite the differences in cell wall structure between gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, xylt from c. acetobutylicum was recognized by the cell sorting machinery of e. coli and functioned properly to complement xylose symporter deficiency. it is important to emphasize that although the performed experiments provided strong support for the predicted functional assignment of xylt, additional studies are necessary to establish its substrate specificity and kinetic parameters, as well as to elucidate the mechanism of xylt-independent xylose uptake.

based on the genome context analysis, the genes encoding the xylose regulator, xylr, were unambiguously assigned in all of the analyzed species. comparative analysis of upstream regions of the xylose and xyloside utilization genes allowed identification of candidate xylr-binding sites and reconstruction of xylr regulons. a novel xylr-binding dna motif, which is exceptionally distinct from the dna motif known for bacillus xylr, was identified in c. acetobutylicum, c. beijerinckii, and a. metalliredigens. experimental validation was performed by emsa using purified recombinant xylr protein. the results confirmed the proposed gene assignment of the xylose regulator and the predicted xylr-binding sites in c. acetobutylicum. in addition to xylr regulation, expression of xyl genes in bacillus is also subject to catabolite repression mediated by the transcriptional factor ccpa that binds to the catabolite responsive element   <cit> . it has been reported that xylose metabolism in clostridium was inhibited in the presence of glucose  <cit> . studies on the involvement of ccpa and cre in regulation of xyl genes and the contribution of xylr to glucose repression in clostridium, are now underway.

since pentose sugars  are the most abundant carbohydrate in the hemicellulose of lignocellulosic materials such as hardwoods and crop residues, the efficient utilization of pentose sugars offers the opportunity to significantly reduce the cost of solvent fermentation processes. however, before this study very little was known about the machinery for xylose and xyloside utilization in solventogenic clostridia, although some of the strains were shown previously to have this catabolic potential  <cit> . a subsystem-based approach applied in this study has allowed us to significantly improve the quality of gene annotations and to accurately infer metabolic and regulatory networks associated with xylose and xyloside utilization in clostridium. key conjectures about important aspects of this subsystem were validated by focused genetic and biochemical experiments in the model system of c. acetobutylicum atcc  <dig>  although other functional predictions have yet to be experimentally verified. this study paves the way for genetically engineering the xylose pathway in solventogenic clostridia to enhance its capability of xylose utilization.

CONCLUSIONS
we reconstructed the xylose and xyloside utilization pathway and xylr regulons in  <dig> firmicutes species by using comparative genomics techniques. it allowed us to discover a novel xylose isomerase that is not homologous to previously characterized xylose isomerase, unambiguously assign the genes encoding the xylulokinase and xylr, and tentatively identify several genes involved in xylose transport and xyloside uptake. the key functional predictions were further experimentally verified in c. acetobutylicum through genetic and biochemical techniques. xylr regulons were reconstructed by identification and comparative analysis of xylr-binding sites upstream of xylose utilization genes. we identified and experimentally validated a novel xylr-binding dna motif in clostridiales, which is exceptionally distinct from the dna motif known for bacillus xylr. these findings provided an accurate and comprehensive understanding of xylose metabolism and its regulation in the diverse species of firmicutes.

