BACKGROUND
what molecular-level events determine the behavioral outcome of individual leukocytes during rolling, activation, and adhesion to venular surfaces? these processes are necessary steps for the proper recruitment of leukocytes from circulating blood to sites of inflammation. once at the target site, leukocytes help destroy pathogens and decompose damaged tissue. however, inflammatory mechanisms are also associated with diseases such as asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and atherosclerosis. such diseases can be characterized by inappropriate leukocyte recruitment and the misdirected actions of leukocytes towards healthy host-tissue  <cit> .

rolling and adhesion following attachment are two of the least complicated of many individual leukocyte behaviors that have been studied in vitro using flow chamber assays. those behaviors are by no means deterministic. a striking feature of such studies is that cell behavior is heterogeneous: individual cell behaviors under identical conditions can be quite different. no two cells behave the same, yet collective behaviors are robust and fall reliably within narrow ranges. rolling, for example, exhibits an irregular, jerky stop-and-go pattern along with highly fluctuating rolling velocities  <cit> . additionally, in the presence of chemokine, only a fraction of a leukocyte population will adhere firmly  <cit> .

a goal in systems biology research is to understand linkages from molecular level events to system phenotype: link genotype to phenotype. that task requires having plausible, adequately detailed design plans for how components  at various system levels are thought to fit and function together. ideas about such plans can be induced from the results of experiments. experimentation is then used to reconcile different design plan hypotheses. more is needed, however, to actually demonstrate that a design plan is functionally plausible, which is very different from demonstrating that it is consistent with measured behaviors. the former requires that one assemble individual components according to a design, and then show that the constructed device, an analogue – on its own – exhibits behaviors that match those observed in the original experiment.

building such analogues in silico is now feasible. to make it practicable, we need multilevel modeling and simulation methods that make it easy to test, reject, and refine many candidate design plans. in this report, we describe discovering, building, and testing aspects of a simple yet plausible design plan. that achievement is an essential step toward the long-term biological goal for this project: develop scientifically useful, validated simulations of leukocyte recruitment under physiological and pathophysiological conditions. we use the synthetic modeling approach. object-oriented software components were designed, verified, plugged together, and then operated in ways that represent the mechanisms and processes believed responsible for leukocyte rolling and adhesion. the result is an analogue of an in vitro experimental system. an analogue refinement method is used in which experimentally measured phenotypic attributes are iteratively compared and contrasted to those of leukocytes in vitro.

during leukocyte rolling, the initial interactions between leukocyte and surface are primarily mediated by the selectin family of receptors and their respective carbohydrate ligands found on the membranes of both the leukocytes and endothelial cells. transient selectin-ligand interactions enable rolling. leukocyte arrest is mediated by the integrin receptor family. integrins exist largely in nonadhesive states to prevent leukocytes from sticking non-specifically to blood vessels. as leukocytes roll along the venular surface, they use their chemokine receptors to detect immobilized chemokines on activated endothelial cells. upon detection, intracellular signaling events trigger integrin conformational changes, increasing integrin-ligand affinity. high affinity integrins enable the leukocytes to firmly adhere to the vessel wall or flow chamber surface  <cit> . signaling through chemokine receptors can also induce lateral movement and clustering of integrins within the membrane to promote leukocyte adhesion  <cit> . in addition, the engagement of some selectins and integrins with their ligands can initiate various activation signals to enhance adhesion  <cit> .

with their adhesive dynamics simulations, hammer and co-workers have elegantly demonstrated how challenging it can be to generate similar rolling characteristics in silico when using physical and mechanical representations combined with traditional modeling formalisms  <cit> . in their models, leukocytes are represented as solid spheres decorated with rod-like "microvilli" containing receptors at their tips. using a monte carlo algorithm for the determination of receptor-ligand interactions, they have successfully produced a jerky stop-and-go pattern similar to that observed for rolling leukocytes. such models can be fragile to context. when they target specific phenomena and constrain their use to account for specific sets of data, it becomes difficult to extend the model to different experimental circumstances or to help explain different phenomena or particular examples of individual behavior. it becomes difficult to explore potential mechanistic differences between individual cell behaviors, for example. are there alternative modeling and simulation approaches that are less susceptible to such problems? the multilevel approach described here was selected in part to help circumvent those problems.

a measure of a particular behavior is a phenotypic attribute. table  <dig> lists several targetable attributes. the greater the similarity between the measured behaviors of our in silico white blood cells  and the in vitro attributes of interest, the more useful that in silico system will become as a research tool and as an expression of the coalesced, relevant leukocyte knowledge. an early goal has therefore been to produce increasing overlap between iswbc behaviors, properties, and characteristics, and the in vitro properties listed in table  <dig>  once that is achieved, we can look forward to simulating behaviors that are more complicated, such as those associated with the above listed diseases, and predicting the consequences of interventions. the phenotypic overlap sought and a method for extending it are illustrated and described in figure  <dig>  to achieve that overlap we need to enable iswbcs to mimic an expanding variety of leukocyte attributes. merging lessons from the literature and related simulation projects  <cit>  with those learned during the early stages of this project, along with identifiable requirements that must be met in order to achieve the insights referred to above, we arrived at ten capabilities that the envisioned iswbcs should exhibit.

 <dig>  individual behavior: the models need to be capable of accurately representing the unique individual behavior patterns typical of leukocytes observed in vitro and in vivo.

 <dig>  multilevel1: it needs to be easy to increase or decrease the number of model levels and alter communications between levels.

 <dig>  mapping: there are clear mappings between leukocyte and iswbc components and their interactions because in silico observables have been designed to be consistent with those of the referent in vitro flow chambers.

 <dig>  turing test: when an iswbc and the simulated flow chamber are each endowed with a specified set of ligands, the measures of iswbc behaviors during simulations should be, to a domain expert , experimentally indistinguishable from in vitro flow chamber measurements; this requires that an iswbc and its framework must be suitable for experimentation.

 <dig>  transparent: iswbcs must be transparent. the details of components and their interactions as the simulation progresses need to be visualizable, measurable, and accessible to intervention.

 <dig>  articulate: the components articulate. it must be easy to join, disconnect, and replace iswbc components within and between levels, including the simulated experimental context.

 <dig>  granular2: because of how iswbcs are componentized, it should be relatively simple to change usage and assumptions, or increase or decrease detail in order to meet the particular needs of an experiment, without requiring significant re-engineering of the in silico system.

 <dig>  reusable: an iswbc  must be reusable for simulating behaviors in different experimental conditions, in vitro and in vivo, and when different sets of ligands, chemokines, and chemical reagents  are considered.

 <dig>  embeddable: iswbcs must be constructed so that they can function as components of larger, whole organism or tissue models, and eventually represent the full range of trafficking attributes.

 <dig>  discrete interactions: to enable the above capabilities, an iswbc and its framework must use discrete interactions that explicitly show the relation between components.

in this report, we describe significant early progress in building and experimenting with iswbcs designed to exhibit these capabilities. to achieve them, the iswbc needed to be distinct from cellular automata  models, including lattice-gas, ising, and potts models, in its combination of spatial and non-spatial interactions between components. some components  interact via a regular grid as in a ca. however, they also interact directly or through other data structures like lists.

we initially focused on the attributes in set a of table  <dig>  we then iteratively revised the iswbc to mimic the combined attributes in sets a and b. each iswbc was autonomous. because the preceding capabilities are oriented toward the evaluation of plausible mechanisms, less emphasis is placed on condition-dependent, precise prediction. behaviors were observed over a range of conditions without modeler intervention. simulation results were heterogeneous and non-deterministic. importantly, when simulating populations of leukocytes under different experimental conditions , the in silico system generated quantitative population-level data that were similar to data from in vitro experiments. the results have provided an important foundation and framework for future modeling and simulation studies capable of exploring plausible causal links between well-documented, subcellular molecular level events and the variety of system level phenotypic attributes that accurately reflect leukocyte rolling and arrest under a wide range of conditions.

RESULTS
to avoid confusion hereafter and clearly distinguish in silico components, features, measurements, and events from their in vitro counterparts, such as leukocyte, adhesion, bond, etc., we use small caps when referring to the in silico components. examples are provided in table  <dig> 

the system described below is the product of iterative refinement of predecessor analogues that focused initially on set a in table  <dig> and later on sets a and b. refinement followed the process illustrated in figure 1b. the in vitro experimental results that we chose to designate as targeted attributes focused on leukocyte ligands psgl- <dig>  vla- <dig> integrin, and cxcr- <dig> chemokine receptor in addition to their respective substrate ligands: p-selectin, vcam- <dig>  and gro-α chemokine. this group represents a minimal set of ligand-binding pairs sufficient for allowing leukocytes to roll, become activated, and firmly adhere in parallel plate flow chambers  <cit> . table  <dig> lists the leukocyte receptors represented, their corresponding ligands, and the behaviors they support.

the system illustrated in figure 2a has been designed to represent an in vitro flow chamber . the experiments using it are analogous to those performed using an in vitro system . the surface of the simulated chamber is "coated" with a uniform density of the ligands of interest. a ligand is a component that represents a number of ligands found within a discrete portion  of a leukocyte membrane or the flow chamber surface. while in the flow chamber, leukocytes use their ligands to interact and form bonds with the substrate-coated surface. each bond is an in silico analogue of a single ligand-ligand bond. those interactions are recorded and measured. under the influence of simulated flow, bonds at the rear of the contact zone experience a simulated cumulative tensile force due to shear; it is controlled by the parameter rearforce. we learned from earlier, simpler analogues that a dynamic decisional process of the type diagrammed in figure  <dig>  was needed at two levels: leukocyte/membrane and membrane unit. as described in methods, the surface, leukocyte, and membrane are separate objects. a membrane unit is an analogue of a functional unit of leukocyte membrane within the contact zone. there is a corresponding surface unit. the number of units is a discretization decision. how fine or course does the discretization  need to be in order to avoid discretization artifacts and achieve the targeted behaviors? as shown below, a level of discretization is reached at which an acceptable match to targeted behaviors is achieved; further increasing granularity does not improve the quality of the match.

we investigated the iswbc's ability to represent in vitro measures of rolling and adhesion by comparing simulation results with data from three different flow chamber experiments:

 smith et al.  <cit>  and park et al.  <cit>  observed human neutrophils rolling on various densities of p-selectin and under varying wall shear rates.

 alon et al.  <cit>  recorded human lymphocyte-rolling trajectories on vcam- <dig> in the presence of increasing wall shear rates at fixed time intervals.

 monocyte rolling and adhesion on p-selectin and/or vcam- <dig> in the presence or absence of gro-α chemokine was studied by smith et al.  <cit> .

simulating neutrophil rolling on p-selectin
the in vitro data suggests that leukocyte rolling is mediated by small numbers of receptor-ligand bonds formed within the contact zone. mathematical model estimates of this number range between two and twenty  <cit> . single bond events are believed to cause rolling behaviors similar to what one might expect of a stochastic process. there are two easily recognized manifestations: jerky stop-and-go patterns and highly fluctuating rolling velocities  <cit> . given the importance of single bond events, each iswbc bond maps to a single ligand-ligand bond. however, a ligand can map to more than one ligand molecule.

two observations considered together, pause times and forward movement during rolling, required that the upper limit for the mapping of simulation cycle to in vitro time be about  <dig> simulation cycle =  <dig>  seconds. pause time measurements, the first targeted attribute, were made over a small range of shear values as reported by smith et al.  <cit>  for human neutrophils rolling on a p-selectin-coated surface. using high-speed videomicroscopy with a smallest resolvable step size of  <dig>  μm, average pause times were in the range of  <dig>  to  <dig>  seconds for shear stress values of  <dig>  to  <dig>  dyn/cm <dig>  higher wall shear stress values caused shorter average pause times.

we defined leukocyte rolling as a sequence of at least  <dig> simulation cycles during which a leukocyte remained non-stationary on the surface. during rolling, iswbcs used the relationship between ligand disassociation probability and bondforce graphed in figure 4a. bondforce is an in silico analogue of the force experienced by each bond within the contact zone. when parameterized according to table  <dig>  using the values listed in table  <dig> , the simulation's smallest forward movement  maps to  <dig> μm, twice that of the videomicroscope used by smith et al. to be acceptably similar, given the difference in time resolution, the magnitude of average simulated pauses needed to be within  <dig> to  <dig> times the in vitro values of  <dig>  to  <dig>  seconds, or between  <dig>  and  <dig> . that was achieved when we specified  <dig> simulation cycle =  <dig>  seconds in vitro. figure  <dig> shows that at rearforce values of  <dig>  through  <dig> , the median pause times fell within that range. we judged these results to be acceptable. at a rearforce value of  <dig> , the median pause time appeared to deviate slightly from this range. future studies using a finer time resolution may yield results even closer to the in vitro data, should that be needed.

simulated distance-time measures for each rearforce condition exhibited the characteristic jerky stop-and-go movement . smith et al. reported trajectories of human neutrophils rolling on p-selectin at a density of  <dig> sites/μm <dig> while under a wall shear stress of  <dig>  dyn/cm <dig>  when using the environment parameter values from table  <dig> , simulations produced leukocyte trajectories that were experimentally similar to in vitro data .

simulated velocity-time measures also showed that leukocytes exhibited fluctuating velocities similar to those reported in the literature. park et al.  <cit>  observed human neutrophils rolling on p-selectin at a density of  <dig> sites/μm <dig> under a wall shear rate of  <dig>  dyn/cm <dig>  when we ran simulations using environment parameter values from table  <dig> , we observed similar behavior: the range of both leukocyte rolling velocity values and distance values plotted in figure  <dig> are similar to those reported in  <cit> . the results clearly exhibit the essential jerky stop-and-go movement and highly variable rolling velocities that are characteristic of leukocytes rolling.

to further evaluate and validate leukocyte rolling, we determined the average rolling velocity, the average number of bonds within the contact area, and the average number of bonds at the rear of the leukocyte. table  <dig> shows results. average rolling velocities fell within ranges that have been reported for rolling on p-selectin. consistent with in vitro experimental data, average rolling velocity increased with increasing rearforce values. the average number of bonds within the contact area and the average number at the rear of the leukocytes under all three rearforce conditions were consistent with the estimated numbers stated above.

experiments that simulate lymphocyte rolling on vcam-1
vla- <dig> is unique among the integrins, as it has been shown to support leukocyte tethering and rolling. in flow chambers coated with vcam- <dig>  a ligand for vla- <dig>  leukocytes roll even in the absence of selectins or chemokines  <cit> . competitive binding experiments determined that native state vla- <dig> has affinity constant values similar to those of the selectins  <cit> .

the goal of the second set of simulation experiments was to show that iswbc rolling behaviors are similar to those of leukocytes rolling on vcam- <dig> in the absence of chemokine. alon et al. observed human t-lymphocytes rolling on different densities of purified vcam- <dig> in flow chambers  <cit>  under increasing shear stress. shear was increased at fixed intervals resulting in increased leukocyte rolling velocities. using parameter values from table  <dig> and table  <dig> , simulations generated leukocyte rolling trajectories that appeared indistinguishable to those reported by alon et al . average rolling velocities were calculated for each rearforce value. they were within the range of in vitro rolling velocities at each reported shear stress value .

simulating monocyte rolling, activation, and adhesion on p-selectin and/or vcam- <dig> in the presence or absence of gro-α chemokine
smith et al.  <cit>  used a flow chamber to observe human monocytes rolling and adhering on p-selectin and/or vcam- <dig> with or without immobilized gro-α chemokine: six different conditions were studied. during perfusion of leukocytes through the chamber, 30-second recordings of five fields of view were taken along the chamber length. the average number of rolling and arrested cells was determined. cells that remained immobile for at least  <dig> seconds were considered arrested. using that same combination of in silico substrate analogues, the iswbc parameter space, constrained by the already established parameter values in table  <dig> , was searched empirically for parameter sets that would provide acceptable matches for all six experimental conditions. the leukocyte parameters from table  <dig> and the environment parameters from table  <dig>  is such a set; it produced the results in figure 9: the data are averages from  <dig> sets of experiments containing  <dig> leukocytes each, with the duration of each run being  <dig> simulation cycles . the number of rolling and adhering leukocytes for each batch were counted and averaged. leukocytes that remained stationary on the surface for at least  <dig> simulation cycles  were classified as adhered. figure  <dig> shows that for all ligand combinations simulated, the data matched that from in vitro fairly well. there was even a similar significant increase in the number of adherent leukocytes on pselectin and vcam <dig> due to the presence of groa chemokine, as was observed in vitro.

there are some notable discrepancies between the in silico and in vitro data that are most likely a consequence of an iswbc being an abstract simplification of the more complex reality. for example, in the absence of gro-α chemokine, smith et al. observed a small fraction of cells that were able to adhere when rolling on vcam- <dig> alone or when vcam- <dig> was co-immobilized with p-selectin. this small fraction of adhering cells may be attributable to the pre-activation of monocytes during cell isolation procedures. we do not include any pre-activation effects, and consequently do not observe any adhering leukocytes in the absence of groa chemokine. by affecting adhesion, the pre-activation of monocytes may additionally affect the number of rolling leukocytes on vcam- <dig> substrate. we had such considerations in mind when we adjusted parameter values, and so did not seek the best possible match for any one condition. instead, we focused on obtaining behavioral similarities under different conditions. by adjusting parameter values to bring in silico and in vitro observations closer together for one condition, we typically amplified discrepancies for other conditions. if narrowing these discrepancies is deemed among the important issues to be addressed next, then our approach would be to include that specification within the targeted attribute list in set c of table  <dig>  to achieve that goal, additional iswbc detail would likely be required. literature guided, exploratory simulations would be needed to identify candidate details. fortunately, because iswbc design and construction are being guided by the ten capabilities listed in the introduction, such exploratory simulations are relatively easy to pursue.

smith et al. also tracked individual monocytes under flow to obtain rolling and arrest profiles  <cit> . they observed that with p-selectin and vcam- <dig> co-immobilized with gro-α chemokines, monocyte arrest occurred within a few seconds. we simulated their protocol: we tracked individual leukocytes that were able to transition from rolling to firm adhesion. we also observed that firm adhesion on pselectin and vcam <dig> in the presence of groa chemokine was primarily mediated by high affinity vla <dig> and that it occurred within seconds. figure  <dig> shows an example leukocyte that is able to adhere after rolling.

discussions and 
CONCLUSIONS
setting the stage
a long-term biological goal for this project is to develop scientifically useful, validated simulations of leukocyte recruitment under physiological and pathophysiological conditions. the envisioned leukocytes, functioning within an analogue of the wet-lab context, will have many behaviors, properties, and characteristics that mimic those of referent in vitro and in vivo systems. stated differently, there will be similarities between leukocyte phenotype and the "phenotype" of simulated leukocytes, as illustrated in figure  <dig>  the expectation is that increasing phenotype similarity will require, and can be achieved in part through, similarities in design plan and in generative mechanisms. once they are achieved, the model will have become a scientifically useful analogue.

our approach to designing and building the envisioned analogues is motivated by aspect-oriented software development and the middle-out approach first suggested by brenner  <cit>  and later detailed by noble  <cit>  for building models of complex biological systems. we adapted and merged these ideas in arriving at our working definition of middle-out modeling. first, specify the biological features under study . each feature becomes an aspect of a software device – an archetype model. that archetype is iteratively transformed into a functioning analogue of the referent in vitro biological system. it is then validated and improved iteratively.

following that approach, our first task was to pick a set of properties, p <dig>  p <dig>  ... pj  – around leukocyte rolling and adhesion in vitro. we specified set a, table  <dig>  we next asked what software device could we implement to realize p1? how can we realize p <dig>  etc.? we then asked, how can we realize p1- pj, all at the same time, using the same software device? getting answers to those questions required exploratory modeling and simulation, occasionally using different modeling and simulation support packages. the in silico properties and the device we created to realize p1-pj formed a foundational analogue, the above archetype model, from which we intended to expand outward  to establish a reductive hierarchy of components that could be used to identify important systems biology principles.

creating an analogue phenotype
the iswbc is an abstract model of a leukocyte, and when placed in an appropriate, simulated environment, it is capable of mimicking a set of targeted characteristics. the iswbc exists within a system that is a model of an in vitro flow chamber system . the iswbc is a multilevel composite model. the components are independent models of their referent leukocyte or environment counterpart. for example, the in silico component representing the membrane units in a portion of the trailing edge of a rolling leukocyte is itself a model of the corresponding leukocyte feature.

the envisioned relationship between measured leukocyte behaviors and corresponding in vitro measures is illustrated in figure  <dig>  pictured are overlapping  sets. one set  contains the results of experiments that measured specific phenotypic attributes, properties, or characteristics of leukocytes in vitro . the smaller sets contain the results of simulation experiments that measure corresponding in silico phenotypic attributes, properties, or characteristics . our motivating hypothesis has been that, when attention is focused on the same features, and the measured behaviors of the two sets are similar, then there may also be useful similarities in the generative mechanisms of the two systems. those similarities can be explored by iterative testing and refinement of the analogue coupled with related wet-lab experiments. an example: distance traveled by a leukocyte in silico  under various simulated  shear stresses. we cannot expect these measurements to overlap completely or even have the same units. observations on behavior similarity can be used simultaneously to eliminate invalid model features and identify gaps in our knowledge of the experimental in vitro system.

the first step in transitioning from an archetype to an improved leukocyte was to thoroughly document the in silico properties and characteristics of the former. by doing so, we improved insight into its strengths and weaknesses. the next step was to obtain increasing overlap with measures of in vitro attributes. that was done systematically by iteratively revising together the hypothesis and the analogue by following the five steps below. an example hypothesis: the current analogue can acceptably simulate the first two attributes  in set a, table  <dig>  figures  <dig> and  <dig> are examples of successful simulations. we begin the next iterative cycle with step  <dig> 

1) select an additional in vitro property or characteristic that is related to those already in the target set, and for which wet-lab experimental observations are available, such as the third property in table  <dig>  identify the additional property as p <dig> 

2) add p <dig> to the targeted set, yielding an expanded set , as illustrated by  <dig> in figure 1b.

3) determine if addition of the new attribute invalidates the current analogue, and if so, why. if not, repeat step  <dig> 

4) revise the model iteratively, possibly by adding mechanistic detail, until the measured phenotypic attributes of the revised analogue are sufficiently similar to .

5) the next iterative cycle repeats steps 1– <dig> with p <dig>  etc.

our approach to achieving an envisioned iswbc was strongly influenced and constrained by the ten capabilities listed in the introduction. we reasoned that to achieve our long-term goal it would be essential for future iswbc descendents to exhibit those capabilities.

design
the conceptual model of the referent system, which is fundamental to the design of the in silico model, is as follows. functionalities within the leukocyte membrane are grouped into a large number of similarly capable modular, functional units. leukocyte rolling in vitro involves a balance between the hydrodynamic force exerted by fluid flow and the resistant forces resulting in part from transient bonds being formed between the leukocyte and the substrate. shear force coupled with random events causes bonds to break at the rear of the contact zone. bonds formed within the contact zone are by nature transient and will dissociate even in the absence of a tensile force. only a few bonds need to be present at any time in order to maintain a rolling interaction. in order to maintain that interaction, broken bonds must be replaced by new ones formed elsewhere within the contact zone.

the transition from rolling to adhesion is mediated by the integrin receptors that, when induced into a high affinity state, are capable of forming effective ligand interactions that are sufficiently stable to withstand the hydrodynamic fluid force. however, they exist natively in a low affinity state and can only aid in supporting rolling interactions. there are many hypothesized mechanisms of integrin activation. we explored one of the simplest: a chemokine receptor, upon binding to its chemokine ligand, induces a local vla- <dig> integrin molecule into a high affinity state. the resulting high affinity integrins form stronger and longer-lasting bonds with vcam- <dig>  diffusion and clustering of vla- <dig> integrins is also hypothesized to play a role in firm adhesion. however, to keep things relatively simple at this early stage, we have not simulated those events.

achievements
the iswbc components have been verified, plugged together, and operated in ways that may represent  mechanisms and processes that influence leukocyte rolling and adhesion. the approach has allowed us to represent the spatial and discrete event phenomena that are thought to occur during leukocyte rolling, activation, and adhesion. it has allowed us to represent apparently stochastic elements within the system that may play a vital role in determining leukocyte behavior in vivo and in vitro. our earliest archetype had a contact zone comprised of  <dig> ×  <dig> membrane units . with it, we failed to even approach the first two targeted attributes in set a, table 1; we were unable to simulate the stochastic fine structure present in the in vitro data because the discretization was too coarse. it is common to observe such discretization artifacts during simulation development when the granularity is too coarse. to better achieve the targeted behaviors, we decreased the relative membrane unit size  to represent the contact zone by  <dig> ×  <dig> units and then in steps to the current size of  <dig> ×  <dig> units . with each increase in granularity, simulated results more closely mimicked the in vitro data, as judged by inspection. we also explored even finer grained contact zones, up to  <dig> ×  <dig>  without further gains in similarity. taken together, these results suggest that membrane functionality within and adjacent to the contact zone is distributed into many  equally capable, somewhat autonomous units.

though the iswbcs are relatively simple, we have demonstrated that they can generate the targeted attributes under three different experimental conditions. traditional models typically focus on just one condition. iswbcs mimic the dynamics of leukocytes rolling separately on a p-selectin or vcam- <dig> substrate. in addition, they mimic the transition from rolling to adhesion on p-selectin and vcam- <dig> in the presence of gro-α chemokine. importantly, when simulating populations of leukocytes under different experimental conditions , the system generates quantitative population-level data that are similar to data from in vitro experiments.

one hypothesis of leukocyte activation suggests that leukocytes roll along the vessel wall progressively engaging with chemokine signals to reach a global activation threshold. once achieved, fully activated integrins can then support firm adhesion. however, there is growing support for an alternative hypothesis: leukocyte adhesion induced by immobilized chemokines occurs via local and spatially restricted signaling to nearby integrins. our results support the latter hypothesis. in an elegant study, shamri et al.  <cit>  showed that leukocyte engagement with chemokine locally and reversibly induced the β <dig> integrin, lfa- <dig>  into an intermediate affinity state that was essential for interaction with icam- <dig> under flow conditions. concurrently, engagement with icam- <dig> induced the signaling events needed to fully activate local lfa- <dig> to the high affinity state needed to support firm adhesion. because of the modeling approach used , it will be relatively easy for future descendents of the iswbcs to represent such fine-grained, cooperative behaviors and spatially restricted events.

appraisal of the model assumptions
we have simulated human leukocytes of slightly different sizes , however we kept the contact zone the same for all simulations. it has been observed that leukocytes of greater size have a greater area of surface contact, and thus can form more bonds that are adhesive. however, biomechanical analysis shows that with increasing leukocyte size there is an increase in the amount of force and torque experienced. this higher magnitude is believed to translate to higher forces experienced by bonds. cozen-roberts  <cit>  presented an analysis that was verified in vitro, which predicted that the disruptive force increases faster than the pro-adhesive effect of increased contact area. rather than changing the dimensions of the contact area when simulating experiments with different leukocyte types and sizes, we fixed that dimension and compensated by using greater rearforce values to represent the same shear force when simulating larger leukocytes .

the conceptual model above is widely accepted for neutrophils. however, it is not entirely known how well it applies to other leukocyte types, such as lymphocytes and monocytes. varying receptor types and densities found on the different leukocyte types may be a factor contributing to differing mechanisms of adhesion. for example, lymphocytes and monocytes express basal levels of vla- <dig> integrins sufficient to support rolling  <cit> . in contrast, it has been shown that transmigration across endothelium or exposure to chemotactic stimuli is necessary to induce expression of vla- <dig> integrins on human neutrophils  <cit> . therefore, rolling and adhesion through the vla- <dig> integrin may require additional or different mechanisms for neutrophils than for lymphocytes and monocytes. our objective during this project was not to construct a comprehensive model of rolling, activation, and adhesion for all leukocyte types. however, when simulating monocyte rolling and adhesion, we assumed that monocytes and neutrophils share similar rolling characteristics on p-selectin. likewise, we assumed that the characteristics of monocyte rolling on vcam- <dig> are similar to those for lymphocytes. the only difference was presumed to be the densities of each receptor type found on each leukocyte type. parameter values representing the densities of the vla- <dig> integrins for lymphocytes in experimental condition  <dig> and monocytes in experimental condition  <dig> were different to reflect the different vla- <dig> density values reported in the literature. values for psgl- <dig> sites/human monocyte were not found in the literature and were assumed to be similar to values reported for human neutrophils.

comparison to other leukocyte rolling and adhesion models
the discrete-time models used in the adhesive dynamics simulations by hammer and co-workers are the most developed models of leukocyte rolling and adhesion to date  <cit> . leukocytes in their models are idealized as solid spheres decorated with rod-like microvilli containing receptors at their tips. their simulations have allowed them to explore the molecular properties of adhesion molecules, such as reaction rates and bond elasticity, and how these properties may relate to macroscopic behavior such as rolling and adhesion  <cit> .

in their simulations, the position of the cell is determined at each time step from the net force and torque on the cell using a hydrodynamic mobility function for a sphere near a plane wall in a viscous fluid. the net force and torque acting on the cell from bonds, fluid shear, steric repulsion, and gravity are calculated. when calculating the forces on the sphere due to fluid shear, their model uses the goldman equation  <cit> : the amount of force a sphere experiences from an applied shear force is calculated by assuming that the sphere is solid. at each time step in the adhesive dynamics simulation, positions of bonds on the spherical particle are tracked enabling the authors to calculate the forces that each bond experiences.

it was not our intention to discover iswbc parameterizations that would yield simulation results that tightly fit specific sets of experimental data. our approach has been focused on simulating a targeted set of system-level properties . therefore, we did not, for example, attempt an explicit mapping between the shear force and the amount of force experienced by bonds at the rear of the leukocyte. leukocytes are notoriously deformable and therefore we elected to avoid a mapping such as the goldman equation. in addition, the mapping from the force on the cell to the force on the rear bonds can be quite complex, as psgl- <dig> and vla- <dig> are both ligands that are concentrated at the tips of stretchy and heterogeneous microvilli. it should be noted that shear stress for selectin tethers at the rear of neutrophils have been estimated previously using the goldman equation to be  <dig> ±  <dig> pn per dyn/cm <dig>  <cit> .

to account for the effect of an applied force on the kinetics of bond dissociation, hammer and co-workers have employed both the bell model and dembo hookean spring model . the bell model predicts bond dissociation rate as a function of applied force, whereas the dembo model treats bonds as hookean springs and relates dissociation rate to the length of the stretched bond. use of a similar fine-grained representation of bond dissociation may have yielded more precise simulation results, but that level of resolution and precision was not needed to meet the simulation objectives in table  <dig>  rather, we used a simple model to relate the probability of bond dissociation with bond force ; it was motivated by in vitro experiments by park et al.  <cit> , and zhang, et al.  <cit> . because the time resolution within the iswbc is low , using the linear approximations in figure 4a proved reasonable: at small bond force values, we assumed a linear relationship between the probability of bond dissociation and bond force. at larger bond force values, we reasoned that the rates of bond dissociation for ligands are too fast to be distinguished on our time-scale. consequently, bonds experiencing larger forces are represented as having undergone a dissociation event during a simulation cycle with a probability of  <dig> 

many molecular level details are believed to impact effective bond formation and breakage within small portions of a leukocyte membrane and the surface. examples include contact irregularities, local dynamics, including ligand relocation within the membrane, force history of bond loading, and bond compliance. all are aggregated and controlled in the iswbc by an event probability. when explanation of system level behaviors requires a more detailed representation, one or more of these factors can be specifically represented, without compromising the function of other iswbc components. the probability parameters will remain, but their values and explanation will have changed.

in the most recent version of their model, hammer and co-workers represent the p <dig> mitogen-activated protein kinase  global integrin activation mechanism leading to leukocyte arrest induced by e-selectin engagement with its ligand psgl- <dig>  <cit> . a simple modular hill function is used to represent the overall mapk cascade leading to integrin activation. at the end of each time step, the total number of e-selectin-psgl- <dig> bonds are counted and used as an input to this function. we have chosen to explore an alternative integrin activation mechanism in which detection of chemokines activates local integrins. future embodiments of this modeling effort may include the e-selectin-dependent signaling pathway.

recent experiments have shown that leukocyte rolling on substrate-coated, flow chamber surfaces is significantly slower and smoother than that of microspheres coated with ligands  <cit> . it has been hypothesized that the deformability of leukocytes can influence rolling by increasing the contact area. in vivo, leukocytes rolling at blood wall shear rates of  <dig> s- <dig> elongate in the direction of flow to 140% of their estimated undeformed diameter and have a  <dig> -fold increased contact area with the endothelium than at blood wall shear rates of  <dig> s- <dig>  <cit> . these experiments have influenced other modelers to explore the mechanical and rheological properties that influence leukocyte morphology and deformation. the 2-d elastic ring model  <cit>  and the 2-d compound drop  <cit>  model offer an account for the deformability of leukocytes during rolling. however, because of the way receptor-ligand interactions are treated deterministically, these models do not produce the characteristic jerky stop-and-go behavior of rolling leukocytes.

recently, jadhav et al. created a 3-d model that provides a representation of leukocyte deformability: it can mimic the stochastic nature of receptor-ligand interactions  <cit> . the model uses a mathematical formulation called the immersed boundary method to simulate the measured motion of a leukocyte by representing it as an elastic capsule in a linear shear field. they use a monte carlo method for simulating receptor-ligand interactions, enabling them to simulate the jerky stop-and-go movement of rolling leukocytes. their model explored the effects of membrane stiffness on cell deformation and leukocyte rolling. it is believed that the contact area between the surface and the leukocyte membrane would increase for leukocytes under increasing shear rates. by introducing deformation in their model, they are able to observe this change in contact area. our model currently ignores this phenomenon: we kept the contact area fixed for all simulations. future iswbc descendents can, when needed, allow each cell to vary its own contact area.

considerable knowledge has been gleaned from these different models of leukocyte rolling and adhesion. they have provided insight into how molecular parameters of adhesion molecules or cell deformability may influence leukocyte rolling and adhesion. the knowledge gained reinforces the merit of investigating complex phenomena using different modeling methods. our approach is quite different and is aimed at studying the interactions of the components and possible mechanisms that may give rise to emergent leukocyte- and systems-level phenotypes.

computational models of cell motility
beyond the primarily mechanical models considered above, what other modeling methods might one consider to achieve the goal presented above under setting the stage? large-q potts models are based on extensions of cellular automaton  models  <cit> , including lattice-gas ca, with features adapted from the ising model. they have been used, for example, to study the cell sorting of embryonic cells  <cit> , and extended to simulate a variety of different biological phenomena  <cit> . a further extension using a layer for partial differential equations  enabled elegant simulations of the complex cell movements occurring during culmination of the morphogenesis of the slime mould dictyostelium discoideum  <cit> . importantly, the simulated cells were represented as a group of connected automata making the basic model scale subcellular. important details of these methods are collectively reviewed by alber et. al  <cit> .

such extended potts models have been the preferred approach for describing cell motility at a subcellular level, including aspects of cell shape, surface chemistry, and internal structure. nevertheless, meyer-hermann and maini found it necessary to develop an alternative, agent-oriented model architecture to interpret recent the two-photon imaging data of lymphocyte movement within lymph nodes  <cit> ; the jerky and individualistic nature of the imaging data is similar to that of leukocyte rolling. they refer to their system as the hyphasma  model.

the hyphasma lymphocyte is a connected collection of subunit objects arranged on a 2d square grid centered on a virtual barycenter. each one has a polarity vector, a list of its constituent subunits, internal velocity states, and a cell volume that determines the number of subunits. during movement, the barycenter is shifted in the direction of the polarity vector and border subunits are randomly moved to lattice points near the newly established barycenter. the simulated results exhibit capability  <dig>  and support the hypothesis that lymphocyte movement within secondary lymphoid tissue may not be a consequence of chemotaxis or haptotaxis, but a simple random walk. it seems likely that the hyphasma model could be used to simulate data like that in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  however, extending the model so that it delivers capability  <dig>  seems problematic. relative to the abstract nature of the subunits, the authors state: "a force balance equation for the cell subunits is not necessarily a correct description of active processes of deformation and reshaping of cells. thus, the interpretation of cell subunit velocities in terms of forces has to be considered as an approximation to more complex internal processes within the cell." simulating data like that in figures  <dig> and  <dig> is beyond hyphasma's current capabilities, but then the model was not developed with the intent that it be adaptable and extensible to represent such data . as stated in introduction, when developing the iswbc we had in mind objectives beyond simply simulating the in vitro data presented. we sought and presented a method for assembling individual components  according to a design, and then showed that the constructed iswbc can exhibit behaviors that match those observed.

future directions
the iswbc described here is an important first step towards our long-term goal of building in silico devices that can simulate leukocyte behaviors in a variety of in vitro experimental systems even in the face of considerable uncertainty. they are useful objects for experimentation, as are the referent in vitro models. the current iswbc is capable of mimicking only a few  of a long list of desired phenotypic attributes of leukocytes observed in vivo and in vitro. the expectation is that iswbcs can be iteratively refined to become increasingly realistic in terms of both components and behaviors. because we strove to deliver the ten capabilities listed in the introduction, any of the above, abstract, low resolution components can be replaced with validated, more realistic, higher resolution composite objects that map to more detailed biological counterparts, without having to reengineer the whole system, and without having to compromise already validated features and behaviors.

