BACKGROUND
microglia are part of the immune system being the resident macrophages of the brain and spinal cord, and were first discovered and defined by pio del rio hortega
 <cit>  as an independent cellular phenotype abundantly present in the central nervous system . microglia are of mesodermal origin and possess an elevated grade of plasticity, undergoing a variety of structural changes based on their location and particular state of activation. unlike other cells in the brain, they are extremely versatile and dynamic
 <cit> . they have the capacity to sense and adjust to the microenvironment, to migrate, proliferate and phagocytose. during early development, microglia enter the brain using vessels and white matter tracts as guiding structure for migration, and then disperse throughout the cns occupying a defined territory
 <cit> . late in development, they transform from an amoeboid morphology into a branched, ramified phenotype composed of long, constantly extending, shrinking and re-growing processes with small, fairly motionless cell bodies, known today as surveilling microglia. these shape-shifting cells constitute about 20% of the total glial cell population within the adult brain and act as the first and main form of active immune defense in the cns, by frequently scavenging for pathogens, damaged or dead cells and misfolded proteins, but also trimming away weak or damaged synapses between neurons
 <cit> . indeed, after a pathological event, microglia respond to the environment by undergoing profound transition in morphological appearance, motility and state of activation, and reacquiring an amoeboid shape similar to the one observed early in development. this high level of plasticity is required to fulfill the vast variety of immunological functions that microglia perform, as well as for maintaining homeostasis within the brain
 <cit> .

the first step towards the comprehension of microglia’s biology consists in discriminating if different morphological features can be acquired in vitro when microglia are cultured on diverse surface topography that are mimetic of an in vivo resembling three-dimensional  environment. to this aim, we employed microstructured pillar-shaped and line-grating geometries produced on poly  by standard soft lithography techniques, and two-layer microfabrication photolithography. while the use of artificial bio-mimetic microtextured substrates and microfluidic devices
 <cit>  was mostly exploited for cancer cells
 <cit>  and neurons
 <cit> , only few studies were performed so far on microglia
 <cit> .

RESULTS
microglia spontaneously adjust to micropatterned structures
the first aim of our work is to identify some experimental conditions that could distinguish the morphological states of microglia in vitro, since the variety of changes that microglia undergo in vivo depends on the heterogeneity of the environment
 <cit> . due to the extreme variability of microglial immortalized cell lines , we mostly used primary microglia dissociated cultures from rat and mouse cerebral cortex
 <cit>  plated on micropatterned pillar-shaped  and line grating  substrates. figure 
2a illustrates primary microglia cultured on plastic dishes coated with fibronectin, a condition commonly adopted in vitro for motility studies. double fluorescence confocal analysis performed with phalloidin  and p2y <dig> receptor antiserum 
 <cit>  shows the heterogeneous morphological features of microglia in culture, likely representing different functional states . indeed, we simultaneously observe roundish cell bodies with single, long processes enriched by short and tiny branches ; asymmetrical “hairy” cells with miniature processes ; elongated “rod-like” cell bodies with no or few branches ; amoeboid cells ; cells crowned by lamellipodia , or possessing several filopodia  or fluffy fan-like cytoplasmic protrusions . when instead cultured on biocompatible microstructured pdms substrates, microglia undergo a remarkable homogeneous metamorphosis. on pillar-shaped geometries , the majority of cells appears multipolar, with protuberances spreading out from roundish or fairly oblongated cell bodies, forming button-shaped lamellipodia or pseudopodia. these protrusions furthermore highlight the subjacent pillar structures , and are likely to reflect points of membrane adhesion to the underlying substrate. on line-grating geometries , microglia become longitudinally flattened on the substrate and show a filopodia-bearing elongated bipolar structure
 <cit> .

morphometric analysis of microglia on micropatterned structures
these morphologic observations are confirmed by quantitative analysis performed importing the fluorescence and confocal microscopy images into matlab. we adopted circularity ratio  and axis ratio  shape descriptors. cr defines the ratio between the area of the shape of interest and the area of a circle having the same perimeter
 <cit> . this parameter represents how the shape of interest differs from a circle, and it is expressed as cr = 4πap- <dig>  where “a” is the cell area and “p” the cell perimeter length. ar defines the ratio between the major axis  and the minor axis  of the cell’s fitted ellipse
 <cit> , and represents a measure of how the shape of interest is “elongated”. in detail, we observe that on pillar  or line-grating  geometries, the average m, m and ar of microglia are different, remaining approximately constant the average p, a and cr values. respectively on pillar or line-grating geometries, we find that m is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm or  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm, m is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm or  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm, ar is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  or  <dig>  ±  <dig>  .

morphological transition of microglia in microfluidic devices
we then asked if the elongated bipolar structure of microglia on line-grating geometries might convert into propensity for instance to motility, when cells are cultured on microfluidic devices . by immunofluorescence and confocal analysis, we observe that primary cortical microglia cultures  are very different from n <dig> microglia cells 
 <cit> , in terms of shape and morphological adjustment to the microchannels. when residing in the culturing chamber of the microfluidic device , between the proper microfluidic channels  and the reservoir , the majority of primary microglia  appears heterogeneous, with a large diameter  but few and long processes . cells tend to aggregate when residing in the culturing chamber  but, when present inside the microfluidic channels , they extend the cytoplasm from a roundish to a stretched, elongated morphology, with a clear leading edge, similarly to what observed on line grating geometries . conversely, round-shaped n <dig> cells have an average diameter of about 20 μm, possess numerous very short processes and have the tendency to disorderly coalesce when residing in the culturing chamber . when engaged inside the microfluidic channels , they acquire a quadrangle shape, are strictly aligned to each other by cell contacts, as suggested by the presence of stronger phalloidin fluorescent signals at the cell-to-cell side. in the two different compartments, n <dig> cells however maintain quite constant their average a, ar and cr . these parameters are instead very different in primary microglia present inside the microchannels, or in the culturing chamber. they are a: 523 ± 52 μm <dig> versus 1807 ± 545 μm2; ar: 20 ±  <dig> versus  <dig>  ±  <dig> ; cr:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  versus  <dig>  ±  <dig> . moreover, we also observe that both morphological appearance and average values of a, ar and cr are very different in polarized primary microglia versus not-polarized n <dig> cells , especially in the microchannels, thus discouraging the use of these last for motility studies.

primary microglia spontaneously migrate in microfluidic channels
in order to prove if morphological transition affects baseline motility of primary microglia, we performed time-lapse recording on artificial microfluidic substrates with controlled characteristics 
 <cit> . fibronectin-coated pdms microfluidic microchannels with a width of 12–18 μm, a length of 500 μm , a reservoir chamber of 200 μl in volume, are found permissive to this aim . the presence of a fibronectin coating gradient potentially generated inside the microchannels and possibly sustaining cell migration is moreover excluded by immunofluorescence confocal analysis in the presence of anti-fibronectin . under these conditions, we observe that several microglial cells are scattered in the culturing chamber , with many cells apparently aligned in proximity to the microchannels . moreover, we detect microglia also engaged inside the microchannels , with some cells finally moving out from the microchannels, after having completed the 500 μm full length . when time-lapse is captured for 20 h every 30 minutes , we observe that at t = 0 min, many round-shaped microglial cells are positioned in proximity to the microchannel openings, at the boundary between microchannels and culturing chamber. at t = 30 min, several microglial processes are already surveilling the environment and entering into the microchannels , with a few cells already engaged inside the channels . at t =  <dig>  h, several cells are committed and already moving inside the channels . at t = 4 h, some cells move forward , some stay still  or move backward in the microchannels . at t =  <dig>  h, two cells  are entering in microchannels already occupied by other cells . between t =  <dig>  and t =  <dig>  h, some cells change direction and move backward , some stop moving after a displacement of about 120–150 μm  or about 250 μm . at t =  <dig>  h, we also observe a cell completing the 500 μm full length and moving out from the other side  . moreover, we detect: cells branching and alternating their processes in and out from the same microfluidic channel, or in more than one channel; cell bodies oscillating between two adjacent channels; two cells proceeding simultaneously inside a single channel; cells inverting direction and moving out from the channels; cells overtaking each other inside the channels . during the time-lapse, the cells always appear healthy and possess a roundish or elongated shape respectively in the culturing chamber and the microchannels.

morphometric analysis of primary microglia migrating in microfluidic channels
quantitative analysis of individual somata performed during the time-lapse confirms the highly dynamic nature of microglia. by analyzing image stacks and time series with image j software, we observe that: a) only 2 ~  <dig> cells are found simultaneously inside a single microchannel; b) the percentage of total cells engaged in the microchannels is about 50% of those residing in the culturing chamber; c) the maximal distance covered by a single cell in the microchannel is 500 μm in  <dig>  h; d) the average accumulated distance of microglia somata over 20 h recording is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm in the microchannels, with respect to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm in the culturing chamber ; e) the highest velocity is  <dig>  μm/min; f) the mean velocity of microglia somata inside the microchannels is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min, as compared to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min in the culturing chamber . moreover, also microglia processes  are found extremely motile, undergoing extensions and retractions when moving inside the microchannels. the maximal length change of individual processes inside the microchannels is 70–80 μm. to quantify the morphological changes, we analyzed cells present in the different compartments of the microfluidic device . inside the microchannels , we observe a 50% decrease in the average cr , with respect to cells  in the culturing chamber , while the average ar increases about twofold.

discussion
microglia consist of at least two subpopulations that coexist in the adult cns and derive from different sources: one that originates from bone marrow-derived cells and migrates to the cns during embryonic development for colonization of the nervous system parenchyma, the second that develops from myeloid progenitor cells and enters the brain after birth
 <cit> , becoming fundamental for microglial maintenance of the cns homeostasis
 <cit> . since adult microglia can play a twofold role, either amplifying the effects of inflammation and mediating cell degeneration, or protecting the nervous system from pathological insults
 <cit> , efficient chemotaxis can acquire either neuroprotective or inflammatory and detrimental roles. whereas we are currently capable of distinguishing amoeboid-phagocytic from branched-surveilling microglia
 <cit> , we are unaware of how these morphological shapes can denote a neuroprotective or neurotoxic role. in other words, it is still an open matter how the vast morphological heterogeneity existing within the mixed microglia population might relate to functional diversification.

cell behavior strictly depends on the stiffness and shape of the microenvironment, and the response to surface topography is a very critical determinant of cell morphogenesis. microglia respond to micro- nano-structured pits, protrusions and grooves with altered morphology, adhesion, and directional growth
 <cit> . in our work, we establish that primary microglia retain in vitro the intrinsic competence of modifying their structure in response to contact guidance cues. when grown on pillar-shaped substrates, microglia acquire a center-stage multi-polar morphology and develop abundant button-like pseudopodia emerging from the cell body with a nearly radial orientation. this situation might very well depict the in vivo condition of microglia not committed to migrate, but exploring the environment with short forward, backward and sideways steps, with the final purpose to orient their migration. when placed on a line-grating substrate in the presence of parallel and symmetrical grooves, microglia elicit a longitudinally flattened appearance with elongated bipolar shape. this in vitro condition might favor a polarized extension of filopodia at the leading edge of the cell, in preparation of a forward translocation of the cell body, with retraction of the rear of the cell
 <cit> . the adjustment of microglia to a line-grating geometry is thus highly suggestive of commitment to follow a straight path in vivo. thus, surface topography can induce a synchronous and homogeneous metamorphosis of microglia in vitro, distinguishing the center-stage multipolar  from the elongated bipolar  cells. with the use of specific markers and cytoskeleton-perturbing drugs, future work will aim to establish if these subpopulations can be correlated to: a) microglia generated from bone marrow rather than from myeloid progenitor cells; b) microglia colonizing the cns during development, rather than maintaining cns homeostasis in adulthood; c) more importantly, “beneficial” rather than “detrimental” microglia. moreover, future analysis of parameters such as cell adhesion, distribution of actin cytoskeleton and microtubules, phagocytosis, antigen presenting power, beneficial or detrimental chemokine/cytokine expression and release, will allow to determine the functional identity of multipolar versus bipolar microglia.

moreover, by the use of bio-mimetic 3d microfluidic substrates, our work demonstrates that primary microglia appear intrinsically different from immortalized n <dig> cells. during cell polarization inside the microchannels, primary microglia tend to align longitudinally and individually, whereas immortalized n <dig> microglia assume a more compact morphology with the propensity to establish cell contacts. this might be reminiscent of the immortalization program that likely confers to n <dig> cells a compact morphology optimizing cell division and contact formation, rather than the aptitude of primary cells to explore the environment with a direction-oriented polarization. in both cases, specific receptors and structural molecules are found enriched respectively at the cell-to-cell surface  or leading edges , as evinced by increased phalloidin and p2y <dig> receptor signals at these sites.

cell adhesion and morphology are dynamically mutable during cell migration
 <cit> . the last issue that we addressed in our work is thus the free motility of microglia in culture. while numerous publications cite motility and short migration of microglia in vivo, only few works describe microglia moving for long distances. this is the case for example of the work by carbonell and coauthors
 <cit> , demonstrating by intracerebroventricular injection of rhodamine and time-lapse confocal microscopy that subventricular microglia at the interface of the cerebrospinal fluid and brain parenchyma, exhibit the “in situ” ability to migrate for several hundred microns into the parenchyma, towards a deafferentation injury of the hippocampus. conversely, nimmerjahn and colleagues indicate only static movement of microglia, branch motility, but not cell bodies migration
 <cit> . using transcranial two photon microscopy, davalos and coauthors
 <cit>  confirm that only microglial processes are highly dynamic in intact brain, reaching up to several micrometers in length, or retracting until they completely disappear. this baseline dynamism of microglial processes is thus in sharp contrast to the stability of the microglial cell bodies and surrounding neuronal processes
 <cit> .

in vitro studies on this subject have instead shown only transwell device infiltration directed by a chemical gradient. lee and chung
 <cit>  describe that adp stimulates chemotaxis of immortalized bv <dig> microglia from the upper to the lower side of the transwell membrane. karlstetter and co-authors
 <cit>  present evidence that curcumin inhibits basal and lps-induced relocation of bv <dig> microglia from the upper to the lower transwell membrane surface
 <cit> . however this passage across a physical barrier limits the possibility of investigating long distance migrations and, moreover, provides only indirect evaluation of kinetic parameters. honda and collaborators
 <cit>  using the dunn chemotaxis chambers report that primary rat microglia have weak motility in the absence of ligands, but perform a mean displacement of about 50 μm in the presence of atp or adp. nasu-tada et al.
 <cit>  confirm that primary microglia are almost static in the absence of stimulants, but show chemotactic responsiveness to adp with a maximal displacement of about 140 μm. finally, haynes and coauthors
 <cit>  prove that the leading edge of mouse primary microglia moves for a maximal displacement of  <dig> and 120 μm after 30 minutes, in a gradient of atp or adp, respectively. however, the average distance spontaneously migrated in the absence of any provided stimulus is only  <dig>  μm.

all considered, spontaneous long distance migration of microglia is described in vivo with conflicting results, but never in vitro until now. here, we demonstrate that biocompatible polimeric channels constitute a more suited environment than transwell devices or dunn chemotaxis chambers for permitting and measuring spontaneous long distance migration in vitro. indeed, the 500 μm traveled by primary microglia inside the microfluidic channels in the absence of stimuli are much above the known average distance so far reported and this achievement might be perhaps improved.

in summary, by the use of interdisciplinary techniques, our data indicate that microfluidic technologies and microstructured patterns with control over the presentation of adhesion sites, are able to sort out different morphological structures within a mixed microglia population and allow free motility in vitro. by reproducing a specialized niche for the cells, these technologies can help to understand the role of structural determinants in priming morphogenesis and free motility of microglia and may be exploited for translational research on functional tissue engineering and implantable device design.

CONCLUSIONS
with our work we have shown that a strict control over biomaterial surface topography by soft lithography techniques can highly impact on microglia morphology and greatly improve spontaneous motility in vitro. the use of microstructured 3d devices to manipulate microglia is thus of interest to scientists working on the mechanisms of cell substrate/matrix interactions, morphogenesis and migration, and particularly on microglia responses and functions also during neurodevelopmental and neuroinflammatory disorders. the advantage of using primary microglia in microfluidics and micropatterning opens the road to the use of these devices for testing drug candidates for cns neuroinflammatory diseases.

