BACKGROUND
scrapie is a fatal neurological disease affecting small ruminants. it belongs to the group of diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies  that among others include bovine spongiform encephalopathy  in cattle and creutzfeldt-jakob disease  in humans.

bse was first detected in  <dig> and was shown to spread between cattle by contaminated concentrate  <cit> . in  <dig> it became clear that bse could be transmitted to humans giving rise to variant cjd  <cit> . throughout europe, scrapie has acquired increased interest because it is considered a potential threat to public health after the successful experimental transmission of bse to sheep  <cit>  and the likely exposure of sheep to concentrate feed contaminated with the bse agent  <cit> . in order to obtain better estimates of the scrapie prevalence throughout the eu, active surveillance for scrapie in small ruminants was introduced in  <dig>  the surveillance comprised both slaughtered and found-dead animals, namely the abattoir  and fallen stock  surveys respectively  <cit> .

a set of regulations established a regime of procedures that each eu member state had to follow: i) the sample sizes should be sufficient to detect a prevalence of  <dig> % and  <dig> % in the populations of slaughtered and found-dead animals, respectively, ii) the target populations were animals older than  <dig> months of age in both surveys based on dentition checks or any other obvious sign of maturity, and iii) the surveys should be as representative as possible of all breeds, regions and any other characteristic defining some stratification in the standing population. furthermore, four screening tests for the rapid detection of scrapie in small ruminants were applied consistently throughout the eu during 2003: two enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays  tests, a luminescence immunoassay test and a western-blot based test. the consistent application of these procedures by all member states should guarantee a certain level of homogeneity in the implementation of the testing across europe. this would allow fair comparisons between the eu countries with the confidence that the surveys' results do not reflect the effect of artefacts, for example differences in the implementation of the surveys, but true differences in the underlying prevalence of scrapie between countries.

in  <dig> the eu commission report on the monitoring for the presence of scrapie  <cit>  reported large variation in the frequency estimates of the two surveys between countries. in most of the countries the frequency estimates from the fs were larger than those of the as. in other countries, however, the fs seemed to detect less scrapie than the as. this pattern is inconsistent with other works that reported the increased risk of scrapie among the dead on farm animals  <cit>  and suggests the occurrence of heterogeneity in the implementation of the surveys between countries; surveys may be reflecting either different situations  or differences in their methodological implementation. there is a need to inform any comparisons between the detected prevalences in the individual surveillance streams.

there have been previous attempts to inform these comparisons. bird  <cit>  compared the surveillance performance of the two active surveillance sources among eu countries for bse and scrapie in cattle and sheep respectively. bird used the tests results from  <dig> and  <dig>  as reported by the eu commission, to calculate the bse and tse rate ratios for each country to describe differences and anomalies in the implementation of the surveys. bird also produced a eu-pooled measure of the rate ratios between surveillance streams: the median tse prevalence rate ratio . for the period april to august  <dig>  bird reported a rate ratio of  <dig>  which indicated some conformity with the reported  <dig> times higher prevalence in the fallen stock group for cattle  <cit> . this increased "efficacy" of the fs is consistent with other works on sheep scrapie  <cit> .

following an approach similar to that of bird  <cit> , the comparison of some form of frequency ratio between the two surveys throughout the eu, under the standard conditions that apply to the surveys' operations, appears as an adequate methodology to assess the comparability of the scrapie surveillance across europe. exploring any differences in the ratios is important because it might help in the understanding of the performance of the surveillance programmes. this might be used to improve the programmes themselves.

the objective of this work is to study the apparent heterogeneity in the behaviour of the surveys across europe and to investigate the sources of this heterogeneity by taking into account available country-level covariates, potentially explaining methodological differences in the implementation of the surveys, and the effect of the underlying risk in the slaughtered sheep population.

RESULTS
the test for heterogeneity was significant . higgins and thompson  <cit>  statistic suggested that most of the total variation in the estimates of effect was due to the heterogeneity between countries .

the forest plot for the random effects meta-analysis of the  <dig> countries dataset is shown in figure  <dig>  the pooled effect, the exponentiated logor, was  <dig>  . germany, the netherlands, czech republic and sweden showed a better performance of the abattoir survey relative to the fallen stock in detecting cases of scrapie, but the 95% confidence intervals for all included  <dig>  slovakia, belgium , ireland and norway showed the best performance of the fallen stock survey in capturing cases of scrapie relative to the abattoir survey.

as illustrated by the galbraith plot , seven countries  appeared within the 95% confidence interval of the unweighted regression line representing the overall logor in a fixed effects  meta-analysis. ireland, the netherlands and germany were the countries that contributed the most to the between-country heterogeneity given their departure from the 95% confidence interval.

the meta-analysis carried out under the bayesian framework, on the  <dig> countries and applying binomial likelihood, allowed the estimation of the uncertainty around the between country heterogeneity . the inclusion of the four countries with zero values in both surveys reduced the overall or .

the results of the meta-regression analysis showed that the regression coefficients  for "test" and "repreas" included zero in their 95% credible intervals. their effect on the heterogeneity was not significant.

"reprefs" appeared significantly related to the outcome . this covariate managed to explain over 18% of the between country heterogeneity  when compared to the crude model. adjusting for the as-baseline did not appear to have a significant effect in the overall heterogeneity of the model.

discussion
we have shown the application of a proven methodology, the meta-analysis framework, to an unusual setting. this has demonstrated the occurrence of great heterogeneity in our measure of choice, the odds ratios between the two surveys, across countries. this can be interpreted as the presence of variability in the way the surveys, across the eu, seem to inform the underlying prevalence of scrapie.

there have been previous attempts to compare the information from the tse testing results in the eu  <cit> . this study, however, could not take into account the potential heterogeneity in the surveys' behaviour between countries because of the preliminary nature of the data. green  <cit>  stated that the detailed description of the design and procedures for case ascertainment should be performed before any comparisons or pooling of estimates was attempted. this is in line with the objective of this paper.

as a by-product, we obtained the overall intervention effect, the pooled or across europe. our results show that scrapie-affected sheep were, on average,  <dig>  times more likely to be detected by the fallen stock survey than the abattoir survey throughout europe. this seems to differ significantly from the expected  <dig> times higher prevalence from the fallen stock group, by analogy with bse, as anticipated by the european scientific steering committee   <cit> . however, the presence of significant heterogeneity prevents one from drawing conclusions on an overall effect. this is true in the case of the meta-analysis and valid too for the meta-regression models where substantial heterogeneity remained.

kuhnert and böhning  <cit>  described the occurrence of two types of heterogeneity potentially present in any meta-analysis: the effect heterogeneity and the baseline heterogeneity. the former seems to dominate in our setting after adjusting for the covariates and the baseline variability. our binomial approach did not return a significant effect of the baseline risks on the model heterogeneity. binomial approaches are reported to be more appropriate when facing sparse data but they would still require caution in their interpretation  <cit> . the sensitivity of our results, due to the rarity of our data, to likelihood assumptions was evident when we modelled the data, the  <dig> countries with the  <dig>  continuity correction, under a normal likelihood. in this situation, adjusting for the variability in the baseline risks managed to reduce significantly the model's heterogeneity .

from the meta-regression approach we can conclude that only the variable "reprefs" appeared to have a significant relationship with the outcome. it also managed to explain some of the between-country heterogeneity in the model. the negative slope, the β coefficient for "reprefs" , indicates that the greater the proportion of the total adult sheep population sampled by the fs, the lesser the ability of this source in detecting cases of scrapie, relative to that of the abattoir survey. one explanation for this is that some animals that did not fall within the scope of the fallen stock group might have been reported under this surveillance stream introducing an unquantifiable selection bias in the tested population. this would produce a dilution effect, a reduction of the "high risk" nature of this group, reducing the prevalence estimates observed. the fallen stock figures from germany, for example, might follow this logic. the food and veterinary office  mission to germany in november  <dig> highlighted the subsidised collection service for the dead on farm animals and the sampling of some fallen stock sheep over  <dig> months of age  <cit> . likewise, the simple observation of table  <dig> shows that those countries with smaller samples in the fs seem to detect more scrapie than those with larger samples. we cannot discard the presence of the so called "small-study effects" described in the systematic review literature by which small studies tend to show lower methodological quality and larger effects  <cit> . alternatively, the increased risk of scrapie among the slaughtered population, relative to that of the fallen stock group, could also explain the negative logor of some countries . if animals from scrapie affected holdings, which had been slaughtered out, were included in the slaughtered population, as culls, this might have increased the risk of scrapie within this group. the  <dig> report  <cit>  stated that, in the context of the eradication measures, a within-holding prevalence of 3% was detected. similar effects would be observed if the farmers did not submit the found-dead animals, which have shown scrapie-like signs, as fallen stock; in itself another form of selection bias.

                           a
                           a
                           f
                           f
rf shows the number of positive samples from the fallen stock, ra shows the number of positive samples from the abattoir survey, nf shows the number of samples tested in the fallen stock and na the number of samples tested in the abattoir survey. logor ), variance of the logor  with  <dig>  continuity correction added to all denominators for those countries with one  <dig> in any of the columns , adult sheep population by country and country-specific covariates inputted into the meta-regression model: "reprefs" , "repreas"  and "test" . n/a under the logor and variance headings show those countries with zero counts in both surveys.

none of the other covariates  showed a significant effect on the heterogeneity. the data provided by most countries on the use of the rapid tests drove the current parameterisation of this variable as the most comprehensive. other parameterisations did not produce any different results. although for nine countries only, "test", as the ratio of elisa tests used in each survey by each country, did not reduce τ either. our analyses do not capture all the potential variability from the use of the four screening tests across the eu. more data on the use of the screening tests by the countries would be required to improve on the present work.

other country-specific covariates might inform some of the remaining variability left in the model. however, the amount of information recorded in the european commission's report  <cit>  was modest. extra variables to feed into the meta-regression approach, e.g. characteristics related to the operational implementation of the surveys or those that would allow a different parameterisation of the test variability , might have explained some further methodological heterogeneity. genotype information, if available, should always be taken into account in any scrapie-related analyses; such is the importance of this variable in the susceptibility to scrapie. although genotype data, from an apparent random subset of the as, was available from  <cit> , only  <dig> countries genotyped the  <dig> sheep suggested by the essc  <cit> . we did not believe there was enough data to inform this variable and decided not to use it in our analyses. in the absence of more covariate information, a meta-analysis of the cluster structure of the data, identifying clusters of studies with similar ratios, has been suggested recently to explore the unobserved heterogeneity  <cit> .

the use of a full bayesian approach is justified by the very same limitations that characterise the traditional weighted regression approach: i) normal likelihood assumption of the measure of effect ii) asymptotic confidence intervals and iii) estimation of τ from the data as if it was the true heterogeneity in the population. this was evident after checking the asymmetry of the 95% credible intervals around the posterior estimates for τ. this alone would justify the use of a non-asymptotic approach  <cit> .

other measures of effect could have been chosen: risk ratio or risk difference. however, the mathematical properties of the odds-ratios , the lesser heterogeneity displayed by them   <cit>  and, for the bayesian inference, a posterior distribution close to normal even for the sparse data we faced, outweighed any of the other two. furthermore, the choice of continuity corrections for normal approximations, in our case  <dig> , together with the scale of the measure of effect  is likely to have influenced our results  <cit> . for example, the application of the reciprocal of the opposite treatment arm size  as continuity correction  <cit>  returned a pooled or of  <dig> . the former would also support the use of the binomial likelihood to model our data. this is particularly so when the numbers in the two groups, abattoir and fallen stock, were very imbalanced and the data very sparse  <cit> .

flat priors were used for all parameters in our bayesian models. the choice of priors is of great importance, particularly for the variance components  <cit> . sensitivity analyses were carried out checking the effect of our choice of priors upon the results. we could not find any significant difference as a result of using different prior distributions.

caution should also be exercised due to the observational nature of the meta-regression as such. the relationship described by meta-regression does not have the benefit of randomisation to back the interpretation of the results. any association identified with one country characteristic may in reality reflect a true association with other correlated characteristics, which are likely to be unknown  <cit> .

as a reflection of the increasing number of countries reporting the occurrence of atypical cases of scrapie that produce discordant responses to the established diagnostic tests  <cit> , the european commission's report  <cit>  clearly stated that all four cases in sweden and  <dig> of the  <dig> from norway were identified as of the nor <dig> type  <cit> . we did not make any discrimination between the two types of scrapie: the classical and the atypical. rather, we considered them together for simplicity and to avoid any further layer in our already scarce data. we cannot ignore however the potential contribution of this joint approach to the overall heterogeneity. multivariate analyses for more than one outcome would be required if the two scrapie types were studied separately  <cit> .

further studies should look at ways of incorporating more than one year's surveillance data together with the incorporation of more sources of surveillance, namely the statutory reporting and those figures from the eradication measures upon the scrapie affected holdings. this would allow extending this comparison process to the entire surveillance network.

CONCLUSIONS
the meta-analysis of the odds ratios between the two surveys proved a valid and systematic approach to inform the presence of heterogeneity in the operation of the surveys and to identify those countries with the greatest contribution to this variability. the extension of the analysis to a meta-regression allowed the assessment of the effect of the available covariates on the overall heterogeneity. although substantial heterogeneity remained in the model, unexplained by the scarce data available, there appears to be a need to standardise further the approach to the surveys by the member states.

