BACKGROUND
the ubiquitous saprophytic mould aspergillus fumigatus is known to cause a spectrum of diseases in humans, including allergic syndromes, noninvasive infections, and invasive aspergillosis, a condition associated with significant morbidity and mortality  <cit> .a. fumigatus is one of the human pathogenic fungi that have a natural habitat in the environment, including soil and plants  <cit> . some members of the azole drug class, which includes voriconazole  and posaconazole , have been shown to be effective in the treatment of invasive aspergillosis  <cit> , and for a long time, azole resistance among clinical a. fumigatus isolates was considered to be an uncommon finding. however, multiazole resistance is emerging and is increasingly recognized as a cause of treatment failure  <cit> . in agriculture, thousands of tons of azoles are sold annually for the purpose of plant protection, either to prevent or to control fungal growth that can cause extensive loss of crops or to ease the problem of postharvest spoilage of plants and fruits  <cit> . the mechanism of action of all azoles - irrespectively of their chemical structure and variable biological properties - is based on its interference with the activity of fungal lanosterol  <dig> alpha-demethylase, an enzyme encoded by cyp51a gene in a. fumigatus that is responsible for the transformation of lanosterol in ergosterol, an essential component of the fungal cytoplasmatic membrane. the inhibition of ergosterol formation results in cell membrane disorganization and impairment of fungal growth. therefore, azoles are considered fungistatic rather than fungicidal, and it is well known that a strong and persistent antimicrobial pressure can lead to the selection of resistant clones, particularly if the drug effect is static rather than microbicidal  <cit> . since azoles are the mainstay treatment for both human and agricultural fungal diseases, a major concern is the predictable emergence of cross-resistance to clinical a. fumigatus isolates that is already observed in several countries, driven by the massive use of azole fungicides in agriculture, which have the same mechanism of action as those used in humans  <cit> . the aim of our study was to investigate whether prochloraz , an azole extensively used in agriculture, could be associated with the development of cross-resistance to clinical azoles among a. fumigatus.

RESULTS
the three isolates developed a progressive increment of pcz minimal inhibitory concentrations  value. in addition, a concomitant increase of the mic of vrc, pos and itraconazole  was also observed . during the induction assay, mic of pcz increased  <dig> times from day  <dig> until day  <dig>  concerning the clinical azoles, cross-resistance was developed since all isolates changed from a susceptible to a resistant phenotype, according to meletiadis and colleagues  <cit> .
a. fumigatus 
isolates to prochloraz and clinical azoles


a. fumigatus 
pcz, prochloraz; vrc, voriconazole; pos, posaconazole; itz, itraconazole; flc, fluconazole; Ø, mic after 30 days of culture in the absence of pcz.

there are several studies that have characterized azole resistance in a. fumigatus, and most recently some addressed the possible cross-resistance between environmental and medical azoles  <cit> . our study demonstrated the time frame between the introduction of a widely used agricultural antifungal and the emergence of cross-resistance to medical triazoles. during the induction assay, we found that besides the emergence of cross-resistance, pcz exposure caused marked morphological colony changes, both macroscopically and microscopically. macroscopic modification of the pigmentation of a. fumigatus colonies, changing from the original green colour to white  was remarkable at the beginning of the assay. with the increase of mic values of pcz the colonies became scarcer, smaller and totally white . microscopic examination showed a progressive absence of conidiation: the original strain  showed normal microscopic features regarding conidiation  while almost white colonies  showed nearly complete absence of conidiation . the totally white mycelia  corresponded solely to hyphae and immature little conidiophore structures without conidia . these changes in pigmentation and in conidiation as a consequence of exposure to azoles have already been reported. varanasi and colleagues speculate that azoles may bind to a phytochrome-like regulatory molecule inhibiting the initiation and subsequent development of conidiophores in aspergillus species  <cit> . such mechanism of action could also explain the different levels of inhibition displayed by other tested azoles and why echinocandins and polyenes did not show this effect  <cit> . notably, such morphological changes may be responsible for laboratorial diagnostic misidentification of the fungal genus/species  <cit> . the high mic values for pcz that were achieved in vitro maintained stable following removal of the selective pressure of the drug. for vrc, the mic value decreased only after 30 days of incubation without the selective pressure, changing the susceptibility phenotype from resistant to intermediate. for pos, the developed mic value also decreased but not enough to change the phenotype of resistance. regarding itz, for both lmf <dig> and lmn <dig>  it was observed the complete reversibility of the resistant phenotype in the absence of pcz, ie, the mic reverted to the initial value . however, strain lmf <dig> had, since day zero, itz mic of 2 mg/l, which falls in resistant category. in all the isolates conidiation reappeared together with the typical green colour of mature colonies following the removal of pcz.

since pcz was responsible for the emergence of stable resistance to itself and to very important medical triazoles in a. fumigatus, a resistance mechanism may have been developed. previous reports describe cyp51a mutation, efflux pump overexpression and/or target upregulation as the main mechanisms responsible for such resistance  <cit> . a clonal expansion of isolates harbouring the tr34/l98h mutation has been reported across several countries  <cit> . interestingly, besides the fact that these resistant isolates are less genetically variable than susceptible ones, no impact on fitness was observed  <cit> . the phenotypic results  and the stability of the developed resistance  herein reported suggest the same. future studies aiming to assess the underlying molecular resistance mechanisms, not only from these induced resistant strains but also from isolates with naturally high mic values to pcz and resistant to medical azoles without previous in vitro induction, will certainly be our next step. meanwhile, our study suggests that the abuse of azole antifungals in nature may cause serious human health problems since azole-resistance and cross-resistance has the potential to further compromise the efficacy of clinical azoles in the future  <cit> . furthermore, we can speculate that the exposure of clinically relevant moulds other than a. fumigatus to agricultural azoles may also be associated with the emergence of cross-resistance to clinical azoles. several compounds are being tested in order to find new antifungal alternatives, anticipating the possible loss of efficacy of clinical azoles  <cit> . on the other hand, efforts should be made to find safer compounds to use in agriculture.

CONCLUSIONS
in order to assess the real dimension of aspergillus resistance, a susceptibility test should be performed in all isolates from patients with aspergillus infection. moreover, for patients with severe infection initial combination therapy may be considered in geographical areas with high prevalence of environmental azole resistant isolates. ultimately, surveillance studies in both clinical and in environment settings should be conducted in order to provide updated local data regarding susceptibility profiles.

