BACKGROUND
buffalograss  is a turfgrass species native to the great plains region of the united states with exceptional drought, cold and heat tolerance. buffalograss is often considered an ideal low input turfgrass species because it requires relatively less irrigation, fertility, and pesticide inputs to maintain an acceptable level of turfgrass quality compared to more commonly used turfgrass species  <cit> . with the increased frequency and duration of drought over the past few growing seasons, buffalograss demand by consumers is on the rise.

buffalograss has a base haploid chromosome number of  <dig> and exists as a ploidy series ranging from diploid  to hexaploid . diploids and tetraploids appear to be more southerly adapted, while hexaploids are found throughout the northern range of the great plains  <cit> . buffalograss is a perennial species that is highly stoloniferous, forms a dense sod, has fine leaf texture, and is greyish green in color  <cit> . buffalograss is also dioecious and thus is an obligate outcrossing, highly heterogeneous species which complicates cultivar development and genomic studies. some challenges associated with buffalograss management are its intolerance of shade  <cit> , short growing season in cooler climates  <cit> , and susceptibility to certain pests  <cit> . each of these traits is being addressed through breeding efforts to reduce the impact of these stresses on future buffalograss cultivars. traditional buffalograss breeding strategies rely on genetic diversity among germplasm and the introgression of positive traits from one cultivar into another with improved turfgrass performance. the development of new buffalograss cultivars is a lengthy process that could be accelerated through the use of expanded genomic resources and molecular assisted breeding strategies.

relative to the major agronomic food crops, there are few genomic resources available for studying buffalograss; for example, there are no buffalograss est sequences published in genbank  <cit>  . to date, most of the genetic studies in buffalograss have been directed towards genetic marker development, resolving the taxonomy of buffalograss, and assessing genetic diversity of individuals among germplasm collections. for example, rapd and isozyme markers were used to evaluate genetic relationships among two diploid buffalograss populations originating from central mexico and two originating from texas  <cit> . sequence-related amplified polymorphic markers  were used to assess genetic diversity among naturally occurring stands of buffalograss  <cit> . both of these genetic marker studies observed a significant amount of genetic diversity among accessions collected from different geographic regions. the matk, rbcl, and cob genes were sequenced from  <dig> buffalograss accessions along with zoysiagrass , bermudagrass , and blue grama  accessions  <cit> . the mitochondrial cob gene showed close association of the buffalograss cultivars ‘bowie’ and ‘density’ to the blue grama entry, while the plastid genes matk and rbcl clearly showed the buffalograss accessions were distinct from the other species studied.

transcriptome sequence data of non-model organisms, such as buffalograss, is increasingly more accessible through the use of next generation sequencing strategies. transcriptome sequencing is an ideal way of identifying trait specific genes, efficiently developing genetic markers, characterizing gene expression, and resolving gene networks, and is routinely applied to the study of organisms with little prior genomic information  <cit> . next generation sequencing technologies are only just beginning to be applied to the study of turfgrass systems and have thus far focused primarily on improving our understanding of how turfgrasses responds to biotic and abiotic stress. for example, rna-seq strategies were used to study the interaction between sclerotinia homoeocarpa, the pathogen causing dollar spot disease, and creeping bentgrass  whereby several genes were identified from either the host or the pathogen that were differentially expressed during infection  <cit> . similarly, the s. homoeocarpa and creeping bentgrass disease interaction was studied using rna-seq and transcriptome changes were identified  <cit> . a better understanding of genes involved in the pathogen-host interactions would facilitate the development of host resistance in future cultivars and help direct cultural practices to reduce the impact of disease. the solid-sage technology was used to identify transcriptional changes in a red fescue  host infected with the epichloë festucae endophyte  <cit> . endophyte infection is often associated with improved stress tolerance of the host, and this study observed changes in host gene expression resulting from the presence of the endophyte. to the best of our knowledge, to date there have been no high-throughput sequencing experiments done on buffalograss; contributing to the limited genetic information available for studying this species.

in the present study, the transcriptome was sequenced of two buffalograss cultivars, ‘prestige’ and ‘378’, known to differ in chinch bug resistance, ploidy level, and other turfgrass performance traits. the cdna libraries were sequenced with both the illumina ga and  <dig> titanium flx sequencing platforms, expanding buffalograss genetic resources. this is a valuable resource that turfgrass breeders and others in the turfgrass research community can use as a reference for comparative transcriptome studies, as a platform for genetic marker development, to characterize buffalograss variety differences, and to implement marker assisted breeding strategies for future cultivar development.

RESULTS
in total,  <dig> , <dig> sequencing reads were generated on the  <dig> titanium flx sequencer, with  <dig>  derived from ‘prestige’ and the remaining  <dig>  from ‘378’. the  <dig> sequencing reads had an average read length of 281 bp with a maximum read length of 669 bp. more than  <dig>  m and  <dig>  m illumina ga 55 bp sequencing reads were generated for ‘prestige’ and ‘378’, respectively. an average of  <dig>  m reads was sequenced on the illumina platform per sample. after strict quality filtering,  <dig>  m and  <dig>  m reads from ‘prestige’ and ‘378’, respectively were used for sequence assembly. for ‘prestige’, the combined velvet/oases k-mer assemblies with redundant sequences removed generated  <dig>  transcripts with an average length of 899 bp and a maximum length of  <dig>  bp. for ‘378’, the combined velvet/oases k-mer assemblies generated  <dig>  transcripts with an average length of 835 bp and a maximum length of  <dig>  bp .

of the  <dig>  ‘prestige’ transcripts,  <dig>  had significant blastx hits  to ensembl commelinid plant protein sequences. similarly, of the  <dig>  ‘378’ transcripts,  <dig>  had at least one blastx hit. the majority of transcripts had a significant level of sequence identity to foxtail millet  proteins. the second closest reference species was sorghum bicolor. a total of  <dig>  unigene clusters were created within ‘prestige’, and  <dig>  clusters within the ‘378’ assembly. the ncbi non-redundant  database lacks foxtail millet proteins, there are only  <dig> deposited. sorghum bicolor is the most closely related species in the nr database based on blastp searches .

while an average of  <dig>  unigenes between the two transcriptomes only contained one transcript, many unigene clusters contained more than one sequence . these multiple transcript unigene clusters can represent transcription variants, allelic variants, closely related paralogues, misassembled transcripts, or transcripts that were fragmented due to low coverage. the latter case would require scaffolding to resolve based on alignments to reference transcripts, but was not conducted in these assemblies. the unigene containing the most transcripts,  <dig> transcripts in the ‘378’ assembly, was similar to the si027417m.g gene in foxtail millet. this foxtail millet gene also represented the largest unigene cluster in ‘prestige’. ncbi blast results indicate that this foxtail millet gene contains an nb-arc domain, which is common in plant disease resistance genes  <cit> .

‘prestige’ transcripts shared sequence identity with  <dig>  foxtail millet genes, which is  <dig> % of the foxtail millet coding genes  <cit> . there is a high degree of synteny among the grasses and thus this percentage may be an initial indicator of how much of the buffalograss transcriptome was sequenced. the translated protein sequence of  <dig>  transcripts in ‘prestige’ and  <dig>  transcripts in ‘378’ aligned to 100% of a reference protein via blastx, indicating that these were complete coding transcripts .

the predicted buffalograss proteins were searched against the ncbi nr database using blastp. the resulting blastp report was input to the blast2go software. gene ontology terms were assigned to  <dig>  transcripts in ‘prestige’ and  <dig>  transcripts in ‘378’. of these annotated sequences,  <dig>  and  <dig>  transcripts were assigned enzyme codes in ‘prestige’ and ‘378’, respectively.

original illumina reads, per sample, were aligned to genotype specific assemblies. an average of  <dig>  m reads from each sequenced sample successfully aligned to its corresponding transcriptome. within each sample, an average of  <dig>  m of these reads were unique alignments, while an average of  <dig>  m mapped reads also aligned to other transcripts.

a reciprocal blastp search was performed to identify transcripts shared among the ‘prestige’ and ‘378’ translated transcriptome libraries. a total of  <dig>  reciprocal hits were identified. of these reciprocal hits,  <dig>  sequences had alignments where 100% of the ‘prestige’ transcript length aligned to the ‘378’ transcript, or vice versa; these transcripts share the same protein length and sequencing reads covered the entire sequence length.

using read counts from the previously mentioned illumina read mapping, expression levels were generated for the transcripts having a reciprocal hit between cultivars. as mentioned in the methods section, the focus of the gene expression analysis in this study was on transcripts where the majority of reads were uniquely aligned. using the deseq bioconductor package, read counts were normalized using the estimatesizefactors function, and the expression levels of the selected reciprocal hits were analyzed for statistical significance, p-value <  <dig>  adjusted for multiple testing. there were  <dig> differentially expressed genes between the two cultivars. of these genes,  <dig> had higher expression in ‘prestige’, and  <dig> genes had higher expression in ‘378’.

expressed genes in which at least 75% of the length of the ‘prestige’ transcript aligned to at least 75% of the reciprocal matched ‘378’ transcript were further analyzed . during the process of finding reciprocal sequences among the two genotypes, it was observed that several transcripts had no significant blast match to any transcript in the other genotype. this suggests that the gene is not expressed in the other genotype in these samples, it wasn’t expressed enough to be assembled, or does not exist in the other genome. read counts for these transcripts were analyzed, and any sequence where all of its matching reads were unique alignments was considered valid .

listed are top  <dig> up-and down-regulated genes with the removal of hypothetical-or uncharacterized-proteins.

listed are the top  <dig> most highly expressed from each cultivar with the removal of sequences of vague descriptions. average expression is a measure of reads mapped per sample.

go terms were assigned to all  <dig> differentially expressed genes between the two cultivars, including those having incomplete alignments to a reciprocal sequence. quantification of level  <dig> gene ontology terms was collected for these transcripts .

gene ontology terms were used to select sequences related to stress and immune response. the parental gene ontology terms for “response to stress” , “response to other organism” , and “immune response”  were found in  <dig> up-regulated ‘prestige’ genes, and in  <dig> down-regulated ‘prestige’ genes. a number of these genes have previous research linking them to defense and immune responses .

genes containing go terms “response to stress”, “immune response” and “response to other organism” were selected.

discussion
there are limited genetic resources available for studying buffalograss, however with current next generation sequencing and de novo assembly strategies, high throughput sequencing can help bridge this buffalograss knowledge gap. in the present study,  <dig>  high quality transcripts were reconstituted from ‘prestige’ and ‘378’ buffalograss cultivars, utilizing a combination of illumina ga and roche  <dig> titanium flx sequencing. transcripts were found to be differentially expressed between samples of the same genotype collected at different times. physiological differences are expected to occur between the two sampling times for a given genotype. since the scope of this research was to expand buffalograss genetic resources and characterize differences between ‘378’ and ‘prestige’, differences occurring within a genotype between the two time points were not examined.

when compared to the ncbi nr database, approximately 50% of the transcripts had blastp hits to sorghum bicolor proteins, while only 5% of the transcripts had hits to brachypodium . brachypodium is often considered a model for the study of grasses, but in this instance was the least informative when compared to the buffalograss transcripts . there are approximately three times as many s. bicolor sequences in the nr database compared to brachypodium which may help explain why more s. bicolor hits were returned. additionally, both s. bicolor and buffalograss are warm season, c <dig>  grasses while brachypodium is a cool season, c <dig>  grass and therefore it is not surprising that buffalograss sequences were more similar to s. bicolor.

the two buffalograss genotypes used in this study, ‘prestige’ and ‘378’, are known to differ in terms of their resistance to chinch bugs, an important insect pest on buffalograss  <cit>  <cit> . previous data suggests that oxidative enzymes play a role in chinch bug resistance in buffalograss  <cit> . for example, the chinch bug resistant cultivar ‘prestige’ had higher peroxidase activity under both uninfested and chinch bug-infested conditions compared to the susceptible ‘378’  <cit> . in the present study,  <dig> differentially expressed genes between these two genotypes were identified . if ‘prestige’ is predisposed for chinch bug resistance, genes expressed higher in ‘prestige’ compared to susceptible genotypes may be involved in the resistance mechanism. similarly, genes more highly expressed in the susceptible cultivar may confer susceptibility.

the differences in gene expression between genotypes may account for some of the performance differences among these cultivars. selecting expressed genes based on gene ontology terms for stress and immune response highlights a potential starting point for understanding these mechanisms. several of these genes have been researched in regards to stress tolerance. for example, the nb-arc domain-containing and the nbs-lrr class of proteins are known to be involved in a plant’s defense response. the nucleotide binding and amino-terminal domains contain a nucleotide-binding site and may act as a molecular switch, regulating specific downstream pathways. large unigene clusters from both ‘378’ and ‘prestige’ were similar to the nb-arc gene, si027417m.g, from foxtail millet. the prec_ <dig> transcript has higher average read counts in ‘prestige’  compared to ‘378’ , representing a− <dig>  log <dig> fold difference in expression  between the two cultivars . the transcript, prec_ <dig>  also had higher expression in ‘prestige’ than ‘378’ . the prec_ <dig> transcript is predicted to be a member of the nbs-lrr family of genes. the leucine-rich repeat  domain may act as the signaling molecule and be involved in recognizing early signs of a pathogen attack  <cit> . the predicted coding sequences from these transcripts contain nb-arc domains. the nb-arc containing proteins are most often associated with disease resistance. there has been limited research characterizing differences in disease resistance of ‘prestige’ and ‘378’, so it would be interesting to test if ‘prestige’ is more resistant to disease relative to ‘378’ and monitor expression of these genes during host-pathogen interactions.

receptor like kinases also contain an lrr domain and may be involved in early pathogen attack recognition and regulate the level of response to pathogen attack, playing a role in triggering early defense response signaling mechanisms  <cit> . the transcript, prec_ <dig>  is a serine threonine kinase and had higher expression in ‘prestige’ relative to ‘378’ .

glycosyl transferases are also involved in stress-induced plant response and show elevated expression in response to several signaling molecules including hydrogen peroxide  <cit> . for example, expression of two glycosyltransferases, ugt73b and ugt73b <dig>  were important for arabidopsis resistance to pseudomonas <cit> . the relative higher expression of a transferring glycosyl, prec_ <dig> , in ‘prestige’ compared to ‘378’  is of particular interest since response to oxidative stress may be one mechanism conferring resistance to chinch bugs in ‘prestige’  <cit> .

the majority of the defense response genes identified in this study are not directly linked to insect resistance, however this study characterizes differences between ‘prestige’ and ‘378’ which may facilitate a better understanding of host pest interactions in future studies. the majority of the previously mentioned defense response genes are associated with disease resistance. buffalograss is most commonly grown throughout the great plains region of the united states  <cit>  and since buffalograss grows in this relatively arid region of the country, there is less disease pressure than in more humid regions. as a result, limited research has been done to evaluate disease resistance of ‘prestige’ and ‘378’.

since two distinct buffalograss genotypes were sequenced here, genotypic differences such as single nucleotide polymorphisms, copy numbers of simple sequence repeats, insertion/deletions, and transposable element insertion polymorphisms  <cit>  could be exploited to develop genetic markers for cultivar discrimination or associated with a trait of interest that differs between the two genotypes. in addition, since the sequences presented here are based on expressed transcripts, any genetic markers developed from these sequences are, by nature of the study, gene-based and ultimately more valuable for future molecular-based cultivar development strategies. since for example, ‘378’ and ‘prestige’ are known to differ in chinch bug resistance, the identification of polymorphic homologous sequences in these plants is a first step at developing markers to use in a marker assisted breeding scheme to improve chinch bug resistance. this research would need further investigation to characterize the markers in a broader germplasm base that has been evaluated for chinch bug resistance.

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first report of transcriptome sequencing of buffalograss , the most widely used native turfgrass species in the united states. transcriptomes of buffalograss cultivars ‘378’ and ‘prestige’ were sequenced by illumina ga and roche  <dig> titanium flx sequencing platforms and  <dig>  high quality transcripts were assembled. there were  <dig>  ‘prestige’ transcripts that had significant blast hits to foxtail millet  which could be useful for future comparative genetic studies between these species. transcriptional profiling revealed  <dig> differentially expressed genes between ‘378’ and ‘prestige’ and may in part help explain cultivar differences. at the time of this study, there were no reported buffalograss est sequences in ncbi and only  <dig> nucleotide sequences , so this study significantly expands on the limited genetic resources available for studying buffalograss. the data presented here will act as a platform for genetic marker development, a basis for marker assisted breeding strategies, and a reference for future transcript expression studies.

