BACKGROUND
dna barcoding is a recent technique that employs one or a few short, universal dna regions to place sampled individuals into named species and to identify individuals as belonging to putatively undescribed species . dna-based identification promises a range of applications, including identification of organisms at cryptic life stages , source identification of plant or animal parts , forensics, and surveys of poorly known biological communities e.g., tropical rainforests, deep-sea communities, microbial communities  <cit> .

although dna barcoding of animals using mitochondrial genes has been done with high success  <cit> , plants have proven to be somewhat recalcitrant to dna barcoding. the low sequence variation in the plant mitochondrial genome has led to a search for alternative universal dna barcodes for plants, which has proven difficult  <cit> . most genes tested as universal plant dna barcodes are within the plastid genome, and a small number of them are becoming increasingly popular  <cit> . a single gene is unlikely to provide enough resolution to differentiate all plant species  <cit> , yet six plastid genes in combination still fail to discriminate all species within the genus crocus <cit> . other candidates include nuclear ribosomal genes  <cit> ; however, their utility as dna barcodes may be limited by incomplete concerted evolution, fungal contamination, and amplification failure  <cit> . although dna barcoding using multiple genes has proven successful with high resolution for phylogenetically diverse communities, e.g., panamian trees , mesoamerican orchids and kruger national park trees , but see gonzalez et al. , barcoding studies of single clades have had limited success, e.g.,  <dig> % species discriminated in bromeliaceae  <cit> , and 32% in fraxinus <cit> . alternative candidates for dna barcodes are low-copy nuclear genes, which have received little attention . problems expected with such genes include the design of universal primers, gene duplications, recombination, allopolyploidy and heterozygosity  <cit> .

the native flora of hawai‘i boasts extreme endemism  and offers a unique opportunity to evaluate dna barcoding on species and communities of different ages. the hawaiian flora is a rich but young assemblage, with the majority of lineages originating on the main islands within the past five million years  <cit> . hawaii’s main islands are part of a broader volcanic chain and span a natural age gradient from  <dig>  to  <dig> my  <cit> . although many of hawaii’s endemic plant lineages span the main islands, most species are restricted to a single island  <cit> , and their maximum ages can be set to the age of the island on which they occur. as such, the hawaiian flora allows estimation of a species-age or a community-age threshold below which dna barcoding fails to delineate species.

to our knowledge, dna barcoding has not been attempted on the hawaiian flora, and, plastid genes  have comparatively been little used for phylogenetic studies of hawaiian radiations, presumably due to a near absence of variation in these genes. instead, most studies have used ribosomal genes  <cit>  or in a few cases low-copy nuclear genes  <cit> , finding moderate levels of variation at these genes. one of the notable exceptions is the phylogeographic study of metrosideros by percy et al.  <cit>  based on  <dig> plastid genes; nonetheless, these genes failed to fully resolve the evolutionary history of the genus within the hawaiian islands. the availability of dna barcodes for the hawaiian flora is particularly desirable as many native species are difficult to distinguish through vegetative characters alone, many are threatened by extinction, and hybridization appears to be common.

our study focused on two plant genera of the hawaiian islands: clermontia  and cyrtandra . clermontia is an endemic genus of rainforest shrubs that are either epiphytic or terrestrial with bird-pollinated flowers that show great variation in flower morphology among species. the genus belongs to the hawaiian lobeliads, the largest hawaiian radiation  <cit> , and comprises  <dig> species  <cit> , most of which are found on the youngest islands of maui and hawai‘i . cyrtandra is a genus of understorey shrubs with somewhat uniform, white and probably insect-pollinated flowers and great variation in vegetative characters, although the adaptive significance of the latter is generally not clear. the genus comprises  <dig> species  <cit> , all endemic, more or less evenly distributed among the main islands, with o‘ahu having the greatest diversity. in both genera, most species are restricted to a single island, and numerous cases of hybridization have been reported. furthermore, circumscription of species with multiple-island distributions is often disputed. the estimated crown ages for clermontia and hawaiian cyrtandra are  <dig>  my  <cit>  and  <dig>  my  <cit> , respectively.

in this study, we evaluate the potential of low-copy nuclear genes as dna barcodes in clermontia and cyrtandra, and discuss some of their advantages and disadvantages compared to frequently used plastid genes. we did not attempt to identify universal barcodes, but rather conducted a pilot study to see how such markers would be informative.

RESULTS
variation within single-copy nuclear genes vs. plastid genes
although relatively short in length, the nuclear genes generally exhibited a greater number of variable sites than plastid genes and had a percentage of variable sites up to several fold that of plastid genes . heterozygosity was common in nuclear genes : 25% of the individuals at clerm <dig>   <dig> % at clerm <dig>   <dig> % at cyrt <dig> and  <dig> % at cyrt <dig>  accumulation curves  for plastid genes showed that in both genera, a plateau was reached and that most of the haplotype diversity present in each group was captured in our study. in contrast, with the exception of clerm <dig> which was especially short , the slopes of the nuclear haplotype accumulation curves showed no inflexion, indicating that many more haplotypes could be found with further sampling. limited variation and especially low numbers of differences between haplotypes did not allow detection of recombination in any nuclear genes.

“ghost” alleles are intermediate alleles that were not recovered in any of the accessions sampled. the ramification index  was calculated as follows: i =  <dig> – .

“ghost” alleles are intermediate alleles that were not recovered in any of the accessions sampled. the ramification index  was calculated as follows: i =  <dig> – .

in clermontia, where haplotype networks for plastid and nuclear genes could be contrasted , networks differed in their structure . with a minor exception, the plastid gene networks for clermontia were strictly linear , whereas the network for clerm <dig> was star-like with the occurrence of loops. the network for the short nuclear gene, clerm <dig>  had only five haplotypes and was neither strictly linear nor starlike . ramification indices for the two nuclear gene networks were greater than those for the three plastid genes. each plastid gene network contained a single intermediate haplotype that was not recovered in any accession ; there was no such haplotype in the nuclear datasets. for cyrtandra, the single plastid gene and two nuclear genes showed highly ramified haplotype networks , but the ramification indexes indicated a greater degree of reticulation in the networks of the two nuclear genes compared to the plastid gene. there was one ghost haplotype  in the plastid network, none in the nuclear cyrt <dig> network, and two  in the cyrt <dig> network.

taxonomic distribution of genetic diversity
for clermontia, the plastid and nuclear genes revealed species-diagnostic haplotypes  for 18% and 12% of the sampled taxa, respectively. each of the three plastid genes had two species-diagnostic haplotypes, and the combined dataset produced diagnostic haplotypes for three species: cl. fauriei , cl. oblongifolia  and cl. kakeana . in nuclear genes, clerm <dig> yielded a single species-diagnostic haplotype for cl. fauriei, and clerm <dig> a single species-diagnostic haplotype for cl. oblongifolia. several species possessed multiple haplotypes for a given nuclear gene, with up to six in c. arborescens for clerm <dig>  species-diagnostic haplotypes that differ by more than one substitution from others  were found only for cl. fauriei and cl. oblongifolia in the combined plastid dataset. conflicts were present in the genetic identity of cl. singuliflora; this species grouped with cl. peleana in the plastid dataset but was closer to cl. parviflora and allies in the nuclear datasets.

for cyrtandra, the plastid and nuclear genes revealed species-diagnostic haplotypes for 20% and 10% of the sampled taxa, respectively. the psba-trnh dataset yielded diagnostic haplotypes for four species: cy. longifolia , cy. wawrae , cy. lydgatei  and cy. paludosa . in contrast, the nuclear cyrt <dig> gene revealed just one species-diagnostic haplotype , and the cyrt <dig> gene revealed diagnostic haplotypes for cy. grayi , that were not distinguished by either of the above markers. only cy. platyphylla had multiple plastid haplotypes , whereas  <dig> species had multiple haplotypes in the cyrt <dig> dataset and  <dig> in the cyrt <dig> dataset. a species-diagnostic haplotype that differs by more than one substitution was found for just one species, cy. longifolia, in the psba-trnh dataset.

geographic distribution of haplotype diversity
across genes and genera, there appeared to be a positive relationship between haplotype diversity and island age . in clermontia, plastid haplotypes occurred on two islands at most, whereas some nuclear haplotypes were found on three islands. in cyrtandra, for which haplotype variation was greater, there were several haplotypes at each of the three genes that occurred on three or four islands.

in contrast to the nuclear genes that showed almost no geographic structure, plastid gene networks aligned to a high  or low  degree with the geographic order of islands . in plastid gene networks for clermontia, haplotypes from kaua‘i were on one end, and haplotypes from hawai‘i island were generally on the other. in the psba-trnh datast of cyrtandra, the most isolated haplotype  was from kaua‘i. in nuclear datasets in contrast, no geographic structure could be detected in the star-like networks in either genus; the nuclear genes generally possessed one or two common haplotypes that were found on multiple islands. nevertheless, the branch bearing the haplotypes j, k and l of the cyrt <dig> network was restricted to kaua‘i. for both genera, the greatest resolution of species was possible for the oldest island of kaua’i . removing kaua’i species from the analysis eliminated most of the observed geographical structure and almost all of the species-diagnostic markers.

discussion
greater coalescence times in nuclear genes
despite their modest lengths, the nuclear genes examined in this study were highly variable relative to plastid genes, most likely due to their greater coalescence times. the short lengths of the nuclear regions  resulted from the difficulty of finding genes with long exons that would allow direct sequencing in all accessions. nevertheless, the high percentage of variable sites in these genes compared to plastid genes allowed detection of a greater number of haplotypes. furthermore, the lack of plateau in the accumulation curves for three of the four nuclear genes indicated that a significant number of haplotypes were not captured in our samples.

the greater variability of nuclear loci and many other differences with plastid genes can be explained by the greater coalescence times of nuclear genes compared to organelle genes  <cit> . because of the larger effective population sizes of nuclear genes  compared to plastid genes , genetic drift is less influential, ancestral haplotypes are maintained for longer periods of time, and fixation of novel mutations in nuclear genes requires longer time periods, perhaps three times as long as required for plastid genes  <cit> . in the nuclear genes examined in this study, ancestral haplotypes are still present at the centre of the star-like networks and are also often abundant and widespread across species, thus contributing to high intraspecific polymorphism. particularly in cyrtandra, high polymorphism was maintained in nuclear genes in many species, and the multiple alleles present are probably much older than their corresponding species or even the islands on which the species are found. similarly, genetic diversity within islands was greater for nuclear genes relative to plastid genes, and the elapse time between the formation of two consecutive hawaiian islands is probably too short to allow for the fixation of a single allele within each island. thus, ancestral alleles are spread through these populations during colonization of new islands, resulting in the presence of several common nuclear haplotypes across the archipelago from kaua‘i to hawai‘i. in plastid genes, in contrast, intraspecific polymorphism was rare. rather, the plastid gene networks revealed that several intermediate haplotypes have been lost , most likely through drift. in summary, the comparison between nuclear and plastid genes reveals that the plastid genes possess a greater number of species-diagnostic haplotypes, some of which were distinct by more than one substitution, allowing delineation of a larger number of species with greater confidence.

is there a species-age threshold below which dna barcoding fails?
with its ~5-million-year chronosequence of islands of known ages, large number of island-endemic species, and generally positive relationship between island age and species age within many taxonomic groups , hawai’i offers a unique opportunity to examine the evolutionary timescale over which dna barcoding works. the progression rule  <cit>  assumes that most native plant and animal lineages colonized hawai’i by way of the oldest main island of kaua’i , and then spread to each new island to the east as it formed: o‘ahu , maui nui  and finally hawai‘i .

evidence for the progression rule in clermontia is clear. a previous phylogenetic analysis based on plastid genes  <cit>  suggested that the single kaua‘i species cl. fauriei is sister to all other hawaiian clermontia, and this same pattern was recovered with an extended sampling of genes and species . clermontia’s putative sister group, cyanea, also probably originated on kaua‘i  <cit> . further, our combined plastid network revealed a linear distribution of haplotypes congruent with the progression rule, from one end to the other: kaua‘i, o‘ahu and maui-hawai‘i. two independent colonizations of hawai‘i from maui are indicated, and the single haplotype of clermontia kakeana , is nested within a clade from hawai‘i, thus indicating westward migration between islands. this combined evidence strongly indicates that clermontia originated on kaua‘i and then colonized the younger islands roughly in the order of their formation. the nuclear clerm <dig> gene network, despite its abundant reticulation and low divergence between haplotypes, is weakly consistent with the above pattern.

although the progression rule is not clear in cyrtandra <cit> , there are some lines of evidence that support an origin for this group on kaua‘i. all three genes revealed common haplotypes that were found on all islands. however, the most divergent haplotypes for both cyrt <dig> and psba-trnh were found on kaua’i. furthermore, haplotype diversity increased with island ages . within all three genes, occurrence of several haplotypes across most or all islands suggests that each island has been colonized multiple times by cyrtandra.

both plant groups therefore appear to show at least a rough association between island age and species age, and this study revealed more species-diagnostic haplotypes on the oldest island of kaua’i than on any other island. the single clermontia species from kaua’i, cl. fauriei, was genetically distinct at five of six loci. each of three cyrtandra species from kaua’i had a unique diagnostic haplotype in one or more markers: cy. longifolia, cy. paludosa and cy. wawrae. when investigated with additional markers, all species of cyrtandra on kaua’i can be distinguished . in contrast, no species endemic to the youngest island of hawai’i had species-diagnostic markers. in most cases, species from this island displayed one of the common haplotypes, associated in some cases with one rare haplotype. genetic diversity was not much greater on kaua’i than on hawai’i island, but it seems that genetic drift has had more time to sort haplotypes among species on kaua’i. in cyrtandra, we did not find any species-diagnostic markers on the second-oldest island of o’ahu  or hawai’i, but found two species-diagnostic markers on maui. our sampling of cyrtandra was most limited on this island, as we collected just three of the ten species there; it is highly possible therefore that sampling of additional species would eliminate some or all of the species-diagnostic markers from this young island. in clermontia, in addition to the well differentiated kaua’i species, c. fauriei, the two species sampled from o’ahu , where the genus is poorly diversified, had species-diagnostic markers. on the younger islands, only cl. kakeana from maui  could be identified through our markers, and none of hawai’i island’s species could be distinguished. these results suggest that species from maui and hawai’i are still too young to be barcoded. there may be a threshold between  <dig> and  <dig>  million years for cyrtandra and between  <dig>  and  <dig>  million years for clermontia below which species flocks are too young to be barcoded with the markers currently available.

CONCLUSIONS
a major issue preventing the use of low-copy nuclear genes in dna barcoding has been the absence of universal primers to amplify genes over a large spectrum of plant taxa. other issues that are less commonly considered include sequencing of accessions with multiple alleles of different lengths. discerning alleles in these cases with the common sanger method will require cloning and therefore a significant increase in cost and labor, although this issue may be circumvented in the future with new high throughput sequencing methods . furthermore, multiple plastid regions are easily combined for analysis because each region has a single allele per individual and no recombination. our examination of two low-copy nuclear genes for each of two hawaiian plant genera and their comparison with classic barcoding genes from the plastid genome reveals another major issue for the use of nuclear genes in dna barcoding: their longer coalescence times. the retention of ancient alleles in young species makes discovery of species-specific markers less likely with such genes in spite of their higher level of variability. studies of more ancient groups are needed to determine whether this problem is restricted to young species radiations. lastly, the greater variability of nuclear genes makes them desirable markers for phylogenetic studies, but the high frequency of heterozygotes and long coalescence times  will likely limit their utility in analyses of closely related species.

