BACKGROUND
parkinson's disease  is a progressive neurodegenerative movement disorder characterised by a selective vulnerability and degeneration of dopaminergic  neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta   <cit> . this is accompanied by formation of eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions in remaining neurons, termed lewy bodies , composed primarily of fibrillar aggregates of α-synuclein  <cit> .

degeneration of da neurons in the snc results in significant depletion of striatal dopamine levels, which can be readily visualised in pd patients using positron emission tomography  in combination with specific radiotracers, such as 18-fluorodopa   <cit> . however, whilst there is abundant pet data for pd, the results of magnetic resonance imaging -morphometric studies regarding the basal ganglia  in pd patients are still relatively scarce and inconsistent  <cit> . indeed, brain atrophy is not routinely ascribed to human idiopathic pd , particularly in cognitively intact patients  <cit> . in early-stage ipd, both normal  <cit>  and partial reductions  <cit>  in grey matter volume  of the bg have been reported  <cit> . similarly, voxel-based morphometry  studies have reported significant morphological changes, including atrophy of the head of the left caudate nucleus and cortical changes in both early and advanced ipd, which correlated robustly with clinical symptoms  <cit> . furthermore, significant asymmetrical hypertrophy of the lateral ventricles  has been reported, which also correlated robustly with patient disability scores on the unified parkinson's disease rating scale   <cit> . importantly, patterns of morphometric change which can be readily detected by mri are already utilised clinically to aid differential diagnosis of ipd from other forms of parkinsonism, including the α-synucleinopathy multiple system atrophy  and the tauopathy progressive supranuclear palsy   <cit> .

in addition, it has been widely reported that t <dig> water proton relaxivity rates are decreased in pathologically relevant areas in ipd patients, including the snc and putamen, which has been ascribed to regional iron accumulation  <cit> . interestingly, a significant relationship between t <dig> relaxivity, iron accumulation and clinical symptoms has been described. alterations in t <dig> relaxivity may therefore represent a surrogate marker for pd progression, although only cross-sectional studies have been performed to date  <cit> . by contrast, the possibility that morphometric changes, or a combination of this with alterations in t <dig> relaxation time may be used to non-invasively monitor disease progression in pd remains unclear  <cit> .

crucial to a more mechanistic understanding of pathology and the evaluation of novel treatments for pd are animal models that reflect important aspects of the clinical manifestation of the disease. foremost of all, rodent toxin-based models of pd, although subject to limitations, have provided useful insights into the pathophysiology of ipd  <cit> . combining such animal models with non-invasive imaging, such as mri, offers a powerful tool with which to investigate potential dynamic morphological changes due to degeneration of the nigrostriatal system, which may lead to identification of surrogate markers of disease progression  <cit> . importantly, detailed anatomical or relaxivity information can be correlated directly with behavioural phenotypes, raising the possibility that mri could provide non-invasive surrogate markers predictive of the degree of functional impairment in individual animals  <cit> .

previous studies have elegantly demonstrated the application of mri to animal models of pd  <cit> . primarily however, these studies have focused on alterations in t <dig> relaxation or 1h mr spectroscopy  and more recently diffusion tensor imaging   <cit>  and manganese enhanced mri   <cit> . in contrast, potential morphological changes and their relationship to histological or behavioural outcomes have not been appropriately addressed. therefore, in this study we have utilised mri to scan in vivo brains from rodents bearing a nigrostriatal lesion induced by an intranigral injection of the proteasome inhibitor lactacystin. this relatively recently developed model has been suggested to be a novel, pathologically relevant model of pd  <cit> , which has already been used with some success in neuroprotection studies  <cit> . our primary aim in this study was to investigate whether morphological and t <dig> relaxation times are altered in pd-relevant brain areas in this new experimental model of pd and to determine how these are related to behavioural and histological outcomes.

RESULTS
behavioural testing
lactacystin-lesioned animals, but not controls, initially developed gross neurological deficits progressively, as shown by a gradual worsening in neurological score . lactacystin-lesioned animals consistently showed deficits in spontaneous motility, which may be a reflection of developing bradykinesia in these animals. lesioned animals also demonstrated clear deficits in the horizontal bar, grasping reflex and placing reaction tests, suggesting defects in skilled forelimb use. lesioned animals showed only moderate deficits in the cage top test and did not show any deficits in righting reflex or visual placement test . consistent with the initial progressive increase in global neurological score between  <dig> and  <dig> days, the percentage of lactacystin-lesioned animals that displayed deficits in these tests increased in this period . modest further increases in the percentage of animals displaying these deficits were observed between days  <dig> to  <dig> post-lesion . however, this likely reflects inter-animal variation in lesion size and not progressive lesion development, as global neurological scores remain static . qualitatively, lactacystin-lesioned animals, but not controls, also developed ipsiversive postural deficits and demonstrated spontaneous circling behaviour ipsilateral to the lesioned hemisphere. importantly, neurological scores became static by  <dig> days post-lesion, and did not increase further until sacrifice  <dig> weeks post-lesion .

to determine if lactacystin-lesioning affects forelimb use, performance was assessed in the grip strength measure  test. baseline measures of grip strength were established prior to surgery with no significant difference in average grip force observed for either forelimb in either group . no significant deficits in grip strength between the contralateral and ipsilateral forelimbs were observed in saline-injected controls . by contrast, 3-weeks post-surgery, lactacystin-lesioned animals displayed a significant decrease in the grip strength of the contralateral compared to the ipsilateral forelimb . no significant differences in the grip strength of the ipsilateral limb were observed between lactacystin-lesioned animals and controls at any time-point . furthermore, three-weeks post-surgery, lactacystin-lesioned animals, but not saline controls, displayed significantly increased net contraversive rotations following an apomorphine challenge . lactacystin-lesioned animals displayed an average net contraversive turns of > <dig> turns/min. this activity increased steadily after  <dig> min and was maintained for approximately  <dig> minutes, at which point locomotor activity decreased back to baseline . no spontaneous recovery of either neurological score or behaviour was observed during the  <dig> weeks of observation in lactacystin-lesioned animals.

brain regional volumes
sample roi used to obtain volumetric data are shown in figure 2a and the anatomical criteria used to define individual brain structures are shown in table  <dig>  there was a significant reduction in whole brain volume  when comparing lactacystin-lesioned animals and saline controls . measurements of individual brain structures revealed numerous regional volume changes in lactacystin-lesioned animals, but not saline controls. indeed, the ipsilateral striatum  was found to be significantly smaller relative to the non-injected contralateral hemisphere in lactacystin-lesioned animals  and the ipsilateral hemisphere of saline controls . in addition, the ipsilateral ventral midbrain  was strikingly deformed with a concomitant increase in the surrounding cerebrospinal fluid  space. quantitative measurement revealed the ipsilateral vm to be significantly smaller in lesioned animals compared to both the non-injected contralateral hemisphere  and the ipsilateral hemisphere of saline control animals .

abbreviations: ac = anterior commissure, cc = corpus callosum, ec = external capsule

notably, the ipsilateral lateral ventricles  were significantly enlarged in lactacystin-lesioned animals compared to both the non-injected contralateral hemisphere  and the ipsilateral hemisphere of control animals . the contralateral lv in lactacystin lesioned animals was also significantly enlarged compared to saline controls .

no significant volume changes were observed in either the absolute volume of the cerebellum   or for the hippocampal formation  in either hemisphere, when comparing saline and lactacystin-injected animals . these data are illustrated in representative mr images in figure 3a, where clear hypertrophy of the lv can be observed  as well as the striking deformation of the ipsilateral vm and corresponding increase in csf space . with the exception of the contralateral lv, no significant differences were observed for any brain region when comparing the contralateral hemisphere of saline and lactacystin-injected animals.

t <dig> signal intensity measurements
in lactacystin-lesioned animals, but not saline controls, visual inspection of t2w images revealed no visible areas of t <dig> signal change in the striatum in either hemisphere between saline and lactacystin-lesioned animals . in contrast, areas of t <dig> hypointensity could be clearly observed in the vm, particularly in an area approximate to the location of the sn . notably, however, areas of t <dig> hypointensity were also observed in extra nigral regions throughout the ipsilateral vm . these data are supported by quantitative roi-based t <dig> measurements, which revealed no significant alterations in striatal t <dig> between hemispheres in either lactacystin-lesioned animals or saline controls . by contrast, a moderate, but significant, decrease in t <dig> relaxivity was observed in the ipsilateral ventral midbrain and sn of lactacystin-lesioned animals, relative to the non-injected contralateral hemisphere and the ipsilateral sn of saline-injected controls .

post-mortem histology
to validate the origin of mri signal changes and to examine how these are associated with nigrostriatal pathology, post-mortem immunohistological analyses were performed on the nigrostriatal system. unbiased stereology cell counts revealed that intranigral injection of lactacystin resulted in an  <dig>  ±  <dig> % reduction of th-positive  cells in the ipsilateral substantia nigra pars compacta  compared to the intact contralateral hemisphere . this was mirrored by an  <dig>  ±  <dig> % reduction in neun-positive  cells , strongly suggesting cell death of a <dig> da neurons rather than down-regulation of th expression in atrophic neurons. no significant differences were observed in either th+ or neun+ cell counts between the contralateral and ipsilateral hemispheres in saline-injected controls or between the contralateral hemispheres in lactacystin-lesioned animals and saline controls . notably however, the pars reticulata of the sn  and the vta were not free from the direct toxicity of lactacystin. indeed, qualitatively, extensive loss of both th+ and neun+ cells was observed in these regions when compared to saline controls . microscopic analysis of extra-nigral nuclei in the ipsilateral vm revealed additional areas of neuronal loss due to the direct toxicity of lactacystin, including the red nucleus, immediately supranigral to the snc and in numerous nuclei in the vm adjacent to the needle injection tract. these data are illustrated by representative photomicrographs in figure 5c and 5d.

consistent with loss of nigral th/neun+ cell bodies, densitometry analysis revealed a  <dig>  ±  <dig> % reduction of th+ fibre density in the ipsilateral striatum, relative to the non-injected contralateral striatum of lactacystin-lesioned animals  confirming significant loss of da axon terminals. no significant differences were observed in th+ fibre optical density in the contralateral striatum when comparing lactacystin-lesioned animals and saline controls, or between the contralateral and ipsilateral striatum in saline-injected animals . qualitatively, however, there was no apparent loss of either neun+ or darpp-32+ cells in the ipsilateral striatum of lactacystin-lesioned animals, suggesting γ-amino-butyric-acid  medium spiny neurons in the str may be preserved .

in the snc of lactacystin-lesioned animals, aggregation of α-synuclein was observed, compared to the diffuse staining in the snc of control animals . pre-treatment with proteinase k allowed selective visualisation of insoluble α-synuclein deposits and abolished immunostaining for endogenous soluble α-synuclein. this revealed focal cytoplasmic proteinase-k resistant α-synuclein immunoreactive inclusions in a small proportion of cells in the snc of lactacystin-lesioned animals, which were not present in saline controls .

prussian blue  histology revealed minimal iron deposits in the striatum of both lactacystin and saline-injected animals . by contrast, pb histology revealed clear and extensive iron accumulation in the ipsilateral snc of lactacystin-lesioned animals compared to saline controls . in support of this, densitometry analysis exposed a significant increase in iron accumulation in the ipsilateral snc of lactacystin lesioned animals compared to saline controls . iron deposits were, however, also observed in the snr and in extra-nigral nuclei in the ventral midbrain, near to the injection tract, as well as in the contralateral hemisphere of lesioned animals compared to saline controls. .

relationships between in vivo mri, behaviour and post-mortem histology
to determine whether in vivo mri measurements are linked to behavioural and histological outcomes in this model, we correlated mri- measurements with behavioural impairments and histological measures of nigrostriatal damage in this model . significant negative correlations were found between apomorphine rotation and wbv, ipsilateral str and vm volumes , whilst lv hypertrophy correlated positively with apomorphine rotations. by contrast, only ipsilateral str volume was significantly associated with decreased contralateral forelimb grip strength. no significant relationships were observed between either cerebellar volume or hippocampal volume and any behavioural measure. in addition, significant associations were found between the number of th+ and neun+ cells in the ipsilateral snc with changes in wbv, ipsilateral vm and str volume. interestingly, a significant relationship was found between th+ fibre density and ipsilateral str volume. in addition, these histological measures all correlated robustly with lv hypertrophy. there was no significant link between any histological measure and hf or cb volume.

*p <  <dig> , **p <  <dig> .

no significant associations could be found between ipsilateral sn t <dig> values any behavioural measure at  <dig> weeks post-lesion . in addition, no significant associations could be found between sn t <dig> values and the number of surviving th+ and neun+ cells in the sn, or the density of th+ fibres in the striatum. however, a significant relationship could be observed between the degree of iron accumulation and t <dig> values in the sn . no significant relationships between striatal t <dig> values and behavioural or histological outcomes were observed. for completeness, ex vivo post-mortem histological measures were also correlated with behavioural outcomes in this model. as expected, there were strong correlations with the number of th+ cells in the ipsilateral snc and both apomorphine rotations  and forelimb grip strength . the number of neun+ cells in the ipsilateral snc also strongly correlated with both apomorphine rotations  and forelimb grip strength . similarly, highly significant relationships were observed between th+ cell number and neun+ cell number in the ipsilateral snc  and th+ fibre density in the striatum .

discussion
using in vivo t2-weighted  mri, we have been able to detect for the first time a pattern of morphological changes in the brains of rodents bearing a unilateral lesion of the nigrostriatal system induced by intranigral injection of a proteasome inhibitior. we observed a moderate, but significant global reduction in brain volume, accompanied by a striking deformation of the ipsilateral vm, shrinkage of the ipsilateral striatum and hypertrophy of the lv. although the presence of bg atrophy in pd patients is a matter of controversy  <cit>  these data correspond robustly with recent published data from clinical neuroimaging studies in ipd patients. indeed, morphological changes, including decreased striatal volume and lv hypertrophy have been reported  <cit> . nevertheless, midbrain atrophy is commonly detected in mri from patients with atypical pd, such as msa or psp  <cit> . no changes were observed in either cerebellar or hippocampal volume. we further observed a slight, but significant decrease in t <dig> relaxivity in the sn, consistent with previous reports of this phenomenon in ipd patients  <cit> . however, we could not find any change in t <dig> in the str in this model. in addition to these mri signal changes, lactacystin-lesioned animals displayed robust parkinsonian-like behavioural defects and classical nigrostriatal pathology, including α-synuclein aggregation in the sn, consistent with previous reports describing the development of this rodent pre-clinical model  <cit> .

relationship between morphological changes detected by mri with behavioural and histological outcomes
examination of the relationship between mri signal changes and behavioural outcomes revealed that volumetric changes in the ipsilateral vm, striatum and lv were significantly correlated to apomorphine rotation, whilst only ipsilateral striatal volume was significantly associated with impaired grip strength in this model. these data suggest volumetric mri measurements of these areas could be predictive of the degree of some, but not all, functional impairments in this model, consistent with human studies  <cit> . these preliminary data, albeit in a small number of subjects, raise the possibility that these volumetric in vivo mri measures may be useful surrogate markers of disease progression in this model. in addition, previous studies have demonstrated that lactacystin-lesioned animals also show significantly impaired performance in the accelerating rotarod test and overall locomotor activity  <cit> . thus it may be interesting in future studies to additionally examine the relationship between mri volumetric changes and performance in these motor tasks in lactacystin-lesioned animals, which may provide further evidence for mri volumetric changes in this model as surrogate markers of nigrostriatal dysfunction. importantly, however, repetition of this analysis in a larger group of subjects and comparison to established pre-clinical models of pd  are required to fully establish the reliability and specificity of these surrogate markers.

in addition, post-mortem validation of mri signal changes is crucial before these can be accepted as surrogate markers of disease progression. an important corollary to this is that lactacystin can induce both selective damage to da neurons or more widespread cell loss. indeed, in vitro, lactacystin has been reported to induce a significant loss of only da neurons  <cit>  or both da and gabaergic neurons  <cit> . in contrast, in vivo, intrastriatal injection of lactacystin  induced a general neuronal toxicity in the striatum  <cit> . importantly, in the current study, volume decreases were significantly correlated with the number of surviving th+ and neun+ cell numbers in the ipsilateral sn, but also the density of th+ fibres in the ipsilateral striatum. however, lactacystin not only induced neuronal loss in the pars compacta and pars reticulata of the sn, but also in the vta, a nucleus that is relatively preserved in human ipd  <cit> . thus, whilst the morphological mri changes observed in the current study are certainly linked to a specific loss of a <dig> da neurons, at least in part, we cannot exclude the possibility that these are also due to an additional loss of other vulnerable neuronal populations.

additionally, focal areas of neuronal loss were observed throughout the ipsilateral vm along the needle injection tract, consistent with previous reports  <cit> . this phenomenon most likely explains the extensive deformation of the ipsilateral vm observed on the mri scans. thus, although volumetric mri measures were strongly associated with both behavioural and ex vivo histological measures, their use as surrogate markers of nigrostriatal damage might be limited, since volumetric changes in these regions do not discriminate between damage to the nigrostriatal or other neuronal populations in the midbrain in this model.

although th+ fibre density was dramatically reduced in the ipsilateral striatum of lactacystin-lesioned animals, qualitatively, no gross loss of either neun+ or darpp-32+ cells was apparent. thus, striatal medium spiny neurons  appear to be preserved in this model. interestingly, th+ fibre loss and dopamine depletion are reported to be associated with synaptic remodelling and dendritic changes in striatal msn in 6-ohda lesioned rodents  <cit> . these data are consistent with reports of decreased msn dendrite spine number and length in the striatum of post-mortem pd brains  <cit> . conceivably therefore, decreased striatal volume could be attributed to th+ fibre loss and subsequent dendritic remodelling. it is tempting to speculate therefore that striatal volumetric change may be a conserved marker of nigrostriatal degeneration across pre-clinical models of pd and perhaps human ipd, which importantly, correlates with behavioural and clinical outcomes  <cit> . however, investigation of volumetric mr changes in established pd models that induce selective nigrostriatal da cell death, such as 6-ohda or mptp, will be important to validate this hypothesis.

relationship between t <dig> relaxivity changes detected by mri with behavioural and histological outcomes
in contrast to our findings, previous studies have identified increased t <dig> relaxation times, visualised as areas of signal hyperintensity on t2w mr images in both 6-ohda-lesioned rodents  <cit>  and mptp-treated primates  <cit> . importantly, these findings were reported at acute time-points post-lesion  and t <dig> hyperintense areas were observed to dissipate on subsequent mri scans with increasing time post-lesion  <cit> . it is therefore possible that t <dig> relaxation may evolve with time, although this may not be a reflection of a continuous physiological phenomenon. indeed, increases in t <dig> at acute stages post-lesion most likely reflect acute oedema  <cit> . by contrast, at longer time-points post-lesion, iron accumulation appears to be the primary cause of t <dig> signal decrease, as suggested by our findings and those of others  <cit> . importantly, although previous studies have suggested a link between changes in sn t <dig> relaxation time and nigral cell death  <cit> , this has not been robustly established in vivo. we, for instance, could not find a significant relationship between ipsilateral sn t <dig> values and either th+ or neun+ cell number in the snc. although the number of subjects in our study was small, these data are in agreement with recently published findings in mptp-treated primates  <cit> . one plausible explanation of these findings may be related to iron accumulation in the sn. iron deposition is known to affect mr signal intensity by creating magnetic field inhomogeneities that de-phase nearby water-protons leading to shortening of t <dig> relaxation time and signal drop off in the affected tissues  <cit> . in support of this, we observed substantial iron accumulation in the ipsilateral sn of lactacystin-lesioned animals, but not saline controls. furthermore, we observed a significant relationship between t <dig> and iron accumulation as measured by prussian blue histology in the sn 3-weeks post-lesion. these data are in good agreement with the findings of zhu and colleagues  who initially reported the observation of significant iron accumulation in the sn in this model by biochemical measurement of iron content in the sn  <cit> . interestingly, previous studies have shown that treatment with novel iron chelators prevented nigral iron accumulation and protected the nigrostriatal system against lactacystin-induced neurodegeneration in vivo  <cit> . speculatively therefore, in vivo mr measurement of nigral t <dig> values may be a potentially useful surrogate measure of the neuroprotective efficacy of novel iron chelators in this rodent model of pd, which may warrant further investigation in vivo.

overall, these data are also consistent with mri findings in pd patients reporting decreased t <dig> relaxation time in the sn  <cit>  and biochemical measurements reporting increased iron accumulation in the sn of pd patients  <cit> . interestingly, changes in sn t <dig> relaxation in pd patients appear to correlate with some clinical symptoms, although the exact relationship is unclear  <cit> . based on these clinical reports, it has been suggested that t <dig> signal changes may be a useful surrogate marker of pd progression  <cit> . importantly, in this pd model at  <dig> weeks post-lesion, ipsilateral sn t <dig> relaxivity was not significantly associated with any behavioural outcome in this cross-sectional study.

taken together, it may be suggested that at least two distinct physiological processes underlie changes in nigral t <dig>  which evolve over time and may in part counterbalance each other. clearly therefore, longitudinal studies are required to further elucidate the relationship between changes in t <dig> and behavioural or histological outcomes in this model to determine whether this can be a useful surrogate marker of ongoing nigrostriatal degeneration in vivo.

it is also noteworthy, however, that in lactacystin lesioned animals we observed numerous areas of t <dig> hypointensity on our t2w mr images throughout the midbrain and not only in the sn. this finding is inconsistent with the patterns of either iron deposition  <cit>  or t <dig> relaxivity changes detected by mri in pd patients  <cit> . this was reflected in both quantitative t <dig> measurements and post-mortem histology, where clear areas of iron accumulation could be observed not only in the snc, but also the snr as well as in areas surrounding the needle tract, where ongoing neuronal loss was also evident.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this study has identified a pattern of morphological changes in lactacystin lesioned animals, as well as alterations in nigral t <dig> relaxivity, that are somewhat consistent with published clinical neuroimaging data from ipd patients. interestingly, morphological, but not t <dig> relaxivity changes, were associated with both behavioural and histological outcomes in this model. this raises the possibility that morphological changes may be non-invasive surrogate markers of nigrostriatal degeneration in vivo in this pre-clinical model. however, post-mortem immunohistological analysis revealed that lactacystin induced non-specific neuronal loss in the vm, as well as widespread iron accumulation. taken together, these data suggest that mri signal changes in this pd model are not wholly specific to degeneration of the nigrostriatal system alone, potentially limiting the usefulness of these markers. nevertheless, this model has pathological relevance to human ipd, and may be a useful tool to study the relationship between proteasome dysfunction, abnormal accumulation of α-synuclein and da neurodegeneration in vivo. moreover, these data reinforce the usefulness of mri for non-invasive evaluation of pathological changes in the brain in pre-clinical models of neurodegenerative disease.

