BACKGROUND
opioids have been well-documented as drugs of abuse  <cit>  and as potential analgesics  <cit> . opioid receptors in tissues and organs may mediate the drug activity, thus opioids acting preferentially on mu, kappa or delta receptor alone may produce unique behavioral and physiological responses. delta opioids have been recently implicated in ischemia  <cit> . following occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in mice, delta binding sites were decreased at least  <dig> h earlier than reductions in mu or kappa binding sites, and concomitant with the extension of the infarct core  <cit> . the early reduction in delta receptors prior to any observable brain damage suggests that these receptors are the class most sensitive to brain insults. accordingly, stimulating the delta receptors may promote anti-ischemic effects. a 'natural hibernation' condition has been suggested to achieve such anti-ischemic effects  <cit> . the preservation of isolated rat hearts can be improved by pharmacologically duplicating the common pathway to natural hibernation and ischemic preconditioning, that is, through an opening of the atp-sensitive potassium channels  <cit> . brain tissues collected from hibernating ground squirrels were more tolerant to hypoxia and aglycemia than those tissues from active squirrels  <cit> . these results indicate that drugs that induce hibernation, such as enkephalin , could act as anti-ischemic agents.

the commonality in the mechanisms  underlying the survival/degeneration of tissues in the periphery and in the central nervous system  suggests that dadle may protect against cerebral ischemia. in the present study, we examined this protective effect of dadle in the cns by pretreating young adult rats with this peptide and subsequently exposing them to occlusion and reperfusion surgery of the middle cerebral artery . routine behavioral tests were employed to characterize functional alterations during an acute post-ischemia period. the volume and size of infarction were analyzed using triphenyltetrazolium chloride   <cit> , a histological assay for determining dehydrogenase activity. because apoptotic mechanism of cell death accompanies the mca or stroke model  <cit> , we also investigated whether dadle could alter the expression of p- <dig> mrna, which is an associated marker for apoptosis. finally, to elucidate possible opioid receptor mediation of dadle's functions in the cns, we carried out pharmacologic manipulations using delta opioid antagonists naltrexone  and naloxone methaiodide .

RESULTS
dadle attenuates motor asymmetrical behaviors
daily behavioral tests revealed that ischemic animals treated with dadle displayed near normal behaviors throughout the post-mcaor test period in a battery of tests . in contrast, ischemic animals pretreated with saline, naltrexone alone or naloxone methiodide alone displayed significant abnormalities in elevated body swing test , spontaneous rotational test, postural bias test, and forelimb akinesia test throughout the post-mcaor test period. the mean locomotor deficits in these ischemic animals are as follows:  <dig> % ±  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . ischemic animals pretreated with dadle + naloxone methiodide or dadle + naltrexone also exhibited similar behavioral deficits at  <dig> h post-mcaor, but showed near normal behaviors at  <dig> h and  <dig> h post-mcaor. this observation of transient behavioral abnormalities in ischemic animals treated with dadle + opioid antagonists suggests that dadle only partially exerted its protection via the opioid system, and non-opioid mechanisms appear to mediate the majority of protective effects of dadle.

dadle reduces cerebral infarction
ttc staining at  <dig> or  <dig> h after reperfusion revealed that brains from ischemic animals that were treated with dadle, alone or with adjuvant opioid blockers, had almost completely intact striata, whereas those from ischemic animals that received saline showed significant infarction in the lateral striatum . ischemic animals pretreated with saline had a mean volume  of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm <dig> of infarcted striatal tissue, while ischemic animals pretreated with dadle alone, dadle + naltrexone, or dadle + naloxone methiodide had no detectable infarction. ischemic animals that received naltrexone alone or naloxone methiodide alone had a mean volume of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm <dig> of striatal infarcted tissue, which did not differ from the ischemic animals that received saline alone. analysis of variance  revealed significant treatment effects  and post hoc t-tests revealed significant reduction in infarct volume in dadle-treated ischemic animals, including those co-administered with opioid blockers, compared with saline-treated ischemic animals . these histological observations were consistent for both time periods of histological examination. the observation of almost intact striatum following mcaor in dadle-treated animals, even with the co-administration of opioid antagonists, suggests that dadle protected against necrotic cell death processes induced by ischemia-reperfusion injury.

dadle decreases ischemia-induced apoptotic cell death
analyses of apoptotic cell death revealed a significant increment in the mrna expression of p- <dig> in the striatum of ischemic animals that received saline, while those that received dadle exhibited near normal striatal p- <dig> expression. anova revealed a significant difference across treatment conditions  . normalized values of p- <dig> mrna expression showed that vehicle-treated ischemic animals had a significant increase in mrna expression of p- <dig> in the ischemic striatum  at  <dig> h post-mcaor surgery compared with the intact striatum of control, normal animals . in contrast, there was no significant difference in p- <dig> mrna expression between the ischemic striatum  of dadle-treated ischemic animals and the intact striatum of control, normal animals . comparisons of ischemic striata showed a marked reduction  in p- <dig> mrna expression in dadle-treated ischemic animals compared with vehicle-treated ischemic animals. moreover, immunohistochemical analyses of phenotypic markers of apoptosis revealed significant reductions in caspase-3- and fas-positive cells in dadle-treated ischemic animals compared with vehicle-treated ischemic animals . these results indicate that dadle protected against apoptotic cell death processes associated with ischemia-reperfusion injury.

dadle increases levels of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor expression
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay  examination of expression of neurotrophic factors revealed elevated levels of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor , but not nerve growth factor , in the striatal and cortical tissues harvested from ischemic animals treated with dadle . ischemic animals treated with dadle had significantly higher levels of gdnf compared with those treated with saline . however, both groups did not differ in their levels of ngf . these results indicate that dadle specifically increased gdnf, but not ngf.

discussion
the present study demonstrated that dadle protected against mca or ischemia-induced deficits. animals that were pretreated with dadle and subsequently exposed to the mcaor surgery did not show significant behavioral deficits as revealed by a battery of tests, while ischemic animals pretreated with saline alone exhibited significant dysfunctions in all behavioral tests. delta opioid blockers naltrexone and naloxone methaiodide transiently antagonized the protective effects of dadle at  <dig> h post mcaor but not thereafter, indicating that dadle's effects are only partially mediated by opioid receptors. the data on ttc staining  revealed almost no detectable dehydrogenase-deficient tissue  in the striatum  at  <dig> h or  <dig> h post mcaor in ischemic animals treated with dadle alone or dadle + opioid blockers. whereas opioid blockers transiently suppressed the behavioral protection by dadle, they did not antagonize dadle's inhibition of ischemia-induced necrosis. in addition, striatal p- <dig> mrna expression, an index of apoptosis, was significantly suppressed by dadle at  <dig> h post mcaor. in contrast, an increment in striatal p- <dig> mrna expression was noted in ischemic animals that received saline alone. thus, pretreatment with dadle was shown to rescue both ischemia-induced necrotic and apoptotic cell injury, which could have promoted the observed behavioral protection.

the observation that dadle exerts therapeutic effects in a stroke model provides evidence for the need for further investigating the role of the opioid system in cell degeneration and regeneration. the novelty of the present study is the demonstration that a delta opioid agonist drug that can induce hibernation protected the brain from ischemic damage. the mu opioid, morphine, has been recently shown to induce a fas-mediated cell death  <cit> . our data, however, indicate that delta opioids possess protective effects against cell death, for both necrotic and apoptotic types. these results suggest that opioids, depending on the specific receptor they trigger, can promote either degenerative or protective effects, in that mu opioids may promote neurotoxic effects  <cit> , while kappa  <cit>  and delta opioids may produce protective/restorative effects.

the significant reductions in cerebral infarction and apoptotic cell death markers  indicate that dadle centrally promoted its protective effects. we recently demonstrated that dadle blocks and even reverses the loss of dopamine transporters induced by chronic methamphetamine treatment  <cit> . moreover, dadle inhibits accumulations of superoxide anions and hydroxyl radicals  <cit> , which have been shown as exacerbating factors for many neurological disorders, including stroke  <cit> . the possibility exists that ischemia-induced cell death involves the dopaminergic system, specifically the striatal dopamine pathway. indeed, we reported that many functional deficits associated with the mcaor are striatal dopamine-mediated behaviors  <cit> . animals with striatal ischemia display methamphetamine-induced rotational behaviors  <cit> , as well as impairments in passive avoidance and morris water maze tests  <cit> . these findings implicate the dopamine-rich innervated striatum as a critical brain area for initiating neuroprotective strategies in this stroke model.

the mechanism we proposed for the observed protective effects of dadle is the ability of dadle to increase expression of gdnf in the striatum and cortex, which are the mcaor stroke target brain areas. we previously demonstrated that intracerebral infusion of gdnf protects against cerebral ischemia  <cit> . moreover, it has been established that gdnf is a highly selective dopamine neuron survival agent  <cit> . we recently reported that dadle enhances embryonic dopamine cell viability in vitro and following intrastriatal transplantation  <cit>  and protects adult dopaminergic neurons in vivo against 6-hydroxydopamine-induced neurotoxicity  <cit> . the present observation of increased gdnf striatal levels following dadle treatment suggests that the striatal dopaminergic system is a highly potent target for dadle in reversing ischemia cell injury, as well as other diseases characterized by dopamine dysfunctions.

the different onsets of behavioral recovery between ischemic animals that received dadle and those treated with dadle and opioid receptor blockers deserve clarification. dadle-treated ischemic animals displayed significantly less behavioral deficits in the battery of tests throughout the post-mcaor test period. in contrast, those ischemic animals that received a combination of dadle and opioid receptor blockers did not exhibit improvements in stroke-induced behavioral deficits until  <dig> h, which persisted up to  <dig> h post mcaor. this observation of transient behavioral abnormalities in ischemic animals treated with dadle and opioid antagonists suggests that dadle only partially exerted its protection via the opioid system, and non-opioid mechanisms appear to mediate the majority of protective effects of dadle. accordingly, blocking dadle via the opioid pathway should only partially prevent dadle's therapeutic benefits. the partial antagonistic effects of opioid blockers were reflected in the delayed onset of behavioral recovery in ischemic animals treated with dadle and opioid blockers. the question arises then of why recovery could be initiated at a later post-mcaor time point if these dadle + opioid blocker treated ischemic animals already exhibited behavioral deficits at early post-mcaor phase. such delayed functional recovery is likely explained by the temporal profile of dadle's non-opioid therapeutic action . based on the reported neurotrophic effects of gdnf on endogenous cells  <cit> , it is possible that recruitment of newly formed cells from neurogenic sites  towards the ischemic striatal area was delayed, thereby corresponding to the delayed behavioral recovery. recent data from our laboratory indicate dadle robust induction of neurogenesis .

the present behavioral and histological results parallel the reported evolution of the penumbra during the acute phase of ischemic stroke  <cit> . stroke-induced histological alterations as revealed by ttc staining reveals that dadle-treated ischemic animals, as well as those that received combined dadle and opioid blockers, all demonstrate near absent infarcts at  <dig> h post-stroke . despite the absence of massive infarcts, ischemic animals treated with dadle and opioid blockers initially exhibited significant behavioral deficits at  <dig> h, then their behaviors eventually improved at  <dig> h and remained near normal levels at  <dig> h post-stroke. notwithstanding near normal gross histology, the behavioral deficits at the very acute stage of stroke could be due to subtle lesions and/or apoptotic cell death not detected by ttc staining. the evolution of ischemic penumbra in these animals that initially demonstrated behavioral deficits could have been similarly abrogated by dadle's non-opioid therapeutic action. it is likely that dadle-mediated gdnf upregulation had already been in place even prior to stroke, since dadle was administered repeatedly starting at  <dig> h pre-stroke. our pre-stroke dadle paradigm is in agreement with previous studies reporting that optimal gdnf therapeutic effects are achieved when initiated at an ample time interval prior to injury  <cit> . dadle neutrophic effects, even in those animals co-treated with opioid blockers, could have been manifested in a two-pronged approach. one pathway is to combat directly the ischemic penumbra, and another process discussed above is via recruitment of endogenous stem cells. the combination of these two neuroprotective mechanisms was robust in dadle treated ischemic animals, while delayed  for those that received combined dadle and opioid blockers. clearly, additional studies are warranted to reveal the exact mechanism of action of dadle, but our results concur with prevailing concepts on stroke cell death cascades and neuroprotective pathways.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study demonstrated that dadle, possibly by increasing gdnf expression in critical brain regions, prevented cell death processes and behavioral abnormalities associated with experimental stroke in rats. the observation that a delta opioid peptide, previously shown to induce hibernation, attenuated deficits inherent in cerebral ischemia provides a new pharmacological target for stroke therapy.

