BACKGROUND
cronobacter is a newly described genus that includes opportunistic pathogens formerly classified as enterobacter sakazakii <cit> . e. sakazakii was first described by farmer et al.
 <cit> , using dna-dna hybridization studies and phenotyping to reclassify a group of yellow-pigmented enterobacter cloacae isolates attributed to cases of neonatal meningitis
 <cit>  into  <dig> phenotypically distinct biogroups. a 16th biogroup was later described
 <cit> . although e. sakazakii was synonymous with the original single species epithet, iversen et al.
 <cit> , using a polyphasic approach based on extensive genotypic and phenotypic criteria, reclassified strains of this diverse species within the novel genus, cronobacter. originally, the genus contained six recognized species, c. sakazakii , c. malonaticus , c. muytjensii , c. turicensis , c. dublinensis, subsp. dublinensis, lausannensis, and lactaridi  and c. genomospecies  <dig>  joseph et al.
 <cit>  have updated this taxonomy by designating members assigned to the genomospecies group  <dig> as c. universalis  and identifying a new species, c. condimenti, based on a single known strain using a seven gene multi-locus sequence typing  scheme.

cronobacter have been primarily associated with infections in infants, but recent reports have highlighted the risk posed to immune compromised adults, particularly the elderly
 <cit> . cronobacter have been recovered from a wide variety of foods, including powdered infant formula , follow-on formulas, weaning foods, milk and sodium caseinate powders, rice seed, dried herbs, teas, and spices, spiced meats, dried flour or meal , dried infant and adult cereals, dried vegetables, grains, tofu, powdered ice tea, mixed salad vegetables, tomato harvesting bins, chocolate, candied cough drops, and pastas
 <cit> . nevertheless, pif remains epidemiologically linked to outbreaks of neonatal and infantile meningitis, and cronobacter are routinely isolated from household pif preparation equipment, including blenders and spoons. although pif is regarded as an important source of this pathogen, the main reservoir for cronobacter seems to be the environment
 <cit> .

cronobacter are capable of surviving and persisting in low-water environments
 <cit> , owing to their distribution in dry food goods. although the exact genetic determinant remains to be identified, breeuwer et al. reported that intracellular accumulation of trehalose, among other features, prevents protein denaturation and membrane fusion and these may contribute to the desiccation-resistant properties of the bacterium
 <cit> . the expression of an exopolysaccharide composed of cellulose may also be required
 <cit> . thermoresistance of cronobacter has also been reported
 <cit> . proteins unique to thermotolerant cronobacter strains have been identified by liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry; for example, a protein, mfla_ <dig>  which is a homologue of a hypothetical protein from the thermotolerant bacterium methylobacillus flagellatus kt
 <cit> . recently, an 18-kb region containing  <dig> open reading frames that are up-regulated under heat adaptation growth conditions has also been reported
 <cit> . the major feature of the region is a cluster of conserved genes, which have significant homology to proteins involved in bacterial stress responses, including heat, oxidation, and acid.

previously, kucerova et al.
 <cit>  reported on the genome sequence of c. sakazakii atcc baa- <dig>  which was isolated from a pif product that was used in a neonatal intensive care unit and which gave rise to an outbreak in  <dig> in tennessee, usa. in an attempt to further determine virulence factors and mechanisms of pathogenicity in this bacterium, the genome of c. turicensis z <dig>  cultured from the blood of one child with meningitis
 <cit>  was sequenced
 <cit> . in this paper, we describe the genomes of the type strains of cronobacter dublinensis subsp. dublinensis, cronobacter dublinensis subsp. lactaridi, cronobacter dublinensis subsp. lausannensis, cronobacter malonaticus, cronobacter muytjensii, and cronobacter universalis. comparative genomics was performed on these six genomes, as well as two previously published, closed genomes of cronobacter. we identified and characterized the features associated with the core and pan genome of this bacterial genus in an attempt to understand the evolution of these organisms and the genetic content of each species.

RESULTS
general features of sequenced cronobacter genomes
whole genome sequencing of six species type strains of cronobacter was performed . each genome analyzed in this study contained a single chromosome and a large repfib plasmid, similar to csak baa- <dig>  and ctur z <dig> , except the genome of c. muytjensii atcc  <dig>  previously, franco and hu et al.
 <cit>  reported that only 75% of strains of c. muytjensii harbored this plasmid, while the incidence of this plasmid in other cronobacter spp. is 99%. the g + c% content of each genome ranged from  <dig> to 57% . each of the six draft genomes contained seven ribosomal rna operons, as inferred from comparative genomics with csak baa- <dig> and ctur z <dig> .

ac. sakazakii strain baa- <dig> and c. turicensis strain z <dig> were previously sequenced and are considered to be closed reference genomes  <cit> .

whole genome phylogeny and cronobacter taxonomy
to confirm the taxonomic standing of cronobacter genus novum and species
 <cit> , genome scale analyses based on nucleotide sequence were performed. average nucleotide identity  has emerged as one of the predominant genomics alternatives to dna-dna hybridization. the pairwise ani values between all cronobacter genomes used in this study support the current proposed species and subspecies classification of cronobacter . although pairwise ani values provide a benchmark of divergence  between two genomes, evolutionary relationships between more than two genomes cannot be inferred from this analysis. therefore, a genome scale phylogenetic analysis was performed on all eight cronobacter genomes . this analysis reveals that extant cronobacter species have diverged into two clusters, cdub-cmuy and csak-cmal-cuni-ctur, from the most recent shared ancestral species. the cdub-cmuy clade evolved as a monophyletic clade for much of its evolutionary history before diverging into two species. however, we expect the reconstruction of this evolutionary history to change significantly as new species that fall within this clade are identified; for example, c. condimenti <cit> . in contrast, the other four species evolved as four distinct monophyletic lineages. the phylogenetic tree is, again, in good agreement with the current proposed taxonomy of cronobacter <cit> , as well as recent proposed cronobacter phylogenies derived from mlst
 <cit>  and sequence of the rpob gene
 <cit> , although more resolving than rpob sequence for csak-cmal
 <cit> , and rpoa <cit> .

anumbers in bold represent pairwise comparisons that are higher than the current species level threshold,  <dig>  for ani, indicating same species.

cronobacter core genome
a cronobacter core genome of orthologous, shared genes was determined for the eight strains analyzed in this study. the chromosome of each of the six type strains of cronobacter consists of approximately  <dig>  cds . of this number, we determined that  <dig>  cds comprise the core genome of cronobacter . previously, kucerova et al.
 <cit>  reported a core genome of  <dig>  gene sequences, among five species using microarray hybridization based on the genome of csak baa-894; c. universalis was not included.

among the genes comprising the core genome of cronobacter, we found several genetic determinants that are experimentally-linked to phenotypic traits, such as reduction of nitrate, utilization of d-mannose, d-mannitol, sucrose, l-arabinose, cellobiose, and d-xylose , which have been previously reported by iversen et al.
 <cit>  as biochemical traits of the genus as determined by phenotypic microarray. additionally, we found genes, gene clusters or operons responsible for the following characteristics in the cronobacter core genome: utilization of fructoselysine, psicoselysine, isomaltulose , n-acetylglucosamine , n-acetylmannosamine, and 2-ketogluconate; a carotenoid pigmentation cluster homologous to pantoea spp., type iv pili , σ chaperone/usher  fimbriae, three γ <dig> cu fimbriae, enterobactin siderophore gene clusters, ferric hydroxymate transporter, several ferric iron receptors, and two ferrous iron transporters
 <cit> , histidine transporter, yeh osmoprotectant transporter, zinc transporter, albicidin resistance protein coding gene, macrolide-specific abc-type efflux pump and several putative multidrug resistance genes, opp oligopeptide transporter system, dpp dipeptide transporter, sap peptide transporter, cellulose biosynthesis genes , kps capsule polysaccharide biosynthesis cluster, glucans biosynthesis cluster, dimethyl sulfoxide reductase, alkanesulfonate monoxygenase and transporter, ytf putative sugar transporter operon, and hexuronate operon .

cronobacter spp. pan-genome
for the approximately  <dig> non-core cds in each of the six cronobacter genomes; i.e., not included in the cronobacter core genome, we determined which chromosomal genes comprised dispensable and unique genomic regions  and which were putative mobile genomic islands and elements. plasmid genes  were not investigated in this study. in total, we identified  <dig> dispensable genomic regions that were present in two or more cronobacter genomes, and  <dig> unique genomic regions . we overlaid these combined  <dig> genomic regions onto the genome-scale phylogeny, determined by alignment of orthologous sequence of the core genome .

afeature, or putative feature, were assigned based on blastp homology of encoded orfs to known proteins. shared chromosomal loci of genomic regions are indicated by matching letters. features in bold are biochemical traits, used previously to biotype cronobacter isolates.

in addition to the extant cronobacter spp. core genome described earlier , a number of dispensable or accessory genomic regions,  <dig> in all, were identified as being a likely component of the last common ancestor core genome . these included metabolic operons for the utilization of taurine, inositol, malonate, and dulcitol ; two chaperone-usher fimbriae operons and curli biosynthetic genes; a crispr element; an alpha- and beta-glucosidase; genes encoding the yih environmental persistence capsule described in salmonella species; two large repetitive protein/hemolysin clusters; spermidine uptake system; nitric oxide reductase system; a  <dig> -kb genomic region missing in cuni nctc <dig> containing gene clusters for the reduction of dimethyl sulfoxide, uptake of biotin and urea , and a multiple antibiotic resistance cluster; as well as several genomic regions containing largely hypothetical protein encoding genes .

we also identified  <dig> non-core dispensable genomic regions, which were acquired by two or more species of cronobacter after diverging from their most recent common ancestor. this subset of genomic regions included  <dig> that were present in the cdub-cmuy cluster and included two ferrichrome iron receptors, fct and fcua orthologues
 <cit> ; methionine and ethanolamine utilization gene clusters; and tryptophanase . additional non-core genomic regions included a β class , a γ <dig> class  and a γ <dig> class chaperone-usher fimbriae ; an oligopeptide transport system ; pyridoxine metabolism cluster ; maltose uptake system ; cellulose degradation operon ; and an α-mannosidase .

each cronobacter genome contained a number of unique genomic regions; however, the vast majority of these contained genes encoded hypothetical proteins. notable exceptions to this trend were genomic regions encoding for mannan degradation ; l-rhamnose abc transporter ; urea decomposition ; dnd , dna sulfur modification system, ; heteropolysaccharide degradation ; putative epoxide hydrolase gene cluster ; κ class chaperone-usher fimbriae ; invasin locus ; γ <dig> class chaperone-usher fimbriae ; and sialic acid utilization  .

a number of chromosomal loci were found to harbor multiple genomic islands ; for example, gr  <dig> and  <dig> in cmuy atcc  <dig> . additionally, there were two insertion sites; namely, trna-pro-ggg and the tca cycle isocitrate dehydrogenase gene, icda, where several small genomic regions were inserted in a multiple cassette fashion for several genomes, indicating insertion loci of genomic plasticity .

cronobacter spp. mobilome
not surprisingly, each cronobacter genome contained multiple prophage or prophage-like elements . in several cases, prophages of different cronobacter genomes were inserted at the same chromosomal locus . indeed, phylogenetic analysis of the integrase gene of all prophages revealed a trend of several clusters in which the chromosomal insertion site was shared among all members of a phylogenetic cluster . interestingly, the genomes of c. universalis nctc  <dig> and c. muytjensii atcc  <dig> harbor a 57 kb integrative conjugative element , which is 99% identical between strains . this mobile genetic element is most closely related to the ice-kks family of integrating and conjugative elements, found in β- and γ- proteobacteria and represented by icekks <dig>  which carries polychlorinated biphenyl degradation genes
 <cit> . for the cronobacter ice, in addition to the conjugal transfer, integrase, and replication/partition genes, there is a 21 kb internal segment which carries unique genes among this class of ices. most of the genes were annotated as encoding hypothetical proteins, so it is unclear what phenotypic trait or characteristic are encoded in this region.

additionally, each genome contained a number of transposons . phylogenetic analysis of the transposases clustered the genes together based on multiple copies of the same transposon found in each genome, but not with regard to insertion site . most of the transposons carried very few additional genes or hypothetical protein encoding genes. there were three noticeable exceptions, a transposon carrying the tellurium resistance island found in the genome of csak baa- <dig>  a transposon carrying a copper resistance island found in the genomes of cuni nctc  <dig> and cmuy atcc  <dig>  inserted near the isocitrate dehydrogenase gene, icda, and a transposon inserted in the yhin - puua intergenic region of csak baa- <dig>  carrying copper and silver resistance genes .

we also observed a number of type six secretion system  gene clusters in the eight cronobacter genomes . all genomes contained a very large t6ss cluster as a component of the cronobacter core genome, which is flanked by a highly variable region of different sizes in each genome containing several hypothetical protein cds as well as those encoding numerous homologues of vgrg, rhs-family and yd-repeat proteins . additionally, seven of the eight genomes contain four to six accessory t6ss clusters; cmuy atcc  <dig> does not contain any additional t6ss clusters. the gene content of each cluster is variable between clusters present at different chromosomal loci, but largely conserved among clusters located at the same chromosomal locus. previously, we reported the presence of a t6ss cluster on a repfib plasmid in strains of c. sakazakii <cit> .

not surprisingly, many of the mobile genetic elements, such as lysogenic prophages, in cronobacter genomes are inserted at trna loci . we also found t6ss gene clusters and some genomic regions inserted at trna sites. and as with genomic regions, we observed cassette-like insertion of multiple types of genetic elements at single sites .

discussion
like many bacterial genera, the taxonomy of cronobacter has evolved and expanded as more sensitive molecular- and sequence-based tools have developed. in this study, we performed two genome-scale sequence analyses to discern the taxonomic relationships of extant cronobacter species, namely ani and genome-scale alignment and phylogenetic reconstruction using syntenic, orthologous chromosomal sequence. the taxonomic reclassification by iversen et al.
 <cit> , which relied on both dna studies and on results from biochemical tests, was confirmed by both analyses. we found that the ani results from this study were more meaningful in discerning relationships between pairs of cronobacter species that are more distantly related as compared to dna-dna hybridization
 <cit> . this is most likely a reflection of the differences in the range of meaningful values for each analysis.

we were able to confirm the presence or absence of eight of the genetic determinants of the biochemical characteristics used previously for cronobacter biotyping ; namely, indole , dulcitol , malonate, myo-inositol, and two genomic regions that are likely responsible for utilization of 4-aminobutyrate and production of α-methyl glucoside , as well as those biotyping traits contained in the core genome of these eight strains, utilization of palatinose and putrescine . the distribution of these operons and genes were in complete agreement with the biochemical results and species description reported by iversen et al.
 <cit> . inositol fermentation has recently been proposed as a marker of pathogenicity for cronobacter, based on the presence of the inositol monophosphatase gene  in pathogenic strains
 <cit> . in this study, we found that this gene, which is seemingly ubiquitous and highly conserved among the enterobacteriaceae, is a component of the cronobacter core genome . additionally, we found that the inositol utilization operon  was present, and functional
 <cit> , in the genomes of strains isolated from the environment , cuni nctc 9529t, cdubdub lmg 23823t, cdublac lmg 23825t, and absent in the genomes of pathogenic strains, cmal lmg 23826t and csak baa- <dig> 

using comparative genomics, we were able to define the syntenic cronobacter core genome for the eight species genomes analyzed in this study, which is approximately 77% of the total protein coding sequences, on average, per genome. this value is considerably higher as compared to the core genome content of other genera. in fact, the core genus genome size of cronobacter is comparable to the core genome size of certain bacterial species
 <cit> , and considerably larger than that of the related e. coli <cit> . this is a reflection of the phylogenetic closeness of this genus, as shown in the ani results , and indicative of a more “closed” cronobacter genome.

the core genome size is considerably higher than that reported by kucerova et al.
 <cit> ,  <dig>  genes, which incorporated four of the six strains used in this study. this discrepancy is best explained by the divergent evolution of the genus to form two distinct clades . this divergent evolution would undoubtedly have a significant impact on the efficiency of hybridization of probes designed from the sequence of csak baa- <dig> to dna from strains of cdub and cmuy, resulting in the smaller reported core genome size
 <cit> . with regard to the genomic regions revealed by the comparative genomic hybridization analysis of csak baa- <dig>  reported by kucerova et al.
 <cit> , we classified  <dig> of the  <dig> reported genomic regions as part of the cronobacter mobilome. they included t6ss clusters, gr <dig>   <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> ; putative prophages, gr <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  12; transposons, gr <dig>  14; and o-antigen gene clusters, gr <dig> .

the comparably large core genome size and overall high sequence identity within the genus support the hypothesis that these two clades have evolved as a result of sympatric speciation; however, the divergence of the two clades indicates that they are under different evolutionary pressures, to some degree. in addition to the divergent evolution of shared genome content, several non-core genomic regions were found to be either present  in one of the two species-complex clades. for example, the cdub-cmuy clade has acquired  <dig> genomic regions that are not present in the csak-cmal-cuni-ctur clade .

an examination of the dispensable gene content of each species provides clues as to differences in environmental niches and pathogenicity, such as virulence potential. among putative virulence-related properties, the presence and diversity of appendages within the cronobacter genus is intriguing. many causative agents of meningitis, such as neisseria meningitidis, haemophilus influenzae, and pseudomonas aeruginosa encode for type iv pili , necessary to colonize in the face of shear forces of blood flow, associated with the capillary beds of the blood–brain barrier. the cronobacter core genome also contains the genes that encode a tfp. bioinformatically, the presence of a tfp, as opposed to a t2ss, was hypothesized due to the presence of the tfp-unique gene, pilt, and the genetic organization of the pilq loci, similar to the tfp of p. aeruginosa. several chaperone-usher fimbriae were also present in the core genome. additionally, seven other chaperone-usher fimbriae were differentially distributed among the eight genomes analyzed in this study , including a p pilus homologue , which is a prominent virulence factor of uropathogenic e. coli, also a causative agent of neonatal meningitis. csak baa- <dig> and cmal lmg 23826t harbor a unique type i fimbriae , which is absent in the other genomes, and csak baa- <dig> also harbors a β class cu fimbriae , shared with cdublac lmg 23825t, and a second, unique type i fimbriae . of interest is the finding that cmuy atcc 51329t possesses only one additional fimbriae operon, in addition to those encoded in the genus core genome. some genomes also harbored curli biosynthesis genes, homologous to curli of e. coli and tafi fimbriae of salmonella. although implicated directly in cell-cell contact and biofilm formation, these organelles likely contribute to the colonization of cronobacter, after initial cell attachment has taken place. we hypothesize that this operon was a component of the ancestral core, and has been lost in all strains of c. sakazakii and c. muytjensii .

in addition to appendages potentially involved in adhesion, several type v, or autotransporter, secretion loci are present in the genomes of the cronobacter analyzed in this study, which are annotated as hemolysin, adhesin, outer membrane autotransporter barrel, filamentous hemagglutinin, large exoproteins, etc. they are found as accessory genomic regions , and present as single genes or pairs of genes in the core genome . of particular interest is gr <dig>  found exclusively in csak baa- <dig>  and gr <dig>  found in the three routinely isolated pathogenic species, ctur, cmal, and csak. gr <dig> contains two putative invasins and an eae homologue and may constitute a pathogenicity island. this region was found to be present in the genomes of three neonatal intensive care unit  outbreak strains  and absent in the c. sakazakii type strain, atcc  <dig>  which was isolated from a child’s throat .

also interesting is the presence of two genomic regions  involved in the utilization of sialic acid in the genome of csak baa- <dig>  sialic acid is a generic term for a family of derivatives of the nine carbon sugar acid, neuraminic acid, which are found at surface-exposed end positions of eukaryotic, primarily animal, tissues. many pathogens have evolved to either coat their surfaces with sialic acid derivatives, in order to evade the innate immune response, or to use this biopolymer as a nutrient source
 <cit> . in addition to csak baa- <dig>  we found that  <dig> out of  <dig> strains of c. sakazakii are able to utilize n-acetyl-neuraminic acid, a derivative of sialic acid . conversely, no other cronobacter strains were able to utilize this substrate, except four of six c. turicensis strains .

it has been hypothesized that the environmental niche of cronobacter is as a plant commensal
 <cit> . accordingly, we found several genomic features, both in the cronobacter core- and pan-genome, which would be beneficial for an organism to possess in this habitat. for example, the cronobacter core genome contains the maltose transporter operon, malgfe- malklambmalm, repressor, malt, and α-glucosidases that can hydrolzye maltose to two glucose molecules. maltose is primarily restricted to plants, particularly seed tissues. an operon for the transport and hydrolysis of isomaltulose is also present in the core genome of cronobacter, in agreement with the taxonomic description of iversen et al.
 <cit> , and previously reported by lehner et al.
 <cit> . isomaltulose , also used in the original cronobacter biotyping scheme, is a disaccharide of glucose and fructose and a component of honey and sugar cane. additionally, we found the following characteristics in the core cronobacter core genome: utilization of arabinogalactan, a major component of plant gums; transport and utilization of xylose, a precursor to hemicellulose; galacturonate, the principal component of pectin; albicidin, a phytotoxin of xanthomonas spp., resistance; β-carotene pigmentation, and several α and β glucosidases.

it is of interest to find that an albicidin resistance protein coding gene was found as a core genome component. albicidin is a bacteriocin-like molecule that degrades dna gyrase, both of bacterial and chloroplast origins
 <cit> . speculatively, cronobacter possessing a gene promoting resistance to the action of albicidin adds further evidence for a plant-associated evolutionary history, as well as, the impartation of a competitive edge to cronobacter survival in a mixed organism environment where competition is controlled through the action of bacteriocin expression. in addition to these conserved features, several other genomic regions and operons were found that have putative functions for plant association, or homologies to proteins from plant commensals. these include gr95/ <dig> of cmuy atcc  <dig> and cuni nctc 9529; gr <dig>  metabolism of pyroxidine/pyroxidal , of which green plants and grains and nuts contain high amounts; gr <dig>  maltose derivative metabolism; gr <dig>  galactose  homologue permease ; gr <dig>  mannanase; gr <dig>  l-rhamnose abc transporter; and gr <dig> of ctur z <dig> 

several inherent properties of cronobacter have been proposed as mechanisms that aid the bacteria in survival and persistence in dried foods, such as pif, food powders, and spices. chief among these have been enhanced heat resistance, as compared to other enterics and contaminating microorganisms. however, most studies have reported variable results in terms of heat resistance at the strain level, and cross-tolerance to other environmental stressors, such as ph and water activity. one consistent finding is an unusually high resistance to dry stress
 <cit> . accordingly, we found several genomic determinants, which would be beneficial in a dry or low water activity environment, including cellulose biosynthesis  operons, colanic acid eps, capsular biosynthesis operon , an environmental persistence capsule , and curli . recently, it has been reported that the synergistic expression of the yih operon encoded capsule, cellulose and curli or tafi provides resistance to desiccation stress in salmonella <cit> . we hypothesize that the same genetic determinants, combined with other capsular and eps operons, likely play a similar role in the environmental persistence and desiccation resistance in cronobacter. although not all cronobacter produce curli, those species possess several other fimbriae which could substitute in this adhesin and/or scaffolding role. in addition to this extracellular matrix, we also found two operons, present in all cronobacter genomes, that encode transporters involved in osmoprotection, yeh and bet operons, with homology to plant commensals and pathogens, such as burkholderia and erwinia species.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we found a large core genome among representative type species strains of the genus cronobacter, which encodes factors for enhanced environmental persistence and plant commensalism, as well as numerous appendages that may aid in attachment and colonization, advantageous both in the environment and in the host. conversely, we found that the genus has diverged in a bidirectional manner. the cdub-cmuy clade has evolved to be more adapted for primarily an environmental and plant association niche, while the other clade, particularly csak and cmal, has evolved and acquired accessory genes that have enhanced its virulence capacity, and host species adaption, and promoted pathogenicity. clearly, in silico analysis of strain level differences, coupled with experimental studies, will reveal which of these factors are most important for environmental, plant, and human pathogenic lifestyles of this group of organisms. this study establishes a powerful platform for further functional genomics research of this diverse group; an important prerequisite towards future development of countermeasures against this foodborne pathogen.

