BACKGROUND
neurons of the mammalian central nervous system have a very restricted regenerative capacity in response to damage  <cit> . the potential of creating a favorable cellular environment for improving neurological recovery from traumatic spinal cord injury is currently a topic of intense basic and clinical research  <cit> . transplantation of schwann cells  and olfactory ensheathing cells  appears to be a promising therapeutic strategy to facilitate axon regeneration and remyelination after spinal cord injury. during lifelong sensory neuron turnover, oecs continuously support axonal outgrowth from the periphery into the olfactory bulb of the cns. due to their potential to create a permissive environment for axon growth and accessibility by nasal biopsy, oecs derived from olfactory mucosa are considered to be compelling candidates for autologous cell grafts  <cit> . indeed, in a recent study of granger et al. on pet dogs with severe chronic spinal cord injury, intraspinal transplantations of oecs derived from the olfactory mucosal cultures caused an improvement in fore limb-hind limb coordination  <cit> . several other transplantation studies have used oecs or schwann cells in models of spinal cord injuries to restore myelination and promote axonal regeneration  <cit> . grafting of cultured olfactory ensheathing cells from the olfactory bulb into the spinal cord promoted regrowth of lesioned long spinal axons  <cit> .

migration into and beyond the site of lesion is a critical point to bridge the glial scar for creation of a permissive environment over the whole lesion site. early studies using schwann cells from rat and mouse reported extensive migration of transplanted cells into the demyelinated regions of the lesion in the spinal cord  <cit> . since the migratory properties of glial cell transplants contribute to the restoration of neuronal function in the injured cns, we investigated the cellular motility of three purified glial types and evaluated whether motility could be up-regulated by application of cyclic nucleotide signaling molecules  <cit>  and a phorbol ester.

to promote axonal regeneration transplanted cells can remove cellular debris of necrotic neurons and glia. especially remaining myelin is a key factor of blocking axonal regeneration  <cit> . both, oecs and schwann cells are known to phagocytize bacteria as well as fragments of degraded neurons, however reports of phagocytosis of cellular debris after transplantation are still lacking  <cit> . thus we studied whether oecs and schwann cells can phagocytize microspheres in an in vitro co-culture system.

another important feature of this study is the establishment of a schwann cell-free preparation as reported  <cit> . the olfactory mucosa contains oecs and myelinating schwann cells from trigeminal afferents and other non-myelinating cells. moreover, the close phenotypic resemblance of oecs and schwann cells and the expression of marker molecules such as the neurotrophin receptor p <dig>  and glial protein s <dig> represent obstacles for the selective identification and purification of pure oec preparations that are free of schwann cells. using magnetic activated cell sorting, it has recently been shown that contaminating schwann cells can be depleted from canine oec preparations allowing further in vitro characterization of purified oecs from olfactory bulb , olfactory mucosa , and schwann cells from fibular nerve  <cit> .

to advance our understanding how these various groups of glial cells may facilitate axonal regeneration in the damaged cns various in vitro assays were performed. since a permissive environment created by transplants of migratory glial cells contributes to axonal outgrowth in the injured cns, initially we investigated the cellular motility of the purified three glial types. to compare cell motility, a scratch migration assay which measures cell migration during the closure of a “wound” that is scratched into a confluent cell monolayer was used. in addition, it was investigated whether motility could be up-regulated by chemical manipulation of intracellular signaling cascades. so far, we found no evidence that glial migration is influenced by application of cgmp or camp signaling molecules  <cit> , but activating pkc enhances motility. glial cells may aid repair processes in the cns by clearing cellular debris via phagocytosis. using a phagocytosis assay, we demonstrated internalization of fluorescent microspheres into all three glial cell types.

finally, glial cells were analyzed for their potential to improve neurite outgrowth in a co-culture system with human nt <dig> model neurons. these neurons were derived from the ntera2/d <dig> clone of a well characterized teratocarcinoma cell line, which can be induced to differentiate into fully functional post mitotic neurons by retinoic acid treatment. nt <dig> cells resemble human embryonic stem cells  <cit>  and the differentiation of nt <dig> cells into neurons has been suggested to mimic aspects of vertebrate neurogenesis  <cit> . the co-culture assays using oecs and scs represent a needed prerequisite to evaluate the potential therapeutic impact of the three glial cell types for repair of spinal cord injuries in a large animal translational model and their future clinical application.

RESULTS
scratch migration assay
one therapeutic aspect of oec cell transplantation for treatment of sci is related to the glial ability to migrate within the injury site and to accompany regenerating neurites. to compare the motility of the purified canine glial cells, we used a scratch migration assay which tracks cell migration during the closure of a “wound” that is scratched into a confluent cell monolayer   <cit> . immunocytochemical staining of purified cultures confirmed p <dig> neurotrophin receptor  expression in all types of glial cells . high magnification images depicted a patchy appearance of immunoreactivity on the glial cell surface, indicative of selective membrane incorporation under cell culture conditions. we seeded the cells into 24-well-plates and performed a scratch wound to the confluent cell monolayer using a pipette tip . figures 1e and f show how a scratch wound in a confluent layer of purified oecs from the olfactory bulb induces glial migratory behaviour. the closure of the gap was monitored by following the advancement of the cell front over 8 h. because this time interval is too short for significant cell proliferation, presence of cells in the gap largely reflects migration . to estimate cell proliferation in the scratch wound, we performed a brdu assay  <cit>  and found less than 20% brdu-positive cells at 8 h of incubation.

all three glial cell types displayed migratory capability and initiated wound closure. in the scratch assay, ob-oecs  migrate considerably faster than om-oecs  and schwann cells .

chemical manipulation of ensheathing cell migration
protein kinases c have been identified as essential regulators of migration in several cancer and epithelial cell types as well as for human neural progenitors  <cit> . in our motility assay, application of  <dig> nm of the protein kinase c activator tpa  resulted in a significant increase of cell migration for ensheathing cells from the olfactory bulb  and the olfactory mucosa . raising the concentration to <dig> nm and  <dig> nm resulted in a still significant increased migration to 130% and 135% of control, respectively . however, migration rates of om-oecs fall back to control level at concentrations above  <dig> nm tpa. schwann cells were less responsive to the pkc activator, showing no significant increase in cell migration . as additional migratory cell type we used human nt <dig> precursor cells as positive control, representing an internal laboratory standard with known reactions to application of cyclic nucleotides and activation of the pkc pathway  <cit> . at concentrations of  <dig> to  <dig> nm of tpa , these cells showed a two fold increase of their cell migration velocity.

dynamic regulation of intracellular cyclic nucleotide levels plays a key role in modulating cellular motility and regeneration in the nervous system  <cit> . additionally windus et al. reported that oec motility regulates activity of pioneer growth cones and therefore neurite elongation in a positive manner  <cit> . to explore a potential involvement of camp and cgmp signal transduction in glial motility, we tested whether membrane permeable nucleotide analogues might facilitate the closure of the gap. for this purpose we seeded the cells into 24-well-plates and performed a scratch wound to the confluent cell monolayer using a pipette tip . both pharmacological agents were applied to the scratch wound assay using concentrations of up to 500 μm of the membrane permeable camp analogue 8-br-camp . migration rates of ob-oecs increased slightly to 122% and 127% of control at 10 μm and 100 μm, respectively . however, this increase was not statistically significant. for schwann cells and om-oecs no increase of migration rates could be observed . even the highest concentration of 500 μm 8-br-camp had no stimulatory effect on cell migration. next we tested the cgmp/pkg pathway which has been shown to stimulate nt <dig> cell migration  <cit>  . application of the cgmp analogue 8-br-cgmp had no significant effects on cell migration in all three glial cultures at concentrations from  <dig> to 500 μm.

treatment of glial cell cultures with all chemical agents including the cell permeable nucleotide analogues 8-br-cgmp and 8-br-camp or the pkc activator tpa, did not affect cell viability, even at the highest applied concentration .

phagocytic activity of oecs
recent studies suggested that olfactory ensheathing cells may be the primary innate immunocytes in the olfactory pathway  <cit> . to obtain evidence for phagocytic activity of the canine glial cells, we examined whether they could internalize yg fluorescent microspheres of 1 μm diameter. after addition of microspheres to glial cells seeded on poly-l-lysine coated chamber slides, phagocytosis could be observed for ob-oecs , om-oecs  and schwann cells within two hours of cell culture . all cells showed at least six microspheres located in the cytoplasm of the cells, confirmed by confocal z-stacks. glial cells incubated in 4°c cold culture medium showed changes in their morphological appearance and did not internalize the microspheres. cells cultured at 4°c failed to engulf microspheres . to investigate how the distinct glial cell types would affect healthy neurons, we prepared co-cultures with cell tracker green cmfda labeled human nt <dig> neurons . under normal cell culture conditions, all of the different canine glial cells showed no evidence for phagocytosis and engulfment of neurons .

canine ensheathing cells of the bulb modulate neurite outgrowth of developing human neurons
to analyze potential interactions between the isolated olfactory ensheathing and schwann cells with neurons, we measured how canine glial cells influence parameters of neurite outgrowth. we co-cultured developing human nt- <dig> neurons after two weeks of retinoic acid treatment   <cit>  together with ensheathing cells from the olfactory bulb , the olfactory mucosa  and schwann cells from the fibular nerve. outgrowing neurites of the developing neurons were visualized by immunofluorescence, using an antibody against the neuronal cytoskeletal marker β-iii-tubulin.

seeding of 2wk ra neurons to laminin, pdl coated culture wells, and a confluent layer of canine glia resulted in the growth of long processes. these extending neurites stained for β-iii-tubulin, while olfactory ensheathing  and schwann cells did not express immunoreactivity . after 24 h outgrowth most of the neurons showed one long major neurite and up to five shorter processes emanating from the cell body. neurons on pdl extended a shorter major neurite compared to neurons plated on laminin. outgrowth on schwann cells resulted in similar major neurite lengths as for neurons on a pdl coating which was, however, significantly shorter than for neurons on laminin only . the longest major neurite could be observed for neurons cultured on ob-oecs. however, the neurite extension was not significantly larger than on the laminin coating alone .

next we looked at the total length of all neurites per neuron and found a significantly enhanced total length for neurons grown on laminin compared to pdl . developing 2wk ra neurons seeded to schwann cells and om-oecs showed the same total length of neurites compared to neurons grown on laminin. the use of ob-oecs as substrate for neurite outgrowth resulted in the largest effect on total length with an increase of up to 129% compared to laminin-coated control. the overall neurite length was significantly larger than for neurons grown on pdl, laminin, schwann cells or ensheathing cells from the olfactory mucosa . next we focused on the initiation and outgrowth of primary neurites. culturing the 2wk ra neurons on canine glia resulted in an increase in neurite number for schwann cells , om-oecs and ob-oecs  compared to controls on laminin or pdl .

to reveal age-dependent neuron intrinsic mechanisms that might affect neurite formation, we repeated the same experiments with mature human neurons . there was indeed a remarkable difference compared to the results of the developing 2wk ra neurons. evaluating the longest neurite per neuron, we could only detect a significant effect between outgrowth on pdl  and outgrowth on ob-oecs with 105% of control . neither outgrowth on schwann cells  nor on om-oecs  resulted in an elongated major neurite compared with outgrowth on a laminin coating only . next we analyzed the total neurite length of all neurites per neuron for all five outgrowth substrates. outgrowth on pdl , scs  and om-oecs  resulted in a not significant reduction of neurite lengths . neurons grown on ob-oecs formed significant longer neurites compared with pdl, but not with the laminin coating . to check whether this elongated neurite length is due to the increase in the number of processes, we counted for each substrate the number of neurites per neuron. nt <dig> neurons grown on laminin formed on an average  <dig>  neurites per neuron whereas pdl coating resulted in  <dig>  neurites . overall, there was no significant difference in neurite formation between neurons grown on laminin or pdl compared to co-culture with schwann cells , om-oecs  and ob-oecs .

discussion
assays for cellular functions of purified canine oecs
olfactory ensheathing cells have claimed to be a unique cell type according to their special localization in the pns and cns as well as their special morphology known for their ability to bridge the gap between the central nervous  and the peripheral nervous system  in the mammalian olfactory neuraxis  <cit> . several studies have reported beneficial effects on neuronal regeneration after oec transplantation into animals with different lesion paradigms in the pns  <cit>  and cns  <cit> . except for a few studies, the majority of investigations concerning the regenerative potential of ensheathing glia have been performed in rodent models  <cit> . only a few studies used canine or porcine ensheathing cells as translational model or even human ensheathing cells to show differences to rodents  <cit> .the present study is one of the first to utilize a comparative approach for analysis of the migratory, phagocytic and neurite growth-promoting properties of purified schwann cell-free preparations of oecs and schwann obtained from a large animal model  <cit> .

olfactory ensheathing cell and schwann cell migration
to test for differences in migratory capabilities, we performed a scratch wound assay over the rather short time interval of 8 hours. therapeutic treatment of sci clearly would require longer migration times in the range of weeks. however, the rather short migration time of 8 h is a concession to the simplicity of the in vitro test system. we have performed a cell proliferation assay and found less than 20% brdu-positive cells at 8 h of incubation. a significant effect of proliferation on the motility component of the scratch wound assay could therefore be excluded. comparative analysis revealed a striking difference in migratory capacities of ob-oecs, om-oecs and scs. former studies have reported either a difference in migration rates between oecs and schwann cells in the x-radiated spinal cord  <cit>  or no difference between these cells after transplantation in a spinal cord injury model  <cit> . the occurrence of lamellipodial waves and the density of cells are reported to influence the rate of in vitro migration  <cit> . however, most of the studies agree that migration within the injured spinal cord is essential to establish a permissive environment to promote sprouting and inhibit scar formation  <cit> . so far, in vitro migration rates of sc-free cultures of oecs obtained from the olfactory bulb and mucosa have not been compared to schwann cells in a scratch wound assay. this study shows that sc-free cultures of canine oecs from the olfactory bulb migrate faster than oecs from the mucosa or schwann cells from the tibial nerve . moreover, activation of the protein kinase c by phorbol ester treatment significantly promoted migration of canine oecs. this was also found for the human nt <dig> cell line. the absence of a response to phorbol ester treatment in canine schwann cells indicated a differential expression of signal transduction pathways regulating migratory behavior in ensheathing compared to peripheral glial cells. a former study of simón et al. reported that inhibiting pkc resulted in a decreased expression of pai- <dig> in human oecs associated with a reduced oec-dependent regeneration of axons of adult retinal ganglion cells  <cit> .

rodent oecs showed an increase in proliferation, expression of gfap and a morphology change of oecs upon the camp-elevating agent forskolin, whereas primate oecs lacked such a response  <cit> .

activation of the camp/pka pathway overcomes the regeneration inhibitory effects of myelin in vitro and neuritogenesis of human nt <dig> neurons is elevated after treatment with camp  <cit> . therefore, to improve ensheathing glia migration we applied 8-br-camp  <cit> . though wang and huang and vincent et al. showed a change of the glia morphology from an astrocyte-like to a schwann cell-like cell type under elevated levels of camp, we could not observe any morphological difference to cells cultured under control conditions  <cit> . in line with this observation, culturing canine glia with 8-br-camp did not change the glial cell migration rate . culturing oecs in the presence of low concentrations or the absence of serum resulted in a shift from a flattened to a more spindle-shaped cell morphology  <cit> . the absence of camp-mediated effects for canine oecs was already shown by techangamsuwan et al. and supports observed differences in migratory properties of human and canine oecs compared to rodent oecs  <cit> .

similarly, the nucleotide cgmp, known to facilitate migration of human nt <dig> neurons, fetal human neural progenitor cells and human bronchial epithelial cells  <cit>  did not enhance canine glia migration .

phagocytic activity of ensheathing glia
during normal olfactory neuron turnover, oecs remove debris of dead receptor cells by phagocytosis  <cit> . moreover, recent studies showed, that oecs and schwann cells represent the first defence mechanism of the nasal cavity and they react upon contact to bacteria  <cit> . along with this function, activation of oecs with lipopolysaccharides  resulted in a strongly increased phagocytic activity consisting of ingestion of apoptotic cell fragments in vitro and in vivo. the remains of degraded olfactory receptor neurons  are known to block axonal regeneration and outgrowth of new orns in general  <cit> . in the nasal mucosa, apoptotic orns and cell debris like o4+ fragments are engulfed by oecs and removed from the olfactory pathway  <cit> . oecs injected into the subretinal space in a retinitis pigmentosa model  <cit>  or a demyelinating spinal cord model of rats, cleaned the subretinal space from accumulated debris or phagocytized degenerated host tissue. this has also been found in intracranial sections of rat olfactory bulbs  <cit> .

culturing both canine oecs and schwann cells with 1 μm microspheres resulted in engulfment and their localization into the cell within two hours . this could be prevented by slowing down the cell metabolism at 4°c. the phagocytosis of the microspheres by cultured canine glia resembles the removal of small cellular debris. in contrast, co-culturing of intact human nt <dig> neurons without any indications of apoptosis together with canine ensheathing glia for 24 hours provided no evidence for a phagocytic uptake of fluorescent neuronal material.

neuritogenesis of human model neurons in co-cultures
in the present study, we show for the first time, that canine ensheathing glia promote neurite outgrowth of developing human model neurons . culturing developing nt <dig> neurons on a substrate of canine ensheathing glia from the pns and cns resulted in an increased sprouting and elongation of neurites. the positive interaction between canine cells and human model neurons is also in support of a concept using dogs as a translational model for the development of neural repair strategies in human patients  <cit> .

previously, we showed a preferential growth of dorsal root ganglion  neurons on canine om-oec, ob-oecs and schwann cells  <cit> . comparative analysis revealed that neurite length of drg neurons and numbers of branching points were significantly increased when co-cultured with om-oecs instead of ob-oecs and schwann cells, respectively. nevertheless, drg neurons growth on ob-oecs and schwann cells was improved compared to om-oecs. drg neurons cultured together with om-oecs tended to stick to the poly-l-lysine substrate more firmly than to the cell surface of the glial cells. using differentiating nt <dig> neurons we obtained an overall beneficial effect of canine ob-oecs, om-oecs and scs compared to a poly-d-lysine or the permissive laminin control. the number of neurites was higher in co-cultures of canine glia compared to both poly-d-lysin and laminin controls. these findings indicate that canine glia support the initiation of primary neurites and the elongation of these neurites. due to the rather confluent glia cell layer, we could not directly evaluate whether co-cultured human nt <dig> neurons were directly associated to canine glia or the underlying substrate. thus we cannot distinguish whether the growth promoting effects are due to soluble factors or direct contact to the glial cell surface.

the results obtained from nt <dig> neurons differ from results obtained after co-culturing rat drg neurons with the same canine glial cells in a previous study  <cit> . drg neurons are a unique type of neurons projecting two axonal branches; therefore reported differences could be neuron specific. dorsal root ganglion neurons exhibit a centrally projecting branch extending into the spinal cord and the peripheral branch projecting through a peripheral nerve  <cit> . drg neurons showed regeneration when the peripheral branch was lesioned first, but failed to regenerate when the central branch was lesioned  <cit> . fudge and mearow reported that a dissociated drg culture is a heterogeneous mixture of different neuron phenotypes showing various responses to a permissive environment  <cit> . the close resemblance of the drg entry zone and the olfactory bulb, both displaying a bridge between pns and cns, encouraged ramón-cueto and nieto-sampedro to use drg neurons as a “proof of principle” for the regeneration facilitating effects of oecs  <cit> . in contrast to drg neurons, human model neurons of the present study resembled more closely the cns phenotype  <cit>  which might account for the neuron specific differences between this and our former study  <cit> .

the regenerative capacity of neurons is strongly reduced with age  <cit> . to account for this neuron-intrinsic limitation of neurite regeneration, we performed the co-culture experiments with nt <dig> neurons of mature developmental stage  <cit> . there was indeed a remarkable difference to the results of the developing 2wk ra neurons . using mature neurons, there was only a weak increase between outgrowth on ob-oecs and outgrowth on pdl control and no positive effect on neurite formation for the other glial co-culture conditions. the reduction in regeneration between the 2wk ra and the mature neurons on glial co-cultures suggested that nt <dig> model neurons can mimic the loss in regenerative capacity that is generally observed in experimental animal models  <cit> . this does not necessarily imply that glial transplantations into mature neural tissue are ineffective to treat spinal injury. the reported beneficial effects of oec transplantations into the injured spinal cord might result from clearance of cellular debris, axon guidance by migrating oecs, and the formation of tunnel-shaped pathways for regenerating axons  <cit> . in summary, co-cultures of canine glia and nt <dig> neurons appear to mimic cellular mechanisms of neural regeneration in damaged nerve tissue, comprising a useful platform for screening novel neuroprotective agents.

CONCLUSIONS
this in vitro study supports the therapeutic approach that oec and schwann cell transplantation into the spinal cord generates a permissive environment for regeneration in the central nervous system. we demonstrate differences of ensheathing glial cell types with respect to migration and neurite outgrowth from neurons. oecs from the olfactory bulb migrate faster and enhance neurite growth of human model neurons better than oecs from the mucosa and schwann cells. we challenged various signal transduction pathways with enzyme activators and show that stimulation of the protein kinase c pathway enhances migration of oecs from the olfactory bulb. moreover, we demonstrate for the first time, that canine ensheathing glia promote neurite outgrowth of developing human model neurons.

