BACKGROUND
understanding the evolution of cooperative behaviour remains one of the most exciting and fundamental challenges to date  <cit> . in the framework of evolutionary game theory  <cit> , this problem is often analyzed using the prisoner's dilemma  game  <cit> . in its popular version a cooperator is modelled as an individual that is ready to pay a cost  in order that another individual receives a benefit . a defector, on the other hand, is one who refuses to offer such help but gladly accepts b when a cooperator offers it. the accumulation of the received benefits and expended costs by all individuals, playing simultaneously as donor and receptor, is associated with the individuals' fitness and this with the individuals' social or reproductive success. different mechanisms to promote cooperative actions in this scenario have been proposed over the years  <cit> . it has for instance been recognized that the population structure  plays a decisive role  <cit>  . in particular, it has been shown that introducing a heterogeneous network of contacts between individuals results in an overall increase of cooperative behaviour in the most popular social dilemmas of cooperation  <cit> . compared to the levels of cooperation traditionally observed in well-mixed populations  <cit> , the role of heterogeneous population structures in which some individuals interact more and more often than others is impressive.

furthermore, real life social networks share another feature that turns out to tremendously affect the viability of cooperative acts: they are examples of adaptive networks  <cit> . our network of contacts does not remain unchanged at all times. instead, we continuously engage in new interactions while abandoning old ones, depending on their kind. as such, individuals should not only be able to alter their behaviour, but also their social ties. the influence of this specific aspect of social networks on the evolution of cooperation has been studied by several authors  <cit> .

in a minimal setting  <cit> , individuals located at the vertices of a graph selfishly decide which social ties they want to maintain. if the individual is dissatisfied with the interaction, then she competes with her partner to rewire the link. this rewiring is done to a random neighbour of the previous partner, adding realistic spatial, social and cognitive restraints  <cit> . it was shown that cooperation blooms  even when, on average, each individual has many social interactions, provided individuals react swiftly to adverse ties  <cit> . in other words, the result depends on how fast the topology is allowed to evolve. having two processes evolving simultaneously , one parameter emerges as determinant in assessing the viability of cooperation: the ratio w = τe/τa of two time scales, the first associated with strategy evolution  and the second associated with evolution of population structure . high values of w reflect populations in which all their members are more apt to adapt their ties. as such, network heterogeneity and social plasticity provide a coupled mechanism that leads to both the survival of cooperation in social systems and evolved network structures that agree qualitatively with empirical analysis of real networks  <cit> .

it is commonly observed, however, that different individuals react differently to the same situation  <cit>  – some individuals have the propensity to swiftly change partner, whereas others remain connected even though they are dissatisfied with the behaviour of their partners. as such, each individual has its own innate behaviour for dealing with adverse ties and generally this innate behaviour resists change, as change brings along uncertainties. furthermore, social networks form and evolve through individuals' decisions based on the social context wherein they find themselves: individuals, for instance, may be socially constrained not to change even when they want to. consequently, one expects w to be an individual's characteristic and not a population attribute. as such, this strategic rewiring behaviour must co-evolve with the other features inherent to the entangled pd game. making the propensity to change partners an evolutionary trait allows one to investigate how individuals should respond to adverse ties given certain social conditions defined by the underlying game. this approach opens the possibility of diversity in individual behaviours, which is ubiquitous in nature. despite its omnipresence, it has not received much attention yet in relation to the evolution of cooperation. only recently its role has been investigated, either as diversity in the role and position of individuals in their social network  <cit> , diversity in individuals' game strategy  <cit>  or in the way in which individuals change their strategy  <cit> . in the following, we combine diversity of individual context in the social network with diversity in the way individuals react to adverse social ties.

a minimal model
using the minimal model defined in fig.  <dig>  we analyze here the effect of the individual willingness to change on the evolution of cooperation in the pd game . individuals have information on their direct partners only and, using this information, they may decide to alter a link or not, based purely on their self-interest. let us consider a link connecting individuals a and b. two scenarios are possible: a is satisfied with the link if b is a cooperator, and dissatisfied if b is a defector. if satisfied, a will try to maintain the link. if dissatisfied, a will try to change partner . decision on whether or not to rewire is contingent on both individuals' payoffs, and here determined by the fermi function  associated with the so-called pairwise comparison rule. in this way the model entangles the evolution of individual's strategy and social structure.

the individual rewiring rate is defined over an interval , where w reflects the common  rate of topological change that each individual can reach. taking a particular w as a limit ensures that we know a priori the outcome of evolution  <cit> . given this context, we introduce an individual characteristic η∈ <cit> , which provides a measure of how eager each individual is to change partners, making ηw the individuals' willingness to rewire unwanted social interactions. thus, on the one hand, when all individuals have η =  <dig> no links are rewired, reducing the model to a static society. on the other hand, when the rate is maximal for all individuals  the limits investigated in  <cit>  are recovered. when different individuals have different values of η, those with lower η <  <dig> will be more resilient to change, and hence can also be viewed as more loyal towards their interacting partners. given this particular definition of how each individual decides upon adverse ties, we can now define each individual type uniquely by two parameters: her game strategy  and her "topological" strategy . note that both behavioural strategy s as well as the topological strategy η are transferred during a strategy update.

in this minimal model, the individual willingness ηa and ηb of two interacting individuals a and b, define three possible outcomes for the rewiring competition as a result of mutual dissatisfaction, as shown in fig.  <dig> – bottom panel. given each individual's willingness parameter η, a and b compete to rewire the link with probability ηaηb. individual fitness ultimately dictates the winner of this conflict, associated with the probability pb  that b  replaces a , where the probabilities are defined by the payoff-dependent fermi function   <cit> . when only a is dissatisfied, a and b compete with probability ηaηb and with probability pa the a individual can change partner. yet, with probability 1-pa  a and b remain connected since b is satisfied. second, individual a  decides unilaterally to change partner with probability ηa  . hence, both a and b have the opportunity to unilaterally change partner. taken together, a changes with probability qa = ηaηbpa + ηa and b changes with probability qb = ηaηbpb + ηb . finally, nothing happens to the link with probability . this last possibility encompasses the situation in which the social tie is maintained despite, e.g., mutual dissatisfaction. overall, η introduces a simple means to study the evolution of each individual's willingness to react to adverse ties.

RESULTS
as a first step to investigate the effect of differences in eagerness to change on the evolution of cooperation , we assume that either cooperators or defectors have a fixed and pre-defined η . the chances of cooperators are measured by calculating the fraction of runs in which the population ends in full cooperation. note that the adopted strategy update rule ensures that full cooperation and full defection are the only two absorbing states of the strategy evolutionary dynamics . fig.  <dig> shows that when defectors are less eager to change partners  relative to cooperators , cooperators ensure the stability of favourable interactions while avoiding adverse ones more swiftly; hence, assortment of cooperators becomes more effective, enhancing the feasibility of cooperation  <cit> . when cooperators' willingness to change is low  or absent  compared to defectors , the level of cooperation decreases with respect to the situation where cooperators and defectors react equally swift to adverse ties . decreasing the level of adaptability of cooperators leads to their own demise. on the other hand, if we compare these results with those in which all social ties remain immutable , the feasibility of cooperation actually increases. why does rewiring of defector-links already improve the survival of cooperators? this latter result is a consequence of heterogeneity created by rewiring defectors. as we start from well-mixed communities of limited connectivity , rewiring of links creates a heterogeneous environment, which always favours cooperators. thus even when cooperators are slow adapters, they prosper at the expense of the defectors greed. overall, our results clearly show that swift decisions concerning partner choice provide a proactive force toward the evolution of cooperation, independent of the strategy.

given this effect of topological strategy on the outcome of the pd game, we analyze the effects of evolving this feature as well. to this end, every time an individual changes her strategy by adopting that of a neighbour, she also changes her topological strategy to that of her neighbour. in fig.  <dig>  we show the evolution of the willingness to change ties of both cooperators and defectors. in both scenarios all values of η are selected from a uniform distribution and assigned to individuals in the population.

we analyze the distribution of η at the end of the evolutionary process when the population reaches fixation . from the results discussed previously one might expect that swift action is always preferred to stubbornness. the lines in fig.  <dig> correspond to the cumulative rate distribution c  is defined as the fraction of individuals who have η ≥ η0) for both cooperators  and defectors . the initial distributions lead to the black diagonal lines in fig. 3; the final distributions are shown with different colours for different values of the temptation to defect t of the pd game . for low values of t  the distribution of η over all individuals hardly changes. for this range of t  cooperation prevails, and hence individuals rapidly become satisfied with all their links. for higher values  a transition occurs from cooperator dominance to defector dominance . hence competition is fierce, as cooperators need to struggle for survival.

consequently, it pays to respond swiftly to adverse ties and evolution leads to an arms race for swiftness between cooperators and defectors, as evidenced by the increase of c in fig.  <dig>  for even larger values of t  defectors dominate the results and evolutionary competition fades away. as a result, the incentive to increase swiftness reduces, a feature which is indeed reflected in the behaviour of c in fig.  <dig>  once all individuals ultimately become defectors there are no fitness differences and hence no selection pressure to further changes. nonetheless, the fundamental differences between cooperators and defectors still have an impact in the overall evolutionary dynamics. when cooperators dominate, many social ties rely on mutual satisfaction, and hence there is no incentive to change. on the contrary, even when dominant, defectors are never able to find a partner with whom mutual satisfaction occurs, as a defector with local information only will always strive to find a cooperator to exploit, whereas a cooperator will strive to escape exploitation. consequently, under cooperator dominance we reach a stable and slowly changing network of ties. in the opposite limit, a quasi-static network is never reached; instead, a stationary one emerges, exhibiting an intrinsic degree of heterogeneity that decreases with increasing number of defectors  <cit> . besides the results discussed here, other features of the co-evolutionary dynamics are also affected by introducing a co-evolutionary dynamics in which individual swiftness in reacting to adverse ties also evolves. in particular, the characteristic times required to reach a stationary regime associated with either full defection or full cooperation depend on individual behavioural diversity. this, in turn, is intimately related to the topology of the evolving graph, which itself depends sensitively into which stationary state the system evolves. a detailed account of the timing features and how they depend on the amount of diversity as well as on the relative time scales of co-evolution will be published elsewhere.

CONCLUSIONS
our results clearly provide an evolutionary basis for the necessity of individuals to adjust their social ties. the struggle for survival between cooperators and defectors leads to an arms race for swiftness in adjusting the ties, based on a self-regarding judgment. since defectors are never able to establish social ties under mutual agreement, they are overall swifter than cooperators, who tend to evolve stable and long term relations when the risk of exploitation is absent. ironically, defectors' constant search for partners to exploit leads to heterogeneous networks that improve the survivability of cooperators compared to homogeneous populations. at the same time, swifter defectors prevent cooperators from wiping them out.

the existence of stable communities such as families, groups, political parties and other social agglomerates, relies on the persistence of social ties, being usually related to an idea of "loyalty" which is often associated with some form of survival advantage  <cit> . however, in modern networks of exchange and cooperation, where partnership preferences have already surpassed the limitations imposed by kin-like constraints, these social structures are evanescent. populations of self-regarding individuals engage in increasingly diverse, short-lived and geographically uncorrelated social ties. in this context, our results show that "loyalty" or persistent social ties bring along an evolutionary disadvantage, both from an individual and a group perspective. once the individual ability to freely reshape partnerships arose – most probably originating from the human organization into increasingly larger communities  – those individuals that acquired the aptness to respond quickly to unwanted relationships obtained an evolutionary edge over other individuals that remained stuck to the same social ties whatever the cost.

consequently our results may provide some important hints on why "persistence of social ties" plays a smaller role in humanity nowadays, as cooperation based on kinship and geographical proximity becomes replaced by increasingly global and volatile exchanges of social and economical nature. our results suggest that the rapid emergence of online social communities – such as the ones involved in wiki's or open source projects – that are mostly based on cooperative efforts while devoid of norm enforcement mechanisms, may be linked to this change of paradigm, which may ultimately provide the escape hatch from the global challenges of cooperation we also face  <cit> .

