BACKGROUND
the mountain slopes of northern thailand are occupied by a variety of ethnic minorities, often referred to as hill tribes. there, in a radius of less than  <dig> miles from the main city of chiang mai, about  <dig>  peoples live in more than  <dig>  villages located at about  <dig>  –  <dig>  meters of altitude.

this area, and the human groups inhabiting it, are of special interest for a population genetics study for at least three reasons: i) different tribes have different social habits concerning the postmarital residence choice, with different expectations on the ratio between male and female gene flow; ii) extreme cultural differences are observed, which are expected to enhance the genetic structure even at a micro-geographic scale; iii) all these groups have a relatively recent, but controversial and largely unknown, origin from surrounding countries. here we investigate all these aspects using maternally  and paternally  inherited markers.

sex-specific differences in migration rates are expected in matrilocal and patrilocal societies. matrilocality, in fact, implies that women remain in their natal villages after the marriage , whereas the opposite occurs in patrilocal groups. in other words, migration rates are expected to be female-biased or male-biased  in patrilocal and matrilocal populations, respectively. if so, the genetic structure at y-chromosome markers should be generally stronger in our species than the structure observed at mtdna markes, since most human groups are patrilocal. different genetic studies seemed to confirm this expectation  <cit> , even though a recent study  <cit>  suggests that the effect of patrilocality can be identified at local, but not global, geographic scale. human groups in northern thailand represent an ideal model to study this effect at a small geographic scale, since the two different social behaviours, matrilocality and patrilocality, are observed in different hill tribes. previous studies on six tribes showed that mtdna and y-chromosome diversity are correlated with postmarital residence pattern  <cit> , and patrilocal tribes also appeared to regulate immigration more tightly than matrilocal tribes  <cit> . but the possible association with other cultural traits, such as language, was not tested. for example, a patrilocal population may strictly control the male immigration rates from groups speaking different languages or dialects, but be much more permissive with immigrants speaking their language. to our knowledge, only two recent studies investigated the possible interaction between patrilocality/matrilocality social behaviour and other cultural traits, with conflicting results. in indian endogamous castes, kumar et al.  <cit>  do not find a significant evidence for the influence of postmarital residence patterns on genetic variation, suggesting that other factors may play a role. on the other hand, bolnick et al.  <cit>  suggest that the expectation based on classification of populations as patrilocal or matrilocal is robust in native americans, at least with respect to the linguistic differences. it seems therefore that considering different aspects that probably affect the patterns and levels of gene flow may further clarify the impact of patrilocality/matrilocality on genetic variation.

large cultural differences characterize the hill tribes in northern thailand. tribes, but also subgroups within tribes, have their own languages , clothing, ornaments, and religion . the influence of linguistic barriers on genetic structure has been extensively analysed in human groups  <cit> , probably because languages, more than other cultural traits, can be classified in a hierarchical manner. we will therefore consider if and how linguistic affiliation is an additional factor in shaping genetic diversity, within and between tribes, in northern thailand.

finally, we will focus on the genetic origin of the hill tribes. as recently shown in a study on the genetic origin of polynesians  <cit> , the analysis of paternally and maternally inherited markers can be very useful to detect sex-specific contributions during the establishment of a population. historical sources and/or oral traditions suggest that hill tribes populations immigrated in thailand during the last centuries , some from the surrounding countries , and some from more distant regions, such as tibet or southern china. however, this hypothesis is strongly debated, also because in several cases the presumed places of origin are no longer inhabited by such tribes, or their obvious relatives. using a clustering analysis, and two specific databases assembled from several published studies on asian populations , we will analyse the genetic legacy of the hill tribes to better understand their geographic origin.

RESULTS
genetic variation within and between populations
a different genetic signature is expected in markers transmitted exclusively by one of the two sexes, depending on the postmarital residence pattern. in patrilocal societies, where male gene flow should be reduced, low diversity within groups and large differences between groups are expected at y-chromosome markers, with the opposite pattern predicted at mtdna markers. on the other hand, if men move between populations and women tend to stay in their birthplace, as in matrilocal populations, the reverse pattern is expected. here we test these predictions by computing different indices of within and between population diversity, mainly using a dataset obtained merging original and published data on the hill tribes. this larger hill tribes dataset allowed us to analyse a total of  <dig> populations. in fact, a preliminary analysis with all the  <dig> samples available  indicated the absence of genetic differentiation between two white karen and between two lahu populations, which were therefore pooled bringing the total number of populations to  <dig>  here and in the following we will use the term tribe to refer to the  <dig> major ethnic groups  and populations to indicate the  <dig> different samples.

within-population genetic diversity in  <dig> populations 
the analysis of  <dig> bp of the mtdna control region in  <dig> individuals from the  <dig> populations typed in this study  identified  <dig> different haplotypes. only  <dig> haplotypes were shared between two or more populations. within population, diversity values are very high in all tribes, with the exception of the matrilocal white karen tribe . the y-chromosome strs were typed in a subset of  <dig> individuals, obtaining  <dig> different haplotypes. none of the y-chromosome haplotypes was observed in more than one population. comparably smaller values of diversity are observed in two sino-tibetan patrilocal tribes, akha and lisu . raw data are available from the authors on request.

samples description, number of individuals typed for mitochondrial and y-chromosomal dna, and standard indices of within-population genetic diversity. the first half of the table refers to the original data typed in this study. the second half of the table refers to the joint dataset  used in most analyses.

k: number of haplotypes; h: gene or haplotype diversity; π: mean number of pairwise differences ast = sino-tibetan, hm hmong-mien; b data only from oota et al.  <cit> ; c data from oota et al.  <cit>  and present work.

within-population genetic diversity in  <dig> populations 
the results obtained with the larger dataset are now analysed in detail, with patrilocal tribes subdivided by linguistic family . specific patterns are observed at different markers as predicted by the social structure, with an interesting additional feature not observed in earlier studies .

on the average, matrilocal populations are less variable than both sino-tibetan and hmong-mien patrilocal ones at mtdna, regardless of the diversity index we consider. within patrilocal tribes, hmong-mien are very similar, or slightly more variable  than sino-tibetans. when male-transmitted y strs are analysed, a significantly higher genetic variation is observed, as expected, in matrilocal populations within the sino-tibetan family. hmong-mien patrilocal groups, however, show a genetic diversity very similar to the matrilocal samples. in other words, social and linguistic factors seem to interact since low variability at y chromosomes is observed in patrilocal sino-tibetans but not in patrilocal hmong-mien tribes. the pattern of higher variability in the hmong-mien group appears therefore unrelated to the social structure: if patrilocal hmong-mien and matrilocal sino-tibetan populations were compared , the relationship between social structure and genetic variation at different markers would not have emerged. we note that i) similar inferences are supported by the results obtained analysing only our original data, which includes fewer populations but more markers , and ii) either student t or mann-whitney u tests  provide statistical support for most of, but not all, the differences described above; the general trend is however clear, and since very few populations are included in each of the defined category, we expected that the typical statistical significance with p <  <dig>  can not be always reached.

between-population genetic diversity in  <dig> populations 
the results obtained with the amova analyses using different grouping schemes  are reported in table  <dig>  in general, populations are statistically differentiated both at mtdna and y-chromosome markers in all the analyses, whereas differently defined groups of populations are never so. population divergence ranges between 5% and 14% at mtdna sequences, and between 5% and 36% at y- chromosomes strs, thus confirming that the tendency to migrate is higher in women than in men  <cit> . each set of amova analysis is considered in the following.

the results obtained with amova assuming different groups of populations, or different hierarchical levels, are provided as Φst  and Φct  statistics. ***p <  <dig> ; *p <  <dig> .

amova schemes 1–2
mtdna genetic distances among matrilocal tribes are higher than those obtained among patrilocal tribes . the opposite patterns, with even more extreme differences, are found in the analysis of y-chromosomes: patrilocal populations are highly differentiated among them , whereas matrilocal ones are rather homogeneous . again, these figures support the view that postmarital residence habits produce patterns of sex-specific gene flow.

amova schemes 3–4
when the analysis was performed separately for the different linguistic families in the patrilocal tribes , we found, especially at the y-chromosome markers, that sino-tibetan tribes are more differentiated among them than hmong-mien. even if the geographic distance between hmong and iu-mien  is much higher than the average distance between the  <dig> sino-tibetan patrilocal tribes , they clearly appear genetically more homogeneous.

amova schemes 5–6
when the two groups of sino-tibetan and hmong-mien speaking population are compared, either including all or only the patrilocal tribes, the amova index Φct is never significantly different from  <dig>  regardless of the marker considered. in other words, tribes are genetically differentiated  but the average level of divergence is not increased when tribes speaking languages of different families are compared.

amova schemes 7–8
finally, we compared the two groups of populations defined on the basis of their social structure, i.e. matrilocal versus patrilocal tribes. as for the comparison between linguistic groups , the amova results seem to suggest that the level of divergence between tribes is not enhanced by differences in social habits . the average divergence between a patrilocal and a matrilocal tribe is therefore similar to the average divergence between pairs of populations within the two groups, the latter being actually a mean of the very different divergence values observed among patrilocal and matrilocal tribes .

estimates of migration rates
gene flow rates estimated in different comparisons are reported in table  <dig>  although the errors of the likelihood estimates between specific pairs of populations are quite variable, as commonly observed in single locus analyses  <cit> , several trends clearly emerge from our analyses based on averages rates or pooled samples.

estimates of the rate of gene flow  obtained in different population comparisons. comparisons 1– <dig> refer to matrilocal tribes, from the same  or different  ethnic groups. comparisons 3– <dig> refer to patrilocal tribes, from the same  or different  ethnic groups within the sino-tibetan linguistic family, and from different ethic groups within the hmong-mien linguistic family . standard errors based on different runs and different pairwise estimates within the same group of comparisons are reported in parentheses.

i) on the average, about  <dig> men and  <dig> women are exchanged in patrilocal tribes every generation, respectively, and about  <dig> men and  <dig> women do the same in matrilocal tribes every generation. therefore, whereas male and female migration rates appear similar in matrilocal tribes, fewer males, but much more females, immigrate in patrilocal compared to matrilocal tribes.

this result is consistent with our analyses on the genetic variation within populations  and with previous studies based on different methods and partially different data  <cit> : maternal and paternal gene flow rates follow an opposite pattern in patrilocal and matrilocal tribes, and migration control is in tighter in patrilocal than in matrilocal groups. it is reasonable to conclude that restriction to female migration in matrilocal communities results in similar dispersion rates for males and females. conversely, in patrilocal communities the generally lower tendency of males to migrate would be further enhanced by strict social rules. our point estimates suggest higher migration rates for both men and women than previously estimated  <cit> , especially in patrilocal groups . confidence intervals across studies, however, overlap.

ii) a reasonable expectation about gene flow patterns is that different hill tribes  exchange fewer individuals than different populations within a tribe. we observe this reduction only in patrilocal  but not in matrilocal  groups. again, we believe that this result should be interpreted as evidence for the tighter migration control in patrilocal than in matrilocal societies.

iii) when the comparison between different linguistic families is possible, i.e. being equal all the other factors , hmong-mien speaking tribes seem to show a higher tendency to migrate. however, when we consider separately the migration rates between all pairs of patrilocal populations  this conclusion should be re-evaluated. in fact, iu-mien, a hmong-mien tribe, shows high and similar female migration rates both with hmong-mien and with sino-tibetan populations, whereas akha  shows low and similar male migration rates both with sino-tibetan and hmong-mien populations. in other words, the observed differences between different linguistic groups seem more related to single tribe effects than to a language – related component.

the genetic affiliation of the hill tribes
here we tested with two large mtdna and y-chromosome databases the possible genetic affinities of the hill tribes, and thus their possible origin, using the bayesian clustering method implemented in baps.

mtdna dataset 
the global mtdna dataset we assembled includes  <dig> populations and  <dig> individuals .  <dig> different haplotypes,  <dig> of them found only in a single individual, were identified. the most likely partition inferred by baps supports the presence of  <dig> groups,  <dig> including only one population. this clustering solution was not informative to identify the most likely hill tribes genetic neighbours. therefore, as in several other studies of clustering  <cit> , we run the analysis with increasing number of clusters, starting from the smallest value, k =  <dig>  up to k =  <dig>  a maximum of k =  <dig> was chosen because for k >  <dig> almost only single-population groups were additionally identified.

in general, the baps partitions significantly reflect the linguistic affiliation of the populations . on the contrary, geographically close populations are included by baps in the same cluster more frequently than expected by chance only for larger k values . significant correlations coefficients range between  <dig>  and  <dig> .

analysing more in detail the partition for k =  <dig> , we can identify i) a northern altaic clade  in northern china and mongolia, which includes also three southern china samples  and one sample form india; ii) an indian indo-european clade , which includes all but one indian samples, and the red karen hill tribe; iii) a central-southern sino-tibetan clade  which includes yunnan populations, most hill tribes, and three taiwanese populations; iv) an eastern clade  which includes all hmong-mien speaking populations , and several sino-tibetan and tai-kadai populations; v) a more heterogeneous clade  which includes central and south-eastern populations speaking either sino-tibetan or austronesian languages.

most of the hill tribes in thailand seem to preserve a maternal genetic legacy with their likely geographic origin.

lahu, lisu and akha are sino-tibetan populations of lolo extraction, and some historical record suggest that they established in yunnan in ancient times  from the tibet region, and then migrated trough myanmar in northern thailand about 100– <dig> years ago  <cit> . consistently with this hypothesis, all of them are attributed to the central southern sino-tibetan genetic clade in the baps analysis, mainly located in the yunnan region.

the karen people belong also to the sino-tibetan language family, but to a different linguistic branch, the karenic. their ethnic origin is largely unknown, since karen usually avoid contacts with other groups, and leave therefore no traces in the regions they pass through during the migrations. the characteristics of the karen suggest china, near tibet, as a possible origin, but none of them live there today  <cit> . from there, they entered myanmar around the sixth-seventh century ad, where they still live in large numbers . some groups then migrated to thailand more recently. unfortunately we do not have genetic data for the myanmar groups, but, at least for the white karen, their genetic affiliation with the central southern sino-tibetan clade in the baps analysis is consistent with their hypothetical place of origin in tibet/china regions. on the other hand, the red karen in our dataset cluster within the indian indo-european genetic clade. this result is difficult to interpret, and may be simply due to the limited sample sizes or to the lack of significant reference samples. we note however that the ethnic origin of red karen is even more debated, with some authors suggesting that they are mon-khmer people  who adopted a karenic language  <cit> .

finally, the two hmong-mien speaking hill tribes in our data, the hmong and the iu-mien, are classified in the eastern and the central southern sino-tibetan genetic clades, respectively. the heartland of the hmong people is considered kweichow, a chinese province eastern of yunnan, where they established at least  <dig> years ago probably arriving from more eastern areas  <cit> . migrations into thailand through laos are documented since the second half of the nineteenth century. the baps maternal affiliation of hmong hill tribes in thailand confirms their origin and genetic legacy with south-eastern china. on the other hand, iu mien, whose origin is located as for hmong people in south eastern china from which they started to migrate southwards to vietnam in the thirteenth century entering thailand about  <dig> years ago, are genetically affiliated with the central southern sino-tibetan group. this contrasting, but interesting result, may have an explanation in the social habits of the iu-mien, who adopt children from neighbour communities to enlarge their work force  <cit> . according to the literature, the percentage of adopted individuals under the age of  <dig> corresponds to about 20% of the population. the genetic composition of the iu-mien people in our dataset may be therefore mixed, resulting in their genetic affiliation with the surrounding hill tribes belonging to the central southern sino-tibetan clade.

y-chromosome dataset 
a dataset of  <dig> populations and  <dig> individuals was assembled .  <dig> different haplotypes,  <dig> of them found only in a single individual, were identified for the  <dig> loci overlapped across studies. the clustering method we applied inferred a partition with  <dig> groups as the most likely . unfortunately, genetic data are missing from several geographic regions important for our purposes, and the vast majority of the samples are included in a single, geographically widespread, baps-defined clade . this dataset is therefore non-informative to identify the genetic legacy and origin of the hill tribes, but the results we obtained suggest that: i) china appears less structured at the y-chromosome markers compared to the mtdna, but this may be the simple consequence of the small number, possibly homoplasic, microsatellite loci available for the y-chromosome analyses; all matrilocal hill tribes are assigned to this group, possibly as a consequence of their higher male permeability; ii) one private and one almost private  clades are identified for the patrilocal hill tribes. the presence of two independent y-chromosome clades in the hill tribes can be attributed to the lack of reference populations in the database. an alternative explanation might be a specific drift effect at y-chromosomes in the patrilocal tribes, where male exchanges are restricted.

CONCLUSIONS
the northern thailand hill tribes show a high level of population structuring. in a restricted geographic area, the levels of divergence can reach the values observed in world wide analyses  <cit> . most of tribes, with an exception related to a specific habit of children adoptions, preserve traces of genetic similarity with the populations living in the areas  where the geographic origin of these groups has been suggested.

the major factor explaining the differences at mtdna and y-chromosome markers between tribes is confirmed to be the difference between postmarital habits of residence, with social rules more strictly enforced in patrilocal than in matrilocal tribes. overall, the migration rates we found for the hill tribes are higher than previously estimated with a different method on a smaller dataset.

linguistic differences, which clearly play a role when a larger asian region in considered, have limited effects at this microgeographic scale. however, specific situations that may disrupt the otherwise robust relationship between social structure and sex specific genetic diversity, related to linguistic or population-specific traits, are identified and should be considered in future studies.

