BACKGROUND
in eukaryotes, the transport and segregation of organelles mediated by cytoskeleton and motor proteins are well-studied processes . in contrast, it only recently became apparent that bacteria not only possess organelles  <cit>  but also homologs of eukaryotic cytoskeletal proteins such as tubulin, intermediate filaments and several actin families . as in eukaryotes, during cell division, the equipartitioning of plasmids, chromosomes and organelles has to be carefully controlled to ensure viability and fitness of the offspring throughout the entire bacterial life cycle. to date, only few examples of organelle or protein cluster segregation in bacteria have been studied in some detail. for example, carboxysomes  are linearly spaced by the cell cycle-related para protein  <cit>  associated to chromosome-partitioning  <cit> , whereas the segregation of cytoplasmic chemotaxis clusters in rhodobacter sphaeroides also depends on the para-like ppfa  <cit> . however, the fundamental mechanisms of bacterial organelle segregation have remained largely unknown.

a particularly intriguing example of well-ordered prokaryotic organelles are the magnetosomes of magnetotactic bacteria. in the α-proteobacterium magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense msr- <dig>  magnetosomes are composed of magnetite  crystals surrounded by a bilayer membrane, thus resembling eukaryotic organelles  <cit> . individual magnetosomes are assembled into a single linear magnetosome chain  that aligns the cell with the earth’s magnetic field. so far, two proteins have been implicated in the assembly of mcs  <cit> , one of which is mamk, a bacterial actin, which polymerizes into a cytoskeletal bundle of two-to-four filaments in vivo and is thought to assemble magnetosomes into a coherent chain . mamk from the closely related magnetospirillum magneticum amb- <dig>  was found to form filaments that require an intact atpase motif for their in vivo dynamics and in vitro disassembly  <cit> . furthermore, mamk interacts with mamj  <cit> , an acidic magnetosome-associated  <cit>  protein thought to attach magnetosomes to the mamk filament in msr, since mamj deletion caused a collapsed-chain phenotype  <cit> .

to become faithfully divided and segregated during cytokinesis, the mc has to be properly positioned, cleaved and separated against intrachain magnetostatic forces. in msr, the mc is positioned at midcell, and later localized traversing the division site to be cleaved by unidirectional constriction of the septum  <cit> . upon mamk deletion msr cells formed shorter and fragmented mcs  <cit>  that were no longer recruited to the division site  <cit> . from these observations, it was concluded that newly generated magnetosome sub-chains must undergo a pole-to-midcell translocation into daughter cells, and mamk was hypothesized to mediate this positioning and migration during the msr cell cycle. however, the pole-to-midcell movement of the mc and the role of mamk in mc positioning are yet to be demonstrated directly and questions such as whether the putative dynamics of mamk filaments may generate the forces required for magnetosome motion and segregation need to be addressed. overall, the exact mechanism of mc repositioning and segregation  has remained elusive.

here, by using photokinetics and advanced electron microscopy, we investigated the intracellular dynamics of both the mc and the actin-like mamk filament throughout the cell cycle. we discovered that equipartitioning of mcs occurs with unexpectedly high precision. we found that the mc dynamic pole-to-midcell motion into daughter cells depends directly on the dynamics of mamk filaments, which seem to originate at the cell pole undergoing a treadmilling growth from the pole towards midcell. furthermore, the observed dynamics of mamj indicates a transient interaction with mamk. we propose a model where the specific features of mamk filaments dynamics as well as its interplay with mamj are fundamental for proper mc assembly, precise equipartitioning, pole-to-midcell movement and, ultimately, segregation.

RESULTS
magnetosome chains undergo a rapid and dynamic pole-to-midcell repositioning which becomes impaired by the mamkd161a amino acid exchange
to assess the mc localization through the cell cycle, we performed in vivo time-lapse fluorescence imaging of egfp tagged to mamc   <cit>  in synchronized cells of msr. in wildtype  cells, single mcs were typically located at midcell , which became evenly partitioned and segregated into daughter cells as the cell cycle progressed . after mc partitioning, the recently divided daughter chains moved apart from the new poles towards midcell into the newborn daughter cells . mc pole-to-midcell repositioning proceeded with a speed of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm/min  and was completed after  <dig>  ±  <dig>  min, i.e., within < 25 % of the msr doubling time . in addition, the mc repositioning mostly occurred before completion of cytokinesis , but in few cells also within the first 30 min after cell division .fig.  <dig> imaging of magnetosome chain  motion throughout the cell cycle. a in vivo time-lapse fluorescence microscopy of mcs by means of mamc-egfp signal  in the wildtype . white bars: center of egfp signal position. distances between bars are indicated in the first and last image. white arrowheads indicate the frame in which cytokinesis has been completed for each cell. white dotted lines: mamc-egfp signal progression. b kymograph displaying the mamc-egfp signal  over the time  of the wt cell indicated in “a” . schemes above and below depict the septum and mc position at the starting and ending point of the time-lapse. c in vivo time-lapse fluorescence microscopy of mcs in the mamk d161a strain. star: mispositioning of the chain at cell pole. d kymograph displaying the mamc-egfp signal  over the time  of the mamk d161a cell indicated in “c” . schemes above and below depict the septum and mc position at the starting and ending point of the time-lapse. scale bars: 1 μm. scale bars of kymographs: 500 nm. e mc cumulative displacement as a function of time in the wt  and mamk d161a  strains. cumulative displacement was determined from the mamc-egfp fluorescence signal




to study the role of mamk dynamics in magnetosome segregation, we exchanged a conserved aspartate residue by alanine within its atpase domain , yielding the mutant strain mamk d161a. mutation of these conserved residues  abolished atpase activity and, in turn, the filament dynamics of other actins .

in contrast to the wt, in vivo time-lapse imaging of mamk d161a cells showed that the mc was inherited by only one of the two daughter cells , suggesting an unequal partitioning of the mc. further, the mamk d161a strain frequently exhibited a mislocalization of the magnetosome signal next to the cell poles . remarkably, mamk d161a did not display mc reposition to the daughter cell center, but instead, after 30 min, a mamc-efgp signal gradually appeared at the end of the chain , owing to de novo magnetosome synthesis rather than mc pole-to-midcell repositioning. this indicates that the mc was no longer dynamic in the mamk d161a strain. although a late and random displacement of mcs was observed in a minor fraction of mamk d161a cells , mcs were rather static during the previously described asymmetric cell elongation  <cit> .

to quantify the difference in mc movement between wt and mamk d161a strains, we determined the cumulative displacement  as well as the mean-square displacement  of nascent mcs from cells undergoing division and plotted them as a function of time. in the wt, both parameters exhibited an initial strong increase and entered a plateau at around 90 min, likely because the mc reaches the midcell position where motion is abruptly stopped. the biphasic time dependence of the mc motion was consistent with an initial directed movement followed by restricted mobility at the end  <cit> . this behavior became even more obvious when the apparent diffusion coefficient  of mcs from wt cells was plotted as a function of time, displaying a continuous increase in d*, consistent with directed rather than diffusive motion, until reaching a maximum value at 90 min lag time, which further underwent a strong and steep decay as observed at 110 min . in addition, the cumulative displacement, msd and d* values were considerably lower in the mamk d161a strain  compared to the wt , indicating a higher displacement rate and mobility of mcs in wt cells. furthermore, using mc displacement data, we have determined the velocity  as a function of time . strikingly, the mamk d161a strain exhibited a low and fairly constant vmc , whereas wt cells showed an increase of vmc during the first 40 min , which then decreased over time, reaching the vmc levels of the mamk d161a mutant . the wt vmc behavior matches our hypothesis that mcs are highly mobile for a certain period after cell division , and then undergo a strong drop of motion likely correlated with the final midcell positioning. moreover, vmc values during the period of high mobility were in agreement with the mc speed of wt cells determined above based on the traveled distance . altogether, these results demonstrate that mcs underwent a directed movement after cell division, which then becomes restricted upon reaching the final position at midcell, and that the mc motion was severely impaired in mamk d161a cells.

the mamk d161a mutation causes a severe mispartitioning of the magnetosome chain
transmission electron microscopy  revealed that the mc was evenly split in wt cells . strikingly, tem micrographs of mamk d161a cells showed unequal partitioning of the chain, where one daughter cell typically inherited a larger fraction of the mc . to further study mc partitioning independently of de novo magnetosome synthesis , wt and mamk d161a strains were incubated for 5 h under 21 % oxygen conditions to suppress magnetite production  <cit>  and to ensure the completion of one entire cell cycle. again, quantification of the inherited chain length from tem micrographs showed that wt cells tended to divide the mc into daughter chains of similar lengths . although a minor mc missegregation was observed in few cells , 83 % of the cells partitioned mcs into equal halves within up to only 10 % fluctuation of the mother chain length. in contrast, in the mamk d161a strain, 73 % of the chains were unequally partitioned between a 70/30 % to 100/0 % of the mother chain length, confirming a strongly biased magnetosome segregation for the mamk d161a mutant.fig.  <dig> distribution of magnetosome chain  partitioning. tem micrographs of  wildtype  and  mamk d161a cells displaying mc partitioning during cell division. scale bars: 1 μm. c scheme illustrating putative partitioning scenarios during mc length quantification. d quantification of the partitioned mc length to be inherited by future daughter cells as determined by tem for the wt  and mamk d161a  strains. cells were incubated under 21 % oxygen for 5 h to suppress de novo magnetosome synthesis. e cumulative distribution of partitioned mc length data for the wt  and mamk d161a  strains




if scored for their intracellular position by tem , in mamk d161a cells a majority of mcs were located at the pole  or adjacent to it . in contrast, wt and ∆mamk cell mcs were predominantly positioned at midcell . therefore, the increment of mcs found at the poles after cell division, likely caused by absence of mamk dynamics, confirmed the repositioning defect in mamk d161a cells resulting in magnetosome missegregation into the offspring.

magnetosome chain cleavage occurs with highest possible precision at midchain
to determine whether the mc cleavage is random or driven by specific factors such as directed forces, we analyzed the cumulative distribution of the chain length fractions. data for the wt strain fitted extremely well  to the exponential function, f = 1–exp , corresponding to a distribution of the chain length fraction  in which increasingly unequal partitioning is exponentially suppressed. the parameter λ , characterizing the accuracy of mc center location, was obtained as  <dig>  % of the chain length, which for a chain of  <dig> magnetosomes corresponds to two magnetosomes. this result remained unchanged if the cell pairs inheriting the mc into one daughter were excluded . another parameter to characterize the accuracy is the point at which the cumulative distribution is  <dig> , that is the median of the distribution. for the fitted exponential function this was  <dig> , i.e.,  <dig>  % deviation from equal partitioning of chain length, again close to one-to-two magnetosomes, suggesting that partitioning proceeded with near-maximal precision.

furthermore, the mc partitioning distributions of mamk d161a cells were compared with a distribution expected for splitting a line  at a random position, which resulted in a linear cumulative distribution . a kolmogorov–smirnov test of mamk d161a strain data was consistent with such random segregation , supporting the mc partitioning defect. on the contrary, wt partitioning data were inconsistent with random segregation .

in addition, as mc partitioning measured by length may not necessarily correlate with the magnetosome number inherited per daughter cell , we also quantified the latter, obtaining similar results . these results support the notion that mamkd161a protein residue exchange negatively affects the mc equipartitioning.

furthermore, the exponential distribution of the deviation from mc equal partitioning in wt cells  suggested that the chain center is determined by a balance of an active directed movement and diffusion. as a consequence, the pole-to-midcell movement of the mc after division reflects this active directed movement. we tested this hypothesis in silico by simulating the pole-to-midcell movement of the chain after division. the computational model  <cit>  considered an active transport of magnetosomes towards the center of the cell  as well as magnetosome diffusive movements, with magnetic forces considered opposed to such movements. simulations resulted in an mc repositioning to the cell center upon low and high diffusive movements . in the model, active transport is characterized by a linear force-velocity relation and thus by two parameters, a force-free velocity  and a stall force , against which active transport can work. we hypothesized that defective mc active transport in mamk d161a cells could occur by reduction of either parameter and tested both scenarios. in both cases, the chain movement was strongly slowed down . remarkably, two or more shorter mcs were formed upon reduced fs and high diffusive mobility , resembling the phenotype observed experimentally in mamk d161a cells.

magnetosome concatenation is disturbed in the mamk d161a strain
tem analysis of the mamk d161a mutant showed an intermediate phenotype between the wt and ∆mamk with respect to mc organization. the wt strain showed only 1 % of cells lacking an mc, whereas 98 % had a single chain , consistent with the mc equipartitioning observed before, the remaining 1 % corresponded to cells with double chains. in contrast, 34 % of ∆mamk cells had two-to-four fragmented chains, and 50 % of mamk d161a cells had between two-to-five chains. thus, mamk d161a cells displayed both wt-like mcs and fragmented chains  resembling that of ∆mamk  <cit> . therefore, it can be hypothesized that a lack of mamkd161a filament dynamics increases mc fragmentation, causing the development of more albeit shorter sub-chains due to magnetosome concatenation deficiency.

considering that the replacement of d161a in mamk had an evident impact on chain assembly, we next analyzed whether this mutation also affects de novo mc development. to this end, magnetite formation was induced by re-addition of iron to iron-starved non-magnetic cells  <cit> . the magnetosome synthesis in wt cells was first detected by magnetic response  <cit>   150 min post-iron addition, and tem images revealed small crystallites evenly scattered along the entire cell . after 180 min, individual crystals began to concatenate into precursory chains, magnetosomes gradually approached each other and moved towards midcell until completion of a wt-like mc at 360 min post-iron addition , demonstrating a dynamic mc concatenation as previously described  <cit> . in contrast, mamk d161a cells showed an evident delay in appearance of cmag . moreover, the crystals remained scattered throughout the cell  even after 540 min post-iron treatment, indicating that magnetosome concatenation was severely affected . only 24 h post-iron addition, mamk d161a cells displayed wt-like mcs. in addition, mc uneven segregation and mislocalization of the chains at the cell poles were again observed .fig.  <dig> 
de novo magnetite formation kinetics assay. a tem micrographs of non-magnetic wildtype  cells induced for magnetite formation upon addition of 100 μm iron at time zero. cells are arranged by progression after iron addition. black arrows indicate magnetite crystals position. b growth  and magnetic response  for iron-starved non-magnetic wt and mamk d161a cells treated with iron at time zero. c tem micrographs of magnetite formation progression in mamk d161a cells. doubling time was determined for wt and mamk d161a strains as  <dig>  and  <dig>  h, respectively. scale bars: 1 μm




the stabilized mamkd161a filaments cause connected cells
the mamk d161a strain displayed a further perturbed cell separation phenotype. although cells seemed almost completely divided, they sometimes failed to become fully separated forming up to four joined cells . fluorescence microscopy of mcherry-mamkd161a filaments in those joined cells showed filaments likely traversing the cell division sites . further, cryo-electron tomography  of mamk d <dig> division sites from connected cells revealed a tight  membranous channel connection between the cells . the mamkd161a filaments appeared to enter and exit the narrow connection of several examined cell division sites . consequently, these observations support the hypothesis that the stabilized, non-dynamic mamkd161a filaments could form such rigid structures holding the cells attached and preventing their separation against forces generated by both the divisome complex and the newly forming cell wall.fig.  <dig> electron microscopy and cryo-electron tomography  of mamk d161a connected cells. ai tem micrograph of four connected cells. arrowheads indicate cell division sites. scale bar: 1 μm. aii closer view of a cell division site. scale bar: 500 nm. b cet sections of a selected cell division site of three connected cells . additional file 11: figure s8a shows a cet micrograph corresponding to the three connected cells indicating the division site imaged in “b”. black arrowheads denote mamk filaments. blue arrows indicate inner  and outer  membranes. c, d cet reconstruction of the selected cell division site in “b”. magnetite crystals  enclosed by vesicles  and flanked by the mamk filament . the cellular envelope inner and outer membranes are depicted in blue. flagella are represented in gold




mamk filaments exhibit dynamics strongly affected by the d161a residue exchange
all phenotypes of the mamk d161a strain presented so far were consistent with a putative lack of mamkd161a filament dynamics. to verify this assumption, the filament dynamics was studied directly by frap. in fact, a functional chromosomal translational mcherry-mamkchromosomal fusion  <cit>  showed a half-time fluorescence recovery  of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s  after photobleaching. the same mcherry-mamk
plasmid fusion episomally expressed under control of the native mamk promoter pmamab in the wt strain  displayed a coherent t½ of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s . we controlled for dark-state-reversal of mcherry fluorophore  by fixing the cells with  <dig> % formaldehyde for  <dig> h and subsequent evaluation by frap, which showed no fluorescence recovery after laser application . these results indicated that mcherry-mamk fluorescence recovery was not due to photoswitching, but reflects a true dynamics of the filaments. in contrast, chromosomal and episomally expressed translational mcherry-mamkd161a fusion showed a consistent t½ of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  min, respectively . therefore, the d161a exchange resulted in a strong decay  in dynamics causing stabilized filaments as expected .fig.  <dig> mamk filament dynamics analysis by frap. photobleaching of mcherry-mamk was used to follow the recovery of the fluorescence corresponding to the mamk filament during 10 min.  mcherry-mamk and  mcherry-mamkd161a translational fusions expressed from a chromosomal insertion from the native pmamab promoter.  mcherry-mamk and  mcherry-mamkd161a translational fusions expressed from a replicative plasmid from the pmamab promoter. the left panels show representative cells for this assay, indicating the selected bleached areas  and fluorescence recovery progression. the pre-bleaching image is a composite of the bright field and fluorescence channel to display subcellular localization. the right panels show the quantification of the mamk filament fluorescence recovery over the time from the corresponding strain. time point zero was measured immediately after laser pulse. the half-time fluorescence recovery is presented as t½ in each plot. scale bars: 1 μm




previously, it was described that mamj promoted mamk filament turnover in the closely related bacterium amb  <cit> . therefore, we next examined the effect of mamj on mamk filament dynamics in msr. first, a ∆mamk strain was used as a control to test functionality of the mcherry-mamkplasmid fusion  in the absence of native mamk. mcherry-mamkplasmid fluorescence recovery t½ was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s , similar to that of mcherry-mamkchromosomal . next, mamk filament dynamics was measured in the ∆mamjk background and the non-magnetic mutant msr-1b  resulting in a t½ of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s, respectively . the latter results are statistically different from the t½ value described for the mcherry-mamkplasmid in the ∆mamk strain, as verified by an unpaired student’s t-test , indicating that mamj absence has an effect on mamk dynamics. furthermore, the absence of other mai-encoded proteins along with mamj did not promote an additional increase in mamk fluorescence recovery t½, excluding a joined epistatic effect of mamj and other mai-encoded proteins. in order to evaluate the mamk filament dynamics in the absence of mamj and all other magnetosome-specific factors from msr, the mcherry-mamk fusion was expressed in escherichia coli under control of the lac promoter . indeed, frap analysis resulted in a mamk filament recovery t½ of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s, a three-fold increase compared to its recovery t½ in msr. despite the mamk dynamics decreasing considerably in the absence of mamj or any mai-encoded protein, the fluorescence recovery was always completely restored to  <dig>  during the experiment. this observation can be interpreted such that the calculated mobility fraction for mamk molecules is a 100 % in all the genetic backgrounds tested, suggesting that mamk is highly dynamic and dependent only partially on the presence of mamj.fig.  <dig> mamk dynamics in different genetic backgrounds. photobleaching of mcherry-mamk was used to follow the recovery of the fluorescence corresponding to the mamk filament. the mcherry-mamk translational fusion was expressed from a plasmid with the pmamab promoter in the following msr strains:  ∆mamk,  ∆mamjk,  msr-1b, and  e. coli. the left panels show representative cells for this assay, indicating the selected bleached areas  and fluorescence recovery progression. the pre-bleaching image is a composite of the bright field and fluorescence channel to display subcellular localization. the right panels show the quantification of the mamk filament fluorescence recovery over the time from the corresponding strain. zero time was measured immediately after laser pulse. the half-time fluorescence recovery is presented as t½ in each plot. scale bars: 1 μm




mamk filaments appear to originate at the cell poles and undergo treadmilling growth
the observed mcherry-mamk filaments usually generated a fluorescence signal whose intensity was higher at the cell poles and gradually decreased towards midcell along the filament length . in contrast, mcherry-mamkd161a filaments appeared slightly shorter and displayed an even fluorescence intensity that was not increased at the poles . we generated kymographs from mcherry-mamk filaments bleached at the cell pole of four msr strains: wt, ∆mamk, ∆mamjk, and msr-1b . remarkably, these kymographs showed that the fluorescence began to recover at the pole itself and migrated towards midcell in the four analyzed strains. moreover, when an internal section of a mamk filament bundle was photobleached , the bleached zone moved towards the opposite pole from where the filaments actually originated. additionally, mcherry-mamk
chromosomal expressed from the native locus in msr also displayed filaments originating at the poles , indicating that this phenomenon was not caused by a mamk overdose in strains expressing the fusion from multiple-copy plasmids. therefore, insertion of subunits at the cell pole likely pushes the subunits in the filaments towards midcell, suggesting a treadmilling behavior. similar results were obtained in e. coli , suggesting that the assumed treadmilling growth is an inherent property of mamk and does not require the presence of additional magnetosome-specific factors.fig.  <dig> mamk filament growth behavior analysis by frap and photoconversion. a kymographs displaying fluorescence signal intensity  of bleached mamk filaments over the time . mcherry-mamk fusion expressed from a plasmid  in msr:  wildtype ,  ∆mamk,  ∆mamjk, and  msr-1b. the corresponding duplicated kymograph indicates bleaching time/area  and filament fluorescent signal progression . the bleach-marked filaments were followed for 5 min . bi photoconversion of dendra2-mamk expressed in wt cells from a plasmid . green channel: mamk filament prior to photoconversion. red channel: photoconverted protein after a 405 nm laser pulse. white dashed circle: photoconverted area. white dashed lines act a reference point. red dashed lines: filament growth progression. arrow indicates appearance of mamk signal at the cell pole. a total of 91 % of cells  showed polar appearance of the photoconverted protein. bii cartoon illustrating intracellular dendra2-mamk dynamics. after the laser pulse , the filament and dendra2-mamk free subunits are photoconverted . freely diffusible dendra2-mamk subunits migrate and incorporate at the right cell pole, where mamk filaments originate. biii kymograph of a cell  displaying intracellular localization of the red photoconverted signal  over time . the corresponding duplicated kymograph below indicates the photoconverted time/area  and mamk filament fluorescent signal appearance/progression . biv quantification of photoconverted dendra2-mamk signal in wt cells . c photoconversion of dendra2-mamkd161a as in “bi”. lack of dynamics was observed in 100 % of cells  . d mamk filament treadmilling speed per strain quantified from mcherry-mamk photobleaching data. an unpaired student’s t-test was performed. * significant: p =  <dig>  to  <dig> . ** very significant p =  <dig>  to  <dig> . *** extremely significant p <  <dig> . ns: not significant.




to further substantiate the polar origin of the filaments, mamk was tagged with the dendra <dig> fluorophore capable of irreversible green-to-red photoconversion upon blue or uv-light excitation  <cit> , allowing tracking of the newly activated red form and, consequently, protein dynamics  <cit> . the dendra2-mamk filament was visualized in the green channel to select the area to be photoconverted. after application of a 405 nm laser pulse to the dendra2-mamk filament at a cell pole, the photoconverted protein was monitored through the red channel. a few seconds after photoconversion of the filament at one cell pole, the dendra2-mamk red signal was detected at the opposite pole as observed qualitatively  and quantitatively . quantification of the fluorescent signal after photoconversion indicated that, while the photoconverted pole  signal intensity decayed over time, the signal intensity of both the non-photoconverted pole and non-polar area increased. the half-time of the red fluorescent signal decay at the photoconverted pole  and corresponding increase at the non-photoconverted pole  shared a comparable timing. however, the half-time signal increment of the non-polar area lagged behind , proving that the signal appearance in the non-photoconverted pole occurred faster than the suggested mamk filament treadmilling. in addition, the occurrence of red photoconverted signal at the opposite  pole was faster than the putative mamk filament growth time  to reach the opposite cell pole. thus, by the last two observations it can be ruled out that the signal appearance at the non-photoconverted pole is due to mamk filaments growing and reaching the opposite  pole.

we also generated kymographs of the subcellular progression of the photoconverted signal that display the mamk filament successive nucleation events in the non-photoconverted pole and further midcell displacement due to filament growth . remarkably, the filament nucleation event could also be seen at the photoconverted pole after a certain time , supporting the concomitant bipolar filament nucleation theory. furthermore, the gradual disappearance of the fluorescence intensity along with filament growth suggests a gradual depolymerization of the filament at the opposite old growing end. signal disappearance was not due to photobleaching during imaging since new signals appeared nucleating at the same cell pole simultaneously . then, the photoconversion data set further supports the incorporation of subunits to the filaments occurring at the poles. in this manner, mamk filament polymerization proceeded growing by the cell poles and migrating towards midcell, likely depolymerizing gradually at the opposite old end. assuming that the laser action at the cell pole photoconverted both  part of the newly growing dendra2-mamk filament and  a pool of existing free dendra2-mamk monomers, the latter could rapidly diffuse to the non-photoconverted pole to be integrated into the mamk filaments.

photoconversion of dendra2-mamkd161a, however, resulted in static, non-dynamic filaments lacking cell pole origination . in agreement with this, no signal intensity changes were detected upon quantification of different cellular zones . in order to further confirm this result, we generated a similar mutation of a conserved glutamate by alanine in the atpase domain of mamk, mamke143a, also predicted to cause impairment of the atpase activity and thus filament dynamics  <cit> . dendra2-mamke143a photoconversion at the cell pole also resulted in static filaments . accordingly, photoconversion experiments also support the notion of mamk filament cell pole origination, treadmilling growth, and lack of dynamics of mamkd161a filaments.

we next calculated the speed of mamk filament putative treadmilling from the bleached filaments dataset. msr cells expressing mcherry-mamkchromosomal had a treadmilling speed of 313 ±  <dig>  nm/min , significantly similar to that of mcherry-mamkplasmid in msr wt  and ∆mamk backgrounds  . strikingly, the filament treadmilling speed was considerably higher  than the mc motion . furthermore, mamj stimulation of mamk filament dynamics was also reflected in the putative treadmilling growth, since absence of mamj as well as the mai decreased the treadmilling speed to  <dig>  and  <dig>  nm/min, respectively , which are statistically different from the filament speed obtained in the ∆mamk strain. to verify the influence of mamj absence in the mamk filament treadmilling speed and the corresponding fluorescence recovery t½, we generated a correlation plot of treadmilling speed versus fluorescence recovery t½ using data of all analyzed msr strains . the data fitted to a linear regression and the pearson correlation coefficient  showed a significant  negative linear relationship  between the decrease in filament treadmilling speed and the increment of fluorescence recovery t½ upon absence of mamj. therefore, it can be suggested that the mcherry-mamk filament fluorescence recovery is likely due to treadmilling growth, which in turn is stimulated by mamj presence.

mamj turnover is higher than that of mamk
to analyze a direct connection between the mamk filament dynamics and magnetosome motion, the mamk-interacting and magnetosome-associated mamj protein dynamics was examined. frap of two mamj c-terminal tagged fusions  using two laser lines showed a consistent recovery t½ of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s, respectively , determining that mamj turnover is faster compared to mamk recovery t½. notably, the fluorescence recovery of mamj-egfp reached 100 % at approximately 5 min post-bleaching , suggesting a 100 % fraction mobility for the mamj protein.fig.  <dig> analysis of mamj dynamics. photobleaching of egfp and mcherry was used to follow the recovery of the fluorescence corresponding to mamj. a mamj-egfp and b mamj-mcherry translational fusions expressed from a tn5-based chromosomal insertion and a replicative vector, respectively. white dashed circles indicate bleached areas. white dashed line acts a reference point. red dashed line indicates signal progression. the right panels show the quantification of the mamj fluorescence recovery over the time from the corresponding strain. zero time was measured immediately after laser pulse. the half-time fluorescence recovery is presented as t½ in each plot. c mamj-dendra <dig> photoconversion upon mamk co-expression in msr wildtype . arrow indicates appearance of mamj signal at the cell pole. a 67 % of analyzed cells  showed a putative polar appearance of the photoconverted protein. green channel displays the filament prior to photoconversion. red channel shows photoconverted the protein after a 405 nm laser pulse application. d photobleaching of mamj-mcherry upon mamk d161a co-expression in msr wt. the white dashed circle indicates the bleached area while the right panels show the quantification of the mamj fluorescence recovery over time. the half-time fluorescence recovery is presented as t½ in each plot. scale bars: 1 μm




photoconversion of mamj-dendra <dig> was employed to investigate whether mamj, like mamk, originates at the cell poles. mamj-dendra <dig> overexpressed in msr wt showed a week filamentous signal compared to the cytoplasmic signal , indicating a limited availability of mamk molecules to interact with. photoconversion of the poles in this strain did not function properly as the tracking of red photoconverted proteins was difficult due to the fast mamj mobility . therefore, we overexpressed mamk together with mamj-dendra <dig> in msr wt and ∆mamjk , which showed an improved mamj filamentous localization where photoconversion suggested a rapid polar appearance of the signal after photoconversion of the opposite cell pole . however, the overly fast mamj dynamics prevented unambiguous interpretation of its polar origination.

we further evaluated whether the mamk dynamic status affects mamj turnover, and specifically whether the lack of mamkd161a dynamics has an influence on the dynamics of mamj. thus, this assay could provide further proof for the short-lived interaction between mamj and mamk. for this, mamj-mcherry dynamics was analyzed upon co-expression of mamk d161a in the msr wt, ∆mamk, and ∆mamjk strains. it is important to note that mamkd161a is a negative trans-dominant mutation in the wt background as shown in fig. 5d. frap analysis of mamj-mcherry showed a consistent recovery t½ of  <dig>  s ,  <dig>  s , and  <dig>  s  for the wt , ∆mamk, and ∆mamjk strains , respectively. the latter values of recovery t½ are similar to that of the mamj dynamics in the presence of the mamk wt gene . in addition, photoconversion assessment of mamj-dendra <dig> upon co-expression of mamk d161a gene in ∆mamjk  and msr wt  strains revealed a fast mamj motion throughout the cell after the photoconversion event.

we controlled for dark-state-reversal of all used fluorophores fused to mamj as mentioned above, revealing no fluorescence recovery or dynamics in fixed cells . to corroborate that mamj and mamk were properly expressed, we checked for complementation of the ∆mamjk strain that no longer displays a linear mc, but instead has a phenotype that resembles that of ∆mamj, i.e., clustered magnetosomes. tem micrographs indicated that cells were rescued by either of these constructs as the agglomerated magnetosomes in ∆mamjk were reconstituted into linear mc , which was also properly segregated upon presence of mamk . it is important to note that, for reconstitution of a wt-like mc and proper mispartitioning, both mamj and mamk must be present. although non-complemented cells exhibiting clustered magnetosomes can still be observed , this is absolutely within expectations due to the fact that we mostly used replicative plasmid derivatives of the pbbr <dig> vector. it has previously been reported that gfp expression from pbbr <dig> plasmid in msr causes only up to 26 % of cells to fluoresce  <cit> . therefore, the observed cells harboring clustered magnetosomes are likely unable to express the fusion of interest, but not due to a lack of functionality of the fusion itself. as a matter of fact, the complementation is such that the chains are even correctly localized at midcell and further properly partitioned , confirming that mamj as well as mamk must be strictly present. finally, when co-expressing a mamj fusion together with a mamk d161a gene in ∆mamjk cells, the agglomerated magnetosomes were reconstituted into linear mcs. additionally, the phenotypes of mc mispartitioning and polar retention in single cells were also commonly observed .

collectively, these findings reveal that the mamj turnover does not depend on mamk dynamics and that the rapid mamj turnover upon the presence of static mamkd161a filaments indicates a putative transient interaction with mamk, where mamj might constantly bind and dissociate from mamk filaments.

discussion
by direct imaging of mcs in live cells, we showed that mcs are precisely partitioned into equal halves and, indeed, undergo a dynamic pole-to-midcell repositioning. furthermore, mc equipartitioning and motion relied directly on a dynamic mamk filament with an intact atpase domain. in fact, despite a minor missegregated fraction, in most cells, mcs were precisely partitioned typically into equal halves. the precision with which the mc center was placed at the septum roughly corresponded to the dimension of two magnetosomes. since  mcs splitting must naturally occur between two magnetosomes and  the maximal precision to locate the chain center is the size of one magnetosome, our data suggest that equipartitioning of mcs take places with the highest possible accuracy.

our data support the notion that msr mamk filaments originate and grow from the cell poles likely undergoing treadmilling, where incorporation of mamk subunits at the cell poles pushes the subunits in the filament towards midcell equivalent to exerting a “treadmilling against a wall”. in agreement with this, previous cet observations showed that msr mamk filament bundles appeared to end nearby the cell poles  <cit> , inferring a putative filament polar origin. the results of photoconversion experiments of mamk filaments also support this hypothesis, as the polar photoconverted filament area moved towards midcell together with the appearance of a new signal at the non-photoconverted cell pole. moreover, the msr mamk filament likely disassembles gradually at the opposite growing end, since the earliest incorporated monomers within the filament might undergo atpase activity causing depolymerization. in accordance with this, mamk filaments exhibited a stronger fluorescent signal at the cell poles  that decreased along the filament length, in contrast to the stable mamkd161a filaments. in agreement with our observations in msr, in the related amb, an intact atpase activity was also a prerequisite for disassembly of polymeric mamk in vivo and in vitro  <cit> . additionally, in our study, the polar photoconverted filaments exhibited a dilution of the signal over time, which may be either due to photobleaching during imaging or filament turnover, assuming that mamk forms bundles of overlapping polymers, non-photoconverted oligomers could be substituted along the filaments by lateral association-dissociation, as suggested for other bacterial actin filaments such as alfa  <cit>  and mreb  <cit> . thus, msr mamk as well as other bacterial actins are proposed to form bundles of dynamic polymers that experience turnover and/or treadmilling  <cit> , the latter also a feature of eukaryotic actins  <cit> .

based on our observations, we propose a model where magnetosomes are actively transported by a mechanism dependent on mamk filaments and their interaction with the magnetosome-associated mamj  <cit> . considering that mamk filaments eventually originate from the new cell poles of recently divided cells, the suggested constant generation and breakage of interactions between mamk-mamj and magnetosomes-mamj would direct magnetosome motion from the poles of newborn cells towards midcell . notably, this implies that mamk-mamj complexes move faster than mcs, inferring that the intracellular directed motion of large objects like mcs across the viscous cytoplasm requires elevated forces and energy, as motion is disproportionally constrained with object size increment  <cit> . it has been shown that eukaryotic actin polymerization can generate forces of approximately  <dig> pn  <cit> , therefore, the fast-moving actin-like mamk filaments and the suggested interplay with mamj might provide sufficient forces for magnetosome transport towards midcell against the cytoplasmic friction. in the same fashion, msr mamk filament growth features could explain why magnetosomes become concatenated into a linear chain specifically located at midcell . independent of the magnetostatic forces, an external force of approximately  <dig> pn is indispensable to form a single midcell positioned mc in msr  <cit> , matching the hypothetical force that could be exerted by mamk. thus, stochastically nucleated crystals in the magnetosome vesicles could be guided towards midcell by mamk filaments and aided by magnetic interactions between adjacent magnetosomes generating a single midcell localized mc. however, the mechanism might be even more complex assuming not a single filament but a bundle of two to four filaments , as previously shown  <cit> , implying that these filaments could be laterally connected. this is also based on the fact that bleached areas of a bundle of mamk filaments seem to move coordinately, making tracking of the treadmilling growth front line possible. on the same matter, a related study by abreu et al.  <cit>  proposed a model for mamk lateral interaction with a second mamk-like homolog. in addition, each single filament could have different polymerization states; thus, the older part of the filament segments could undergo atpase activity and disassemble. the filament disassembly also seems to be coordinated as observed by photoconversion, which could be explained due to a coordinated growth rate of many single filaments and their putative lateral interactions helping to synchronize bundle growth. in this scenario, mamk molecules may be incorporated by the cell poles , whereas mamj could interact transiently with either free mamk or mamk units incorporated in the filament , and also associating-dissociating from magnetosomes . although there is strong evidence endorsing a direct mamk-mamj interaction  <cit> , the presence of a third party intermediary protein cannot be discarded, which could have an important role in the interplay of these two proteins regulating their dynamics. however, our data suggest that a dynamic mamk filament and its interplay with mamj are fundamental for proper mc assembly and intracellular motion in msr.fig.  <dig> mamk-mamj tracks drive magnetosome chain concatenation and repositioning. a progression of a recently divided mc undergoing motion from the pole towards midcell conducted by the mamk-mamj tracks due to the mamk incorporation to the filament at the cell poles and further treadmilling growth. b stepwise magnetosome concatenation into a linear chain driven by mamk filament treadmilling and its interaction with mamj. c models depicted in “a” and “b” show only one filament. however, it is known that mamk forms filament bundles that flank the mc. steps  <dig> to  <dig> represent the putative dynamics and interactions of mamk, mamj, and magnetosomes during mc assembly and/or transport




mamk possesses a recovery t½ comparable to eukaryotic actin   <cit>  and several bacterial actins involved in plasmid segregation such as parm  <cit> , alfa   <cit> , and alp <dig>  <cit> . strikingly, mamk from msr has a recovery t½ 10-fold faster with regards to amb mamk   <cit> , which instead resembles that of msr mamkd161a stable filaments. furthermore, mamj is essential for amb mamk dynamics as its deletion caused absolutely static filaments  <cit> . although we observed that mamj enhances the msr mamk filament dynamics, namely treadmilling, no additional magnetosome-specific factors are necessary for its dynamics as it was self-sustained, exhibiting a fast fluorescence recovery rate, 100 % of mobility fraction, and treadmilling growth in all tested genetic backgrounds. these phenotypic differences between msr and amb might be attributed to species-specific characteristics previously reported. for instance, while msr forms a single or double compact coherent mc located at midcell, amb generates a long and continuous mc that may traverse the entire cell. however, and remarkably, mcs of amb seem to be fragmented, as mature crystals are often interspersed with empty magnetosome vesicles. second, deletion of mamk in msr caused formation of shorter and segmented mcs  <cit> , but not scattered magnetosomes as in amb  <cit> . a third and more striking difference resulted from the deletion of mamj, which in msr caused loss of the linear mc, forming clustered magnetosomes instead  <cit> , whereas in amb, the same deletion had only a minor phenotype in mc organization as the chain displayed small gaps lacking magnetosome vesicles  <cit> . furthermore, amb contains a single mamk-like  <cit>  and mamj-like  <cit>  homolog, whose independent deletion had no major influence in mc arrangement. these examples reveal incongruences between identical mutants of msr and amb, conferring unique processes of chain assembly.

replacement of key residues within the atpase active site of mamk  also generated connected cells in which the separation of individual cells was impaired, reminiscent to previous observations where equivalent mutations in bacterial actins  <cit>  or tubulin-like proteins  <cit>  and overexpression of intermediate filament-like proteins  <cit>  resulted in comparable phenotypes. likely, the growing septum requires higher constricting forces to split these rigid filaments, which eventually might break due to local filament disassembly or turnover.

following from our study, an intriguing question remains to be answered: what are the cellular factors causing the mamk filaments to first originate at the cell poles and to then position the mc at midcell? to address this, obvious candidates such as other cytoskeletal structures including the actin-like mreb   <cit>  or the tubulin-like ftsz   <cit>  need to be investigated with respect to their influence on mc assembly, positioning, and segregation through the msr cell cycle. in addition, an assessment of mamk protein surfaces involved in direct contact with either mamj or with other mamk proteins  is needed to further understand the mamk dynamics. further, current cutting edge microscopy techniques such as single molecule tracking at nanometer resolution could serve to meticulously study the intracellular motion of mamk.

to date, only few other prokaryotic organelles were studied with respect to their intracellular distribution and segregation. for instance, the intracellular distribution of carboxysomes was found to be directed by the cell cycle-related para  <cit> . the type-i  partitioning system encodes a walker-type atpase , a dna-binding protein , and a cis-acting centromeric site, pars  <cit> . thus, para is associated to chromosome-partitioning forming a protein gradient based on monomer-dimer states  <cit>  as well as specific and unspecific interactions with parb and dna, respectively. furthermore, segregation of cytoplasmic chemotactic clusters in r. sphaeroides was also attributed to the para-like ppfa  <cit> . these two examples are based on a type-i system somewhat reminiscent of chromosome segregation. in contrast, the mechanism of mc segregation seems entirely dissimilar, as it is based on the mamk actin-like cytomotive protein resembling the type-ii partitioning system, which is also defined by dynamic actin-like filaments represented by the parm family  <cit> . thus, magnetosome segregation mechanisms could classify as a type-ii-like system, where mamj could serve as an adaptor between the motor protein  and cargo . our model is also reminiscent of the myosin-actin organelle transport in yeast  <cit>  in which most organelles are segregated by the actin cytoskeleton operating with the motor myosin v protein  <cit> . although this comparison currently seems speculative, we hypothesize that the non-motor cargo-associated mamj does not “walk” onto the mamk filament as myosin does on actin, but instead mamj is carried by mamk, like “a luggage on a belt”, continuously “hopping on and off” along the mamk filament.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings provide direct evidence to sustain that, after cell division, mcs are in fact repositioned from the newborn cell pole to the cell center of the daughter cell as hypothesized in previous work. in addition, our data support the concept that mc motion is directly dependent on the dynamics of the mamk filaments suggested to undergo treadmilling. thus, mamk filaments display a positive growing end located at the cell poles, where mamk units are incorporated to the filament, thereby pushing the units already in the filament towards the cell center. finally, we demonstrated that the dynamics of mamk filaments is a fundamental feature for proper mc equipartitioning, intracellular motion and, ultimately, faithful organelle segregation. in conclusion, we have dissected here, for the first time, the mechanism of segregation of a cytoskeleton-interacting bacterial organelle, which seems to be independent of endogenous segregation systems and instead utilizes a dedicated mechanism controlled by magnetosome-specific proteins.

