BACKGROUND
morbidity and mortality caused by invasive aspergillus infections are increasing due to an expansion in the number of patients receiving potent myeloablative and immunosuppressive regimens for transplantation and the treatment of malignancy and autoimmune disorders  <cit> . patients with hematologic malignancies and recipients of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplants  belong to high-risk groups for invasive aspergillosis .

ia is the most common invasive mould infection in immunocompromised patients. although neutropenia following the conditioning regimen remains an important risk factor for ia in the early post-transplant period, most cases of ia in allogeneic hsct recipients occur after neutrophil recovery in the setting of potent immunosuppressive therapy for graft-versus-host disease . this treatment of gvhd in the late post-transplant period with corticosteroids and potent immunosuppressive therapy contributes to the risk for ia  <cit> .

in immune competent hosts, pulmonary alveolar macrophages  coordinate the early inflammatory response and ingest and kill the inhaled conidia  <cit> . besides ingesting inhaled conidia, ams are believed to play a key role in orchestrating the inflammatory response to a. fumigatus. pattern recognition receptors  on am recognize specific fungal cell wall motifs displayed during the conidial and hyphal stages and produce cytokines and chemokines that stimulate neutrophil recruitment and subsequent antigen-specific immunity. recent studies have demonstrated the key role of prr in regulating innate and antigen-dependent immunity in response to fungal infections  <cit> . for instance, β-glucan that is exposed on the surface of aspergillus germinating conidia and hyphal cells  is recognized by the c-type lectin, dectin- <dig>  <cit> .

in addition to ams, other innate immune cells that include neutrophils, monocytes and nk t cells have important antifungal effector roles. the critical role of neutrophils has been substantiated by the high risk of ia in patients who have severe and prolonged neutropenia and the lethal course of ia in neutropenic murine models  <cit> .

although the past few years have witnessed advances in our understanding of the pathophysiology of ia, our understanding of the disease process and the host response has been hampered by the inability to follow in vivo fungal growth and dissemination in real time.

we recently generated a bioluminescent a. fumigatus strain, which constitutively expresses the luciferase from photinus pyralis under control of the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase promoter. we showed that the bioluminescence of this strain correlated well with fungal biomass under in vitro conditions and demonstrated that using bioluminescence imaging enables researchers to monitor the onset of pulmonary ia in corticosteroid-treated mice  <cit> .

in the present study we applied bioluminescence imaging to an animal model of ia by using different immunosuppression regimens that affect either am and/or neutrophil number or function. the primary aim of this study was to evaluate the suitability of in vivo and ex vivo bioluminescence imaging to monitor the development of invasive aspergillosis. bioluminescence imaging was combined with quantitative fungal dna determination, histopathologic and morphometric analysis of infected lung tissues to assess the fungal burden and progression of ia, the timing and pattern of extrapulmonary dissemination, and the development of inflammatory cell infiltrates in the lung. our results suggest that neutrophils, rather than am, play an indispensable role in host defense against a. fumigatus.

RESULTS
pathogenesis of invasive aspergillosis following different immunosuppression regimens
different immunosupression regimens were used to study their impact on murine survival, the development of invasive aspergillosis , and on fungal growth and dissemination, using the bioluminescent a. fumigatus strain c <dig>  <cit> . immune competent mice manifested a transient weight loss on the day of infection  and uniformly survived the infection . as expected, mice treated with the alkylating agent cyclophosphamide or the glucocorticoid cortisone acetate died within five days after infection  and progressive infection was accompanied by ongoing weight loss . both treatments are frequently used for testing the virulence of a. fumigatus and these results confirmed the virulence of bioluminescent strain c <dig> in different infection models.

neutrophils were depleted by using the monoclonal antibody rb6-8c <dig>  which binds the myeloid differentiation antigen gr- <dig> and leads to neutropenia lasting for three to four days at the dose administered in our experiments  <cit> . in agreement with prior studies, transient neutropenia was sufficient to cause lethal pulmonary aspergillosis   <cit> . however, weight loss of mice treated with rb6-8c <dig> was less pronounced than observed with the other immunosuppressive regimens .

we also targeted resident alveolar macrophages by intranasal instillation of liposomes containing clodronate . phagocytosis of clodrolip leads to an intracellular accumulation of clodronate and the induction of macrophage apoptosis  <cit> . to confirm that the observed effects were not due to the instillation with liposomes, empty liposomes served as a control. the 20% loss of treated mice shown in figure 1a is due to the accidental death of one mouse that displayed pulmonary haemorrhages after drug administration, at necropsy. after infection, none of the mice treated with clodrolip showed severe signs of illness and weight loss was transient .

bioluminescence imaging of infected mice
to understand the specific impact of each immunosuppression regimen on fungal growth, we performed in vivo bioluminescence measurements in different infected cohorts of mice using a. fumigatus strain c <dig>  subsequently, we performed histopathologic analyses to correlate the light emission pattern with fungal invasion and immune effector cell recruitment.

in summary, these results suggest that the rapid increase in bioluminescence, observed in cortisone acetate-treated mice in particular, but also in rb6-8c5-treated mice, reflects early conidial germination post-infection.

correlation of bioluminescence signals with fungal burden in infected mouse lungs
to correlate our assumption concerning the germination speed of conidia with the bioluminescence signal intensities under different immunosuppression regimens, we performed additional experiments on mice immunosuppressed either with cortisone acetate or cyclophosphamide. mice were infected with the bioluminescent strain c <dig> and sacrificed after bioluminescence monitoring on day one or three after infection. lungs of these mice were used to determine the fungal burden by quantification of the fungal dna among the total dna isolated from lung tissues . as observed before , the development of bioluminescence was most strongly pronounced at early time points under cortisone acetate treatment, but declined at later stages of infection. contrarily, under cyclophosphamide treatment the bioluminescence signal was hardly detectable one day after infection, but steadily increased at later time points . as assumed, the amount of fungal dna detected one day after infection in cortisone acetate treated animals was generally higher than that of cyclophosphamide treated animals at the same time point, confirming an increased early germination rate of conidia under corticosteroid treatment. surprisingly, the quantity of fungal dna stayed rather constant under the corticosteroid regimen. this implies that the immune response under this treatment either prohibits further growth of hyphae or even kills fungal cells, which could explain the decrease in the bioluminescence signal. however, lungs explanted from mice sacrificed at day three still showed significant luminescence . therefore, we assume that, besides reducing the expansion of fungal mycelium through the lung tissue, neutrophils cause extensive tissue destruction leading to tissue hypoxia, which could attenuate the bioluminescence signal. oxygen is an essential substrate for firefly luciferase activity and an oxygen saturation below 5% significantly decreases light emission  <cit> .

in contrast, treatment with the cytostatic drug cyclophosphamide prevents the recruitment of immune effector cells to the side of infection. therefore, despite a retarded germination of conidia, fungal hyphae stay alive, which is well visualized by the massive increase in fungal dna determined at the late stage of infection . in agreement, the bioluminescence steadily increased under this regimen and explanted lungs show a  <dig> -  <dig> times higher light emission than observed under corticosteroid treatment. this result shows that bioluminescence measurements and dna quantification correlate best under the cyclophophamide regimen. although the bioluminescence readout does not correlate linearily with the fungal burden as measured by qrt-pcr, the general tendency of increasing and decreasing fungal burden as well as the impact of the inflammatory response seems well reflected by bioluminescence imaging.

impact of immunosuppression regimens on the inflammatory response
in order to correlate survival curves, weight loss, fungal burden from dna quantification and bioluminescence with histopathological findings, additional experiments were performed, in which mice were sacrificed one day  and three days  post infection. for the clodrolip condition, mice were sacrificed eight days after infection to assess any later effect of treatment on mice survival. lungs were removed, and thin sections were studied for the evaluation of the recruitment of immune effector cell lineages and fungal tissue invasion.

clodrolip treatment
lung instillation with clodrolip was expected to reduce the number of am, which are generally denoted as the first cellular line of host innate immune defense through phagocytosis and killing of inhaled conidia. to confirm the reduction in the number of am, the bal fluid of non-infected mice were sampled two days after intranasal administration of clodrolip or liposomes, respectively. flow cytometry was used to quantify the number of am within the bal fluid. the clodrolip treatment resulted in a numeric depletion of 60% of am  when compared to control liposome treated animals . furthermore, the viability of the residual am subset was only 50% as evaluated by trypan blue staining. taken together, clodrolip treatment depleted or resulted in the death of 80% of am compared to control mice.

when the cell populations in bal were evaluated one day post-infection, we noted a  <dig> -fold decrease  in the concentration of am and a  <dig> -fold increase  in the neutrophil concentration in clodrolip-treated mice compared to control liposome-treated mice . thus, am depletion did not result in an apparent defect but rather in airway neutrophil recruitment  <dig> h post-infection.

furthermore, we performed an evaluation of the luminescence in the bal one day after infection, comparing clodrolip versus liposomes  or cortisone acetate treated mice. cortisone acetate was used as a positive control for fungal germination within the lung tissue, because we previously showed that cortisone acetate inhibits the killing capacity of am and resulted in the germination of conidia even one day after infection  <cit> . mice treated with clodrolip had a fourfold lower bal luminescence signal than cortisone actetate-treated mice  , consistent with the finding that preserved airway neutrophil recruitment under these conditions can inhibit the conidial germination. however, although not significantly different, the signal in the bal from clodrolip treated mice was higher than that of liposome treated control mice . nevertheless, germination and mycelium formation was inhibited in am-depleted mice as confirmed by lung histopathology analyses performed one and eight days post infection .

neutrophils may act as the first line of defense against conidia
one day post-infection, the lungs of clodrolip-treated mice contained multifocal lesions  characterised by scattered hemorrhagic foci associated with small  perivascular, peribronchiolar, or intra-bronchiolar/alveolar inflammatory infiltrates . at this stage, few macrophages were detected, which implies that alveolar macrophage depletion was not compensated by massive monocyte recruitment at day one after infection. the cellular infiltrates contained mostly karyorrhectic  neutrophils , embedded in a necrotic material associated with extravasated erythrocytes. clusters of non-germinated conidia were observed in the neutrophilic infiltrates .

eight days post-infection, the lungs of euthanized mice displayed inflammatory lesions  characterised by multifocal hemorrhages and peri-vascular/bronchiolar lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration . very few non-germinated conidia were detected in the cytoplasm of macrophages located in alveolar spaces . at this stage, morphometric analysis revealed that the total surface of the inflammatory cell infiltrates was  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of the total lung parenchymal surface on the histologic sections, in comparison to  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at day one after infection . these data indicate that, at early post-infection time points, neutrophils have supplanted am as a first line of host defense, leading to the destruction and inactivation of conidia prior to germination and hyphae formation. the observed absence of fungal hyphae under these conditions correlated with the inability to detect an increase of the bioluminescence signal.

a group of five mice was studied at each time point, for each condition. the lesions were very similar between the different animals in a same group . a group of three mice was studied for the measurement of the surface of inflammatory cell infiltrates in tissue sections .

- none, +/- minimal, + mild, ++ moderate, +++ marked, ++++ severe

cortisone acetate treatment versus the combination of cortisone acetate and clodrolip
as shown in figure 1c,  <dig>  and  <dig>  mice treated with cortisone acetate  or the combination of cortisone acetate and clodrolip  displayed the highest peak of lung luminescence between day one and day two post infection. both treatment groups experienced 100% mortality five to six days after infection. in addition to the thoracic region, a significant luminescence was observed from the abdomen of all infected mice. however, the abdominal signal declined rapidly and therefore was unlikely to result from fungal dissemination. this was confirmed in histology, by the absence of fungal cfu from the liver, spleen, stomach, and kidneys . therefore, it is likely that some conidia were swallowed and maintained for some time within the intestinal tract without manifestation of an infection. in contrast, a luminescence signal from the sinus regions has been observed in 20% of infected mice. this signal steadily increased and peaked during the terminal survival phase of illness . in parallel with the bioluminescence increase from the sinus region, these infected mice became ataxic and displayed a disturbance in equilibrium. these data demonstrate that bioluminescence imaging can detect signals from extrathoracic sites.

neutrophils encircle a. fumigatus conidia and limit their infiltrative potential, but fail to prevent their germination under corticosteroid-treatment
for histopathological analysis, five mice were sacrificed one day post-infection to visualise fungal outgrowth and the immune response in the early phase of infection. the late phase of infection, at which all the five studied mice displayed strong clinical signs of illness, was studied in lung sections derived from dying animals 3- <dig> days post-infection. lung histopathology at one day after infection revealed multifocal inflammatory lesions mostly centred on alveoli but also involving some bronchial/bronchiolar spaces . they were characterised by small to large infiltrates  of neutrophils that were often karyorrhectic and associated with the necrosis of the overlying epithelium . the total surface of inflammatory infiltrates was  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of the total lung parenchyma surface . germinating conidia and hyphae were diffusely observed in bronchiolar and alveolar spaces, as well as in the interalveolar septae , but they displayed different maturation stages. bronchiolar spaces contained mature septated hyphae , in contrast to alveolar spaces, where only early germinating conidia and short hyphal germlings were detected . these experiments confirm the data obtained from the quantification of fungal dna within the infected tissues, which implied that conidia are rapidly germinating under cortisone acetate treatment.

in comparison to clodrolip-treated mice , cortisone acetate-treated mice exhibited a higher and more severe level of pulmonary parenchyma destruction, and conidia and hyphae were at a more advanced stage of maturation.

three days after infection , pulmonary inflammatory lesions within the corticosteroid-treated group were multifocal, centred on bronchi/bronchioles but secondarily extending to alveoli and blood vessels , and displayed a concentric organisation . in the centre of the inflammatory lesions, bronchiolar, alveolar and vascular spaces were infiltrated mostly by karyorrhectic neutrophils . neutrophils were circled by a peripheral rim of activated macrophages : pyogranulomatous lesion . this was the only condition where pyogranulomatous lesions were observed and all the five mice of the studied group displayed similar lesions . the surface of these pyogranulomatous lesions was up to  <dig>  μm2; the general inflammatory lesion filled  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of the total parenchyma surface , indicating ongoing tissue destruction under cortisone acetate treatment. numerous septated hyphae were detected in bronchial/bronchiolar spaces, but also infiltrating bronchiolar walls and spreading to peripheral alveoli . although histopathology indicates an increase in fungal biomass at the late stage of infection, a significant proportion of fungal cells might have been killed by neutrophil attack. this assumption is supported by the determination of the fungal burden by quantitative real-time pcr . although this investigation was only performed on two animals for each time point and immunosuppression regimen, this analysis indicated that the number of living fungal cells does not seem to increase, since the amount of fungal dna remains rather constant when compared to the early time point. additionally, the massively observed tissue destruction indeed might cause hypoxic conditions accompanied by a decrease of light emission from lung tissues of corticosteroid treated mice.

the same pattern of severe lesions was observed after the clodrolip/cortisone acetate treatment . therefore, depletion of alveolar macrophages does not exhibit additional effects on the development of invasive aspergillosis in the presence of cortisone acetate.

histopathological analysis from the sinus regions performed at the late stage revealed an inflammatory lesion  with a very high density of intralesional fungal hyphae . no histological lesions were observed in the brain . whether the disturbance in equilibrium may be caused by fungal infection of the inner ear cannot be excluded, but had not been investigated here. however, contrasting the decline in bioluminescence in infected lung tissues under cortisone acetate treatment, the steadily increasing bioluminescence from the sinus region might indeed resemble an increase of the fungal biomass.

collectively, these results suggest that in the cortisone acetate condition, the early infiltration of neutrophils results in parenchymal destruction without stopping conidial germination. three days post infection, neutrophils encircling a. fumigatus conidia and hyphae may limit fungal spread. however, despite the obvious killing of some fungal cells, these neutrophils are not able to completely prevent disease progression and mice suffer strongly from the severe inflammatory processes.

rb6-8c <dig> treatment
to determine the effect of neutrophil depletion at specific time points in relation to infection, mice were treated with a single  <dig>  mg intraperitoneal dose of monoclonal antibody rb6-8c <dig> . this method of transient neutrophil depletion was chosen because it is well characterized and specific compared with other methods . however, the luminescence signal was significantly lower than that obtained for cortisone acetate treated mice and the highest values were obtained two days post infection, later than the day  <dig> peak observed in the cortisone acetate-treated group .

monocytes and macrophages are insufficient to prevent conidial germination and hyphal spread in the absence of neutrophils
one day post infection in neutrophil-depleted mice , multifocal pulmonary lesions were observed, characterised by small infiltrates  of mononucleated cells , located either in alveolar spaces or in interalveolar interstitial tissue . neutrophils were not observed within these lesions, indicating a successful depletion of this cell population by the rb6-8c <dig> treatment. lesions represented  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of the parenchymal surface . germinating conidia and short hyphae were observed  in extracellular spaces, typically surrounded by small clusters of inflammatory infiltrates , or within the cytoplasm of am . in contrast to the cortisone acetate treated-mice, no difference in the fungal maturation stage was observed between intra-bronchiolar and intra-alveolar fungi, and fungi displayed less parenchyma infiltration potential.

the late stage  of ia induced by transient neutrophil depletion  was characterised by a multifocal inflammatory lesion, centered on bronchi and bronchioles but extending to alveoli and blood vessels as well . the lesions were extensive, with large areas of necrosis and vascular involvement that was more pronounced than in cortisone acetate-treated mice . mature septated fungal hyphae were observed infiltrating bronchiolar and alveolar spaces as well as interstitial tissue . hyphae were more numerous than in cortisone acetate-treated mice and infiltrated the pulmonary parenchyma more readily . the inflammatory infiltrate was predominately composed of mononuclear cells  . individual lesions measured up to  <dig> μm <dig> in area and accounted  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of the total lung section surface , which is even higher than the area affected under cortisone acetate treatment.

taken together, these data indicate that the recruitment of mononuclear cells, in the absence of neutrophils, is insufficient to prevent conidial germination, hyphal outgrowth and tissue infiltration. it is likely that the severe vascular and parenchymal lesions observed in rb6-8c5-treated mice prevented the development of high bioluminescent signals in vivo. this is most likely due to hypoxia resulting from the pulmonary parenchyma destruction, which was even more severe than under cortisone acetate treatment.

cyclophosphamide treatment
treatment with cyclophosphamide was expected to cause severe neutropenia accompanied by a reduction of monocytes. however, resident alveolar macrophages were not expected to be affected by this treatment. bioluminescence imaging revealed that cyclophosphamide treatment resulted in a delayed , but steadily increasing bioluminescence signal until mice succumbed to progressive disease .

at the late stage of infection, in the absence of inflammatory cells, a. fumigatus disseminates rapidly in cyclophosphamide-treated mice
at day one post-infection , histopathology revealed no significant histological lesion but rare neutrophils could be observed in bronchiolar spaces . non-germinating and rare early-germinating conidia were detected throughout bronchiolar and alveolar spaces . as in the cortisone acetate-treated mice, intrabronchiolar fungi  were seen at a more advanced stage of maturation than intra-alveolar fungal cells . however, hyphal branching was rarely observed at the early stage, even in intrabronchiolar regions , confirming the data from the quantitative analysis of the fungal dna from infected lungs, which implied, despite the small animal group studied, that conidia germination is delayed under cyclophosphamide compared to the cortisone acetate treatment .

in contrast, the late stage of pulmonary infection  was characterised by a severe and diffuse destruction of bronchoalveolar structures , without any inflammatory cell infiltrate . the parenchyma destruction was due to severe fungal parenchymal and vascular wall infiltration, leading to thrombosis and infarcts . bronchial, bronchiolar, and alveolar epithelial cells were necrotic . grocott methenamine silver staining showed a high number of mature septated fungal hyphae, spreading diffusely from bronchiolar spaces to alveoli and infiltrating blood vessels , as already assumed from the increasing bioluminescent signal and the high amount of fungal dna obtained from these tissues . collectively these results demonstrate that immune effector cells recruitment is vital to limit hyphal growth and dissemination.

discussion
in this study we successfully imaged murine invasive pulmonary aspergillosis using bioluminescence recordings in a serial manner. we applied different immunosuppression regimens to elucidate their impact on the susceptibility of mice to invasive aspergillosis . by combining bioluminescence imaging and histopathology we gained new insights on the impact of different immune effector cells  in host defense against conidial germination and tissue invasion.

interestingly, under conditions of high inflammation, such as the cortisone acetate or rb6-8c <dig> treatment, bioluminescence signal intensities nicely reflected the early germination of conidia, but only showed limited correlation with the amount of alive fungal cells at later time points of infection. quantification of the fungal dna from late time points of cortisone acetate treated animal implied that the number of living cells stayed constant over time. this result confirmed that neutrophils, although affected in their killing capacity by the corticosteroid, limited the uncontrolled spreading of fungal mycelium through the lung tissues. however, one would have expected that the bioluminescence signal stays at a high level rather than declining. due to the large necrotic areas , we attribute the decline of the bioluminescence signal to the development of hypoxia, as observed in tissues after stroke or myocardial infarction and for growing tumors, which become hypoxic when they outgrow the vascular supply  <cit> . the limitation of bioluminescence imaging in hypoxic tissues has already been described by investigating the decrease in bioluminescence of luciferase-transfected gliosarcoma tumor cells under defined hypoxic in vitro conditions  <cit> . additionally, bioluminescent implanted tumor cells can become necrotic at a certain age with subsequent decline of bioluminescence although the tumor itself does not reduce its size  <cit> . this latter scenario is likely to be comparable to our results obtained during bioluminescence imaging of invasive aspergillosis under cortisone acetate and rb6-8c <dig> antibody treatment. in addition, the occurrence of hypoxia has been assumed from the attenuated virulence of a. fumigatus mutants with a defective adaptation to hypoxic conditions  <cit>  and seems confirmed independently by our bioluminescence measurements. although the correlation of the bioluminescent signal at later time points with the fungal burden is limited the decline in bioluminescence under in vivo conditions in late stages of infection acts as an indicator of tissue destruction and hypoxia and indicates the imminent death of the animals.

despite the low correlation of fungal biomass and bioluminescence at late time points after infection in the cortisone acetate and rb6-8c <dig> treatments, a good correlation between the increase in the fungal biomass and the bioluminescence was observed under the cyclophosphamide regimen. under this treatment, although the growing hyphae were responsible for diffuse parenchyma lesions, the accessibility of oxygen remains possible in the absence of inflammation. at late time points, an ongoing increase of the luminescence signal reflects the increase of biomass. therefore, cyclophosphamide immunosuppression seems best suited to follow the effect of antifungal drug treatment on clearance of fungal infections.

this study additionally allowed gaining new insight concerning the impact of different immune effector cells in the defense against invasive aspergillosis. alveolar macrophages  were assumed to play an important role in clearance of conidia from tissues and provide a "first-line of defense" against a. fumigatus infections  <cit> . am are thought to trigger the recruitment of immune effector cells to the site of infection after recognition and phagocytosis of conidia  <cit>  through the release of inflammatory and chemotactic mediators.

due to the importance of am in conidial host defense, we expected that their reduction by the clodrolip treatment would increase the susceptibility of mice to ia. this assumption was not confirmed experimentally. intranasally clodrolip-treated mice showed a 80% reduction in the number and viability of am  <cit> , but a  <dig>  fold increase in the number of bal fluid neutrophils, one day post-infection. a significant increase in the neutrophil number in bal fluid of macrophage-depleted  mice  <dig> hours after instillation of pseudomonas aeruginosa has already been reported. however, in this work macrophage-deficient mice showed impaired bacterial clearance  <cit> . in contrast, in our model, neutrophil migration into the airways of macrophage-depleted infected mice is likely to have prevented conidial germination per se.

supporting this idea, we found that the thoracic region or bal fluid of am-depleted animals only showed a slight increase in bioluminescence above control levels . this finding correlated with survival data and histopathological findings, demonstrating an absence of conidial germination in am-depleted mice. these results do not fully exclude the possibility that  there were still sufficient residual viable alveolar macrophages to trigger an immune response due to only 80% of depletion and  the possibility of recruitment of peripheral monocytes or  that the increase in recruited neutrophils was able to control the infection in the absence of normal alveolar macrophage counts. the first and second scenarios, however, appear rather unlikely, because hardly any macrophages or monocytes were observed in histopathologic analyses at day one after infection. the third scenario appears quite likely, because histopathological analysis revealed a strong infiltration of neutrophils encasing ungerminated conidia. in contrast, functionally attenuated neutrophils and macrophages in corticosteroid-treated mice allowed development of invasive disease despite robust cellular recruitment in the lung parenchyma.

the treatment of mice with cortisone acetate or the combination of clodrolip and cortisone acetate led to 100% mortality and invasive fungal growth within the lung tissue. although systemic administration of corticosteroids increases the number of circulating neutrophils by three- to fivefold  <cit> , their ability to damage a. fumigatus hyphae is strongly reduced  <cit> . one day post-infection, the lung tissue showed an extensive neutrophilic infiltration that surrounded germinating conidia. these neutrophils were able to delay uncontrolled tissue invasion by killing some proportion of fungal hyphae. as a consequence of the neutrophil infiltration severe tissue damage accompanied by parenchymal destruction  was observed, leading to a decreased bioluminescence as described above. it is also noteworthy that under cortisone acetate treatment the efficiency of alveolar macrophages in inhibiting conidial germination after phagocytosis was strongly defective. none of the other treatment groups yielded hyphal germlings as early as one day post-infection. it could be assumed that this rapid germination is due to growth stimulation via a. fumigatus corticosteroid receptors  <cit> . however, experiments, in which different concentrations of cortisone acetate were added to a. fumigatus cultures, neither stimulated conidia germination, nor increased the light emission . since cortisone acetate itself constitutes an "inactive" corticosteroid derivative, which is converted into "active" cortisol during metabolism in the liver  <cit> , it might be possible that a stimulation of germination is only mediated by this metabolite rather than by cortisone acetate.

another possibility for the rapid germination of conidia is given by a neutrophil mediated tissue destruction releasing large amounts of nutrients from tissue cells, which enhanced the germination speed under this immunosuppresive regimen. the mild inflammation under rb6-8c <dig> treatment one day post infection and the absence of inflammation under cyclophosphamide treatment may not provide the same nutritional conditions leading to a delayed germination when compared to the cortisone acetate treatment.

another piece of evidence that supports the dependence on the number and functional integrity of neutrophils in the clearance of a. fumigatus is the observation that rb6-8c <dig> treatment renders mice highly susceptible to ia. our results confirm earlier studies  <cit>  and clearly demonstrate that am and monocytes cannot functionally compensate for loss of neutrophils. rb6-8c <dig> treated mice succumbed to ia with a similar time course as cortisone acetate-treated mice. however, a notable difference between both models was the absence of neutrophils and the severe tissue infiltration by mononuclear cells  seen in rb6-8c5-treated mice at days three to four after infection. this tissue infiltration covered approximately 19% of the total lung surface and was more severe than observed in the cortisone acetate treatment group .

treatment with cyclophosphamide was assumed to have the strongest impact on the development of ia. it results in:  a reduction in the number of monocytes and neutrophils in the peripheral blood by  <dig> and 88%, respectively  <cit> ,  a reduction in the number of am and neutrophils in an experimental lung infection with streptococcus pneumoniae  <cit> ,  an impairment of phagocytosis  <cit> ,  an immune dysfunction through reactive oxygen intermediate-induced damage to the immune system cells  <cit>  without alteration of the degranulation process  <cit>  and finally  a failure in neutrophil chemotactic function  <cit> . as expected, under this treatment, we did not observe inflammation within the infected tissues. therefore, mice treated with cyclophosphamide succumb to uncontrolled infection resulting in tissue destruction and blood vessel infiltration by the fungal mycelium and the fungal biomass produced under this regimen was by far most pronounced at late time points . in contrast, cortisone acetate and rb6-8c <dig> treatment likely results in additional tissue injury due to the strong, but ineffective host inflammatory response.

interestingly, the luminescence additionally enabled us to detect and monitor extrathoracic growth of a. fumigatus in particular in the sinus area even in cortisone acetate treated mice. the resulting suppurative sinusitis may indicate a defect in the innate immune response in the upper respiratory airway rather than dissemination.

reflecting on the outcome of aspergillosis from the different infection models, we conclude that am are likely to be important in orchestrating the early immune response to recruit other immune effector cells. however, although able to slow fungal outgrowth, am are insufficient to clear the infection in the absence of neutrophils. neutrophil depletion by the rb6-8c <dig> antibody leads to a predominately monocyte infiltration to the site of infection. influx of mononuclear cells is insufficient to replace neutrophil function. corticosteroid treatment leads to the most rapid germination of conidia, which may reflect functional inactivation of alveolar macrophages followed by the ongoing influx of neutrophils, which are attenuated in their conidial and hyphal killing mechanisms. although after corticosteroid-treatment, neutrophils were not able to inactivate growing hyphae completely, they retarded hyphal tissue invasion at the great cost of massive tissue inflammation and necrosis. therefore, preservation of neutrophil number and function is indispensable for the control and clearance of a. fumigatus infections. macrophages may play an important role in orchestrating the immune response, but their action alone is not sufficient to combat a. fumigatus.

our data suggest that the early neutrophil recruitment is crucial to form an efficient immune response against a. fumigatus. this assumption is supported by two previous studies, which have reported that mice deficient in the chemokine receptor cxcr <dig>  display a defect in neutrophil recruitment and were more susceptible to ia  <cit> . therefore, we conducted a preliminary investigation, in which we used a bioluminescent a. fumigatus strain to monitor the pathogenesis of cxcr2-/- mice. this experiment revealed an overall average of 3-fold increase of bioluminescence signal within the thoracic region of knockout compared to wild type mice. at day  <dig> post infection, a  <dig> fold-increase in luminescence was observed in knockout animals with a mortality rate of more than 60%, whereas all immune competent wild-type mice survived . although this experiment has to be confirmed by characterizing the histological lesions, it fits well with the assumption that the early recruitment of immunocompetent neutrophils is one of the most important factors to combat the initial onset of invasive aspergillosis.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, the bioluminescent a. fumigatus strain provides a valuable tool to define the progressive nature of ia under different immunosuppressive regimens, although the quantification of fungal biomass by bioluminescent imaging was difficult to assess especially under inflammatory conditions. however, in order to confirm that the tendency of the progression of infection is correctly assigned by bioluminescence imaging, we confirmed our results by histopathologic analysis and quantification of the fungal dna by qrt-pcr. the latter method is the most reliable measure for quantification of living fungal cells, but cannot be used in time response analyses since the animals need to be sacrificed to gain the infected organs. although larger animal groups and all immunosuppression regimens need to be investigated by quantitative real-time pcr, it appears that bioluminescence imaging cannot be used for replacing alternative methods for quantification if an exact value for fungal biomass in a certain animal and time point needs to be determined. this is mainly due to the fact that bioluminescence does not increase or decrease linearly with the burden as determined by quantitative real-time pcr since determination of light emission from living animals is strongly dependent on availability of oxygen. however, and most importantly, bioluminescence imaging was indeed able reflecting the general tendency of the speed of fungal germination, tissue invasion and inflammatory response. histopathology revealed a rapid germination of conidia under cortisone acetate treatment and, coinciding, a high bioluminescent signal was obtained. at later stages, neutrophils partially inactivated fungal mycelium and caused tissue necrosis under corticosteroid treatment. in agreement, the bioluminescent signal strongly declined. contrarily, under cyclophosphamide treatment conidia germination is delayed. therefore, one day after infection only a weak bioluminescence signal was detected. however, at later time points under this regimen, a strong fungal invasion of the lung parenchyma was observed in histopathology and confirmed by quantification of fungal dna. coinciding, the bioluminescence strongly increased. therefore, bioluminescence signals cannot be used for comparison of the fungal burden among different immunosuppression regimens but within one well-defined regimen, the bioluminescence correlates well with the independently determined fungal germination speed, immune response and the fate of fungal cells within the infected tissue.

by using the bioluminsescence imaging system, we found that experiments that perturb the number, recruitment, and function of neutrophils result in predictable patterns of invasive aspergillosis that can be imaged serially in real time with bioluminescence imaging. in vivo monitoring shows light emission from lungs as soon as  <dig> hours post infection, indicating rapid outgrowth of the fungus. therefore, early diagnosis of fungal infections is of tremendous importance. in addition, our study provides new insights into the innate immune response emphasizing an essential role for neutrophils as recruited phagocytes in the early innate response to a. fumigatus.

the currently constructed strain seems most suitable for disease monitoring in host system that have undergone myeloablation . the reproducible imaging results from small groups of animals and is likely to help in substantial cost savings in trials that examine the effects of pharmaceutical compounds, antibodies, and genetic or cellular lesions in small animal models of ia. in further studies, bioluminescence imaging will be used to assess the efficacy of antifungal drugs under in vivo conditions. a successful monitoring of clearance of fungal infections might help improving future treatment strategies for combating invasive fungal infections.

