BACKGROUND
membranous nephropathy  is an important glomerular disease characterized by podocyte injury and proteinuria. although the definite pathogenic mechanisms of mn has not yet been entirely clarified, it is widely accepted that mn involves the in situ formation of subepithelial immune complex deposits and subsequent complement activation leading to podocyte injury and diffuse thickening of the glomerular basement membrane, based on experimental animal models and human studies  <cit> . the diagnosis and treatment of mn patients are presently based mainly on clinical manifestations, urinary protein excretion levels, and renal biopsy. renal biopsy, though providing specific diagnosis currently, is an invasive procedure with considerably significant complications, particularly in patients with bleeding tendency or skin infection on the flank. thus, a renal biopsy may be contraindicated for certain high risk patients, and was often refused by early patients. at the stage of mn, the function of glomerular filtration can be kept in a normal range. routine clinical chemical measures of renal function based on blood, such as serum creatinine, serum uric acid, albumin, and total protein, are insensitive and laggard for early diagnosis. they elevated significantly only after substantial kidney injury occurs, generally after a loss of two third or greater of nephron functional capacity  <cit> . however, the metabolites that are overproduced during mn progression will enter urine space and be secreted into final urine. for this reason, urine possibly is an ideal source of test materials to noninvasively characterize the activity of kidney.

metabolomics, an important constituent of systems biology, aims to simultaneously measure as many metabolites as possible in a given biological system in order to acquire an overview of metabolic status and global biochemical events associated with a cellular or biological system  <cit> . it is well known that the minor alteration at the level of gene or protein expression usually leads to significant change in metabolite level. combining a robust instrumental analysis with whole metabolite information and multivariate statistical analysis, such as principal component analysis  and partial least squares discriminant analysis , metabolomics has been a considerably intensive means for comprehensively evaluating toxicity of drugs or xenobiotics  <cit> , early diagnosis and identifying potential biomarkers  <cit> , and elucidating biological pathways  <cit> . mass spectrometry  and nuclear magnetic resonance  spectroscopy are major analytical tools for metabolomics. ms coupled with advanced chromatographic separation instruments, such as gas chromatography  or liquid chromatography , has become a powerful metabolomics tool, with a wide dynamic range and reproducible quantitative performance, for the measurement of complex biological samples. gc/ms is a robust analytical platform for quantification with better sensitivity and resolution than the commonly used nmr approach and better reliability in structure identification of candidate biomarkers than lc/ms  <cit> . it has been widely applied in metabolomics research of biofluids, feces, and tissue samples  <cit> . nowadays, metabolomics has been successfully used in the fields of physiology, diagnostics, functional genomics, pharmacology, toxicology, and nutrition. furthermore, simple and non-invasive sample collection techniques, fast instrumental analysis, and meaningful diagnostic information enable urine to be a considerably suitable biofluid for metabolomics analysis in personalized medicine such as the recent application in personalized neonatal medicine  <cit> .

urine-based metabolomics has been applied in the researches of early detection and renal toxicity  <cit> , diagnosis, biomarker identification, and pathogenic pathway of kidney cancer  <cit> . to our knowledge, there is no research work published about mn based on metabolomics. in omics field, there is only a paper reported the changes of urinary proteome profile using a mn animal model  <cit> . in the present study, we adopted a gc/ms-based metabolomics approach, based on clinical urine and serum samples, to systematically evaluate the metabolic alterations and understand the differential pathological characteristics between the mn patients with urine protein lower than  <dig>  g/ <dig> h and those with urine protein higher than  <dig>  g/ <dig> h. ongoing work in our lab is directed to further study of such disease at a larger sample scale and validate the potential biomarkers for the researches of clinical diagnosis and pathological mechanism.

RESULTS
histopathology and clinical chemistry
the diagnosis and grading of mn patients were performed according to clinical chemical parameters and renal biopsy. the patients were clinically classified to low urine protein mn group  and high urine protein mn group . according to the detailed pca analysis in the next section,  <dig> samples with serum creatinine higher than  <dig> μmol/l but urine protein lower than  <dig>  g/ <dig> h were found to be outliers, and were excluded from final statistics of clinically chemical parameters. table  <dig> lists the clinical parameters. although the average urine creatinine level of hupm group was higher than that of lupm group, there was no statistical difference between them. it was worth noting that the serum creatinine of hupm group was significantly higher than that of lupm group, suggesting the different glomerular filtrate rate and renal function between the two groups of mn patients. obviously, the serum creatinine clearance by kidneys of hupm patients was weaker than lupm patients, but the creatinine values of both two groups were still within the normal range. in general, the glomerular basement membrane with normal function is negatively charged in the body, which prevents the filtration of the negatively charged proteins such as albumin to the urine. in contrast to the lupm group, the markedly reduced serum albumin and total protein in hupm group possibly reflected the increased damage of glomerular basement membrane.

urinary metabolomics analysis
trimethylsilyl derivatization was applied in sample preparation prior to gc/ms analysis. this derivatization can efficiently improve gc/ms analysis of the compounds which contain carboxylic, amino, or hydroxyl group, such as fatty acids, amino acids, amines, hydroxyl acids, carbohydrates, and phenolic acids. the representative urinary gc/ms total ion current  chromatograms of the lupm and the hupm patients were displayed in figure 1a and 1b, respectively. a total of  <dig> chromatographic peaks were resolved from over 80% of samples after the exclusion of known internal standard and artifact peaks. in order to obtain more reliable outcomes at the level of population, multivariate statistical analysis, such as pca and pls-da, was performed on the preprocessed gc/ms data matrices. pca was initially performed on the normalized peak areas obtained from all the samples to evaluate the quality of sample analysis and view the holistic distribution, clustering, and outlier of samples. the pca scores plot  shows that all qc samples, prepared by pooling the urine samples in this study, are tightly clustered in a small area, demonstrating that current protocol is reliable and thereby the variance derived from metabolomics analysis can be ignored at the following data analysis  <cit> . four samples were out of the hotelling t <dig> 95% confidence, and thus were suspected as outlier samples. after checking the clinically chemical parameters, it was found that all of the  <dig> samples with serum creatinine higher than  <dig> μmol/l but urine protein lower than  <dig>  g/ <dig> h were involved in the outliers. in addition, the outlier samples with high serum creatinine distributed in scattered space of pca scores plot. the three samples and another one outlier sample were excluded at the subsequent analysis.

after removing  <dig> outlier samples, pca model  was constructed again, and the scores plot shows that no evident separation but a separation tendency indeed exists between the lupm group and hupm group . r <dig> and q <dig> values were calculated for the model to assess any significance of differentiation and the quality of model. the low statistical parameters showed that pca model was not suitable for interpreting the differences. a pls-da model with  <dig> components was thus conducted to reveal the differences between the two groups. the pls-da model showed significantly improved model predictability , and fairly good capability to explain the metabolic variation between lupm and hupm patients . figure 1e indicates that the two groups are evidently separated in pc <dig> and pc <dig>  the pls-da scores plot implied that the severity of mn patients could be discriminated according to the urine protein level.

the differential metabolites contributing to the metabolic differences between the lupm group and hupm group were further identified. among the statistically significant variables,  <dig> differential metabolites were structurally qualified using reference compounds and nist library with retention indexes http://www.sisweb.com/software/ms/nist.htm. these metabolites were summarized in table  <dig> 

a variable importance in the projection  was obtained from pls-da model with value higher than  <dig> ;

b the p-value calculated from two-tailed student's t test;

c fdr adjusted p value from two-tailed student's t test;

d fold change was calculated as binary logarithm of average mass response  ratio between hupm and lupm patients, where the positive value means that the average mass response of the metabolite in the hupm group is larger than that in the lupm group.

they mainly included dicarboxylic acids, hydroxyl acids, phenolic acids, tca cycle intermediates, sugar alcohols, cytosine, quinolinic acid, and cholesterol. in contrast to lupm subjects, the majority of metabolites were increasingly excreted in the urines of hupm patients. dicarboxylic acids are generally the products of polyunsaturated fatty acids under oxidative stress. sugar alcohols are commonly as the regulator of the osmotic pressure during the formation of urine. the overproduction of this kind of metabolites in the urines of hupm patients indicated that the re-absorption function and self metabolism of their kidney possibly received more severe injury than lupm subjects.

metabolomics analysis of serum samples
serum samples were simultaneously analyzed in this study. with the consent of patients, we collected the serum samples of a part of volunteer patients. the representative serum gc/ms total ion current  chromatograms of the lupm patient and the hupm patient were shown in figure 2a and 2b, respectively. totally,  <dig> chromatographic peaks were obtained from the over 80% of samples after exclusion of known internal standard and artifact peaks. similar to urine metabolomics analysis, we first performed a pca model to validate the robustness of our metabolomics protocol. after exclusion of qc samples, a new pca model was performed again. the pca scores plot  indicates that, similar to urine, no clear profile separation was present between the two groups of samples . the small values of statistical parameters indicated that pca model cannot explain the differences between the serum samples of lupm and hupm patients. subsequently, a pls-da model was conducted to reveal variations between the two groups. the parameters  indicated that the pls-da model was reliable to explain the phenotype difference between the lupm and hupm patients. the pls-da scores plot demonstrates that the two groups of samples are well separated to two clusters, thus the lupm group was different from the hupm group by metabolomics analysis of serum samples .

the serum metabolites contributing to such metabolomics profile separation were identified. nine serum metabolites were annotated by the nist library, and of which  <dig> metabolites were confirmed by our reference compounds . the number of differential metabolites from serum is obviously less than that from urine. similar to the urine results, cholesterol was found significantly increased in the hupm group. however, unlike urine, the citric acid level of hupm group was significantly higher than that of lupm group. no urinary amino acids were found differentially expressed between the lupm and the hupm patients, but  <dig> serum amino acids were significantly increased in the hupm patients.

a variable importance in the projection  was obtained from pls-da model with value higher than  <dig> ;

b the p-value was calculated from student's t test;

c fdr adjusted p value from two-tailed student's t test;

d fold change was calculated as binary logarithm of average mass response  ratio between hupm and lupm patients, where the positive value means that the average mass response of the metabolite in the hupm group is larger than that in the lupm group;

# the metabolite was structurally confirmed by available reference compound.

discussion
the metabolites that are massively overproduced during the progression of membranous nephropathy and fit the criteria of glomerular filtration, including blood and the metabolites of kidney, will enter urine space and the final urine. in this study, the routine clinical chemical measures of renal function indicated that the serum creatinine of almost all patients were kept in normal range, suggesting that the function of glomerular filtration probably was not substantially altered, irrespective of glomerular injury happened actually. here, we performed a parallel metabolomic study based on urine and serum to globally profile metabolic differences and identify differential metabolites, and attempted to understand the pathogenic mechanism of membranous nephropathy based on different urine protein levels.

it is important to compare the differential metabolites before kidney  and after kidney . the number of differential urinary metabolites was markedly more than that of differential serum metabolites between the patients of lupm and hupm. the levels of the majority of differential metabolites were significantly increased in hupm patients for both urines and serums. figure  <dig> demonstrates that all differential metabolites can be classified to  <dig> groups according to their change trend in urine and serum. cholesterol was higher in both urine and serum of hupm patients . four amino acids were found as differential serum metabolites with markedly increased levels in hupm patients, while they were not differentially excreted in the urines . class  <dig> reflects that the kidneys of hupm patients possibly possessed weaker filtration ability for amino acids and citric acid, and thus suffered more severe injury than those of lupm patients. it was presumed that these elevated  <dig> amino acids and citric acid in serum samples of hupm patients probably came from the metabolism of other organs  rather than kidney, and were to some extent prevented into urine by impaired kidney. 2-keto-3-methylvaleric acid and m-cresol were higher in the serums of lupm patients and classified to class  <dig>  but their functions remain unclear. the class  <dig> contains lactose and cis-aconitic acid with higher secretion only in the urines of lupm patients. other differential metabolites increased only in urines of hupm patients , such as sugar alcohols, dicarboxylic acids, hydroxyl acids, and phenolic acids, are possibly derived from the metabolism of kidney, because there were no differences between the serum samples of lupm and hupm patients. thus, the metabolites of class  <dig> probably were the direct outcomes of renal injury.

four sugar alcohols  were increasingly excreted in the urines of hupm patients, while their concentrations were not changed significantly in the serum samples. polyols are polyhydric alcohols, derived from aldoses and ketoses by reduction with nadph. in this study, the serum and urine glucose levels of hupm patients were significantly higher than those of lupm subjects , suggesting that these polyols possibly came from the elevated glucose. recent research proved that erythritol was an excellent antioxidant  <cit> , and attenuated the diabetic oxidative stress  <cit> .

the increasing evidence shows that oxidative stress formed in podocyte response to the membrane attack complex c5b- <dig> induced injury is an important outcome. the attack of c5b- <dig> on podocytes induces production of reactive oxygen species , which initiate lipid peroxidation and subsequent degradation of glomerular basement membrane collagen iv, leading to development of proteinuria  <cit> . in this research, the majority of metabolites in class  <dig> and  <dig> were presumed to be closely related to the increased oxidative stress. according to previous knowledge, we proposed a metabolic network associating with the increased oxidative stress during the developing of membranous nephropathy .

in this study, a series of dicarboxylic acids and corresponding hydroxyl metabolites, such as adipic acid, suberic acid, and 3-hydroxysebacic acid, were excessively excreted in the urines of hupm patients, compared with lup patients. bergseth et al  <cit>  found that urinary dicarboxylic acids might to a significant extent be formed in the kidneys themselves. glutaric acid, a product of lysine degradation, can induce oxidative stress in brain of young rat  <cit> . under pathological status, free or esterified cis-polyunsaturated fatty acids generated saturated short-  and medium-chain length dicarboxylic acids  due to peroxisomal disorder by oxidative attack  <cit> . the elevated urinary dicarboxylic acids in hupm patients possibly reflected an more severe oxidative stress than lupm patients in this study.

threonic acid is another one metabolite of interest. the formation of this metabolite is closely related to the deficiency or degradation of ascorbic acid, a potent water-soluble antioxidant that readily scavenges free radicals such as molecular oxygen, superoxide, and hydroxyl radical  <cit> . threonic acid is related to the protein collagen, but its function in nephropathy hitherto was still not reported. the higher level of urinary threonic acid in hupm patients than lupm patients indirectly indicated the significantly strengthened oxidative stress in hupm patients. it is known that ascorbic acid helps decrease cholesterol. the increased urinary and serum cholesterol levels in the hupm patients further proved the deficiency of ascorbic acid and hence the increased oxidative stress.

previous proteomics research based on a rat mn model found that aldehyde dehydrogenase, which is capable of converting 9-cis and all-trans retinal to corresponding retinoic acid with high efficiency, was decreased  <cit> . its function has been suggested to involve in oxidative pathway  <cit> . it is known that hupm patients clinically are more severe than lupm patients. metabolomics analysis in this research proved the more strengthened oxidative stress, mainly in kidney, during the pathogenesis and progression of hupm patients. currently, studies that used antioxidants and oxygen radical scavengers have demonstrated beneficial effects in animal model and human mn treatments  <cit> .

a lot of phenolic acids were increasingly excreted in the urines of hupm patients. they are the metabolites of phenylalanine and tyrosine metabolism and usually serve as antioxidants  <cit> . in contrast to lupm patients, the increased  <dig> -dihydroxybenzoic acid, 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid, vanillic acid, and vanillactic acid in the urines of hupm patients suggested that more antioxidants were possibly produced and transferred into glomerulus to defense the increasing oxidative stress during pathological progression, and thereafter excreted massively in urines. in this study, however, we did not know whether these phenolic acids were primarily formed in kidney or in other organs, because no differences were found between the serum samples of the two groups of patients.

a phenolic acid of special interest is 4-hydroxyphenyllactic acid, which was increasingly excreted in the urines of hupm patients. it is a carcinogenic metabolite of the disorder of tyrosine metabolism, and will be increasingly produced in patients with deficiency of p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate oxidase. it was demonstrated to decrease considerably ascorbic acid concentration in mouse organ and blood  <cit> . it can impair the function of kidney tubules. such different concentration likely suggested the more serious kidney injury happened in hupm patients.

quinolinic acid is an important metabolite which lies upstream of nad+ and nadp+. increased quinolinic acid in the kidneys of hupm patients provided the precursor of nadph for the biosysnthesis of polyols, dicarboxylic acids, and pyrimidine metabolism. quinolinic acid could reduce antioxidant defenses in rat brain  <cit> . the increased quinolinic acid in hupm patients possibly reduced the effects of antioxidants. one recent research suggested a link between quinolinic acid and kidney disease with increased proliferation when kidney mesangial cells were exposed to this compound in vitro  <cit> . kim et al  <cit>  performed a urine metabolomics analysis to find the correlation between kidney cancer and increased quinolinic acid. based on previous knowledge and our results, we presumed that oxidative stress was one of the vital features in the developing of mn.

CONCLUSIONS
parallel metabolomics of urine and serum based on gc/ms platform is an appropriate approach for revealing the systematic alteration associated with diverse renal diseases, such as membranous nephropathy in current research. in this case, there were obvious metabolic distinctions between the patients with urine protein lower than  <dig>  g/ <dig> h  and those higher than  <dig>  g/ <dig> h  according to pls-da model analysis. in total,  <dig> urine metabolites and  <dig> serum metabolites were identified to account for such differences. the majority of differential metabolites was significantly increased in hupm patients for both urines and serums. combining the differential urine with serum metabolites, all metabolites were classified to  <dig> classes. the markedly increased metabolites  only in the serum samples of hupm patients implied more severe injury of renal filtration function than lupm patients. the significantly increased excretion of dicarboxylic acids, threonic acid, quinolinic acid, cholesterol, and phenolic acids in urines of hupm patients suggested more severe oxidative stresses than lupm patients. these results prompted us that the severity of membranous nephropathy was associated with oxidative stress. in summary, the parallel metabolomics of urine and serum is a promising approach revealing systematic metabolic variations associated with renal diseases. the urinary marker metabolites correlated with oxidative stress also showed a prospective application in early diagnosis of renal diseases.

