BACKGROUND
the advent of high-throughput genome sequencing coupled with breakthroughs in the field of functional genomics has provided an unprecedented opportunity to study the molecular mechanisms that govern the dynamic behavior of cells, organs, and organisms  <cit> . indeed, there are excellent examples documenting interdisciplinary use of these emerging technologies, from human genome snp scans diagnostic of human disease susceptibility  <cit>  to discovery of the genetic mechanisms underlying beak morphology of darwin's finches  <cit> . applications are also apparent in plant biology, where the use of genomic technologies have uncovered stress-dependent behaviors in mechanistic detail . such studies have led to the elucidation of highly complex and interacting networks of the abiotic stress response. for example, salinity, drought, and cold elicit a dehydration response that shares many common elements and interacting pathways  <cit> . these findings have spurred additional investigations searching for shared signaling cascades or molecules associated with pathway integration, or cross-talk, and have led to numerous candidates including reactive oxygen species  and calcium signaling  <cit> , hormones  <cit>  and others  <cit> . however, despite the advances made possible by "omics"-based technologies, we still struggle to accurately associate the genes, transcriptional cascades, and signaling networks with physiological performance and ecological fitness.

one obstacle to this lack of association is perhaps the result of two opposing paradigms often used in comparative physiology  <cit> . the first approach, termed gene-to-phenotype, is typified by that of many "omics"-based studies where the effects of specific genes on phenotypic performance and fitness are evaluated . this is in contrast to the phenotype-to-gene approach where the biologist attempts to determine the evolutionary potential of a given trait within a population without identifying the underlying genes . thus, the latter approach is interested in the potential for a trait to evolve, while the former focuses on the underlying genetic mechanism of a particular trait. the integration of both approaches will be an important component of the emerging field of evolutionary and ecological genomics, which aims to study adaptation of natural populations to their environment  <cit> .

to fully understand the genetic mechanisms underlying physiological adaptation to abiotic stress, we must first begin to understand the complex biological processes of how the resultant phenotype is generated from the genotype and then seamlessly coalesce our newfound understanding with population and evolutionary genetics. to initiate this task, we have adapted and integrated two recent analytical advances from the biomedical community. the first approach uses a novel weighted gene coexpression network to determine signaling networks and core genes underlying disease states and evolutionary diversification  <cit> . the second approach explores the genomic signature concept as recently defined by lamb et al.  <cit> , and is currently used to connect the disease state of an organism with the underlying genes and possible drug treatments  <cit> . our purpose is to determine if these techniques can be used to associate the abiotic plant stress transcriptome with common and specific pathways underlying phenotypic response in a manner that is conducive to current and future genetic studies. we address this by combining gene coexpression networks with the genomic signature concept to investigate transcript profiles for plants exposed to drought, osmotic, salt, cold, heat, and uv-b stress. our intent is not to describe in exhaustive detail the genes unique to or common among these stresses, although we do this to some extent, but rather to illustrate the power of this approach and provide sufficient information so that we and others can evaluate the full potential of this technique for plant biologists and evolutionary ecologists.

RESULTS
arabidopsis stress gene coexpression network
it is known that the plant stress response is characteristic of highly complex and often integrated signaling pathways  <cit> . to help elucidate the transcriptional networks associated with exposure to abiotic environmental stress, a weighted gene coexpression network was constructed as described in zhang and horvath  <cit>  and in materials and methods from a subset of the atgenexpress abiotic stress dataset  <cit> . the data subsets were determined by first analyzing all abiotic stress datasets separately for differential gene expression between control and treatment conditions using the limma package  <cit>  operated within the r statistical program language  <cit> . genes that had an adjusted p <  <dig>  and a log-odds ratio >  <dig>  were deemed significantly differentially expressed and were subsequently included in the data subset. this subset, or initial input gene list, contained  <dig>   unique gene transcripts identifiers with significantly higher or lower abundance at least once per treatment and per time-point .

the network construction algorithms were applied to normalized raw intensity transcript abundance values across all microarray samples  for designated genes from the above subset list. due to computational constraints, only the ~66th quantile  of the most highly connected nodes  were subjected to unsupervised hierarchical clustering to define groups of highly correlated gene expression patterns, termed modules. using the above criteria, six unique modules were found to have high expression similarity , and were subsequently assigned individual colors .

to determine the relationship between module designation and environmentally-induced expression patterns, we rank ordered all genes according to the log <dig> fold-change in transcript abundance between treatment and control and then color-coded each gene according to its corresponding module color. the resultant ranked gene-lists showed clear patterns in response to treatment duration . in the osmotic condition, for example, yellow  and red module  genes significantly enriched the distribution of up-regulated genes at the initial time point, with both modules maintaining significantly enriched distributions throughout the treatment period . however, at three hours of osmotic treatment, blue module genes began to enrich down-regulated genes , while turquoise module genes enriched up-regulated genes . temporal trends for module enrichment of up- and down-regulated genes were apparent for all treatment conditions , and are summarized .

according to network theory  <cit> , genes within coexpression modules often share conserved biological functions. to investigate the functional relationship between individual modules and stress response, we used the singular value decomposition method as developed by alter et al.  <cit>  and applied by oldham et al. and horvath et al.  <cit> . this method characterizes the expression of each module by its first principle component- eigengene value. in general, the results from the singular value decomposition corroborated the visual patterns from the rank lists  and distribution of module genes within differentially expressed genes . for example, the greatest eigengene value for the green module was for the heat treatment . using the gostat program for gene ontology analysis , the most overrepresented go category for the green module was in response to temperature stimulus .

the green module contained genes known to participate in the heat response pathway including many of the heat shock proteins . in addition, the green module eigengene significantly correlated with the expression of heat responsive markers genes at5g <dig>  and at4g <dig>  as previously reported  <cit> .

the brown module showed a slight yet significant relationship to the cold treatment  and was enriched with gene products targeting the thylakoid  and that participate in photosynthesis . the module was most associated with the early stages of cold stress as determined by differential gene enrichment  and the - <dig>  pearson correlation  between eigengene value and the known cold responsive marker genes  <cit>  cor15a , but not in at4g <dig> , as previously reported  <cit> .

the turquoise module showed a significant relationship for both salt  and osmotic  treatments. the module is enriched with go categories in starch metabolism , protein/peptide degradation , and included dehydration responsive genes , early dehydration responsive genes  and late embryogenesis abundant genes . the module eigengene value significantly correlated with known maker genes for salt  <cit>   and osmotic stress   <cit> , further suggesting a role for the turquoise module in the dehydration responsive program.

the blue module showed a significant relationship with the uv-b treatment , which is characterized as a down-regulation response. according to ontology analysis, blue module genes tend to encode products that are involved in protein modification  including amino acid phosphorylation  and translation .

the yellow module also showed a significant relationship with the uv-b treatment , except that the module genes were up-regulated. ontology analysis indicated that the yellow module was enriched for macromolecule biosynthetic processes  including organelle biogenesis  and ribosome biosynthesis and assembly . the blue module showed a significant relationship with the uv-b marker at2g <dig> , but not at5g <dig> . alternatively, the yellow module displayed a weak yet significant relationship with at5g <dig> , but not at2g <dig>  as previously reported  <cit> .

according to the singular decomposition values and differential gene enrichment analysis, the red module showed significant relationships with nearly all stress treatments . ontology analysis indicted that the red module was overrepresented with genes participating in signal transducer activity, including transmembrane receptor activity  as well as response to environmental stimuli . interestingly, the most connected gene within the red module, or hub, is an uncharacterized ankyrin repeat family protein , which has been shown to regulate salicylic acid signaling. genes involved in calcium-based signaling also enriched the red module, including calcium dependent protein kinases, calmodulin related proteins, calcium and calmodulin binding proteins .

genomic signatures
as illustrated above, genes with significantly higher or lower transcript abundance were associated with specific modules depending on the duration of and kind of stress treatment. to relate patterns of genome-wide mrna expression to phenotypic state, we adapted the genomic signature concept from lamb et al.  <cit>  where statistical approaches are used to scan an unknown query signature against a database of known reference profiles. for our purposes, the database of reference profiles was created from the above atgenexpress dataset specific to uv-b, heat, salt, cold, osmotic, and drought treatments at the four initial time-points already detailed above. the 'query' signatures were derived from independent studies imposing uv-b  <cit>  and cold  <cit>  treatments as well as our own heat and drought investigations. in contrast to the lamb et al.  <cit>  approach, we used ordered list statistics  <cit>  to determine structural similarities among gene ranks of query and reference signatures.

to investigate the integrity of the reference database and the concept in general, we generated a rank-based signature from an independent expression profiling experiment conducted by lee et al.  <cit> . the authors imposed a 0°c cold treatment starting at  <dig> pm under light for  <dig> ,  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> h on two-week old arabidopsis seedlings grown in agar medium. query signatures from the  <dig> and  <dig> h time-points had the highest similarity scores against the  <dig> h cold reference,  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . the intersect between query and reference signatures  consisted of known dehydration responsive marker genes, namely dreb family genes, including dreb-1a , dreb-2a , dreb-1c , and dreb 1b , . the  <dig> h cold query list showed similarity to the  <dig> h cold reference signature , but also had similarity to the  <dig> h osmotic  and the beginning stage of the drought reference signature . previous research has shown a close link between dehydration and cold responsive signaling in the past and our results support this notion  <cit> .

next an independent uv-b specific query signature was generated from brown et al.  <cit>  data to scan against our reference database. despite differences in growth and treatment induction conditions, the query signature showed strong similarity with the uv-b  <dig> h and  <dig> h reference signatures . interestingly, the common intersect genes between reference and query signatures were enriched with transcription factors, particularly the wkry family at1g <dig>  at2g <dig>  at5g <dig> and zinc finger family at1g <dig>  at5g <dig>  at5g <dig>  at5g <dig>  .

under field conditions, plants are often exposed to multiple environmental conditions that impact yield and fitness  <cit> . to test if the signature concept could be applied to multiple stress treatment conditions, we conducted an expression profiling experiment on plants exposed to heat, drought, and then heat and drought in combination . the singular heat stress scan yielded high similarity scores specific to heat at  <dig> h and  <dig> h, with similarity scores  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . intersect genes common to query and heat reference signatures contained genes known to participate in heat responsive pathways, particularly the heat shock proteins . the scan from the singular drought treatment showed high similarity to dehydration responsive signatures including drought at  <dig> h and osmotic  <dig> h and  <dig> h references . nine genes were common to query signature, and drought and osmotic reference signatures  including a water responsive transcription factor , salt stress responsive gene , and fungal defense response  .

we next created a signature from the simultaneously imposed heat and drought treatments to query the reference database. interestingly, the two highest similarity scores were  <dig> h heat  and  <dig> h drought , indicating that the genomic signature concept as applied here has the potential to detect more than one environmental perturbation within a single treatment. unfortunately, the significance of the similarity score is difficult to interpret. to address this more specifically, we decomposed the dual stress signature into its  <dig> independent replicates . the results still place drought and heat as the two most similar signatures yet the significance of the drought similarity is weak. however, the similarity score becomes significant when the depth of the signatures is increased . nonetheless, the query signature had  <dig> genes in common with the drought signature including the drought responsive marker rd <dig> , and contained  <dig> genes in common with the heat reference including many of the heat shock protein encoding genes and a number of genes encoding dna heat shock n-terminal domain-containing proteins .

discussion
the goal of our study was to demonstrate the use of an integrative systems approach for connecting gene expression patterns to physiological characteristics, thereby providing mechanistic insight into genome function under abiotic stress conditions. central to our approach is the use of the genomic signature concept to characterize the plant stress phenotype and provide a link to the underlying network pathways, modules, and eventually genes. the use of expression array data to create a signature cataloging system  has been used previously to characterize chemical perturbations on tissue samples and cell culture populations  <cit> , and more recently to link genes and disease states to potential therapies  <cit> . in the present study, we extend the signature cataloging approach to plant biology/ecological genomics by using the atgenexpress abiotic stress dataset to compile our first-generation reference signatures database.

validation of the reference database, and the approach in general, was accomplished with independent datasets for uv-b  <cit> , cold  <cit>  and our own datasets for heat, drought, and the simultaneously imposed heat-drought treatments. altogether, more than half of the stress treatments included in the signature database were scanned by independent query signatures. our results are encouraging and show that despite differences in array platform, growth conditions, and even the application of treatments, the signature approach is robust in classifying the plant stress phenotype. this was particularly evident with highly conserved stress specific responses such as heat and uv-b. at the same time, our results illustrate the complexity of the stress response that is characteristic of cross-talk pathways  <cit>  and multiple secondary effects from prolonged treatments. for example, the early cold stress query signatures  showed very high similarity to cold signatures with only weak similarity scores to other signature phenotypes. alternatively, the  <dig> h cold query showed similarity to cold signatures as well as drought and osmotic signatures. this result likely reflects the secondary effects of the prolonged  cold treatment. not surprisingly, the co-occurrence of cold and dehydration response reflected in their signaling pathways, or cross-talk, is widely reported in the literature  <cit> .

one promising aspect of the signature approach as applied in this study is in the potential use for classification of the dual imposed heat/drought treatment. in nature, a departure from the homeostatic equilibrium, or stress, is often brought about by multiple environmental factors  <cit> . heat and drought, for example, are co-occurring stresses that have been implicated in severe yield losses . in this study, the highest similarity scores were observed with the heat and drought reference signatures, but the significance of the drought score was dependent upon the depth the signature lists interrogated . one explanation for this finding is that the drought responsive transcripts were further down the signature list than the more responsive heat induced transcripts, thereby requiring a greater depth of the signature lists to be compared. this suggests that care must be taken with comparisons between multiple stress phenotypes. however, our results are encouraging in this regard and future research should consider additional statistical means for determining depth of signature list comparisons.

network theory and analysis was used in an attempt to relate the phenotypic signature information to genome-wide transcriptional programs. network theory, in general, is promising in this regard because it allows us to view the biology as a system of networks and interacting modules  <cit> . here, we use the weighted gene coexpression network approach recently proposed by zhang and horvath  <cit> , which has been used successfully to link molecular targets to oncogenic signals  <cit> , complex traits , and even network divergence between human and chimpanzee neural patterns  <cit> . this approach is particularly relevant for our application because it is based on unsupervised clustering, bypasses multiple testing problems when relating gene information to physiological traits, and does not need a priori gene ontology information. the latter point is especially important for ecological genomics, which continues to transition from the use of model organisms to those of more ecological relevance.

results from weighted gene coexpression network analysis produced six distinct modules from the abiotic stress dataset. importantly, this unsupervised approach grouped genes into network modules that are reflective of biological process. for example, brown module genes clearly participate in photosynthetic processes while turquoise module genes contribute to starch and sucrose regulation. in addition, specific stress responsive modules were identified. the green module, for example, was almost entirely unique to the heat stress pathway and was, in fact, enriched with genes known to participate in heat responsive programs. equally interesting was the identification of module genes participating in multiple stress responsive pathways. this was apparent for modules consisting of conserved metabolic pathways i.e., brown  and blue  modules.

one of the more promising aspects of weighted gene coexpression network analysis was the identification of a common abiotic stress responsive module  that enriched differentially expressed genes for all treatments investigated. the most connected gene, or hub, within this module was an uncharacterized ankyrin repeat family protein that was specific to our analysis. ankyrin proteins have been reported to act as regulators in salicylic acid signaling, which is a key molecule in signal transduction of biotic stress responses  <cit> . the discovery of this ankyrin family member as the hub in our common stress responsive module suggests that salicylic acid signaling may play a role in abiotic stress response, which would corroborate results from exogenously applied salicylic acid  <cit> . in addition, this common stress responsive module was enriched with genes known to participate in calcium and calmodulin signaling pathways, which have been shown to participate in a multitude of cellular functions including cell death  <cit> .

although our findings are robust within the current context, a number of questions remain to be answered. for example, the reference database is generated from immediately perturbed systems that typically exhibit marked and highly significant changes in transcript abundance, and does not include acclimated states where changes in transcript abundance are typically smaller. this has recently been shown in studies investigating changes in gene expression in response to long-term growth at elevated carbon dioxide concentration  <cit> . therefore the feasibility of scanning the database with a signature from a fully acclimated organism and obtaining a highly correlated signature is uncertain. however, we hypothesize that the acclimated state will also be characterized by unique expression patterns that, in theory, should be amenable to our approach. like lamb et al.  <cit> , we are also uncertain how to interpret the significance of the similarity score. unique to our approach is the use of ordered lists statistics to compare signatures. this statistical test provides a p-value based on permuted data that indicates if signature comparisons are more similar than by chance alone. unfortunately, the interconnectedness among stress responsive pathways resulted in low p-values even for some low similarity score comparisons . however, we are reluctant to disregard the p-value entirely, because as the reference signature database grows and more diverse datasets are included, the p-value may help assign phenotypes to general category .

here, a first-step approach toward classifying and understanding the processes behind the plant stress phenotype is presented. we integrated two analytical techniques that have traditionally been applied only within the biomedical community. results from our adaptation of the these techniques show that one can take an unknown query signature and through pattern matching software scan a reference database to classify both singular and multiple plant stress phenotype. then, one can use a number of inferential techniques to link phenotypic attributes to their corresponding signaling modules and genes. in essence, this technique provides a tool allowing one to navigate the potential phenotypes of a given arabidopsis genotype. in the current context, the approach is restricted to a single organism. however, a number of technical advances, including sequence-based transcriptomics  <cit> , comparative gene ontology algorithms  <cit> , and analytical approaches for linking network characteristics to quantitative genetics  <cit>  illustrates the potential to enrich our methodology to address questions of evolutionary and ecological interest, particularly physiological trait development.

there are two attributes of our approach that facilitate its use for such purposes. first, the technique is applied within a network framework. network theory, has been well received in molecular biology for providing a 'systems biology' framework for the discipline , and has more recently been proposed as possible means for determining the evolutionary basis of complex phenotypic traits  <cit> . second, and just as important, is the potential to link our approach with population-based genetic analyses. many of the molecular-based, systems biology experiments are conducted within a narrow adaptive context, with little or no regard for other nonadaptive evolutionary forces . the inclusion of a genetic association with network analysis, as demonstrated by  <cit> , and placed within a population genetic context allows the appropriate testable null models  to be included in such studies. therefore, relating genomic information to genetic information, e.g., quantitative trait loci, is not only possible, but crucial for those interested in exploring the full potential of the evolutionary mechanisms shaping phenotypic development.

although useful in its current form, we envision that the true potential of our approach will be realized when the scientific community accepts, critiques, and eventually amends our methods with current and future applicable analytical and technological improvements. to facilitate this process, we conducted our analysis within the publicly available r statistical language and make available to the scientific community our signature compendium, r scripts used within, and a brief tutorial illustrating the process, with the near-term goal of providing the community with an integrative systems tool for connecting genes and signaling networks to phenotypic characteristics in order to further the continuing goal of understanding plant genome function.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we detail the initial stages of a theoretical and analytical framework for classifying the plant stress phenotype according to the architecture of the transcriptome, and relate that information to underlying coexpression networks and genes. our results confirm the existence of known stress-specific genomic signatures, report previously unknown stress-responsive modules and genes, and successfully scale such information to the physiological state of the phenotype. we are encouraged by the results of our present investigation and believe that the approaches developed and information gained here will be critical as we continue to use these tools to better understand species and population-level adaptation to environmental stress, including stress resulting from climate change. future research in our laboratory is centered on linking functional genomic approaches to genetic information, thereby providing a clear means to pursue evolutionary and ecological genomics at the level of individual organisms, populations, and ecosystems.

