BACKGROUND
recombination can occur between closely and distantly related double-stranded dna  phage genomes  <cit> . the relative rate at which each of these types of recombination occurs can play an important role in determining if and how genomes move across sequence space. when an individual gains a genomic fitness advantage, maintaining its location in sequence space is essential for keeping the fitness advantage  <cit> . recombination between closely related genomes can suspend the genome in sequence space by repairing slightly deleterious mutations, thereby preserving the fitness of the genome . individuals whose genomes are less fit can move across sequence space in larger steps via recombination, allowing them access areas of sequence space with higher fitness that cannot be reached by mutation alone  <cit> . higher rates of close relative to distant recombination lead to and maintain the formation of discrete genotypes in sequence space. in contrast, the reverse can drive the formation of genomic continuums in sequence space  <cit> .

while genetic exchange plays an important role in maintaining and moving genomes in sequence space, high mutation rates were historically thought to overpower the impact of recombination in viral evolution resulting in the formation of quasispecies, mutant spectra of diverse genomic continuums  <cit> . this concept was built upon observations of rna viruses, whose mutation rates mostly range from 10− <dig> to 10− <dig> mutations per nucleotide per generation  <cit> . in contrast, dsdna viruses have mutation rates that fall consistently between 10− <dig> and 10− <dig> mutations per nucleotide per generation indicating that patterns of recombination may be strong enough to counteract mutation and lead to discrete population structure  <cit> . recent work on dsdna phages has consistently revealed discrete structure in wild populations  <cit> . nonetheless, it remains unclear as to whether dsdna phage populations in nature are discretely structured  <cit> , or part of a continuum that is, as yet, insufficiently sampled  <cit> .

key to assessing dsdna phage population structure is knowledge of the relative levels of close and distant genomic recombination. despite analyses of recombination events across a subset of highly conserved genes  <cit> , little work has been done to look at recombination across whole genomes. there are many lines of evidence that suggest recombination analyses across naturally coexisting whole genomes are necessary for accurately assessing the relative levels of close and distant recombination. first, recombination rates vary across genomes resulting in regions of high and low gene flow  <cit> . further, many known viral recombination breakpoints occur outside or on the peripheries of genes  <cit> . lastly, only phages that coexist in the same environment and are able to infect the same host bacteria are able to undergo recombination. thus, recombination analyses should be limited to whole genomes of individuals that can and could have potentially recombined.

here we sought to establish and analyze a large-scale cyanophage genomic dataset to better understand the evolution of dsdna phage genomes. specifically, we characterized the structure and relationship of  <dig> closely-related cyanophage genomes isolated using a single host and only two source water samples. we assessed the impact of the relative rates of close and distant recombination in governing the emergence of discrete dsdna cyanophage populations.

RESULTS
in order to investigate patterns of recombination across dsdna phage populations, we chose to study wild dsdna cyanophage communities. cyanophages are abundant and ubiquitous in the global surface oceans  <cit> . further, many cyanobacterial hosts are already in culture  <cit> . these factors increased our chances of isolating multiple individual dsdna phages from a single environment on a single host.

isolating dsdna cyanophages to explore population structure
in total,  <dig> cyanophages were isolated using a single cyanobacterial host strain, synechococcus wh7803; the strain which yielded the highest number of plaques of the synechococcus strains available. while all  <dig> cyanophages were randomly isolated by picking all available well-separated plaques regardless of morphology, then triply plaque purified, grown to large volume, and whole genome sequenced to finished quality. thus selection bias was limited only by plaque detection. to deeply evaluate isolate genomes in the environment, the  <dig> isolates were sourced from only two water samples such that  <dig> isolates were derived from a coastal water sample and  <dig> isolates were derived from an offshore, mesotrophic water sample. both sites are part of the well-described california cooperative oceanic fisheries investigations line  <dig> oceanographic transect, and represent ecologically distinct environments based on physical-chemical parameters  and proportions of host clades , despite strong interconnecting currents  <cit> . all  <dig> genomes were sequenced and annotated and found to be myoviruses using transmission electron microscopy of representative isolates from each lineage .

phylogenomic lineages represent discrete genotypic populations
phylogenomic analyses of the  <dig> core genes  shared across all  <dig> viral genomes, revealed ten phylogenomic lineages of t4-like phage genomes , each well-supported by bootstrap analyses. six lineages had at least three representatives enabling further within-lineage investigations. t4-like phage taxonomic classifications were confirmed by phylogenomic analyses using representative genomes from the literature . the abundance of t4-like myoviruses in our isolate collections is consistent with the predominance of this virus type in  less culture-dependent viral-tagged metagenomes derived from these same coastal waters and using this same host  <cit> , as well as  global ocean surveys  <cit> .fig.  <dig> phylogenomic analyses of  <dig> cyanophages. a unrooted phylogenomic maximum likelihood tree of  <dig> concatenated core genes  in  <dig> genome-sequenced isolates reveals  <dig> distinct cyanophage genomic lineages. six lineages  contain three or more representatives, while the remaining four are less well-represented and indicated by colored hexagons. isolate origin  is designated in the outer ring. b pairwise comparisons of average nucleotide identity  of shared genes between genomes in the well-represented lineages reveals six with ani >98% that correspond to phylogenomic clusters i-vi.  the pairwise fraction of shared genes within clusters are high . clustering of ani and shared gene content are statistically not random  and correspond to bootstrapped phylogenomic lineages




to determine if the phylogenomic lineages represented discrete genotypic populations, we looked at shared gene content, average nucleotide identity  of the shared genes, and gaps in the distribution of pairwise differences between genomes. within a phylogenetic lineage, most  genes were shared between genomes . average nucleotide identity of across the  <dig> core genes was an average of >99% across the lineages  within and 80–89% between lineages . further, adding the  <dig> genomes to the aforementioned viral-tagged metagenomic sequences we performed in silico sizing and positioning to arrange the viral-tagged sequences and genomes into sequence space using ani . we found that the  <dig> genomes clustered tightly in sequence space with an average of >99% ani across clusters, which is consistent with previous findings from viral-tagged metagenomes obtained from the same host  <cit> . these shared gene content percentages and ani values are also relatively consistent with commonly observed thresholds in prokaryotes, which are commonly used to designate species cut-offs  <cit> .fig.  <dig> alternative sequence-based clustering of genomes match phylogenomic lineages. a principal component  projection of the relationship between the  <dig> cyanophage genomes, previously sequences t4-like cyanophage genomes, and viral-tagged t4-like phages from the same coastal waters revealed tight clustering of genomes within the same phylogenetic lineage. genomes were clustered based on ani of genes within shared protein clusters. b automatic barcode gap discovery method which sorts individuals in to the same population when divergence is smaller within than between also revealed identical clustering to the phylogenomic lineages




as a separate metric for delineating separable populations, we next used the automatic barcode gap discovery method  <cit>  to explore the distribution of pairwise differences between the  <dig> concatenated core genes. the method works by establishing the range of intra-population divergence values, then detecting gaps via an iterative process to partition the sequences into emergent discrete population boundaries. for our  <dig> cyanophage genomes, the number of populations predicted following recursion under multiple prior intra-population divergence values converged at ten populations  – all of which map identically to the phylogenomic lineages . taken together with the shared gene and ani analyses, we interpret these phylogenomic lineages to represent discrete genotypic populations rather than artifacts of undersampling.

populations are distinct from each other
of these ten populations, six are well-represented with one of these six  being the most divergent. within a population and between closely related populations, there is a strong conservation of synteny . however, synteny breaks down between phylogenetically distant populations. percent gc, genome length, and gene number are also highly conserved within a population . one population, lineage iv, has one individual, syn7803c <dig>  whose genome, though complete based on our metric for a complete genome , is a statistical outlier  by genome length compared to the rest of the genomes in the lineage. data from this genome was removed from the mean values of lineage iv. the mean percent gc ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> % across lineages. mean population genome length and gene number ranges from 171kbp to 221kbp and from  <dig> to  <dig> genes, respectively. interestingly, population genome length and gene number increase with phylogenetic distance from lineage i to lineage vi suggesting that population differentiation events may correspond with increased access to novel gene pools.fig.  <dig> comparative genomics of lineages. a synteny plot  within and between clusters shows high conservation of synteny within a cluster and between phylogenetically close lineages. lineages v and vi shows an erosion of synteny. b codon usage within each cluster reveals similar codon usage between lineages i-v with lineage vi as an outgroup





table  <dig> mean genome length, percent gc, and gene number across the populations reveals lineage vi as an distinct from the other lineages, with a much larger genomes size, higher percent gc, and higher gene number. for lineage iv, phage sync <dig> was excluded from analyses.

furthermore, one population  is significantly phylogenetically divergent  from the other five populations . it is the only population with a mean genome length greater than 200kbp and it has the highest percent gc and gene number. the high gc content may correlate with its different codon usage . it is the only population to have a different codon usage for both phenylalanine and leucine codons. this may suggest that while it can share a host with lineages i, ii, iii, iv, and v, it may be more efficient at infecting an alternative host and, thus, has an expanded gene pool paralleling the increase in genome size and gene number.

population boundaries are not caused by physical isolation
because biogeography has large impacts on microbial diversity and abundances  <cit>  as observed between our coastal and offshore sites , we predicted that physical boundaries based on these host differences across the two sites might lead to genetic drift. thus, we next evaluated whether genetic drift caused by physical boundaries across the two sites sampled may have a role in shaping the high genomic divergence between our genotypic populations. at least one member of all six well-represented populations could be found at both the coastal and offshore locations . all paired geographic populations , except those of lineage ii, had low genetic differentiation , suggesting high gene flow between environmental sites. the cyanophage data presented here provide a first look at gene flow in ocean viruses, and are consistent with recent observations that “everything is everywhere, and the environment selects” derived from patterns observed in global ocean surveys using viral population genome fragments  <cit> .

mechanistically, while gene flow in bacteria and archaea can occur from multiple sources, gene flow in viruses is restricted to times when two viruses co-infect the same host. such “co-infection” need not be simultaneous, but it does require spatial proximity and shared host range. to quantify the role of this ‘host partitioning’ in driving physical boundaries between cyanophage lineages, we next conducted a large-scale host range analysis of  <dig> of the viral isolates against  <dig> diverse synechococcus host strains. this revealed only minimal host range differences between lineages, as assessed via alternative clustering metrics . this provides little support for host partitioning amongst our six cyanophage lineages, and contrasts observations in rna phages where reproductive isolation appears driven by a decrease in shared host range  <cit> . we also assessed the infection efficiency of the phage isolates across the hosts via a quantitative host range . again, we observed no significant difference in hierarchical clustering across lineages. however, we did observe a significant difference in infection efficiency between phages that were isolated from either the coastal or offshore sites in lineages i, ii, iv and vi . this suggests that environmental conditions may alter the expression of infection genes, but not the presence or absence of genes or single nucleotide variants within genes themselves across these lineages.fig.  <dig> host range analyses of  <dig> synechococcus host strains against  <dig> cyanophage isolates. four of the genome-sequenced isolates  were not examined. cyanophage standard host ranges, i.e. infection or no infection host range, exhibit little correspondence with phylogenomic lineage or environmental origin with at least one member of each lineage sharing the ability to infect cc <dig>  wh <dig>  mits <dig>  uw <dig>  and wh <dig>  indicating a lack of physical boundaries between cyanophage populations. there is little correspondence between host range and phylogenomic lineages, even if the structure of the host range is unlikely to occur as a result of chance 




together these findings provided no support for the hypothesis that genetic drift caused by physical isolation – whether by spatial site or by host range – was a driving factor in the emergence of the observed cyanophage phylogenomic lineages.

population boundaries may be instigated by niche-differentiating genes
we next explored whether natural selection might facilitate the differentiation of the six dsdna cyanophage populations. to this end, the genotypic populations were evaluated for differential selective pressures by non-polarized  mcdonald-kreitman  tests with low frequency slightly deleterious mutations removed from the analyses. these conditions are suggested to conservatively estimate positive selection in asexual organisms  <cit> , but this remains a controversial area of the literature  <cit> . the mk tests detected selective signatures across all phylogenomic lineages  with p-values < <dig>  and varying negative effect sizes . one population  had no detectable positive selection which could be due to low statistical power because of the low sample size. while positively selected genes varied across the populations, the number of signals was indistinguishable from a false positive rate across all populations. thus, we cautiously interpret any mk signal here as it may either represent niche-driving selection or be an artifact.fig.  <dig> selection and recombination results across lineages. a non-polarized mcdonald-kreitman analyses reveal different selective signatures across phylogenomic lineages  and effect size cut-offs . b the number of recombination events detected within and between lineages as inferred using coalescent  and substitutions . detailed gene annotations, p-values, and effect sizes for panel a are available in additional file 3: table s9




if the positive selection signal is indeed biological, then it suggests niche differentiation across the populations, ranging from specialization in nucleotide synthesis  to improving energy capture during infection . admittedly, the small signal of positive selection on psba and psbd in lineage vi may be artifactual as the effect size is small for these genes and the finding contrasts that of previous studies where these genes were under strong purifying selection  <cit> . further, we evaluated the relative abundance of all genes putatively found under positive selection in the global ocean viromes  populations  <cit> . the gp <dig> neck protein was found to be under selection in lineage iii and also found to be an abundant protein cluster specific to upwelling ocean regions and the mediterranean sea, indicating that it may be helpful in adapting to coastal regions. while the remaining genes were unannotated, one of them, mbari_cyanophage_pc_ <dig>  is among the  <dig> most abundant protein clusters in the gov populations, and present across  <dig> out of  <dig> of the epi- and meso-pelagic gov samples. this suggests it may play a role in adapting to open ocean conditions. it should be re-noted that we should be cautious about of the selection results because the number of positive selection signals was indistinguishable from a false positive rate across all populations.

patterns of recombination maintain discreteness of genotypic populations
leveraging an unprecedented genomic sequencing effort for dsdna phages isolated on a single host at only two sites, we examined close  and distant  recombination in the  <dig> cyanophage genomes. the goal was to evaluate patterns within and between cyanophage genotypic populations to determine the extent to which niche differentiation may be reinforced by diminished gene flow. we predicted that recombination would play a strong role in our dataset because previous work, with eight conserved gene markers across  <dig> dsdna cyanophages, revealed high levels of within-relative to between-population recombination  <cit> .

to quantify gene flow, recombination events were identified across whole genomes using both substitution- and coalescent-based methods on datasets of core genes  and core gene regions , respectively. recombination was greater within- than between-population for three  populations by the coalescent method and two  populations by the substitution-based method . this suggests that at least four of the six population boundaries were detectably maintained by recombination. because the frequency of recombination events detected can be biased by sample size and nucleotide divergence, we evaluated such biases in our data. sample size did not influence the frequency of recombination events detected, as the population with the lowest  and second highest  number of representatives both had high within-population recombination. in contrast, nucleotide divergence likely did affect our ability to detect recombination, as recombination was not detected in lineage ii and was only weakly detected in lineage iv, the populations with > <dig> % nucleotide identity. also, the highest number of recombination events was detected within the population with the most within-population divergence, lineage vi. these findings are consistent with prior suggestions that >5% nucleotide divergence is needed to detect recombination  <cit>  and suggested that we are accurately measuring recombination between populations that all have >5% divergence , but likely under-estimating recombination within our closely related populations  <cit> . thus, we only felt confident in addressing cases where we observed higher between- than within population recombination.

significantly, recombination breakpoints detected using rdp <dig>  which integrates both substitution- and phylogenetic-based recombination detection methods, across the whole genome were identified outside of genic  regions. intergenic recombination breakpoints have been identified in both rna  <cit>  and ssdna viruses  <cit> . while we only found intergenic recombination breakpoints of within lineage vi , we hypothesize this is because of the higher level of nucleotide divergence within lineage vi relative to the other lineages which allowed for the detection of multiple recombination events. this indicates that recombination can occur outside of genic regions and that analyses of full genomes rather than single genes is necessary to quantify the total relative rates of inter- versus intra- population recombination.

overall, it appears that at least four of the six populations show patterns of gene flow that help maintain, rather than ameliorate, discrete population structure, and the remaining two of six populations appear too closely related to accurately quantify gene flow.

in contrast to our cyanophage findings, analyses in mycobacteriophages, where  <dig>  genomes are available , have suggested that dsdna phage sequence space represents a continuum that merely remains undersampled. previous analyses of these genomes, mostly siphoviridae and isolated using a single host, revealed genomic “clusters”, but the authors also infer rampant mosaicism or horizontal gene flow  events  thought to evidence genomic continuity in sequence space. notably, however, mycobacteriophage gene flow events were inferred from shared protein lineages, “phamilies”  <cit> , defined by relatively low sequence identity . while such permissive cut-offs are invaluable for comparative phage genomics, they measure evolutionary events much deeper than those relevant for speciation. instead, to measure recombination events relevant for studying speciation, the inferences should be made using substitution, coalescent, or phylogenetic methods. unfortunately, these cannot be used here due to vast undersampling at a single site, as only  <dig> or at most  <dig> phages were isolated per site. thus, more intensive, per-site mycobacteriophage sampling are needed to explore homologous recombination events between “clusters” and better discriminate between a genomic continuum and discrete population structure.

mechanistically, however, it is plausible that recombination could both maintain  and amelioreate  discrete population structure as these two phage groups may simply evolve differently. this is because the cyanophages and mycobacteriophages are predominantly lytic t4-like myoviruses and temperate siphoviridae, respectively. the latter has been inferred via presence of an integration cassette  <cit> , and confirmed experimentally for  <dig> of the mycobacteriophages . because temperate viruses may experience higher gene flow due to increased exposure to and recombination with foreign dna resulting from the prolonged accessibility of their genomes within a cell in the prophage state  <cit>  such as previously described in the mycobacteriophage giles  <cit> , it is possible that the lytic lifestyle of cyanophages could result in more population structure than the more rampant recombinogenic, temperate mycobacteriophages.

recombination analyses on whole genomes of other wild, naturally coexisting dsdna phage populations are necessary to determine if our results are broadly applicable to other dsdna phages, such as the mycobacteriophages.

CONCLUSIONS
while the role of recombination in maintaining discrete population structure is established and empirically defined among sexual eukaryotes  <cit> , it remains controversial for bacteria, archaea  <cit>  and viruses  <cit> . our findings suggest phylogenomic lineages in naturally occurring dsdna cyanophages represent discrete genotypic populations. we hypothesize that discrete population boundaries are most likely initiated by sympatric niche differentiation rather than by allopatric isolation and that recombination maintains differentiated populations once established. problematically, these latter conclusions are challenged by currently-insufficient methods to detect recombination and selection across closely-related genomes. whether selection and recombination, rather than mutation and genetic drift, drive differentiation in other viruses remains an open question. this will undoubtedly vary along the spectrum of viral nucleic acid types and lifestyles – with minimal population structure among rna and ssdna viruses, and more population structure among dsdna viruses. together with microbial studies  <cit> , these cyanophage results suggest the potential for a unifying role of recombination in maintaining differentiation in populations across multiple scales – from sexual eukaryotes to bacteria and archaea to at least a subset of dsdna phages.

