BACKGROUND
with the recent technological advances, different genome-wide studies have uncovered an unprecedented number of structural variants in the human genome  <cit> , mainly in the form of copy number variations . as much as 12% of the human genome has been reported to be variable among different individuals  <cit> . the important number of genes and other regulatory elements encompassed by those variable regions, makes it very likely for them to have functional and, ultimately, phenotypical consequences  <cit> . in fact, several publications have already correlated the number of copies of different genes with different degrees of disease predisposition  <cit> . therefore, the identification of dna copy number is important in understanding genesis and progression of human diseases.

several techniques and platforms have been developed for genome-wide analysisi of dna copy number, such as array-based comparative genomic hybridization . the goal of the analysis of dna copy number data using this approach is to partition the whole genome into segments where copy numbers changes between contiguous segments may be present. the ability of acgh to discern between different number of copies is very limited, thus different kinds of techniques have been developed for targeted, and more precise, analyses of genomic regions. multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification   <cit>  is one of the most used technologies among other existing ones such us quantitative multiplex pcr of short fluorescent   <cit>  or multiplex amplifiable probe hybridization   <cit> .

mlpa is a recently developed semi-quantitative method that aims to detect copy number alterations at the genomic level  in a test dna with respect to a control. due to its low cost, reliability and ease of implementation it has become very popular both as a research and a diagnostic tool. after hybridization, ligation and multiplex amplification of specific probes targeting different genomic regions, the probes are electrophoresed and analyzed using a dna analyzer  <cit> . each specific probe migrates according to its molecular weight and the resulting pherograms show specific peaks that correspond to each probe . relative dosage information can be obtained after the comparison of peak intensities  of the different probes between test and control samples.

due to the variation of pcr efficiencies across probes  and across samples, a normalization method is needed before comparing dosage quotients. this step is crucial because the variation in experimental conditions may lead to differences of measured values between samples, thus hampering the correct interpretation of results. after normalization, which eliminates possible differences introduced during the experimental process, we aim to find biological differences in gene dosage . that is, the normalization tries to minimize the amount of systematic non-biological variation among samples. different normalization methods have been used for analyzing mlpa data. the most common method divides each intensity by the sum of all intensities in each sample . other alternative approaches are based on regression methods that account for the amplification decay of larger probes. one of such regression methods uses internal control probes  <cit> , while the another normalizes intensities based upon the statistically most probable median peak intensities using a median filter  <cit> . other authors suggest to normalize peak intensities by using  <dig> separate peak groups according to increasing frament sizes ot the peaks . finally, a similar approach using the mean intensity of control probes inside a normalization group as the dividing factor was considered in  <cit> .

after an intensity normalization, the next key point is the determination of genes that are significantly altered. as an example, the peak intensity of exon  <dig> in figure  <dig> seems to be lower in patient than in control indicating a deletion. again, different approaches have been used to find probes that are altered. in this work we are considering ratio-  <cit>  and regression-based  <cit>  methods. in both approaches, the basis for the analysis is the comparison among normalized peak intensities from patient and control samples using a dosage ratio. in the ratio-based approach, deletions and duplications are given as outliers from the data set after defining a "biological" threshold . we assume that the simplest, most likely scenario, is an heterozygous gain or a loss of the material, under which ideal ratio values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  are expected, respectively. in such a simple scenario, and taking into account experimental noise, it is generally accepted in the literature that values below  <dig>  and above  <dig>  are indicative of loss and gain of a genetic material, respectively  <cit> . the regression-based approach is based on fitting several linear regression models, considering the normalized peak intensity of a given patient as the dependent variable and the normalized peak intensities of the mean control sample as independent variables. another method based on taking into account the individual noise for each probe  for all control samples is considered in  <cit> .

both the ratio- and regression-based methods have general drawbacks. the ratio-based approach always considers the same gain/loss threshold without taking into account the different variability among experiments and among probes. on the other hand, although the regression-based approaches solve this problem, fitting regression models without considering that the independent variable  is also subject to error may lead to wrong conclusions. in addition, the regression method uses confidence intervals for predictions which are built under the normal theory. the normality assumption may be untenable, particularly because of the limited amount of control probes that are typically used in routine experiments . finally, none of these procedures considers replicates for each individual, reducing information by averaging the replicate values.

to overcome these difficulties, we propose alternative methods to deal with the normalization and the discovery of alterations when analyzing mlpa data. our approach is based on both nonlinear  and linear  mixed models. the main advantages of our methods are:  the variation among individuals is modelled explicitly using a random effect; and  the replicates may be easily incorporated in the model. the deletions and duplications will be determined using tolerance intervals. we validate and compare our methods with the existing methods using a controlled experiment. we evaluate the presence of gains and loses in a set of dnas from normal individuals and individuals affected by known genetic disorders. the probemix we used included probes of single copy number regions located both inside and outside of the genomic disorder regions. a total of  <dig> samples, including  <dig> controls and  <dig> patients, were analyzed blindly.

RESULTS
simulation study
in this section, we investigate the performance of the two existing methods and our proposed approach through a number of simulations. we simulated an hypothetical assay with  <dig> probes. we also simulated internal control probes  to be used in the iterative regression approach by setting σγ =  <dig>  two different scenarios were simulated in order to investigate the performance of rex-mlpa approach given the number of control probes: 10% and 20% of the  <dig> probes. finally, the ratios of the rest of probes were simulated as altered  depending on a different percentages: 5%, 10%, 20% and 50% of the probes. these values were generated from a normal distribution under different scenarios varying between probe variability , probe-test variability  and within-probe or random variability . we simulated  <dig> replicates of each peak intensity for test and control samples. note that the average of these replicates were considered in the case of using threshold and rex-mlpa approaches. we summarized our simulations by computing the mean number of altered probed simulated in each run, the empirical type-i error and the empirical power to detect gains and loses. these results are based on  <dig>  simulations.

tables  <dig> and  <dig> show the results for the case of having 10% of true altered probes when 10% and 20% of probes have been generated as a internal control probes, respectively. the results for the rex-mlpa method were based on building confidence limits at 99% at each iteration. regarding the empirical type-i error, the rex-mlpa approach usually overestimate the expected 5%, while the threshold method clearly underestimates type-i error since in all simulations the simulated type-i error was closer to 0% . on the other hand, the probe-specific model shows a good performance. as expected, the power of the three methods increases when the probe-test variability increases. that is, the power depends on the size effect of those altered probes. in general, the probe-specific mixed-model outperforms both rex-mlpa and threshold approaches. the threshold approach is clearly underpowered for those cases in which the magnitude of the effect is not large enough. finally, the same pattern is observed when the random variability is increased  but showing lower power. the simulation results for the case of having 5%, 20% and 50% of true altered probes showed similar behaviour and they can be found in the additional file  <dig> 

these results are for the case of having 20% of probes as a internal control probes  and 10% of probes as a true altered probes. the results are given for different scenarios between probe variability , probe-test variability  and within-probe variability . the column x¯alt indicates the mean number of simulated altered probes.

these results are for the case of having 10% of probes as a internal control probes  and 10% of probes as a true altered probes. the results are given for different scenarios between probe variability , probe-test variability  and within-probe variability . the column x¯alt indicates the mean number of simulated altered probes.

validation study
in order to validate our proposed method, and compare its performace with those of the existing methods, we have designed a controlled mlpa probemix in which we have included  <dig> different oligonucleotides, corresponding to  <dig> different targeted regions with single copy number in normal individuals. eight of the targeted regions are variable in copy number in individuals suffering from different genomic disorders . a total of  <dig> dnas from different individuals were assayed in triplicate in the study.  <dig> of the dnas came from unrelated hapmap individuals ,  <dig> dnas from prader-willi syndrome patients ,  <dig> dnas from digeorge syndrome patients  and  <dig> dnas from autistic patients with a duplication in 10q region. after hybridization, ligation and pcr, probes corresponding to the different individuals were electrophoresed and peak intensities were recorded and blindly analyzed using the different methods. mlpa hybridization, ligation and pcr with universal mlpa primers was performed as described elsewhere  <cit> . pcr products were loaded on a capillar dna analyzer and electrophoresed. genescan software was used to analyze the runs and to retrieve peak intensities corresponding to each probe in the different samples.

comparison of methods of copy number estimation
before analyzing the data we illustrate that our proposed method based on a mixed-model can be applied. supplementary figure s <dig> shows the residual error for each individual and probe indicating that the residuals are centered at zero and that the variability does not change with individuals. table  <dig> shows the results obtained from the  <dig> test samples used in the validation study using the threshold, iterative regression and proposed probe-specific mixed-model method. for the two patients with prader-willi syndrome, we observed that all methods were able to detect the three deletions in 15q11-q <dig> region. the same conclusion was observed regarding patients diagnosed with digeorge syndrome. considering patients with autism, all methods detected gains in the 10q region. only in one case threshold method had a false negative result and the rex-mlpa method indicated a deletion in the ube3a, a false positive finding. these results clearly agree with our simulation studies in which we found that iterative regression has a increased type-i error rate and the threshold approach a low power. for instance, the ratio between the second individual diagnosed with autism and the mean controls was  <dig>  at probe named zwint, so the threshold method did not indicate that this was a probe altered in this individual. this result is due to the fact that the ratio between the probe-test variability and the random error variability was around  <dig>  and the simulation study showed that in this case the power of threshold approach is very poor. finally, regarding hapmap individuals who were considered as negative controls, we observed that any method found a false positive result.

the three colums for each individual indicates the result obtained using mixed-model, threshold and rex-mlpa approaches, respectively. the code for the results are the following: -1: relative loss, 0:normal, 1:relative gain. those result where a disagreement between the three methods is observed are in bold face.

CONCLUSIONS
the mlpa method is a potentially useful semi-quantitative method to detect copy number alterations in targeted regions obtained after performing genome-wide screening using comparative methods usually based on genomic hybridization. mlpa is based on comparing peak intensities of the different probes between test and control samples through its ratio. before determining the statistical significance of dosage ratios, a normalization procedure is needed to control variation of pcr efficiencies across probes. we have proposed a non-linear mixed-model to perform such normalization, and two other existing methods have been discussed. one of them is based on considering the sum of peak intensities in each sample, while another uses internal control probes to fit a regression line which is used as a reference.

so far, the widely used method to detect statistical significance of dosage ratio is to consider as altered those probes that are outside a given threshold. in this paper, we have described a new approach to detect altered probes based on a mixed-model. the threshold is then established by using a tolerance interval which accommodates the specific random error variability observed in each test sample. we have also discussed another approach based on an iterative regression. through simulation studies and a controlled mlpa assay, we have shown that our proposed method outperforms the existing ones. another important advantage by comparing our approach and the rex-mlpa method is that our method can be used even when no internal control probes are available in the assay.

a novelty of our algorithm is that it can handle information from replicate experiments. replicates of mlpa assays are typically not necessary for commercial kits since in most cases more than one probe is used to interrogate the same region and concordance between those probes is considered to provide enough reliability of the existence of a copy number variation. nevertheless, in cases where a single probe per region is placed in the assay, it is definitely useful and desirable  to have replicates that help minimise possible variations arising during the long mlpa protocol and to ensure reliability of the findings. thus, having a method that is able to handle such information is very useful and provides extra statistical robustness to the findings.

the use of control probes as references for data normalization is one of the methods recommended by the manufacturer. commercial and home-made mlpa assays are clearly different in terms of quality of the resulting pherograms, mainly due to the process of producing the specific probes that target regions of interest. while commercial applications produce very high, sharp and neat peaks, home-made assays typically do not perform that well. nevertheless, in both cases, the use of control probes is always desirable from a statistical point of view and it is so regardless of the number of probes that target a determined loci. in exploratory experiments with mlpa designs targeting extremely variable and polymorphic cnvs, adding control probes whose behaviour is proven unvariable and can help in assessing reliability of single experiments. in such cases, we understand that the inclusion of evenly spaced control probes is a good practice. one key point is to know the number of replicates that should be included in a mlpa assay. our simulations indicates that  <dig> replicates was enough to reach a power of 90% keeping a value of alfa around 5% in those combinations where the probe-test variability was over  <dig> times greater than that of random error . thus, if the probe-test versus random error variability ratio was lower, a lesser power would be expected. in that case the researcher could improve the expected power by increasing the number of replicates.

although our proposed method outperforms other existing ones, it has to be kept in mind that in the case of having probes targeting regions that are highly variable among the population , the tolerance intervals calculated for those probes might collect all existing variability and become very broad, thus making it impossible to distinguish the existence of copy number alteration. nevertheless, the other existing methods would also show inconsistent copy number calls when analysing such regions. in statistical terms, this means that we should have homogeneity of the random error variance through the probes. this is the reason why a visual inspection of the pherograms as well as manual curation of the results might be the most reliable way to proceed. however, we can easily accomodate cases where the homogeneity of random error variance assumption cannot be assumed by introducing an interaction probe-random error allowing a different random error variance for each probe. in this case, different tolerance bands would be therefore estimated for each probe.

in conclusion, we have proposed a mixed-model which is able to determine thresholds to decide whether a region is altered. these threholds are specific for each individual, incorporating experimental variability, resulting in improved sensitivity and specificity as the examples with real data have revealed. an r language package for the three approaches discussed in this paper and data analyzed will be freely available at our web page  <cit> .

