BACKGROUND
one of the major aims in modern molecular biology is to identify how living organisms are brought into existence from the basic building blocks of life, such as genes and their protein products. with the completion of the human genome project and recent advances in molecular biology, a complete understanding of the chromosomal organization of human genes will become possible in the not so distant future  <cit> . in the post-genomic era, the next step in modern molecular biology is to understand how gene products, or proteins, interact to perform cellular functions  <cit> . the human body is composed of millions of cells which differ greatly in morphology despite the fact that they all possess the same set of genetic information. some genes are persistently transcribed and expressed in all cells and are called house-keeping genes, as they are involved in the basic cellular functions required for the maintenance of a cell. for instance, the genes that code for histones, proteins responsible for dna packaging in chromatin  <cit> , are universally expressed in all cells  <cit> . other genes are expressed only in cells of certain tissue types, also known as tissue-specific genes, and are thought to be responsible for the cell diversity observed in living organisms today. a good example is found in the immune system, where the human leukocyte antigen genes and their regulatory proteins are specifically expressed in macrophages and b cells  <cit> . using microarray-based  <cit>  and tag-based  <cit>  techniques, gene expression patterns in different tissue types can be easily quantified, and the identification of house-keeping and tissue-specific genes is possible with modern statistical analysis  <cit> . however, little is known about how the protein products of house-keeping and tissue-specific genes are organized or embedded within the protein-protein interaction  networks that ultimately give rise to the observed similarities and differences in morphology between cells. in this paper, we employed the tool of network analysis to address this issue.

network analysis has its origin in sociology, but, in recent years, has been successfully applied to different fields of biological sciences from molecular biology, proteomics, medicine to ecology and epidemiology  <cit> . a major goal of network analysis is to reveal the structural organization of a network and propose mechanisms that may give rise to the observed network topology  <cit> . for instance, the nodal connection of several biological networks tends to follow a power law distribution, with the majority of nodes having only a small number of neighbors and only a few having many  <cit> . such a power law distribution in connectivity renders a network robust against random attacks  <cit> , and the preferential attachment model of network evolution has been proposed as a possible mechanism that gives rise to such a power law distribution  <cit> . another goal of network analysis is to quantify or characterize the position of individual nodes in a network and relate this information to the biological roles in which they might be involved  <cit> . for instance, jeong et al.  <cit>  analyzed the yeast ppi network and found that genes coding for proteins that have many interacting partners tend to be essential genes vital to cell survival.

this study had two aims. the first was to use network analysis to elucidate the topological importance of house-keeping and tissue-specific genes  in human ppi networks by asking whether proteins encoded by house-keeping genes or tissue-specific genes tend to occupy topologically important positions or not. topological importance here simply refers to how prominent or central a node is to others in the same network and can be measured in different ways. the second aim was, using an anthropomorphic analogy to humans who tend to arrange tools performing similar tasks in close vicinity to each other, to determine how nature organizes tools  in human ppi networks. specifically, we asked whether the protein products of house-keeping genes or tissue-specific genes tend to connect or interact among themselves in a ppi network; for convenience, we define such a connection pattern as homophylic connectivity. we examined these issues using two different datasets to test the robustness of our findings. the paper is organized as follows. we first describe the databases used and how the lists of house-keeping genes and tissue-specific genes were acquired, then how we constructed the different ppi networks. we then describe the three commonly-used measures of topological importance, how homophylic connectivity in a ppi network was quantified, and how the statistical significance of our findings was tested. finally, we present the results and discuss their implications.

RESULTS
basic network statistics
the human gene expression index  database  <cit>  contains gene expression data for  <dig> different tissue types. for simplicity, we identify here each tissue-type by the name of the organ from which the tissue was derived. for each tissue type, we mapped the genes expressed to the human protein reference database   <cit>  and identified the corresponding proteins in order to construct a tissue-specific ppi network. the huge index database provides a list of expressed genes and a list of tissue-specific genes for each tissue type, together with a list of house-keeping genes expressed in all tissues. here a node in a ppi network represents a protein, nodes representing proteins encoded by house-keeping genes are called house-keeping nodes and those representing proteins encoded by tissue-specific genes are tissue-specific nodes. table  <dig> summarizes, for each tissue type, the total number of nodes in the ppi network and the number of house-keeping and tissue-specific nodes. we also constructed the est-sage dataset , which contains gene expression data for  <dig> different tissue types, and mapped the expressed genes to the hprd and constructed the ppi networks for the different tissue types. again, we identify each tissue-type by the name of the organ from which the tissue was derived. table  <dig> summarizes, for each tissue type, the total number of nodes and the number of house-keeping and tissue-specific nodes in the corresponding ppi network. the network data for different tissue types are given in additional file  <dig>  tables  <dig> and  <dig> also provide the proportions of house-keeping nodes and tissue-specific nodes in the total number of nodes for each tissue type. the proportion of house-keeping nodes varied from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for the huge index dataset and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for the est-sage dataset, while the corresponding values for the proportion of tissue-specific nodes were  <dig>  to  <dig>  and  <dig>  to  <dig> . with a few exceptions, each ppi network tended to have more house-keeping nodes than tissue-specific nodes. furthermore, each ppi network consists of a large network fragment  and several much smaller fragments . the proportion of total number of nodes in the largest network fragment varied from  <dig>  to  <dig>  among different ppi networks for the huge index dataset and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for the est-sage dataset; therefore the extent of connectivity of every ppi network constructed in this study is high.

the figures in parenthesis are the proportion of house-keeping nodes and the proportion of tissue-specific nodes in the total number of nodes in a particular ppi network.

the figures in parenthesis are the proportion of house-keeping nodes and proportion of tissue-specific nodes.

in the middle column, each number represents the size of a network fragment and in the following parenthesis is the number of fragments belonging to this network fragment size.

in the middle column, each number represents the size of a network fragment and in the following parenthesis is the number of fragments belonging to this network fragment size.

the huge and est-sage datasets have  <dig> tissue types in common . for each of those common tissue types, we determined the number of nodes common to both ppi networks and the number of common house-keeping and tissue-specific nodes and determined the extent of overlap of nodes of a certain type between the two datasets. as shown in table  <dig>  depending on the tissue type considered, the percentage of common nodes  in a huge-derived ppi network varied from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, while the percentage of common house-keeping nodes and common tissue-specific nodes varied from  <dig> % to  <dig> % and from 0% to  <dig> %, respectively. again depending on the tissue type considered, the percentage of common nodes in a est-sage-derived ppi network varied from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, while the percentage of common house-keeping nodes and common tissue-specific nodes varied from  <dig> % to  <dig> % and from 0% to  <dig> %, respectively. the extent of overlap between the two datasets was low, so it is reasonable to say that the results derived from one dataset can complement those derived from the other.

the first number for each entry is for the huge-derived ppi network and the second for the est-sage-derived ppi network.

topological properties of the house-keeping nodes
the topological importance of a node can be quantified using different centrality measures . those commonly used are the degree centrality , the betweenness centrality  and the closeness centrality . for each ppi network, we determined these three centralities for all individual nodes, then picked out the house-keeping nodes and calculated their means. we also calculated the expected distribution of these means if the collection of house-keeping nodes were a random subset of nodes in the ppi network. figures  <dig> and  <dig> summarize the results for the huge index and est-sage databases, respectively.

for the huge index dataset, only the house-keeping nodes in the brain and testes tissues had observed mean degree centralities significantly greater than the expected means  . despite the non-significant results, the observed mean degree centralities for the remaining tissue types were all greater than the expected means . for the betweenness centrality, only the house-keeping nodes in the testes tissue showed a significant difference from the expected mean despite all tissues having observed means greater than the expected means . for the closeness centrality, none of the observed means were significantly different from the expected means, although eight tissues had observed means that were greater than the expected means, while eleven had observed means lower than expected .

all but four tissue types in the est-sage dataset showed that the observed mean degree centralities for house-keeping nodes were significantly greater than the expected means  . for the betweenness centrality, five tissue types have observed means significantly greater than the expected means despite that all observed means were greater than the expected means . for the closeness centrality, all but one  tissue types had an observed mean greater than expected: six tissue types had an observed mean significantly greater than expected while the remaining tissue types showed non-significant differences .

topological properties of the tissue-specific nodes
for the huge index database, none of the tissue types had observed mean degree centralities for tissue-specific nodes significantly different from the expected means . three tissue types had observed means greater than the expected means, while the remaining tissue types had observed means lower than expected. for the betweenness centrality, the testes had an observed mean significantly lower than the expected mean, while the remaining tissue types showed non-significant differences . for the closeness centrality, the ovary was the only tissue with an observed mean significantly lower than the expected mean, while the other tissue types had observed means not significantly different from expected .

for the est-sage database, only the prostate has an observed mean degree centrality significantly lower than the expected mean, while the others had observed means not significantly different from expected . for the betweenness centrality, the prostate again had an observed mean significantly lower than expected, while those for other tissue types were not significantly different from the expected means . for the closeness centrality, all tissue types had observed means not significantly different from expected .

homophylic connectivity of the house-keeping nodes
for each ppi network, we calculated the proportion of house-keeping neighbors for individual house-keeping nodes  and their mean. figure 5a shows how the observed means compared with the model distribution for the  <dig> tissue types in the huge index database. our results show that the observed mean proportions were all significantly greater than the expected means, as they were all well above the upper limit of the 95% confidence interval of their corresponding model distributions. a similar pattern was seen for house-keeping nodes in the est-sage dataset .

homophylic connectivity of the tissue-specific nodes
for the huge index dataset,  <dig> of the  <dig> tissue types had observed means significantly greater than the expected means, while the remaining tissue types showed a non-significant difference . for the est-sage dataset,  <dig> of the  <dig> tissue types had observed means significantly greater than the expected means, while the remaining tissue types showed a non-significant difference . note that, for both datasets, a few tissues had a mean pts of  <dig> due to the fact that there were no connections between their tissue-specific nodes .

discussion
in this paper, we analyzed the topological properties of proteins encoded by house-keeping genes and tissue-specific genes and their local connectivity structure in the ppi networks for a variety of human tissues. an interesting pattern in terms of how cells organize their inventory tools emerged. although the results for the average degree and betweenness centrality for house-keeping nodes in a ppi network derived from the huge index dataset were not statistically different from those for randomly selected nodes, in each of the tissue types examined, the proteins encoded by house-keeping genes tended to have a greater number of direct neighbors  and to occupy network positions that were incident to many shortest interaction paths  than randomly selected proteins in a ppi network. this finding was more evident in the analysis of the est-sage dataset, where the results for several tissue types were statistically significant. such a consistent observation across different tissue types and different gene expression platforms indicates that house-keeping genes tend to code for proteins of more topological importance in a ppi network. in contrast, the protein products of tissue-specific genes tended to occupy network positions no different from those of a group of randomly selected proteins. with relatively few exceptions, this was observed in most tissue types across both the huge index and est-sage datasets. moreover, our results suggest that closeness centrality does not consistently reflect the topological importance of house-keeping genes in ppi networks. this is because the closeness centralities of a node and any of its direct neighbors should be similar, since there is only one link separating them  <cit> . some house-keeping genes are bound to connect to some tissue-specific genes. thus, if a house-keeping gene occupies a highly central position in a ppi network, as measured by closeness centrality, then its tissue-specific neighbors will also be important, and this results in many tissue-specific genes being more important than some house-keeping genes. the observation that house-keeping genes tend to occupy important network positions seems to fit the general trend that topologically important network positions tend to reflect common characteristics or vital processes in biology. for instance, proteins that have many interacting partners in a ppi network tend to be encoded by essential genes in yeast  <cit> , and topologically important enzymes tend to be shared by many different bacterial species  <cit> .

the second part of our analysis revealed that the protein products of house-keeping genes tended to connect or interact among themselves in a ppi network. such homophylic connectivity was observed for all tissue types in the two databases used. however, homophylic connectivity of tissue-specific gene-encoded proteins was not so widely observed. if one pools the results from both datasets, then slightly fewer than half of the tissues examined exhibited homophylic connectivity for tissue-specific genes. although house-keeping and tissue-specific functions are probably the two most fundamental biological functions in cell biology, we believe our findings still fit the general trend that network nodes performing similar biological functions tend to form clusters in a molecular network  <cit> . for instance, in metabolic and biochemical networks, metabolites tend to aggregate in the same network locations and form distinct functional modules or metabolic pathways  <cit> .

the observation that house-keeping genes tended to be topologically important, whereas tissue-specific genes did not led us to speculate why nature has organized a cell's inventory tools in such a manner and to propose the following hypothesis. imagine there is a hypothetical neutral cell, neutral in the sense that it is in an undifferentiated state. if the protein products of tissue-specific genes were located in topologically important positions in a ppi network such that they had many interacting partners, then it might be possible that the process of differentiation to a particular morphological state might involve other unnecessary tissue-specific genes. this could have two hypothetical drawbacks. first, expressing unnecessary and unrelated tissue-specific genes while performing tissue-specific functions or tasks is not an economical or efficient way for a neutral cell to utilize its resources when undergoing cell differentiation. second, because of the expression of these unrelated tissue-specific genes, unwanted functions might be performed such that a neutral cell might fail to differentiate to the correct morphological state. in contrast, house-keeping proteins are topologically important because they are involved in processes that perform basic and common cell functions, without which cells of different types would have difficulties in their maintenance. a close inspection of our results and ppi networks provides hints supporting our hypothesis. for instance, beta actin is one of the house-keeping gene-encoded proteins that ranked high in terms of topological importance  in our ppi networks. it has many interacting neighbors, many of which, such as cofilin, gamma actin, profiling, and beta tubulin, are also encoded by house-keeping genes  <cit> . these proteins form the cytoskeleton that provides structural integrity to a cell and organizes cellular activities  <cit>  and their expression in all cell types is therefore essential for a cell to function properly or even exist in the first place. one of the non-house-keeping neighbors of beta actin is troponin i  <cit> , which combines with troponin t and troponin c to form the troponin complex  <cit>  that plays an important role in the contraction of cardiac and skeletal muscles  <cit> . the constituent protein components of the troponin complex had average rankings of 688th and 558th in the degree and betweenness centralities, respectively, in the huge-derived muscle-specific ppi network, while the equivalent average rankings for the actin-cofilin-profilin-tubulin core were 279th and 334th. as for the est-sage-derived muscle-specific ppi network, the troponin complex components had average rankings of 736th and 537th in the degree and betweenness centralities, respectively, while the actin-cofilin-profilin-tubulin core was ranked 170th and 158th. thus, the troponin complex is, on average, of lower topological importance and is attached to the actin-cofilin-profilin-tubulin core at a more peripheral position in the muscle-specific ppi network. another example is neurogenesis, the process of formation of nerve tissue  <cit> . the crmp  family plays key roles in growth cone guidance during neural development  <cit> , and four members of this family, crmp <dig>  crmp <dig>  crmp <dig>  and crmp <dig>  could be mapped to the brain-specific ppi network for the est-sage dataset. crmp <dig>  crmp <dig>  crmp <dig>  and crmp <dig> interact sequentially to form a complex  <cit> , which connects to the actin-cofilin-profilin-tubulin core via crmp <dig> and beta tubulin  <cit> , as well as via crmp <dig> and profilin  <cit> . in the brain-specific ppi network, the crmp complex was ranked on average 1864th and 1531st in terms of the degree and betweenness centralities, respectively, while the corresponding values for the actin-cofilin-profilin-tubulin core were 356th and 294th. again, this demonstrates that the actin-cofilin-profilin-tubulin core is located in a topologically important position in the ppi network, while the tissue-specific proteins, such as the crmp complex, are more peripheral.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we have shown how a cell organizes its house-keeping and tissue-specific tools in a ppi network. both house-keeping and tissue-specific functions are very broad functional categories and structural patterns in network organization have been observed. in general, our findings suggest that house-keeping genes are topologically important in a ppi network, whereas tissue-specific genes are not, and that both sets of protein products exhibit a tendency, although to different extents, to homophylic connectivity. our findings led us to hypothesize that house-keeping genes tend to code for proteins that form the core of a ppi network, while tissue-specific genes are responsible for those at more peripheral positions of the network. the next challenge is to propose and explain the evolutionary mechanism that gave rise to the observed network organization of cellular tools.

