BACKGROUND
many plants allow intracellular accommodation of symbiotic microorganisms in order to improve nutrient uptake. the most ubiquitous example is vesicular arbuscular mycorrhizae  which are specific organs contributed by plant roots and fungi  <cit> . vam are probably as old as the common ancestor of all land plants  <cit>  and most of them are described as generalist . in contrast, only plants of the fabaceae family , plus the ulmaceae parasponia, harbor nitrogen-fixing bacteria in specific root organs . a polyphyletic group of symbiotic bacteria collectively named rhizobia are able to trigger nodule organogenesis  <cit> . the legume-rhizobium symbiosis is characterized by host-symbiont specificity controlled by stringent partner recognition. as a result, only a limited range of bacteria can nodulate a given legume species. despite their differences in levels of specificity, vam and rhizobial symbioses exhibit the same identical host cellular responses at early stages of the interaction. it is possible that vam have served as a pre-adaptation to the rhizobial symbiosis  <cit> . the specificity in legume-rhizobium symbiosis is mediated by signaling molecules released by both partners, among which rhizobial nod factors are thought to be the most important  <cit> . recently, vam fungi have also been shown to release signaling molecules as well  <cit> . there is mounting evidence that the same genes are activated during the establishment of both rhizobial and fungal symbioses  <cit> .

the gene nork  of medicago truncatula  <cit>  controls a common signaling pathway required for some of the earliest stages of nod factor signaling, but also mycorrhizal signaling. nork encodes a transmembrane protein with structural analogy to receptor kinases involved in signaling or disease resistance. its extracellular region contains a large n-terminal which has not yet been functionally characterized. the c-terminal region of the extracellular domain  contains three leucine-rich repeats  which are motifs involved in ligand binding. lrrs appear in many proteins involved in disease resistance or cellular signaling. lrrs are expected to conform as aligned β sheets in which solvent-exposed  residues control ligand specificity  <cit> .

current hypotheses regarding its functional role propose that nork is involved in a complex nod factor receptor  <cit>  or that it plays an intermediary part and connects the activity of nod factor  receptors to subsequent steps  <cit> . however, no functional experiments testing these hypotheses have been reported yet. we previously examined patterns of within- and between-species nucleotide variation in nork and found footprints of positive selection in the phylogeny of six legume species from five different genera but no evidence of positive selection in the polymorphism of medicago truncatula  <cit> . the finding of positive selection was based on messenger rna  sequences spanning the entire coding region of the gene but available for only a few species. signatures of positive selection were clearly located in the region encoding the lrrs. even if nork is a key component of the nod factor signaling pathway, it is not obvious that the legume-rhizobium symbiosis is the only explanation for the selective pressures found in that gene. we aimed to investigate whether nork evolution can be linked specifically to the evolution of rhizobial symbiosis, focusing on shifts in host specificity.

the medicago genus is the only available fine-scale case study of the patterns of rhizobia specificity  <cit> . most medicago species are associated to two sister species, sinorhizobium medicae and s. meliloti. however, basal species are associated to more specific, near-east strains . two non-basal medicago species  seem to have reverted to this preference for near-east strains. two sister species m. laciniata and m. sauvagei are associated to the specific group of s. meliloti bv. medicaginis  <cit> , and m. monspeliaca is associated to another group. this pattern suggests several important transitions of symbiotic preference along the medicago phylogeny.

here we present a detailed analysis of the evolution of nork using an intensive sampling of species from the genus medicago and focusing on the lrr region. species included in our sample were selected to encompass evolutionary transitions that occurred during the evolution of the genus medicago. we examined a region of  <dig> nucleotides coding for the extracellular domain of nork. we sequenced  <dig> medicago species and used  <dig> mrna sequences from other genera. a widely used indicator of selective constraint is the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous substitution rates  <cit> . this parameter is referred to as ω and can be estimated from aligned coding sequence data using a maximum-likelihood method  <cit>  which allows testing various hypotheses. the data exhibit strong evidence that nork has undergone positive selection in the history of the medicago genus. we present an estimation of the proportion of sites under selection and their position in the gene. we test whether branches of the medicago phylogeny which are associated to changes in rhizobial preferences exhibit evidence of positive selection. we find that there is no obvious such influence whereas at least one branch associated to no known transition in symbiotic specificity has almost certainly undergone positive selection.

RESULTS
sequence data
a region of  <dig> nucleotides was sequenced in  <dig> medicago species . positions of exons were determined by homology with m. truncatula. a protein-coding region of  <dig> nucleotides was extracted and aligned with mrna sequences of  <dig> species from other genera . this alignment was translated in an alignment of  <dig> amino acids . the nork protein has undergone a few insertion and deletion events. they are restricted to a short track of the extracellular domain . within medicago  we observe two short deletions  and one short insertion . outside medicago there are only two additional short insertion/deletion events: a two-residue insertion at positions 214– <dig> common to all medicago and a single amino acid insertion/deletion at position  <dig> . hence nork has undergone relatively few rearrangement events within the hologalegina clade  <cit> .

significant excess of non-synonymous substitutions in nork between medicago species
the phylogenetic relationships between medicago species have been examined in a previous study using a nuclear locus  <cit> . the analyses described below have been performed using the branching order  found in this study. the unrooted phylogeny we used is displayed in figure 1a. at first, only between-site variation of selective constraints was considered. we fitted two models of site variation of ω, the non-synonymous to synonymous rate ratio . the comparison of these models allows detecting positive selection  <cit> . the model m8a is the null model and doesn't allow positive selection. variation in the strength of purifying selection among sites is modeled by a beta distribution controlled by two parameters , and an additional category fixed to ω =  <dig> is implemented. in m <dig> this last ω value is allowed to vary beyond one, while all other features are the same. we find that the maximum likelihood estimate of ω in m <dig> is  <dig>  . the frequency of these sites under positive selection is  <dig>  . there is a large and unambiguously significant gap in likelihood between m8a and m <dig> , strongly supporting the finding of signatures of positive selection in nork.

identification of candidate sites targeted by positive selection
the amount of data at each site of an alignment is considered to be insufficient to allow an independent estimation of ω for individual sites. the so-called bayes empirical bayes procedure  <cit>  overcomes this problem by using the parameters of the m <dig> model as a prior distribution of ω. the bayes empirical bayes procedure allows estimating  the probability that a given site belongs to each ω category in the model and  a per-site prediction of ω along with a confidence interval. sites displaying a high probability  of belonging to the free ω category of model m <dig>  are candidate targets of positive selection. our analysis suggests nine candidate sites with probability >  <dig> :  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> . site numbering and amino acids given are these of m. truncatula .

among site variation of ω is represented in figure  <dig>  the nine candidate sites, and more broadly sites with high predicted ω values, are scattered in the extracellular domain of nork . the solvent-exposed β sheets of the lrr motifs, which are predicted to control ligand specificity  <cit> , have not undergone positive selection. interestingly, the c-terminal ends of the three lrrs harbor five of the nine candidate sites, and these sites are at comparable distances from the end of the β sheets. assuming the spatial structure of other lrr proteins  <cit> , these five candidate sites may be at spatially nearby positions. the four other sites occur in the large n-terminal region of the extracellular domain of nork which consists of a currently undetermined structural domain.

positive selection did not occur preferentially in branches where shifts in rhizobial specificity took place
we tested whether positive selection occurred specifically in the branches where changes in rhizobial preference occurred. we used the test designed by yang  <cit>  for detecting positive selection in particular branches of a phylogeny. the branches numbered 1– <dig> correspond to changes in rhizobial specificity . the branch  <dig> is selected a posteriori because of its unexpected length in the phylogeny of nork, comparing with branch lengths of previous phylogenies of the genus . this length is defined as nucleotide substitutions per codon and not in non-synonymous substitutions, and therefore there is no a priori knowledge of any excess of non-synonymous substitutions in this branch . to our knowledge, branch  <dig> is not correlated to any known change in phenotype in medicago species. the null model for this test assumes no variation of ω between both sites and branches . the addition of one additional ω <dig>  different from the background ω <dig>  is tested separately in all six chosen branches. for branches  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  ω appears not to be significantly different from other branches . branch  <dig> is of length  <dig>  and therefore the test is meaningless for this branch. in contrast, ω is significantly higher in branches  <dig> and  <dig> and significantly smaller in branch  <dig>  it is very unlikely that any non-synonymous substitution occurred in this last branch . for branches  <dig> and  <dig>  however, ω is not significantly greater than one .

note:

κ: transition/transversion ratio; np: number of free parameters; log-l: log-likelihood; lr: likelihood ratio; *: p <  <dig> ; p: p-value.

most branches where changes in rhizobial specificity occurred don't display any increase in the rate of non-synonymous substitutions. the only one that shows such increase is the branch leading to m. noeana . conversely, at least one other branch  displays an even larger increase . branch  <dig> is not associated with the pattern of rhizobial specificity in extant species. these results indicate that positive selection in nork is very unlikely to be connected to changes in rhizobial specificity in the medicago genus.

discussion
we have examined the pattern of nucleotide divergence in the coding sequence of nork between species of the genus medicago. we found signatures of positive selection suggesting episodes of molecular adaptation of nork in the history of this genus, but with no evidence of correlation with shifts of rhizobial specificity. below we first examine one methodological issue that might put into question the finding of positive selection, and then discuss its possible interpretations.

are our results robust to tree misspecification?
we used a phylogeny of medicago species previously published, and determined using a different locus than the one used for testing positive selection. the phylogeny built from nork sequences  is indeed severely conflicting with the one we used. using a tree inconsistent with the data may restrain the validity of the test for positive selection  <cit> . to confirm our finding of positive selection, we evaluated the robustness of our results to several tree topologies . overall we find that the evidence for positive selection is not as strong but still highly significant . the estimated number of candidate sites tends to drop, but the estimated ωs is still close to  <dig> and the positions of candidate sites are qualitatively conserved .

positions of candidate sites in the protein
no candidate site has been identified in the solvent-exposed β sheets of the lrrs. this result contrasts with many previous studies of lrr-containing resistance gene families where positive selection mostly targeted these solvent-exposed sites . however, caicedo and shaal  <cit>  noted that a majority of sites under positive selection fell outside of solvent-exposed regions in a study of positive selection in a lrr resistance gene of a solanum,. therefore the operating mode of positive selection in the evolution of lrrs might vary between genes, presumably resulting from different spatial interactions between lrr proteins and their ligand or ligands.

four of the nine candidate sites are in the n-terminal region of nork which consists of a currently undetermined structural domain. resistance proteins containing lrrs often include tir and nbs domains at a similar position. their role in determining ligand specificity  <cit>  as well as the presence of positively selected sites in these domains  <cit>  have been demonstrated. it is therefore possible that the unknown n-terminal domain of nork has a role in controlling interactions with other proteins. the position of sites where positive selection occurred might be relevant for the inference of the spatial structure of nork.

nork does not seem to control partner choice between sinorhizobium strains in medicago
the occurrence of positive selection in nork being demonstrated, we sought for a hypothesis to explain it. the product of this gene is involved in both rhizobial and endomycorrhizal symbioses  <cit> . furthermore, nork may have additional roles. it is possible that it intervenes also in the control of root hair growth  <cit> . in this context it is difficult to infer which selective constraints have driven the numerous amino acid substitutions we detected. a phylogeny of the genus medicago was previously reconstructed using internal and external spacers of the nuclear ribosomal dna  <cit> . this phylogeny allowed to identify five putative events of changes in rhizobial specificity within the genus medicago  <cit> .

here we tested whether amino acid substitutions of nork have played a role in these changes of specificity, by testing whether more substitutions occurred in branches where these changes occurred. the branches corresponding to the association with a large range of sinorhizobium meliloti and medicae strains , and to specializations to limited ranges of strains  show very small and non-significant variations of ω. m. noeana and m. rigiduloides are closely related  species which seem to have both reverted to an ancestral state. however their branches exhibit contrasted pattern of non-synonymous and synonymous evolution. the branch  <dig>  has an ω of  <dig>  significantly larger than in the rest of the tree but not significantly larger than one. the branch  <dig>  has a significantly lower, virtually null ω. the result for branch  <dig> is ambiguous because it is not possible to positively discriminate between positive selection and relaxed purifying constraints, since ω is not significantly greater than one. furthermore, the statistical properties of branch-specific ω, such as sampling errors, as well as their behavior with varying branch length, have been poorly described. even if positive selection indeed occurred in the branch leading to m. noeana, it must have occurred also in other branches not connected to changes in rhizobial specificity. first, because our initial study having detected positive selection did not use this species  <cit> . second, because the branch  <dig> is an even more likely candidate than branch  <dig> . therefore it is obvious from the results described in table  <dig> that there is no general increase in ω in branches associated to changes in rhizobial specificity. evolving preferences between several groups of sinorhizobium are not a good candidate for explaining the high rates of amino acid replacements in nork in medicago.

alternative explanations
the exact role of nork in nod factor signaling is currently unclear  <cit> , as well as the way it is involved in its other putative functions . it is not excluded that the nork protein interacts directly with nod factors, putative mycorrhizal signaling molecules, or any kind of ligand. it is therefore difficult to formulate any precise hypothesis for explaining positive selection in nork. below we only enumerate a few general hypotheses.

the hypothesis tested in this article is that nork evolution has been driven by changes of rhizobial specificity . this form of evolution can be detected because former states are conserved in unchanged descendants of ancestral species. another possibility is a coevolutionary arms race between medicago and sinorhizobium, a process where both partners evolve in response to each other's innovations  <cit> . this may not be easily detectable because the changes don't occur at speciations and the ancestral states do not persist. this suggestion assumes that nork interacts directly with a rhizobial product, and that the symbiosis generates antagonist-like pressures of selection .

as a putative receptor for vesicular arbuscular endomycorrhizae  signaling, nork might as well be under selective pressures caused by the interaction with mycorrhizal fungi. at first glance, vam are not expected to be able to require molecular adaptation because of a typical absence of specificity . however hidden specificity caused by specific life history  <cit> , and also possible conflicts of interest in vam, can be taken on consideration as potential sources of selective pressure.

genes can be recruited as resistance genes while having an initial different function . as a regulator of common plant symbioses, nork may be used as an entry route for parasites using nodule/vam development pathway to infect root tissues. in that case, this gene is likely to behave as a resistance gene. there is some clue that the lotus japonicus homologue of nork is required for parasitic infection by root parasites  <cit>  but this result has not been confirmed in medicago.

eventually, functional studies of protein interactions in which norkis involved will help identifying the putative selective pressures it undergoes and consequently narrow down these hypotheses.

CONCLUSIONS
we confirm the occurrence of positive selection in the symbiotic gene nork. we show that positive selection was probably not induced by changes in rhizobial specificity during the evolution of the medicago genus. positions of amino acid sites exhibiting an excess of substitutions indicate that selection did not target solvent-exposed residues of the lrrs, but other sites, inside and outside the lrrs. these results confirm that nork has undergone crucial selective pressures at least in the medicago genus, but raise questions relative to their origin.

