BACKGROUND
members of the phylum nematoda can be found in nearly every habitat on earth, with high abundances and diverse arrays of species existing in both marine and terrestrial habitats. nematodes are ubiquitous and integral to ecosystem functioning-they facilitate processes such as nutrient cycling, sediment stability, and even pollutant distribution in marine systems  <cit> , yet we lack a comprehensive understanding of global diversity within this phylum. out of an estimated  <dig> million to  <dig> million nematode species  <cit> , fewer than  <dig>  have been formally described, representing the largest taxonomic deficit for any group of animals  <cit> . this minimal sampling of nematode diversity has implications for our understanding of systematic relationships, as adequate taxon sampling has been identified as a major factor for building accurate phylogenies  <cit> .

marine free-living nematodes are particularly understudied compared to their terrestrial and parasitic counterparts, with only ~ <dig>  species known to science. the order enoplida  contains a diverse group of primarily marine taxa; these nematodes represent the largest marine species in terms of physical size, and can reach up to several millimetres in length  <cit> . many enoplids are thought to be active predators , and play important ecological roles within meiofaunal communities. however, evolutionary relationships within the enoplida are poorly understood-published phylogenies have been overly reliant on terrestrial and parasitic species, , and have inadequately sampled the known diversity of the enoplida  <cit> .

before the advent of molecular techniques, a number of taxonomic classifications attempted to catalogue the substantial morphological diversity observed within the subclass enoplia. filipjev  <cit>  was the first author to produce a comprehensive morphological classification of free-living nematodes, and subsequent revisions that included a focus on the enoplia were completed by pearse  <cit> , chitwood and chitwood  <cit> , clark  <cit> , de coninck  <cit> , andrassy  <cit> , maggenti  <cit> , lorenzen  <cit> , and siddiqi  <cit> . morphological schemes primarily differed in their placement of the tripyloididae, alaimidae, ironidae , and the mononchoidea . lorenzen's  <cit>  framework is the currently accepted classification system for free-living marine enoplids, and has been used as the basis for platt & warwick's  <cit>  ubiquitous illustrated keys for identifying genera.

de ley and blaxter  <cit>  proposed the first comprehensive classification of the enoplia based on ssu sequence data, following on from the original molecular phylogeny by blaxter et al.  <cit> . this framework outlined two ranks within the enoplia, orders enoplida and triplonchida; seven suborders were denoted within the enoplida , and three within the triplonchida . despite this proposed classification, de ley and blaxter's framework was based on relatively few gene sequences compared to the most recent molecular phylogenies  <cit> . these subsequent frameworks also offered limited insight regarding the enoplida, with only a few authors sequencing additional species to supplement publically available data  <cit> . in a study focused on marine species, meldal et al.  <cit>  noted that the monophyly of some enoplid families was highly supported , whilst other families were suspected to be polyphyletic . holterman et al.  <cit>  and van megen et al.  <cit>  recovered the bastianiidae and the rhabdolaimidae within the enoplida, despite de ley and blaxter's original placement within the order plectida . van megen et al.'s  <cit>  recent phylogeny of nematodes utilised more enoplid sequences than any prior investigation . despite this expansion, taxon sampling remained sparse for some groups and the placement of many major clades in the enoplida remained unresolved.

these published phylogenies have also transformed our understanding of relationships amongst major nematode clades. however, there is continued uncertainty surrounding the basal splits within the nematoda. earlier frameworks identified both the enoplia and dorylaimia as early-branching nematode taxa  <cit> , although these studies reported a polytomy at the basal node. holterman et al.  <cit>  and van megen et al.'s  <cit>  large-scale analysis both recovered the enoplia as the earliest-branching clade amongst nematodes, although support values for this topology were low-only  <dig>   and 65% , respectively. understanding the order of early splits is crucial for accurately reconstructing nematode evolution; molecular phylogenies provide a valuable glimpse back in time, given the non-existent fossil record for nematodes. the enoplia  and dorylaimia  represent very different life histories-if dorylaimids were to be confirmed as the earliest branching lineage, it may imply a terrestrial origin for the phylum  <cit> , and challenge the widely held view that nematodes first arose in marine environments.

enoplids are often assumed to be the oldest nematode group  <cit> , despite the continued lack of resolution in molecular phylogenies. certain developmental traits in enoplid species appear to represent plesiomorphic states, such as the symmetric embryonic cleavage that can be observed in tobrilus diversipapillatus and several other marine species; in contrast, nematodes in other clades show asymmetric patterns that are unique amongst metazoa  <cit> . in addition, enoplid species retain a nuclear envelope in mature spermatozoa , compared to all other nematode groups, which show a clear loss of this structure  <cit> .

there is currently little morphological and developmental evidence to insinuate ancestral traits amongst the dorylaimia, but the absence of evidence does not preclude dorylaimids from representing the earliest-splitting nematode clade. de ley and blaxter  <cit>  present an intriguing discussion that suggests a resemblance  between dorylaimid mouth structures and protrusible 'introvert' structures seen kinorhyncha, priapulida, and juvenile nematomorpha. dorylaimid species exhibit vastly different lifestyles and span a broad ecological range-this diversity has prompted speculation of an early terrestrial evolution and radiation within this group  <cit> ; however, dorylaimids possess surprisingly little genetic divergence despite this high diversity, which may alternatively signify a quite recent evolutionary origin for these terrestrial species. a molecular framework with firm support at the basal node will be necessary for resolving the longstanding debate about early splits within the nematoda.

this study aimed to resolve phylogenetic relationships within the enoplida using greatly increased taxon sampling and sequence data from multiple genes. prior to this investigation, few publically available full-length ssu sequences were available for enoplid nematodes. morphological data and up to three gene sequences  were collected from a total of  <dig> nematodes from the order enoplida, representing  <dig> genera collected from marine habitats. large-scale phylogenies were constructed in order to assess the overall placement of the enoplia in the nematode framework, elucidate major clades within the previously undersampled enoplida, and investigate lower taxonomic relationships amongst enoplid genera.

RESULTS
resolving relationships within the enoplida
the 18s rrna gene and the d2/d <dig> region of the 28s rrna gene were both amplified from a total of  <dig> enoplid nematodes, and cox <dig> was additionally isolated from a subset of  <dig> specimens. all gene sequences were subsequently deposited in genbank . amongst different phylogenetic topologies, clade membership and lower taxonomic relationships within the enoplida were consistent between trees. congruent topologies were obtained using both small and large 18s datasets . certain higher clade relationships in the enoplida remained unresolved; the placement of the syringolaimus/campydora/rhabdolaimidae and ironidae/alaimina clades were often unstable, and the order of sub-clades within the oncholaimoidea/oxystominidae group, often changed between trees. in this study, both 28s and cox <dig> were too variable for inferring deep phylogeny. alignments of 28s sequences showed regions of high variability and uncertain orthology between divergent groups and consequently higher clade relationships did not always correspond well with 18s data. other authors have used these genes to elucidate relationships at the genus level or below  <cit> , and in our analyses lower taxonomic relationships inferred from 28s data largely agreed with 18s topologies. in a few cases, 28s added further insight to relationships amongst genera compared to 18s phylogenies . fewer inferences were possible from the limited cox <dig> dataset, but many genus-level relationships corresponded well with 28s and 18s tree topologies.

a molecular framework of the enoplia
the enoplia is divided into two orders, the triplonchida and the enoplida . this separation is highly supported in ml and bayesian analyses, and agrees with previous molecular frameworks  <cit> . the triplonchida was consistently recovered as monophyletic, in line with previous phylogenies  <cit> ; this group contained three well supported sub-clades , and arrangement of taxa within this group agrees with the most recent nematode phylogeny by van megen et al.  <cit> . unfortunately, online sequence databases did not contain many 28s sequences from enoplid nematodes, so it was not feasible to clarify lower taxonomic relationships for terrestrial clades within the triplonchida-only marine taxa were sequenced during this study.

ml and bayesian analyses recovered five distinct lineages within the order enoplida . clade i contains only the rhabdolaimidae, the genus syringolaimus and campydora demonstrans. clade ii contains the alaimina and ironidae  as sister taxa. the tripyloididae and the trefusiidae  were recovered as sister taxa in clade ii. clade iv contained both the oxystominidae and the superfamily oncholaimoidea. finally, the genera representing the superfamily enoploidea sensu lorenzen  <cit>  plus the leptosomatidae represented clade v within the enoplida.

the oxystominidae and superfamily oncholaimoidea  were always recovered as a monophyletic grouping in tree topologies, although the relationships between sub-clades are not fully resolved in either ml or bayesian topologies. support values for the oncholaimoidea-oxystominidae clade were not always high in ml analyses , but this grouping was recovered with high support in bayesian topologies . the oncholaimoidea is firmly supported as monophyletic in 18s, 28s and cox <dig> tree topologies  and includes both the oncholaimidae and the enchelidiidae, in line with previous phylogenies  <cit> . the enchelidiidae appears to be a more recently derived clade within the oncholaimoidea; this family is consistently recovered as a monophyletic, although support values vary . the family oncholaimidae is confirmed to be paraphyletic, as first suggested by van megen et al.'s  <cit>  topology.

within the oncholaimidae, the genera oncholaimus and viscosia appear to exhibit substantial molecular diversity. according to genetic data, most shallow water oncholaimus specimens were placed in a clade next to viscosia; the primary shallow-water clades containing the majority of oncholaimus and viscosia specimens isolated in this study are denoted by a black square in additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig>  however, there also appeared to be another divergent group of oncholaimus nematodes within the oncholaimoidea. two shallow water sequences obtained from genbank, oncholaimus spp. and viscosia sp., appeared more closely related to the divergent oncholaimus group containing deep-sea specimens, and not to the main clades representing specimens from intertidal sediments.

the placement of genera within the oxystominidae is not overly stable in 18s trees, and this group is sometimes recovered as paraphyletic . the four sub-clades  were observed to vary consistently in regard to their internal placement and splitting order. the genus halalaimus is consistently recovered as a long-branch clade, and it is possible that this taxon has a destabilizing effect on the internal topology of the oncholaimoidea/oxystominidae clade.

this study always recovered the families tripyloididae and trefusiidae within a single clade , despite varying support values ; this clade also contains two terrestrial genera formerly grouped within the tripylidae, tripylina and trischistoma. molecular evidence has firmly placed the terrestrial tripylidae family within the triplonchida, and not within the enoplida; tripylina and trischistoma are strongly supported  within the enoplida, suggesting that their past classification within the tripylidae was based on homoplasious morphological characters.

large subunit sequences were able to add further resolution regarding relationships within the tripyloididae. data from 18s suggest that the genera bathylaimus and tripyloides do not form distinct, separate lineages . maximum likelihood phylogenies built using 28s data from the same enoplid specimens  clearly differentiate one genus from the other and denote a sister relationship for these two taxa. however, mitochondrial trees  resemble 18s topologies-cox <dig> does not indicate a clear distinction between genera, as indicated by 28s data.

the proposed monophyly of the superfamily enoploidea  <cit>  is not upheld by the present study. the enoploidea sensu lorenzen  <cit>  instead appears to be paraphyletic, with all genera recovered in a well supported clade that additionally included the leptosomatide . this large grouping contains the enoplidae, thoracostomopsidae, anoplostomatidae, phanodermatidae, anticomidae, and leptosomatidae. the anoplostomatidae sensu lorenzen  <cit>   appears to be polyphyletic; the genus anoplostoma is an early branching clade within the enoploidea, while the genus chaetonema occupies a more derived position. the leptosomatidae was not extensively sampled , but specimens from this family were always recovered within a single clade with high support . the anticomidae was also recovered as monophyletic. the branching order of clades within the enoploidea was unresolved in bayesian trees and exhibited low support in ml topologies; denser taxon sampling within these families may help to resolve the exact branching order in future studies. the thoracostomopsidae, enoplidae and phanodermatidae were always recovered within a monophyletic clade . the phanodermatidae and enoplidae were usually recovered as sister taxa, although support values are low under ml analysis  and not especially high in bayesian topologies .

both 18s and 28s data suggest that species within the phanodermatidae are morphologically similar but genetically diverse. in this study, most specimens identified within this group had few distinguishing features; ribosomal sequence data confirms the monophyly of the phanodermatidae, but tree topologies appear to divide the family into three distinct clades . the observed clustering of taxa was identical in both 18s and 28s tree topologies. mitochondrial trees did not resolve the phanodermatidae as monophyletic , but cox <dig> trees additionally support the grouping of taxa observed in ribosomal phylogenies .

the divergent clade containing the rhabdolaimidae, the genus syringolaimus, and campydora demonstrans was recovered with high support  in 18s topologies . the rhabdolaimidae was consistently recovered as a sister taxon to campydora demonstrans, despite low support values . previous studies insinuated a close relationship between syringolaimus  and campydora  <cit> , and our results uphold these findings. relationships amongst other species in the ironidae remain unresolved, although it appears that at least several genera form a monophyletic grouping. dolicholaimus and ironus were consistently recovered as single clade with high support . this study was only able to obtain gene sequences from two ironidae genera; additional sampling will be required to resolve placement of other taxa within this group.

the alaimina was recovered in accordance with van megen et al.  <cit> , and was often observed to form a sister relationship with the ironidae . this clade arrangement showed minimal support in ml topologies, but bayesian trees recovered high support values for this alaimina/ironidae association .

resolving the order of early branching nematode clades
the large-scale maximum likelihood topologies recovered in this study agree broadly with previously published nematode phylogenies  <cit> , recovering all major nematode clades and providing increased resolution at certain nodes. we found good agreement across optimality criteria with both bayesian and maximum likelihood methods; our analyses revealed that the dorylaimia and enoplia split early from other nematode lineages, although tree topologies did not definitively resolve the branching order of these two groups.

three scenarios  were observed across ml tree topologies: 1) the dorylaimia splitting first from all other nematodes , 2) the enoplia splitting first from all other nematodes, or 3) the dorylaimia and enoplia placed as sister taxa in a single clade that appears as a sister taxon to all other nematodes. the first and second scenarios were the most common across different parameters and outgroup taxa ; the third scenario was only rarely recovered. the choice of outgroups and phylogenetic parameters had a significant impact on this branching order of nematode clades . the dorylaimia was always observed to split off first when nematode taxa were analysed alongside the purportedly closest metazoan relative, the nematomorpha . the enoplia was repeatedly observed to split off at the basal node using either the priapulida or kinorhyncha as outgroups, but when these same datasets were partitioned according to secondary rrna structure the dorylaimia was instead recovered as the earliest branching clade. the tardigrade outgroup usually recovered the dorylaimia splitting off at the basal node, although occasionally the enoplia and dorylaimia were recovered as sister taxa. adding a second, third, or fourth outgroup to the dataset did not improve resolution at the base of the tree, and the dorylaimia and enoplia were alternately recovered as the earliest branching nematode lineage. when four different non-nematode phyla were included in gene alignments , the enoplia was usually observed as the earliest-splitting lineage. however, when the same four non-nematode phyla were used in conjunction with gblocks analysis , the dorylaimia was instead recovered as the earliest branching clade.

basal split recovered using different combinations of nematode taxa, outgroup taxa, and phylogenetic parameters; all topologies utilized stem/loop gene partitions according to rrna secondary structure. "earliest splitting clade" identifies the group that diverges most basally from all other nematodes. "doryla+enop" indicates the dorylaimia and enoplia as a monophyletic group. outgroup taxa were chosen according to the phylogeny of animal phyla by dunn et al. . asterisk  denotes topologies where the trichnellida and dorylaimida are recovered as paraphyletic, with trichnellida splitting first in all cases.

the trichinellida  was often recovered as a sister taxon to all other dorylaimid species, but occasionally these two clades were resolved as paraphyletic ; previous molecular frameworks have supported the monophyly of the dorylaimia  <cit> . the frequent paraphyly of trichinellida in this study suggests that more intensive sampling of the diversity of this order and the dorylaimida may be required to fully understand their systematic affinities. removal of the trichinellida did not result in an unequivocal basal split-outgroup choice continued to dictate the order of splits at the base of the tree. bayesian phylogenies did not recover the trichinellida and dorylaimia within a monophyletic clade and did not resolve the branching order of early-splitting nematode lineages.

we tested support for the alternative split patterns at the base of the nematode phylogeny using the shimodaira-hasegawa log likelihood ratio test  <cit> . this test could not reject the hypothesis that a tree with dorylaimida and trichinellida as a monophyletic group was equally good as the paraphyly of these groups. a topology containing enoplia as part of the basal split was found to be significantly worse  to a basal branching of paraphyletic dorylaimia. yet if dorylaimia was constrained to be monophyletic rather than paraphyletic then enoplia branching first was not found to be a significantly worse topology.

discussion
a revised framework for the enoplia
this study represents the first comprehensive phylogeny of the nematode order enoplida, a group of primarily marine free-living species; our investigation has obtained the first gene sequences from some enoplid genera  and even families  that were formerly absent from public sequence databases. the resulting phylogeny has significantly resolved the molecular framework of the enoplia as first outlined by de ley and blaxter  <cit> , elucidating five major clades within the order enoplida and providing substantial insight regarding relationships amongst lower taxonomic levels. most notably, our analyses firmly place the leptosomatidae within the superfamily enoploidea , while the oxystominidae is consistently recovered in a major clade alongside the oncholaimoidea; previous frameworks incorrectly placed both these families within the ironina  <cit> .

the suborder oncholaimina appears to encompass both the oxystominidae and the oncholaimoidea; these families were consistently recovered as a major clade within the enoplida, in line with van megen et al.'s  <cit>  topology. morphological evidence also lends support to this proposed relationship-lorenzen noted that species from these two families possess 'orthometaneme' type metanemes with associated caudal filaments  <cit> ; most other enoplid taxa that possess this specific type of metaneme do not have associated caudal filaments, with the exception of a few isolated species. despite a large number of specimens included from the oncholaimoidea/oxystominidae, the internal topology of subclades in this lineage remains largely unresolved.

the present data firmly support early historical classifications  <cit>  and previous molecular studies  <cit>  which placed the trefusiidae within the enoplida. terrestrial genera trischistoma and tripylina were also recovered within the enoplida, despite their historical placement within the dorylaimia based on morphology  <cit>  or within the triplonchida according to molecular evidence  <cit> . holterman et al.  <cit>  first suggested the placement of trischistoma within the enoplida; meldal  <cit>  confirmed that both trischistoma and tripylina were excluded from the triplonchida, but was unable to resolve their exact placement. our analysis here  strongly indicated that the trefusiidae includes, or is closely associated with, the genera trischistoma and tripylina. this investigation consistently recovered the tripyloididae as a sister taxon to the clade containing the trefusiidae, tripylina, and trischistoma. such a relationship was first suggested by siddiqi  <cit>  who placed the tripylidae species and the tripyloididae together in the order tripylida based on morphology. the molecular framework outlined by van megen et al.  <cit>  recovered a similar association between these taxa, although this relationship demonstrated low support values in their analysis .

within the tripyloididae, morphological evidence seems to support the observed separation between bathylaimus and tripyloides in 28s phylogenies . taxonomic descriptions outline distinct anatomical differences between these two genera, relating to buccal cavity morphology, amphid shape, shape and position of cervical setae, tail shape, and spicule shape in male specimens  <cit> . the extent of this morphological differentiation seems to suggest an older split between the two genera  rather than a more recent divergence .

ribosomal topologies suggest that the ironidae and alaimina may reside within a single suborder; these two groups were usually recovered as sister taxa, and this relationship was highly supported in bayesian topologies . the exact placement of the ironidae/alaimina clade was not fully resolved; some trees denoted this clade as an independent lineage within the enoplida, while other topologies suggested a sister relationship with the tripyloididae/trefusiidae clade . previous molecular investigations returned similar results  <cit> ; molecular data confirmed the placement of the alaimina and ironidae within the enoplida, but other studies were also unable to resolve the exact placement of these taxa. historical morphological classifications have also struggled to firmly place these two groups. the ironidae and alaimina were formerly classed within either the dorylaimia  <cit>  or the enoplida  <cit> . several taxonomists proposed a close relationship between the ironidae and the tripylidae  <cit> , and both filipjev  <cit>  and chitwood and chitwood  <cit>  insinuated a close relationship between the ironidae and alaimina. only a handful of gene sequences from each group were included in the present analysis; increased sampling in future molecular studies may be able to firmly resolve the placement of these two groups.

this study supports previous topologies  <cit>  that denote the rhabdolaimidae, the genus syringolaimus and campydora demonstrans as members of an independent, highly supported clade. however, our analyses do not support a sister relationship between syringolaimus and campydora that was previously recovered by van megen et al.  <cit> . the overall placement of this divergent clade amongst enoplid lineages was not well resolved. morphological evidence has previously suggested a close relationship between the rhabdolaimidae and syringolaimus; most classifications grouped syringolaimus within the ironidae  <cit> , but some placed this genus within the rhabdolaimidae in the araeolaimida  <cit> . the genus campydora was historically classified within the dorylaimia based on morphology  <cit> ; only siddiqi  <cit>  was the only author to suggest a relationship with the enoplia based on the structure of the pharynx and amphids. the current placement of syringolaimus clearly denotes the polyphyly of the ironidae sensu lorenzen  <cit> , a finding that was originally put forth by meldal et al.  <cit>  upheld in later phylogenies  <cit> . our analyses suggest that the syringolaimus/campydora/rhabdolaimidae clade represents a sister group to the tripyloididae/trefusiidae clade; however, support values for this sister relationship were usually very low in ml topologies , and not significantly high in bayesian phylogenies .

the placement of the anticomidae suggests that species within this group represent a major enoplid family. previous morphological classifications largely considered the anticomidae as a subfamily within the leptsomatidae  <cit>  and only a few authors separated this group and raised it to family rank  <cit> . lorenzen's  <cit>  separation of the anticomidae was based on the left-hand position of gonads and the existence of pre-anal tubules in males of these species . although the leptsomatidae and anticomidae are both placed within the enoploidea, these taxa were never recovered as a monophyletic clade, supporting the morphological separation of these two groups.

the anoplostomatidae sensu lorenzen  <cit>  appears to be an artificial, polyphyletic taxon. the two member genera, anoplostoma and chaetonema, were originally grouped together on the basis of buccal cavity and cephalic capsule structure; however, this study never recovered these two genera within a monophyletic group, despite both being consistently recovered within the superfamily enoploidea. previous morphological classifications placed chaetonema within the enchelidiidae  <cit>  or within the enoploidea as a member of the rhabdodemaniidae  <cit> . anoplostoma was first placed within the phanodermatidae  <cit> , but later excluded completely from the enoploidea and considered part of the oncholaimoidea  <cit> . most historical taxonomic classifications did not suggest a close relationship between chaetonema and anoplostoma, and phylogenetic analysis confirms that these two genera represent independent lineages.

molecular data upholds the classification of the thoracostmopsidae, enoplidae, and phanodermatidae defined by lorenzen  <cit> . these three taxa form a large, well-supported clade within the enoploidea, supporting previous morphological classifications of this superfamily  <cit> . tree topologies also suggest a sister relationship between the phanodermatidae and enoplus ; support values for this pairing were weak in most trees, despite this topology being consistently recovered across different datasets and phylogenetic parameters. morphological similarities between thoracostomopsidae and phanodermatidae were previously suggested by lorenzen  <cit> , supporting the association between these two groups in molecular frameworks. lorenzen markedly diverged from earlier classifications by considering enoplus as the only genus within the enoplidae, basing this separation on differences in metaneme structure, gland arrangements, and the absence of onchia. all other genera previously placed within this group were moved into the thoracostomopsidae . our investigation only included thoracostomopsidae species representing the subfamily enoplolaiminae; further analysis is needed to determine whether genera within the subfamilies thoracostomopsinae and trileptiinae also belong within the thoracostomopsidae sensu lorenzen.

cryptic diversity has recently been uncovered in well-known marine nematode species  <cit> , and evidence from the enoplida has revealed further unexpected genetic diversity in several groups. ribosomal 18s and 28s data suggest that the genera oncholaimus and viscosia  represent artificial, paraphyletic taxonomic groupings. both groups are known to be taxonomically difficult genera, containing many species with very similar morphology. for specimens identified during the present study, it was often impossible to definitively assign an oncholaimid specimen as belonging to either genus; the position of the largest subventral tooth was usually the only character that could be used to identify the correct genus of female specimens, and this feature was often obscured if a specimen was awkwardly mounted or exhibited a buccal cavity filled with detritus. ribosomal topologies imply that morphologically similar oncholaimus and viscosia species represent multiple divergent lineages within the oncholaimoidea , suggesting that both genera should be the focus of an extensive taxonomic revision. high genetic diversity was also observed within the morphologically homogeneous phanodermatidae; species within this family have few distinct anatomical characters, possessing a smooth cuticle, typical pocket-shaped amphids, and little buccal cavity ornamentation. specimens identified during this study did not display any distinct differences in morphological features, despite ribosomal topologies indicating a complex genetic structuring. the oncholaimoidea and phanodermatidae represent the two most densely sampled groups within this study-similarly intensive sampling efforts will be needed to determine true extent of molecular diversity in other nematode families.

phylogenetic splits according to habitat
internal relationships within the enoplida demonstrate that nematode lineages are primarily separated according to habitat . both bayesian and maximum likelihood tree topologies resolved two primary enoplid clades: one comprised entirely of terrestrial/freshwater species , and a second clade containing mostly marine taxa and a few freshwater species . the phylogenetic structure of the enoplida suggests that habitat transitions have occurred at least five times during the evolution of the enoplida, supporting previous evidence proposing that such habitat transitions are relatively common amongst nematode species  <cit> . within the tripyloididae/trefusiidae clade, the terrestrial genera trischistoma and tripylina may have arisen from marine ancestors, with the trefusiidae representing a subsequent reversal back to marine habitats. the genus campydora and the rhabdolaimidae are two terrestrial taxa that also appear to have arisen independently in a divergent nematode lineage. the phylogenetic relationships in figure 1a also suggest that marine species of the ironidae  may be descendents of terrestrial ancestors, although further taxon sampling within the ironidae may be needed to clearly elucidate patterns within this clade. past morphological classifications did not typically separate enoplid genera according to habitat-maggenti  <cit>  was the sole taxonomist to propose separate terrestrial and marine lineages within the enoplia , whereas other authors vociferously dismissed this structure  <cit> . molecular data appears to support a division primarily  based on habitat, with several transitions scattered throughout the tree. citing multiple habitat switches within the chromadorida, holterman et al.  <cit>  suggested that nematode species only need simple physiological adaptations to move between different physical environments, supporting this seemingly arbitrary pattern of transitions observed in the enoplida.

resolving the earliest splits within nematoda
despite exhaustive topological tests and greatly improved taxon sampling, our large-scale phylogenies were unable to resolve the earliest-splitting lineage within the phylum nematoda. dense taxon sampling has greatly improved recent molecular frameworks  <cit> , but our results indicate that the placement of certain clades is unstable even using a large-scale sampling effort. in the this study, maximum likelihood methods using a large ssu dataset alternatively recovered both the terrestrial dorylaimid clade and the primarily marine enoplid clade as the earliest-splitting nematode group, while large-scale bayesian analyses consistently returned a polytomy at the basal node of the nematode tree.

there are two primary viewpoints regarding outgroup choice during phylogeny reconstruction. some authors believe that the most reliable phylogenies are obtained when using the closest sister taxa as an outgroup  <cit> , while others advocate the inclusion of both close relatives and more distantly related species  <cit> . an alternative tactic focuses on alignment positions; eliminating divergent  sites increases the likelihood of homology  if alignments are unambiguous  <cit> . although the relationships amongst metazoan phyla are still hotly debated, mounting molecular evidence supports the nematomorpha as the sister phylum to the nematoda  <cit> . taking into account different phylogenetic viewpoints, it would be reasonable to argue that the most robust clade placements should occur when using the nematomorpha alone as an outgroup , multiple non-nematode phyla in combination, or utilising gblocks-trimmed alignments containing only well-aligned sites. however, these three scenarios give conflicting results: the dorylaimia is always recovered as the earliest-splitting clade when the nematomorpha is used as a single outgroup , while the enoplia is most often observed as the earliest splitting lineage when multiple non-nematode phyla are included in gene alignments. when variable ribosomal regions are removed from alignments using the gblocks program, the dorylaimia instead splits off first when multiple non-nematode phyla are present.

many authors currently assume that enoplids are earliest branching nematode group  <cit>  and both holterman et al.  <cit>  and van megen et al.  <cit>  reported the enoplida as the earliest splitting lineage in their published phylogenies, although support values for this topology were low . in addition, neither study details any rigorous empirical tests to confirm the stability of tree topologies. molecular frameworks of nematodes generally agree that the enoplia branched off at some early point in evolutionary history of the phylum  <cit> -while it is certainly possible that this group diverged first from other nematode groups, the current evidence to support this hypothesis is not strong. we find highest bootstrap support instead for an alternative scenario, the terrestrial dorylaimia being part of a basal split. our tests however were unable to resolve either topology as significantly more likely than the other and we do not consider this topology yet resolved.

this unstable topology observed amongst early-splitting clades is likely related to the choice of a single, conserved gene for phylogeny reconstruction. currently, the 18s gene is the only locus known to resolve deep phylogenetic relationships amongst nematodes. other genes such as lsu and cox <dig> are only informative at shallower taxonomic levels  <cit> ; in this study, neither gene produced coherent tree topologies for inferring deeper clade relationships . resolving the base of the nematode tree will require intensive efforts to locate other informative genes-ideally protein-coding-which can supplement evolutionary inferences from ssu data. phylogeny reconstruction in other taxa has already embraced multi-gene phylogenies , and efforts are now moving towards phylogenomic methods  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the sampling effort in this study was by no means exhaustive; isolated specimens represent only a small portion of the diversity within the enoplida and many genera still remain unsampled in this ubiquitous marine group. nevertheless, increased taxon sampling within the order enoplida was able to clearly elucidate major clades and clarify evolutionary relationships amongst genera. the internal structure of the enoplida is consistent and supported by different analysis methods and data from multiple genetic loci; the resulting molecular phylogenies exhibit clear differences between past morphological classifications and have further refined the molecular framework first proposed by de ley and blaxter  <cit> . tree topologies suggest that the two main clades within the enoplia are primarily separated according to habitat , with habitat transitions occurring at least five times amongst enoplid species. ribosomal sequence data further suggests that some morphologically homogenous groups  exhibit extensive molecular diversity, and further investigation will be required to fully describe this unexpected genetic structure and subsequently revise taxonomic frameworks. despite dense taxon sampling and rigorous empirical tests, our large-scale phylogenies were unable to recover a well-supported topology amongst early-splitting lineages. the dorylaimia and enoplia were both recovered as the earliest-branching clade using a wide range of phylogenetic parameters and outgroup taxa. future molecular studies of nematodes will need to incorporate phylogenomic methods in order to resolve longstanding questions regarding relationships at the base of the nematode tree.

