BACKGROUND
extant cetaceans , which consist of approximately  <dig> species in  <dig> families, are ecologically diverse, ranging from coastal to oceanic and from tropical to polar waters  <cit> . the order cetacea has traditionally been divided into two highly distinct suborders: mysticeti  and odontoceti . cetaceans differ dramatically from other mammals in terms of morphology, behavior and ecology, representing one of the most fascinating evolutionary transitions within vertebrates. the phylogeny of cetacea has long attracted interest of evolutionary biologists and has been investigated using both morphological  and molecular data  <cit> . some of the issues have been well resolved including the monophyly of cetacea  <cit>  and its sister relationship with hippoptamidae  <cit> . however, these studies left unresolved issues: 1) the phylogenetic relationships of some major cetacean lineages; 2) the systematic status and phylogenetic position of some taxa such as the ganges river dolphin or susu  and the now nearly extinct yangtze river dolphin or baiji , as well as those between the three delphinoid families: monodontidae , phocoenidae  and delphinidae  . the phylogenetic relationships among the various river dolphin genera  remain controversial, despite that a variety of studies have been conducted using a diverse array of systematic markers  <cit> , even in large concatenations of data  <cit> . the now nearly extinct lipotes has been difficult to classify especially with respect to inia and pontoporia  <cit> . additionally, the position of platanista at the base of odontoceti was unstable, with conflicting evidence coming from morphology, mtdna, and nuclear dna . in addition to these conflicts, previous phylogenetic hypotheses disagreed with one another in revealing relationships and diversity of the species within delphinidae, especially within the sousa-delphinus-tursiops-stenella complex . in this complex, tursiops truncatus  was long considered as the single species in the genus tursiops, but recently two species, t. truncatus and t. aduncus, have been recognized as valid for this genus  <cit> . leduc et al.  <cit>  suggested that t. aduncus was more closely related to the striped dolphin  than to the congener t. truncatus based on cytochrome b analysis. this is contrasted with morphological and other molecular evidence supporting tursiops and stenella as monophyletic genera  <cit> .

sines  have been proposed as perfect molecular markers for studies of systematics, phylogenetics, evolution, and population biology, etc.  <cit> . they have been successfully applied to resolve phylogenetic relationships among various groups at different taxonomic ranks  <cit> . sines are one of the major classes of retroposons that are dispersed throughout eukaryotic genomes. they are nonautonomous retroposons lacking the machinery to replicate themselves and they propagate in the genome via cdna intermediating and are reintegrated into the host genome by retroposition  <cit> . integration of a sine sequence at a specific site in the genome is irreversible, and its target site is chosen almost at random  <cit> . to date, no mechanism has been described for the reversal of retroposon integration, and it is highly unlikely that the same type of retroposon would be integrated into the same genomic locus independently in different lineages  <cit> . sines, which are shared by some taxa but missing from the genomes of others, are ideal shared, derived phylogenetic characters at the molecular level  <cit> . thus, a sine sequence found at an orthologous locus in two or more lineages can be regarded as evidence for synapomorphy.

nikaido and his colleagues pioneered the use of sine insertions to address the relationships among cetaceans and other orders of mammals as well as to address relationships among both mysticetes and odontocetes  <cit> . for example, they examined  <dig> informative sine insertions to support the monophyly of toothed whales and the paraphyly of river dolphins  <cit> . however, the interrelationships among some cetacean lineages, especially three families within delphinoidea , were not well resolved with sine markers, although their analysis of the sine-flanking sequences supported the sister group relationship of monodontidae and phocoenidae with the exclusion of delphinidae.

thus, the main objectives of the present study are to: 1) address some of the remaining problematic areas of the cetacean phylogenetic tree through the analysis of additional sine insertions and flanking sequences, and 2) utilize flanking sequences of  <dig> retroposed elements to estimate divergence times associated with the cetacean radiation. identifying additional sine elements that resolve the relationships within superfamily delphinoidea and family delphinidae will be important steps forward in completely resolving cetacean phylogenetic relationships in the future.

RESULTS
phylogenetic relationships
a total of  <dig> insertion loci were identified from random sequencing of genomic dna from the indo-pacific bottlenose dolphin, screening genomic libraries from five species , and screening the genome sequence of the common bottlenose dolphin. after eliminating loci that failed to amplify in all taxa , were difficult to decipher , and were present in all taxa ,  <dig> loci proved phylogenetically informative .

divergence time estimation
all estimated divergence dates for nodes with labels from a to n in figure  <dig> were presented in table  <dig>  the split between mysticeti and odontoceti was estimated to have occurred in the late eocene, shortly before the appearance of the first documented fossil mysticete llanocetus denticrenatus  . radiation of the major clades of odontocetes  dated from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mya , suggesting a rapid early radiation within the major odontocete lineages. these estimates are close to and at some degree later than previous estimates which were primarily based on mitochondrial dna sequences and other markers  <cit> . the divergence of the three extant delphinoid families took place in the middle miocene, whereas the radiation of the crown delphinid lineages appeared to occur in the middle miocene, while the sousa-delphinus-tursiops-stenella complex may have a recent divergence in the middle-late miocene and pliocene.

clade letters refer to those shown in figure  <dig>  the asterisk indicates that this clade was constrained in the phylogenetic analysis. hpd = highest posterior density. units are in million years, my.

anomalous pcr amplification patterns of retroposon insertions in cetaceans
although the vast majority of sine insertions in our study supported a single most parsimonious tree, two anomalies in the present sine analysis of phylogenetics remain noteworthy. at the locus stec <dig>  it was present in the ganges river dolphins, based on preliminary analysis of the agarose gel electrophoresis. however, further analysis of the dna sequences indicated that a different sine insertion has occurred near the insertion stec <dig> locus  . this indicated that the locus stec <dig> was absent in the genome of the ganges river dolphins, instead, there was a novel species-specific insertion and we tentatively named it plag <dig>  owing to its discovery only in platanista gangetica.

the second anomaly came from the locus turt <dig>  st. attenuate and st. coeruleoalba exhibited the typical heterozygous profile consisting of the insertion amplicon  and the lack of insertion pcr product   at this locus, while nearly all other species examined  amplified a single amplicon of band b corresponding to the lack of insertion allele . in contrast, t. truncatus and t. aduncus generated the usual single band a of homozygote for the insertion allele. to confirm this polymorphic amplification, four more t. truncatus and t. aduncus individuals were examined and they all generated the same single band a. in order to investigate this interesting scenario, different amplicon types  were isolated, cloned and sequenced . as shown in additional file  <dig>  the only difference between the sequence of amplicon a and b in both st. attenuate and st. coeruleoalba is the lack of a sine element in b.

discussion
phylogeny of odontoceti and its oligocene radiation
relationships among odontocete families obtained in the present study were broadly congruent with most previous molecular and morphological hypotheses  <cit> . for example, the monophyly of odontoceti and the sister relationship of physeteroidea to all other extant odontocetes , supported the sine analysis of nikaido et al.  <cit>  and was compatible with the morphological evidence  <cit> . the grouping of ziphiidae  with delphinida to the exclusion of platanistidae and physeteroidea , was concordant with previous sine insertion analyses  <cit> , as well as the sine-flanking sequence analysis in the present study .

the grouping of the four genera of 'river dolphins' in family platanistidae or superfamily platanistoidea  <cit>  has long been challenged by both morphologists and molecular systematists  <cit> , and instead conflicting relationships of the four major river dolphin clades have been proposed . although the lack of inia and pontoporia in the present study made it difficult to discern the phylogeny of river dolphins, the present finding that platanista has no direct affinity with lipotes clarifies that river dolphins are an artificial rather than a natural group, which is consistent with many previous molecular studies  <cit> .

our estimates of divergence times suggested that the common ancestors of extant cetaceans occurred in the late eocene epoch, prior to approximately  <dig>   mya , slightly younger than several previous estimates  <cit> , but conflicted dramatically with the early eocene split around  <dig> mya proposed by cassens et al.  <cit>  based on only one delphinid calibration. the present estimate accorded closely with the earliest known fossil crown cetacean, the archaic mysticete llanocetus denticrenatus   <cit> . in addition, the present study estimates divergence of the major odontocete lineages such as physeteroidea, platanistidae, ziphiidea, lipotidae and delphinoidea occurred primarily in the early oligocene and early miocene . climate change from greenhouse to icehouse which occurred in the late eocene to early oligocene  <cit>  might have played an important role in the cetacean radiation. during that period, atmospheric co <dig> level decreased, and the polar ice caps expanded rapidly, southern ocean upwelling and ocean productivity increased  <cit> , which may explain the radiation of cetaceans  <cit> . early representatives of cetacean fossils including ferecetotherium, waipatia and kentriodontidae were present in the late oligocene, demonstrating that these lineages were diverged during this time period  <cit> .

interrelationship within delphinoidea and rapid divergence of delphinidae
the interrelationships among the three families within delphinoidea were disputed and several alternative branching patterns were proposed  <cit> . while several morphological and molecular studies agreed that a close relationship existed between delphinidae and phocoenidae  <cit> , other molecular analyses supported the sister relationship of monodontidae and phocoenidae  <cit> . besides these hypotheses, an unresolved relationship between the three families was mentioned in some studies  <cit> . in the present study, the differentiation between delphinidae and other two families was suggested with four sine insertions, while no sine was found to suggest the divergence between phocoenidae and mondontidae. however, sine flanking-sequences analysis here further resolved the relationship among three delphinoidea families ), which was the same as those revealed in waddell et al.  <cit> , nishida et al.  <cit>  and may-collado and agnarsson  <cit> . within delphinoidea, the divergence between phocoenidae and monodontidae was estimated at  <dig>   mya , which are close to and at some degree later than previous analyses  <cit> , but are much younger than nikaido et al.  <cit> , which predicted the divergence at  <dig>  mya on the basis of sine flanking sequences using the calibration date  for the separation of cetacean from the hippopotamus based on the relaxed clock of cytochrome b data . our result is consistent with the age of the oldest representative fossil, the late miocene phocoenid salumiphocaena stocktoni  <cit> .

of the delphinidae species examined, the sister relationship of grampus griseus and sousa-delphinus-tursiops-stenella complex  <cit>  was confirmed by sine-flanking sequences analysis with a posterior probability of  <dig>  . within sousa-delphinus-tursiops-stenella complex, it was supported the closest affinity between sousa and stenella coeruleoalba, with t. truncatus and s. attenuata as their sister clades, then they cluster with a clade of d. capensis and t. aduncus. this is in contrast with caballero et al. 's  <cit>  and mcgowen et al. 's  <cit>  suggestion of the basal position of sousa among delphinine, the alliance of sousa with stenella and delphinus  <cit> , or the alliance of sousa with steno  <cit> . further, the sister relationship of t. aduncus and d. capensis obtained in the present study with a posterior probability of  <dig>  was well congruent with the studies based on mt genomes  <cit> . obviously, the present sine flanking sequence data rejected the monophyly of genera tursiops and stenella  <cit> , although some branches were not supported by high posterior probability . the delphinids was estimated to radiate in the middle-late miocene and pliocene, with branch events taking place within a narrow time frame  . unfortunately, no sine insertion was identified to solve the relationship within delphinidae and especially within sousa-delphinus-tursiops-stenella complex, and more sines are necessary to solve this problem.

anomalous events in sine-based phylogenetic analysis
several potential anomalous sine intertion events were revealed in the present study . these anomalies may have been brought about through near-parallel insertions, lineage sorting, and paralogous insertions, as discussed in previous studies  <cit> .

a. parallel insertion
according to ray et al.  <cit> , near-parallel insertion meant that a secondary independent sine was inserted into a site near the insertion originally being studied. to detect whether this is the case in cetaceans, we sequenced and analyzed the insertions. at locus stec <dig>  the original insertion was not found in the ganges river dolphins, while an additional independent insertion was found to occur near the first insertion  .

b. anomalous pcr amplification patterns of turt164: paralogous insertion, incomplete lineage sorting, or introgressive hybridization?
turt <dig> is another interesting sine that appeared to be polymorphic . for example, st. attenuata and st. coeruleoalba exhibited the typical heterozygous profile consisting of the insertion amplicon  and the lack of insertion pcr product , whereas a single pcr amplicon  was found in other representative species examined in the present study .

paralogous insertion  <cit>  might be a potential interpretation of this anomalous phenomenon. only one band  was amplified from the genus tursiops, a scenario that can be interpreted as segmental duplications occurred around the locus turt <dig> of genus stenella. further studies including more samples of stenella species should be performed to confirm this interpretation.

incomplete lineage sorting  <cit>  may also be an alternative cause. rapid speciation might occur in the common ancestor of genera tursiops and stenella  <cit>  and turt <dig> inserted into their genome during a short period. this insertion might have been fixed in genus tursiops, but not in genus stenella because of incomplete lineage sorting. however, because only a small number of tursiops individuals were examined in this study, further studies including more samples of the two tursiops species should be performed in the future to confirm this.

introgression could be the third explanation for the anomalous pcr amplification pattern. numerous cases of dolphin hybridization both in captivity and in the wild  <cit>  have been reported. it is reasonable that insertion might have occurred only in the genome of tursiops, however introgression between tursiops and stenella may have taken place at some time, which may explain the unexpected polymorphism of turt <dig> between them .

CONCLUSIONS
a series of additional sines were identified to support the monophyly of the order cetacea as well as odontoceti, delphinoidea, and delphinidae. especially, several novel sines were found to differentiate delphinidae with other two delphinoidea families , whereas the sister group relationship of monodontidae and phocoenidae with exclusion of delphinidae was revealed by the sine-flanking sequences. furthermore, members of classical river dolphins and the genera tursiops and stenella were found to be paraphyletic. estimates of divergence times based on the flanking regions of  <dig> retroposed elements using a relaxed-clock bayesian approach furthered our understanding of the rapid radiation events in cetacean evolution. interestingly, potential ancestral sine polymorphisms and incomplete lineage sorting in delphinidae were detected. although a few loci are potentially anomalous, this study still demonstrated that sine-based approach is a powerful tool in phylogenetic studies. identifying additional novel sine elements that resolve the relationships in the superfamily delphinoidea and family delphinidae will be important steps forward in completely resolving the cetacean phylogenetic relationships in the future.

