BACKGROUND
differential allocation of resources can give rise to tradeoffs that are manifest as negative associations between traits  <cit> . tradeoffs presumably exert a central role in life history evolution given that energy-limited organisms cannot simultaneously maximize all components of fitness. for an insect with ephemeral food sources, such as d. melanogaster, starvation resistance is a complex trait which is quite likely to interact with canonical life history traits such as fecundity  <cit> . in order to understand the evolutionary response of this  species to food deprivation, it is important to investigate the relationship between resistance to food deprivation and life history traits.

ovariole number variation is related to ecological conditions. among related species of fruit flies, a greater number of ovarioles is correlated with "niche breadth" measured as the number of different kinds of fruits used by ovipositing females  <cit> . it is not clear that the fresh fruit resource of these flies is comparable to the rotting fruit habitat of d. melanogaster, but the main point is that there is an association between ovariole number and environmental variation. another line of evidence for the importance of ecological variation is that d. melanogaster ovariole number varies with latitude on three continents: a europe-africa transect  <cit> ; north america  <cit> ; and australia  <cit> . such replication of clines strongly implies the action of selection in the creation and maintenance of the clines, as argued for an isozyme cline  <cit>  or quantitative traits such as body size  <cit> . these clines in ovariole number might be associated with differences in temperature, duration of reproductive period, the seasonal pattern of food availability and geographic variation in over-wintering conditions. the evidence from both between and within species suggests that there may be a relationship between environmental variation and ovariole number.

artificial selection in the laboratory is one approach to investigate the relationship between life history and stress resistance traits. in particular, indirect responses to artificial selection can reveal sets of correlations among traits some of which may suggest underlying mechanisms  <cit> . starvation resistant lines have been shown to have a relatively long development time  <cit> , and most relevant to the present study, starvation selected-lines have been observed to be genetically correlated with relatively reduced early age fecundity  <cit> . the latter association does not prove that the traits are linked, but it does suggest precedence for some of the trait relationships investigated here.

in the present study, we examined the relationship between starvation resistance, ovariole number and fecundity in lines of d. melanogaster that were artificially selected for resistance to female starvation. our working hypothesis was that females selected for starvation resistance would exhibit decreased egg production at the age they were selected, presumably as a change in allocation from the ovary to the body, possibly by reducing ovariole number. starvation resistance was negatively genetically correlated with reduced early age fecundity. however, total egg production for the first  <dig> days of life was not different between selected and control lines. ovariole number increased in response to selection for starvation resistance. this increase cannot be explained by a change in linear body size between selected and unselected lines. to further investigate the unforeseen positiveassociation between starvation resistance and ovariole number, we studied the plastic and phenotypic relationships between starvation and ovariole number. maternal starvation resulted in an increase in progeny ovariole number indicating an integral relationship between maternal food deprivation and the state of the ovary in the next generation.

RESULTS
ovariole number
based on a comparison of progeny from unstarved mothers, there were a greater number of ovarioles in selected line females than in control line females . figure  <dig> presents the grand average number of the sum of ovarioles from both ovaries ± se for the control and selected lines when the latter were two generations removed from the selection experiment regime. the standard errors were derived from the individual line means within line type . the mean sum of ovarioles per female for the five control lines was  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> ; and the mean sum of ovarioles per female for the five selected lines was  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  . selected lines have significantly more ovarioles than control lines, whether the dams were zero, one, or two generations removed from the selective regime . dams refers to females used to produce daughters for ovariole number determination. zero generations removed from the selective regime is the case in which the dams were taken from selected lines. one generation removed from the selective regime refers to the case in which the selection was relaxed for one generation in the dams of daughters used for ovariole number determination. two generations removed from the selection regime refers to the case in which selection was relaxed for two generations in the dams of daughters used for ovariole number determination.

maternal starvation increased the number of ovarioles in progeny of selected and control lines females. two generations removed from selection, there was a significant effect of parental starvation resulting in increased ovariole number  as well as significant interactions between block and treatment, and line type , treatment, and block . a similar result was seen when parental flies were taken directly from the selected and control lines . line type  was again significant , as was maternal starvation . there was evidence for genetic variation within selected and control lines for ovariole number in flies whose dams were zero or one generation removed from selection , p <  <dig> ). there was no statistical support for genetic variation within selected or control lines in flies whose dams were two generations removed from selection , but this is likely more reflective of the relatively large and significant line  * treatment * block term in the denominator of the f test rather than reflective of the biology.

egg production
wing length
there was no effect of selection on wing length when selected females were one generation removed from the selection regime . further, there is no relationship between ovariole number and body size, either between selected and control lines  or within each type of line . across line types, the correlation between ovariole number and body size is not significant . within line types, there is also no relationship between the two traits . results from non-parametric analyses are consistent with parametric analyses .

starvation resistance
to assess the direct response to selection at the end of the present study, starvation resistance was assessed in the same manner used in the selection experiment except that starvation continued until all flies died. the grand mean female survival time under starvation was  <dig>  hours for the selected lines and  <dig>  hours for the control lines. these mean values are similar to those for selected and control line females at generation  <dig>  <cit>  which was five generations before the present study began. thus, the marked difference in starvation resistance between selected and control line females, was maintained throughout the present study.

discussion
selection for increased adult female starvation resistance resulted in a correlated increase in the number of ovarioles. similarly, maternal starvation resulted in an increase in offspring ovariole number. the present study was consistent in terms of an increase in ovariole number in selected females, irrespective of the assay generation or of the number of generations removed from the selection regime. moreover, maternal starvation consistently resulted in an increase in progeny ovariole number in both control and selected line females. one might expect the effect of maternal starvation on ovariole number to be substantially greater in control females because  <dig> –  <dig> hours of starvation would be expected to have greater physiological impact on these females than on selected females. on the other hand, selected line females might have evolved to become more responsive to starvation conditions. our study provides evidence for a consistent effect of starvation on ovariole number, which should motivate additional research on underlying mechanisms including the effect of duration of maternal starvation in the context of evolved starvation resistance.

the lines used for the present study were produced by selection only on female starvation resistance  <cit>  because of the heterogeneity observed among starvation-selected lines when females and males were selected  <cit> . both female and male starvation resistance evolved in response to selection on females  <cit> . indirect male responses to selection have not been investigated in lines selected for female starvation resistance  <cit> . it is not clear what the likely correlated responses in males would be, but it might be the case that male reproductive performance paralleled the pattern of female egg production, showing a relative decrease at early ages in selected lines . selection only on females might have contributed to the pattern of indirect responses in the present study. however, selection only on females probably does not explain the relationship between starvation resistance and reduced early age fecundity because a decrease in early age fecundity was previously observed to be a correlate of selection for starvation resistance when both sexes were employed in the selection regime  <cit> .

the indirect responses to selection, increased ovariole number and decreased early age fecundity, were not a result of cryptic selection for an increase in linear body size, because there was no difference in wing length between selected and control lines. wing length was chosen as an estimate of body size in preference to estimates of mass for two reasons: first, because differences in ovariole number could contribute to differences in mass; and second, because it is well established that laboratory selection for starvation resistance results in an accumulation of lipid in flies  <cit>  and hence an increase in weight. body size as estimated by wing size or thorax length is often correlated with development time  <cit> . generally, slower development time was correlated with greater thorax or wing length and vice versa, but this relationship was not found in all studies. in any case, if there was any difference in development time between selected and control lines in the present study, then it was not manifest as a difference in a linear measure of body size .

the response to selection in the present study might conform to the y model of resource allocation in which endogenous resources are allocated to either survival or reproduction  <cit> . when lines were selected for starvation resistance early in life, female flies responded by reducing early age reproduction in favor of survival under starvation conditions. although the indirect responses of similar laboratory selection experiments using drosophila are sometimes heterogeneous  <cit> , our results were consistent with another selection experiments in which starvation resistance was genetically correlated with reduced early age fecundity  <cit> . thus, in both studies it is plausible that the females selected for early age starvation resistance have shifted energy away from reproduction to survival under starvation conditions.

energetic studies on selected and control lines of d. melanogaster are relevant to the relationship between reproduction and starvation resistance. energy storage compounds have been measured in lines selected for starvation resistance and there is an increase in lipid and glycogen content  <cit> . reduced reproduction does not arise from relatively low metabolic rate in the selected lines; there is little evidence that metabolic rate decreases in lines selected for starvation resistance  <cit> . one might expect a tradeoff between somatic energy storage and reduced energy in the reproductive system for egg production, but is not clear that energy for reproduction is limiting in the laboratory environment  <cit> .

an alternative to an energetic explanation for the observations in the present study is derived from consideration of the role of molecular signaling in life history evolution  <cit> . the basic argument is that the ovary could be a source of signals that affect the soma independent of the role of the ovary as a sink for nutrients used for reproduction. as reviewed in leroi ,  <cit> , there is evidence for such signals in caenorhabditis elegans and these signals require a functional insulin signaling pathway. the d. melanogaster insulin signaling pathway is conserved in that it shares common features with pathways in c. elegans and mammals  <cit> . the insulin signaling pathway could play a role in biochemical and life history clines documented for d. melanogaster  <cit> . however, a homozygous null mutation in the d. melanogaster insulin receptor substrate protein gene, which blocks normal insulin signaling, has little effect on ovariole number in an outbred wild type genetic background  <cit> . nevertheless, signaling from the ovary could act as a mediator of egg production as an indirect response to selection for starvation resistance.

greater numbers of ovarioles in the selected lines were correlated with reduced early age fecundity, but there was no correlation with overall fecundity. earlier studies found a negative genetic correlation between ovariole number and early age reproductive maturation in a selection experiment for longevity and late age reproduction although there was no clear association between late life ovariole number and altered vitellogenic egg maturation  <cit> . does the early age negative correlation imply that that there is a tradeoff between ovariole number and early age fecundity? perhaps, but it will be necessary to establish a functional relationship between the traits to rigorously document whether a tradeoff exists  <cit> . such a tradeoff may be relatively pronounced in the context of starvation resistance. many studies of unperturbed natural populations have found a positive association between ovariole number and early fecundity  <cit> . candidate genes associated with starvation resistance tend to be in developmental pathways responsible for cell fate  <cit> . these genes might exert pleiotropic effects during the pre-adult stages when ovarioles develop, whereby alleles conferring starvation resistance could cause an increase in ovariole number. interestingly, an increase in the number of ovarioles would be expected to increase the total number of oocyte stem cells per ovary; and that could promote greater fecundity later in life assuming that a decline in stem cell number and function underlies the decline in late-age reproductive potential  <cit> , as well as the lack of difference in total  <dig> day fecundity between selected and control lines in this study, despite the decrease in early fecundity in the selected lines. this could also explain the positive genetic correlation between longevity and ovariole number in lines selected for late life reproduction and extended longevity  <cit> .

there is an alternate interpretation of the phenotypic manipulation experiments reported in the present study. in the absence of a suitable egg laying substrate during the time females were held in empty bottles for the starvation treatment, fertilized eggs might develop within the females. if such internal development resulted in a head start for these eggs; and if the first eggs laid after 28– <dig> hours of starvation comprised a large proportion of the progeny used for ovariole measurements, then it is possible that the relative maturity of these eggs could contribute to an increase in ovariole number. however, such developmental processes could not explain the increase in ovariole number in selected lines relative to control lines, because the difference in ovariole number persisted even in control lines two generations removed from the selective regime; and thus egg retention and accompanying accelerated maturation due to lack of oviposition substrates did not occur.

the clines in ovariole number within d. melanogaster  <cit>  suggest that there is a relationship between a temperate environment and increased ovariole number. however ovariole number and starvation resistance are not known to positively covary in natural populations; a shallow cline in starvation resistance among australian populations  <cit>  appears to be negatively correlated with an australian cline in ovariole number  <cit> .

in general, there is a negative relationship between early age fecundity and stress resistance in selection experiments  <cit> . moreover, phenotypic manipulation experiments have documented a negative relationship between egg production and starvation resistance  <cit> . similarly, increased stress resistance, reduced early age reproduction, retarded vitellogenic oocyte maturation and increased ovariole number were all indirect responses to selection for late life reproduction and longevity  <cit> . in the present study, a greater number of ovarioles was associated with reduced early age fecundity and resistance to a specific stressor, starvation. a genetic correlation between female starvation resistance and increased ovariole number, and phenotypic correlation between maternal starvation and increased ovariole number, is documented for the first time in the present study. in the present study, reduced early age egg production is associated with increased ovariole number, as is relatively high later age egg production; but it is not clear that the larger number of ovarioles was necessary for the relatively elevated later age egg production in the selected lines. as a possible underlying mechanism for the relationship between ovariole number and egg production in the present study, the ovary might be able to modulate the distribution and allocation of endogenous energy storage compounds in relationship to life history traits. as summarized in chippindale et al. ,  <cit> , various studies have implicated the ovary and the neuroendocrine system as controlling factors in cellular lipid content and energy storage compound distribution in the body. in terms of life history traits and physiological tradeoffs, the number of ovarioles might correspond to the physiological impact of the ovary as a mediator of energy storage compound allocation between reproduction and the soma. whether caused by energy compound shifts in the adult or pre-adult developmental pathways, the parallel phenotypic and genetic association between starvation resistance and ovariole number warrants further investigation.

CONCLUSIONS
selection for female starvation resistance resulted in an increase in ovariole number as a correlated response to selection as well as a decrease in early age fecundity, but total egg production was not affected by selection. selection was associated with relatively low early age egg production; there was a negative correlation between starvation resistance and early age egg production and a negative correlation between ovariole number and early age egg production. phenotypic manipulation by starvation resistance resulted in an increase in ovariole number in progeny. starvation and ovariole number in progeny are apparently genetically and phenotypically linked, but the functional basis for this association is not yet understood.

