BACKGROUND
ultraconserved elements  have been defined as segments spanning at least  <dig> base pairs and showing 100% identity between the human, mouse and rat genomes. further analysis of the distribution of uces demonstrates that they tend to be organized in clusters, in regions that are enriched for transcription factors and developmental genes  <cit> . they have been suggested to be important for functions involving dna binding, rna processing and the regulation of transcription and development  <cit> , as well as being depleted in regions containing copy number variants  <cit> . however, our knowledge on these elements is still limited. the mechanisms responsible for maintaining these sequences through evolution are unclear but seem likely to include profound negative selection, suggesting that these segments have important, if not vital, functions  <cit> .

recent studies provide conflicting evidence on their functional role: although it has been shown that many of these elements act as long-range enhancers during mouse development  <cit> , this function is not found for all elements tested and it has been shown that similar proportions of functional enhancers can be found in less constrained sequences  <cit> . moreover, deletion of some of these regions in knock-out mice was not associated to any notable phenotype abnormality  <cit> . these results provided grounds to speculate that uces might be simply due to "mutational cold spots", yet it has been shown that these regions are ultraselected  <cit> . finally it has also been shown that a larger number of regions in the genome, although shorter, are under similar evolutionary constraints  <cit> .

recently it has also been shown that some uces are expressed and their expression is altered in human tumors, suggesting that these elements may also be involved in cancer development  <cit> . the transcription of non-coding rnas from genomic regions acting as enhancers has already been shown to occur in elements with significant sequence conservation, although little is known about the mechanism involved. indeed the functions of promoter, enhancer and non-coding rna have been found to overlap in the same dna fragments with 85-90% mammalian conservation  <cit>  as well as in one uce  <cit> .

despite these many findings, the level of constraint observed in uces remains as yet unexplained. we decided to further investigate the extent of transcription of uces by using an ad-hoc developed microarray as well as several next-generation sequencing datasets. by hybridizing the microarray with total rna from different mouse embryonic stages and from mouse embryonic stem  cells, and comparing this data with existing next generation sequence  data, we were able to show that the majority of uces which have been shown to act as enhancers during mouse development are also transcribed and investigated salient properties of these transcripts.

RESULTS
the majority of uces are transcribed during mouse development on a single strand
we decided to systematically ascertain to what extent uces are expressed and whether the corresponding transcripts can be distinguished from general "transcriptional noise" in the genome. we therefore designed a custom microarray  encompassing  <dig> different probes on each dna strand of uces , as well as a large number of negative controls , which were used to assess the levels of background signal. the sequences of all uce probes were manually verified to be unique in the genome. this allowed us to assess reliably the levels of expression from both strands of uce genomic regions during mouse development. in order to define a uce probe as being expressed, we took into account only probes showing signal intensity above the 90th percentile of the signal distribution in at least two of the three independent hybridizations carried out.

the analysis of the microarray data shows that, at each developmental stage,  <dig> to 40% of the uces analyzed are transcribed. however, more than half  of the transcribed uces are expressed in at least one of the tested stages , and 28% of those are found within an exonic location . in total ~50% of transcribed uces fall under the exonic category if those considered "possibly exonic" are included . although we have designed probes on both dna strands of each uce, only 4% of them display signal on both strands, indicating that most uces are parts of transcripts transcribed from only one strand . of these, the majority  is transcribed in all stages tested as well as in es cells . moreover, when attempting to identify uces with a possible differential expression across development, we did not find any uce showing statistically significant differences in expression between stages . on the contrary, 83%  of the uces transcribed in all stages shows a significantly stable signal across the developmental stages tested.

it should be noted that our experiment can only account for differences across distinct stages of development, while previous experiments accounted only for differences across tissues but not across developmental stages  <cit> . thus, if uces are regulating transcription in a tissue-specific manner these would not be detected in our study. this data suggests that transcription is a constitutive function in a large fraction of uces during development. the only broad difference that was noticeable was the generally lower expression levels in es cells as compared to other stages, but this was expected since low levels of expression of a broad range of transcripts are known to occur in es cells.

rt-pcr validation indicates more widespread transcription
we proceeded to validate the microarray results by carrying out reverse transcriptase -pcr experiments on  <dig> randomly selected uces on total rna extracted from e <dig>  mouse embryos, using  <dig> independent rna preparations . the rt-pcr analysis was considered positive for expression only for uces yielding a specific pcr product validated by sequence analysis in  <dig> replicates. we used pcrs without reverse transcriptase as a control to ensure that we were detecting a transcribed product rather than a genomic dna fragment. we observed concordance between the e <dig>  microarray data and the rt-pcr results from the same stage in 18/ <dig> uces analyzed . among the remaining  <dig> cases, there are  <dig> uces which were found to be positive only by rt-pcr and no other dataset ,  <dig> which is found to be negative only by rt-pcr, but confirmed by all other methods,  <dig> which are not confirmed by the microarray data, but are confirmed by the rna-seq data, and  <dig> which are confirmed by the es microarray data . the discordance observed is likely due to several factors. above all, owing to the fact that the nature and length of uce transcripts is not yet elucidated, both assays are quite limited. pcrs were conducted with only two pairs of primers per uce and each uce was represented with  <dig> probes per strand. thus it is likely that testing uces with further microarray probes and with further pcr primers would yield different results and greater concordance. moreover the stringent criteria applied to our microarray analysis is likely to detect a lower number of positives than pcr which is known to be more sensitive. the overall results indicate that our microarray results are likely to under-estimate the number of uces that are actually expressed. the rt-pcr validation data would therefore indicate that the number of uces transcribed at e <dig>  is in the range between approximately 38%  and 70% .

we wanted to investigate further the potential nature of the transcripts encoded by uces and thus performed further rt-pcr analysis for five expressed uces  on rna extracted from either the nucleus or the cytoplasm of mouse es cells . the results indicate that only the control exonic uce can be detected in the cytoplasmic fraction of rna, as expected, while the other uces tested  were found only in the nuclear fraction of es rna. further investigation will be required to ascertain fully the nature of these transcripts, however this data suggests that some intergenic uces may act as nuclear transcripts, thus suggesting the possibility that some uces might encode ncrnas. ncrnas are known to have an extremely wide variety of functions , however given the function of uces as enhancers it is tempting to speculate that some of them might act in a manner similar to previously studied highly conserved elements which act as both enhancers as well as ncrnas  <cit> .

uce transcription and enhancer function overlap
since we performed our expression analysis during mouse embryonic development, we were able to compare our data with previously published data on the function of uces as long-range enhancers in mouse embryonic stages  <cit> . a total of  <dig> uces which were not part of annotated transcripts  were tested for enhancer function and are also present in our microarray design. on this subset of uces we were able, therefore, to compare expression and enhancer activity. this comparison showed that 20% of all uces tested are transcribed at some developmental stage and act as enhancers during mouse embryonic development, indicating that the two functions can coexist within the same dna sequence, despite the fact that these regions are intergenic. in the closest embryonic stage analyzed  14% of the tested uces still present both enhancer and transcription function , indicating that the two functions also can overlap temporally. some uces still present only one of the two functions, i.e. 13% are transcribed but without enhancer activity and 37% behave as enhancers but show no transcription .

it must be taken into account that the enhancer dataset of uces was identified based on experiments carried out at a single developmental stage . therefore, we cannot exclude that the extent of the overlap will be greater when considering enhancer function in other developmental stages. moreover, due to the different approaches utilized  we cannot compare directly expression levels and enhancer function in the same tissue at the same developmental stage. therefore, we cannot exclude that the enhancer and transcript function might overlap temporally  but not spatially  and equally we cannot exclude that a broader overlap could be detected if expression assays had been performed on specific e <dig>  tissues in which enhancer function has been observed. a further bias can arise from the construct used for the enhancer assays: since some of them contain two uce elements within a single construct, it is not always possible to clearly distinguish the contribution of each specific uce element to the enhancer assay results.

previous studies have shown that a single ultraconserved element, contained between the dlx <dig> and dlx <dig> genes, could act at both dna and rna level, and that the ncrna encoded within them had an effect on the coding transcripts within the locus  <cit> . our findings would suggest that the results obtained have a much wider impact than just a few selected elements, since we show that transcription from ultraconserved elements affects more than half of the ultraconserved elements, and also that the enhancer function attributed to some uces overlaps in the majority of cases with that of rna transcript.

analysis of the genomic context of uce elements
given that uces are known to be present in both regions overlapping exons as well as intergenic or intronic regions, we proceeded to verify to what extent the transcription and enhancer functions observed correlate with the genomic context in which they are found. we therefore divided uces in the following subgroups: 1) those previously shown to act as enhancers  <cit>  , 2) those shown to be transcribed in our microarray study , and 3) those displaying both of the above features . we then compared these datasets with the genomic context of uces as previously defined  <cit> : a) exonic, for uces found within exons of known genes ; b) possibly exonic, for uces found within portions of the genome for which gene predictions and/or est evidence indicate the possible correspondence with an exon; c) intronic, for those found within introns and not classified as possibly exonic, and d) non-genic for the remaining uces . most categories did not show statistically significant enrichment, except for exonic uces which are slightly enriched within the transcribed set of uces as expected , and significantly impoverished within the set of uces acting as both transcripts and enhancers as well as among those acting as enhancers only . this suggests that uces acting as enhancers are more rarely found within exons of known genes . transcribed uces, on the other hand, although slightly enriched, as expected, within exons, are present in all uces, irrespective of their genomic context: in fact, the largest number of transcribed uces in absolute terms is within introns. taken together these findings suggest that the enhancer function of uces negatively correlates with their localization within the exons of protein coding genes despite showing transcription in a significant percentage of cases, indicating that transcripts covering uces are very likely to perform different function from traditional coding genes.

next, we investigated whether transcribed uces are preferentially clustered together arguing for a gene-like structure. in order to assess this we verified the distance between all uces and compared transcribed uces to non-transcribed uces. the results indicate quite the contrary: transcribed uces are more distant from each other than non-transcribed uces at all developmental stages analyzed . while it is known that some of the uces acting as enhancers are quite close to each other, this result indicates that transcribed uces are less likely than non-transcribed uces to require proximity to other uces for their function. given the average distances observed among transcribed uces  they are unlikely to funcion as exons of a gene. we note a bimodal distribution among non-transcribed uces with one peak in the  <dig> kb range, quite distinct from that of transcribed uces, and a second peak which aligns well with the distribution of distances among transcribed uces. if distances are relevant to the function of uces, it would be interesting to verify further whether more distant uces which do not appear to be transcribed in our study are perhaps transcribed in other tissues/stages or using other validation means.

utilizing the genomic context of each uce element, we also verified whether uces, classified according to our expression data and published enhancer data, are found within genes enriched for specific gene ontology  terms. we therefore focused this analysis only on uces that have been tested both for enhancer function and for expression during mouse development. the analysis shows that uces which act as enhancers  are slightly enriched for genes involved in protein binding . expressed uces, on the other hand, are slightly enriched for go terms, related to development and regulation of biological processes. we also verified the go analysis on all uces . this further analysis confirmed the go terms that had been obtained on the smaller dataset and indicated several additional potential enrichments of uces, including an interesting enrichment for uces which have only evidence for transcription  to be contained in genes involved in rna processing and rna binding . interestingly a similar enrichment for rna-related functions has recently been reported for uces which preserve completely identical sequence across primates and rodents  <cit> . given the small size of this dataset, however, it is not possible to draw strong conclusions, and no significant enrichment is found when using multiple testing correction. it could be interesting in the future study to assess transcriptional levels of a larger set of highly conserved elements similar to uces  <cit>  and verify whether this go classification is confirmed.

rna-seq analysis of uces indicates significant expression levels, similar to those of other regions acting as enhancers
in order to further verify our findings, we also utilized recently published transcription datasets to validate the extent to which uces might be transcribed. we re-analyzed two publicly available datasets. first, we used a microarray dataset obtained from the analysis of several human wild-type and cancer tissues  <cit> . from this study we used the list of uces annotated as expressed by the authors. secondly, we also utilized a recently published solid sequencing dataset obtained from high-throughput rna sequencing  of mouse embryonic stem cells  <cit> . the analysis of the rnaseq dataset indicates that uces present significantly higher rna-seq expression levels as compared to random non-transcribed regions of the genome , which provides further evidence for the fact that their transcription  is not comparable to general "transcriptional" noise visible across the genome. the comparison with random regions of the genome provided us with a cut-off for bona fide transcribed uces based on the rna-seq expression levels.

we also verified if we could obtain uce expression information from a recently published small rna sequencing dataset obtained from human embryonic stem cells. this experiment utilizes a protocol that filters rnas based on their length, selecting for transcripts between  <dig> and  <dig> nt long  <cit> . in this dataset, however, we did not observe significant small rna-seq expression levels within uces, indicating that they are not likely to transcribe small rnas . further evidence reinforcing this notion is that rnaseq sequences which map to uces  always cover 100% of the uce region. taken together, these observations suggest that the majority of uces are not part of short transcripts.

in order to shed further light on the transcription encoded within uces we utilized two recently developed datasets: a recent study in which a genome-wide identification of mouse brain enhancers was performed using p <dig> chipseq  <cit>  as well as a recent study in which rnaseq was performed on several mouse tissues including brain  <cit> . using these two datasets, we were able to compare rnaseq- based expression levels in the brain between random regions of the genome, uces, p300-bound region likely to encode enhancers, brain enhancers tested in vivo, and coding exons using a z-score test . the analysis revealed that uces present levels of expression that are very similar to those of in vivo tested enhancers , resemble p300-bound regions , while they are higher and significantly different from those of random non coding regions of the genome  and lower than and significantly different from those of coding exons .

this data would confirm that the majority of uces in which we can detect expression are likely to encode transcripts that are transcribed at significant and, comparable levels with respect to those of other enhancer regions, but lower to those of coding exons. it should be noted, however, that given that our data indicates that uces could also encode nuclear transcripts, rnaseq results will be heavily influenced by the rnaseq protocol used and the resulting proportion of nuclear transcripts within the rna sample sequenced. given that the data utilized was made using a poly+ enrichment step, it is likely that the real levels of expression of the nuclear transcripts encoded by uces are under-estimated.

in order to further investigate the nature of the transcripts derived from transcribed uces we verified the rna-seq expression levels of es cells in the regions proximal to these elements . our analysis indicates that the majority  of uces that were found to be expressed in es cells using the rna-seq data also present significant expression levels in the surrounding regions. half of the uces expressed in es cells present significant levels of transcription on both sides of the element , while 10% present transcription on one side only . the remaining 40%  do not present transcription in nearby regions. in contrast, only 3% of the uces found not to be transcribed in es cells using rna-seq presented transcription in the proximal  <dig> bp regions, of which only  <dig> uces  appear to be transcribed both upstream and downstream. interestingly most of the latter  were exonic, indicating ultra-conserved exons which might be expressed in other stages/tissues, but whose surrounding regions are expressed in es cells. this result indicates that in the majority of cases the uce expression investigated in this study might be representative of longer, underlying transcripts which span across and beyond the uce region. we also inspected the microarray results  and obtained similar results, i.e. 44% of uces found to be transcribed in es cells present expression in the surrounding regions .

although our data clearly indicates that transcription is an important function of uce elements, and that this function clearly overlaps with that of enhancer, it remains to be understood to what extent this explains the high evolutionary constrained found in these sequences. the fact that p300-bound regions and in vivo tested enhancers exhibit similar levels of transcription to uces would suggest that the co-occurrence of the two functions alone does not explain the constraint. on the other hand, much more in depth investigation of nuclear, tissue-specific transcription should be analyzed before drawing conclusions with regards to their similarity to less constrained enhancers.

it was shown recently that there is a much larger number or regions that are likely to be under similar evolutionary constraint to uces, despite their shorter size  <cit> . only an in depth analysis of transcriptional levels of a large set of enhancers and conserved regions  performed on nuclear and cytoplasmic rna is likely to provide further clues with regards to the role of transcription in uces.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we report that the majority of uces are expressed throughout mouse development in single-stranded transcripts. based on our preliminary characterization of these transcripts the rnas encoded within uces are unlikely to be short rnas and some of them might encode nuclear rnas. a significant fraction of uces appears to act as both enhancers and rnas during mouse development and rnaseq data indicates that the levels of transcription found in uces are likely to be similar to other enhancer regions in the mouse genome. this data provides further evidence and clues with regards to their functional complexity, and reinforces the possibility that the elevated constraint on their sequence might arise from multiple concurrent functions.

