BACKGROUND
micrornas  are a novel class of endogenous, ~ <dig> nt long rnas that post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression  <cit> . they guide the rna-induced silencing complex  to their mrna targets by sequence complementarity. in animals, mirnas generally bind to the 3'utr of the mrna imperfectly and in most cases lead to translational inhibition of its targets  <cit> . in plants, most mirnas match perfectly to the coding region of their targets causing mrna degradation  <cit> . however, some other interactions have been identified in vitro, e.g. interactions with the 5'utr and with the coding region of transcripts in mammals, with the 3'utr of plants transcripts and even some expression-enhancing mirnas <cit> .

mirnas are known to be involved in development  <cit> , cell proliferation  <cit>  and differentiation  <cit> , apoptosis  <cit> , cell cycle progression  <cit> , tumorigenesis <cit> , and many other physiological and pathological processes <cit> .

there are several experimentally defined rules of mirna targeting in mammals. sequence complementarity with the "seed", generally the nucleotides  <dig> to  <dig>  is sufficient to produce the repression of most animal mrnas  <cit> . the seed matches are grouped into four canonical types: 6mer, 7mer-m <dig>  7mer-a <dig> and 8mer. there are also other features outside this region. in fact, sequence complementarity to nucleotides 13- <dig> of the mirna can either enforce the affinity  or compensate for an incomplete seed pairing . furthermore, g:u wobbles within the seed are unfavorable to the regulation by mirnas <cit> . the thermodynamic stability of the duplex is a crucial feature of the interaction  <cit> . there are few other specificities for the mode of action of mirnas in plants and metazoa <cit> .

development of deep-sequencing methods have increased considerably the number of newly discovered mirnas <cit> . mirbase <cit>  is up to date the most complete database of precursor and mature mirnas. its latest update  covers  <dig> species and contains  <dig>  precursors and  <dig>  micrornas.

presently there is a plenty of algorithms and databases to predict mirna-mrna interactions based on sequence, physical-chemistry properties, expression levels or even experimental validations. for a common molecular biologist this panorama represents yet another level of complexity to its every day work since there is no single answer to the questions of what are the target genes for a single mirna? which prediction algorithms or databases is the best performing one? how can i reduce the number of predicted targets? the nature of the questions reflects the current panorama. in this work we try to provide answers to those questions by proposing a methodology that combines and re-score the mirna-mrna interactions from all different available sources. our intention is to provide the community with a unique source for mirna-mrna interactions based on the goodness of all available ones.

mirna-mrna interactions
experimentally validated interactions. currently there are several databases with experimentally-validated interactions such as: mirwalk <cit> , mirecords <cit> , tarbase <cit> , mirtarbase <cit>  and starbase <cit> . they differ mainly on the number of interactions they host. the starbase database includes interactions validated only by hits-clip and by degradome sequencing. these techniques provide more accurate information about direct mirna-mrna interactions, and also about the exact binding site  <cit> . table  <dig> contains detailed information about databases and number of interactions per organism.


caernorhabditis elegans

drosophila melanogaster

danio rerio

gallus gallus

homo sapiens

mus musculus

rattus norvegicus
summary of the number of validated interactions for each species we have studied as well as the source where this interaction was reported.

computationally predicted interactions. today, the use of computational methods has sped up considerably mirna target analysis. currently available computational methods can be grouped into ab initio, machine learning and hybrid methods  <cit> .

ab initio algorithms are based on the experimentally defined rules of mirna targeting. among them, miranda <cit>  uses an estimated complementarity score to select the duplexes, microtar <cit>  considers different sequence complementarities in the seed  allowing for g:u wobbles. pita <cit>  selects seed matches of six to eight nucleotides, allowing up to one g:u wobble in  <dig> and 8-mers and up to one mismatch in 8-mers. targetscan <cit>  first searches perfect complementarities to the seed and then calculates a score, based on the site type, local a-u enrichment and other aspects of the seed match context. finally, findtar <cit>  finds seed matches allowing up to one g:u wobble and scores them by the position of the central loop. except targetscan, these methods consider the thermodynamic stability of duplexes using vienna rna package  <cit> . for instance, rnahybrid <cit>  and miriam <cit> , first maximize the thermodynamic stability of the mirna-mrna pair and then search for sequence complementarities.

machine learning algorithms, such as rfmirtarget <cit>  and multimitar <cit> , filter predictions from ab initio algorithms by using classifiers trained with feature patterns extracted from experimentally-validated interactions. rfmirtarget is based on a random forest classifier that evaluates  <dig> features extracted from a previous prediction performed using miranda on the test dataset. multimitar is a support vector machine-based algorithm that rewards  <dig> features of the mirna-mrna pair. these features are selected by means of the novel multiobject metaheuristic technique amosa <cit>  integrated with svm. both methods were trained  <dig> interactions extracted from mirecords database and  <dig> systematically identified tissue-specific negative examples and evaluated using an independent experimentally validated set of interactions.

one example of hybrid methods is nbmirtar algorithm  <cit> . it first applies the miranda algorithm, and then uses a näive bayes classifier to filter the output based on  <dig> features. nbmirtar was trained with a set of  <dig> positive mirna targets of  <dig> animal species and  <dig> negative interactions from tarbase.

databases of predicted interactions. some computationally predicted interactions have been incorporated to different databases: eimmo <cit> , diana-microt <cit> , microcosm  <cit> , http://microrna.org <cit> , targetscan <cit> , mirdb <cit> , pita, mirwalk-predictive  <cit>  and targetspy.

among them, mirwalk algorithm first searches for perfect complementarities in the seed and then extends it until a mismatch is found. eimmo searches possible target sites of a microrna in four different species, retrieves the number of species in which the site is conserved and using bayes statistics it calculates the probability of conservation of the seed. diana-microt searches for 7-, 8- or 9-nt long seed-matches, or 6-nt seeds with one g:u wobble and retrieves the weighted sum of conserved and non-conserved sites of a gene in up to  <dig> species. finally, mirdb uses the svm-based algorithm mirtarget <dig>  <cit> . a comparative description of in silico prediction methods is shown in table  <dig> 

comparison of different algorithms of mirna-mrna target prediction including different algorithm features, the databases and software availability, scoring method, type of classifier, and species for which the algorithm was designed.

combination of mirna-mrna interactions
one drawback of sequence-based methods is the large numbers of false positives they predict. some studies have made use of conservation analysis for interaction filtering. however, this can lead to the loss of species-specific interactions.

in the last years, several unions and intersections of different databases have been proposed to improve the specificity and sensitivity of the predictions. one of these attempts was done in  <cit> . here the performance of targetscan, diana-microt, miranda, targetscans and pictar <cit> , as well as their combinations was compared. the highest value of specificity was obtained for the intersection of the five algorithms and the specificity for the different proposed combinations was over  <dig> %.

in  <cit> , authors experimentally analyzed the intersection of the possible microrna regulators predicted by targetscan, miranda and pictar for the human angiotensin ii type  <dig> receptor . they validated one of the initially considered interactions showing that using the intersection of databases was a viable way of interaction filtering.

other approaches, such as, comir <cit> , exprtarget <cit> , ranking aggregation <cit> , bcmicro <cit> , genmir <dig>  <cit>  and a bayesian graphical model <cit> , combine the scores of different databases .

the aim of genmir <dig> and the bayesian graphical model is not to combine different databases but to extract the most outstanding interactions given the mirna and mrna expression data as well as sequence based information. however both perform database combination internally and are based on logistic priors.

ranking aggregation method is designed to combine different numbers of top-k ranked lists and is based on cross entropy monte carlo method. it was successfully evaluated in combining the ranked list of targets of human mir-155-5p predicted by miranda, targetscan and pictar.

comir combines four databases by estimating the probability of every gene of being targeted by the input set of mirnas by using an svm algorithm. if available, mirna expression data is also considered.

exprtarget uses a logistic regression to combine the scores of different databases with expression data of mrnas and mirnas. in their model, each of the scores of the databases is weighted by means of their capability of replicating experimentally validated interactions. expression values are used to fit a linear model for each pair and the obtained p-value of the fit is used as an additional score in the model. exprtarget is based on miranda, targetscan and pictar scores. tarbase is used as gold standard. roc curves  <cit>  showed that exprtarget outperforms individual databases.

finally, bcmicro uses a probabilistic model to determine how likely is an interaction to be experimentally validated given the scores in different databases. this model is expressed in terms of individual conditional probabilities, one per database and interaction. the authors generated a negative set of mirna-targets to use as true negatives. this method was tested with targetscan, miranda, pictar, mirtarget, pita and diana-microt. roc curves showed bcmicro method outperformed individual databases.

our approaches. currently, there is no method considerably better than others in predicting microrna targets. some recently developed tools provide different ways to combine predictions of several algorithms, assuming that they perform similarly and share the same scoring system, which is not necessarily true. ideally, an integration of different prediction algorithms should take into account their level of performance as well as the score of each interaction when it is reported by more than one method. in this study, we introduce two complementary approaches to improve the mirna-mrna interactions by combining nine predictive algorithms, as well as experimentally validated interactions. global performance of the algorithms as well as the individual score of every interaction reported by different methods is taken into account. we show that the combination outperforms previous approaches while reducing the number of potential targets candidates.

RESULTS
reliability of databases. it is difficult to compare across the different databases of interactions since they differ in size, quality of the interactions and the ability of the scores to reflect the quality of the interactions. we have used a hypergeometric test to measure the reliability of databases . results are shown in table  <dig> 

 minimum z-score of a hypergeometric distribution. the lower the z-score the more statistically significant the enrichment in experimentally validated interactions is.  number of interactions for the minimum z-score.  total number of interactions in the database.  number of experimentally validated  interactions in the database.  proportion of ev interactions within the database.  proportion of selected interactions in the database for the minimum z-score.

this table shows the different databases sorted by z-score that, in turn, is a measure of their enrichment in experimentally-validated interactions when sorted by their provided score. the first two rows of this table correspond to wsp and lrs databases in this work and we will refer to them later. eimmo and diana-microt are top-ranked according to the z-score. targetscan, although being lowly ranked by the z-score, has the highest proportion of experimentally validated interactions. it seems that targetscan focuses on including only the most reliable interactions. on the other hand, mirtarget is a medium-sized database, but the quality of interactions, in terms of proportion of experimentally validated interactions, is small, and therefore, lowly ranked in this table. targetscan results indicate that using z-score as the unique parameter for database comparison is not sufficient  of table 3). however, this measurement seems reasonable to compare databases with large non-uncut lists of interactions. this is the case of many of the databases used in this work.

comparison of methods. materials and methods describe in detail the two approaches we propose to combine predictive mirna-mrna interactions from nine different algorithms widely used by the scientific community. the first one, named weighted scoring by precision  is based on summing up the weighted scores for different databases whilst the second one applies logistic regression to find the combined score . these approaches were evaluated using four different experimentally validated interactions databases to define the tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity. the evaluation of our methods has been restricted to the comparison against the predicted databases and algorithms and compared with two widely used integration methods: the union and the intersection.

both approaches outperform any of the predicting algorithms. a first evaluation of the predictions of our two methods has been done using the hypergeometric test used previously for database reliability measurement . it can be noted that both of them rank better than any other considered database in terms of z-score and number of interactions. figure  <dig> shows the roc curve of the individual predicting algorithms as well as the two combined approaches we introduced here. lrs outperforms the rest of the algorithms in terms of the roc curve, while wsp also improves almost all the other algorithms and behaves similarly to eimmo. it is important to notice that the number of interactions predicted by the different algorithms is quite different, except for the combined approaches that use all mirna-mrna pairs reported by the different methods .

for this particular application, both, the number of false positives and true negatives, cannot be exactly estimated. to limit the effect of this missing information, we proposed the use of the precision curve described in figure  <dig>  the ranking of the different methods resemble those reported in the roc curve, however, the improvement in performance of the combined approaches is now clearer. figure  <dig> shows an example of this effect is roc auc of the intersection , it is much higher than those of the proposed methods . it appears that the intersection is the best-performing method in terms of roc auc. this appreciation is misleading. intersection seems to be the best method since it is the most conservative one. intersecting all the prediction databases results in only  <dig> interactions and most of them are obviously experimentally validated. the roc curve is also misleading because since there are no databases containing non-interactive mirna-mrna pairs, the number of false positives and true negatives cannot be exactly estimated. there is no optimal solution available for this and that is why we proposed the use of the precision curve described in figure  <dig>  as can be seen in figure  <dig>  the intersection is not the most prominent. on the other hand, it is known that if the positive and negative populations are not evenly balanced, the roc curve does not reflect adequately the behavior of the classifier <cit> .

differences between the two proposed approaches are apparent in both the roc curve and the precision curves. we noticed, however, that the main inconsistencies concern the first  <dig> interactions, which represents less than  <dig> % of the entire universe of predicted mirna-mrna pairs. this is a very small percentage of interactions. our observation is that the exact score values in the method are not as important as being in the top of the list with a high prediction value. from that perspective, both methods are perfectly compatible. these differences are highlighted in figure s <dig> in the supplementary material.

in this work we have compared our methods with the two most used integration and straightforward approaches: the union and the intersection. although a full comparison with all available methods would be ideal, this is not always possible for several reasons: a) the idea in this contribution is to use the largest amount of individual prediction methods and databases available and therefore the integration needs to be performed with the same databases and algorithms to make a fair comparison. most of the integration approaches that we cite in the paper use only a subset of the databases and this would make the comparison very unfair. b) availability of the code or data: most of these methods do not provide a full code we can run and modify or the full interactions data; therefore, a full comparison is in some cases virtually impossible. c) lack of simple ways to reproduce and calculate these results several times.

despite of our efforts in making a full comparison, only exprtarget could be included, even if the comparison was not totally equal in the conditions we have used for the union and intersection. supplementary section  <dig> contains all details.

we consider that, as it is already happening in other areas, there is a need of community efforts to provide the data, and algorithms available to facilitate comparison.

all the interactions from the computational methods described in this work, as well as all the experimentally validated interactions are available to the scientific community in a database accessible via web at http://m3rna.cnb.csic.es. predictions are sorted according the criteria presented here. each individual prediction is reported with a new combined score. this functionality allows researchers to access a unified repository with most of the available and known information about mirna-mrna interactions and use it to compare it with their own methods.

CONCLUSIONS
no mirna-mrna algorithm makes perfect predictions under every condition. because of the multi-faceted nature of mirna targeting, and the lack of consensus among existing predictions, it makes sense to combine them in a way that maximizes the number of true predicted results while minimizing that of false ones. there have been previous attempts to combine the predictions of several algorithms by first taking their union or intersection, as a way to improve accuracy or coverage, balancing out their sensitivity and specificity, and finally, choosing the most likely candidates by consensus. most of these approaches give the freedom to choose which combination of prediction algorithms to use. the main issue is that a significant proportion of users do not have the necessary information about each algorithm's performance to make an educated decision.

our approaches present alternative solutions to this problem by assigning confidence scores to each prediction regardless the algorithm that originally predicts it. both methods provide a score that objectively quantifies the quality of a particular interaction given its score and the database  that predict it. this solves the implicit problem of choosing a candidate by consensus in which the confidence of the predictions is not taken into account. in addition, it solves the problem of setting the thresholds  to decide whether a predicted interaction is sufficiently reliable or not.

there are some limitations in our approaches that represent open research problems for the scientific community and could be interesting future research directions. for example, we assume that prediction algorithms have a high precision when they contain many validated interactions in their top scores, but this does not necessarily mean that algorithms with low precision are not predicting true interactions. it may just mean that the interactions they predict are harder to prove experimentally, or because the necessary experiments to validate them were never carried out. almost all prediction algorithms, however, make this assumption. another weak point in our approaches is that they start with the predictions that were reported by their authors and that are publicly available. it turns out that different reported interaction databases use different versions of sequence databases and therefore, the universe of mrna used for predictions by the different algorithms is not exactly the same. rerunning all prediction algorithms with the same mrna and mirna sequences would solve this limitation. it is difficult, however, to reproduce the same results than the ones reported on the authors' web sites because of parameters selection and availability of the code. this issue has no simple solution and no statistical tests or algorithms would solve it. we consider that a community effort by the algorithms' providers is the only way to solve this problem, either by making all codes available or by providing updated results of their prediction based on a common set of mirnas and mrnas. our methods presented here do the best they can with the available information and helps in minimizing the negative effect of this lack of homogeneity of the databases. as a final limitation, the lack of information at the transcript level from both predicting algorithms and experimentally validated databases create an important limitation to any method that combines predicting algorithms. interactions make more sense when they are described at the transcript level, if possible.

as our understanding of mirna targeting improves and experimental methods become cheaper and more precise, our combined database will become more sensitive and specific. a good example is the starbase database <cit> that contains interactions identified by the latest and more precise high-throughput techniques. it will certainly become one of the reference databases for experimentally validated mirna-mrna interactions. integrating starbase, as well as any other new database, will be a future logical continuation of this work and a good input for future versions of m3rna. besides the databases of experimentally validated mirna-target interactions, there are quite a few large-scale expression-based analyses which can also be used as alternatives for prediction validation <cit> . we have developed these approaches to serve as a useful way to obtain higher-confidence predictions using all available information and thus we hope that new opportunities will span from this.

