BACKGROUND
as more genomic sequences become available, functional annotation of genes presents one of the most important challenges in bioinformatics. because experimental determination of protein structure and function is expensive and time-consuming, there is an increasing reliance on automated approaches to assignment of gene ontology   <cit>  functional categories to protein sequences. an advantage of such automated methods is that they can be used to annotate hundreds or thousands of proteins in a matter of minutes, which makes their use especially attractive – if not unavoidable – in large-scale genome-wide annotation efforts.

most automated approaches to protein function annotation rely on transfer of annotations from previously annotated proteins, based on sequence or structural similarity. such annotations are susceptible to several sources of error, including errors in the original annotations from which new annotations are inferred, errors in the algorithms, bugs in the programs or scripts used to process the data, clerical errors on the part of human curators, among others. the effect of such errors can be magnified because they can propagate from one set of annotated sequences to another through widespread use of automated techniques for genome-wide functional annotation of proteins  <cit> . once introduced, such errors can go undetected for a long time. because of the increasing reliance of biologists and computational biologists on reliable functional annotations for formulation of hypotheses, design of experiments, and interpretation of results, incorrect annotations can lead to wasted effort and erroneous conclusions. computational approaches to checking automatically inferred annotations against independent sources of evidence and detecting potential annotation errors offer a potential solution to this problem  <cit> .

previous work of several groups, including our own  <cit>  has demonstrated the usefulness of machine learning approaches to assigning putative functions to proteins based on the amino acid sequence of the proteins. on the specific problem of predicting the catalytic activity of proteins from amino acid sequence, we showed that machine learning approaches outperform methods based on sequence homology  <cit> . this is especially true when sequence identity among proteins with a specified function is below 10%; the accuracy of predictions by our hdtree classifier was 8%–16% better than that of psi-blast  <cit> . the discriminatory power of machine learning approaches thus suggests they should be valuable for detecting potential annotation errors in functional genomics databases.

here we demonstrate that a machine learning approach, designed to predict go functional classifications for proteins, can be used to identify and correct potential annotation errors. in this study, we focused on a small but clinically important subset of protein kinases, for which we "stumbled upon" potential annotation errors while evaluating the performance of protein function classification algorithms. we chose a set of protein kinases categorized under the go class go <dig>  protein kinase activity, which includes proteins with serine/threonine  kinase activity  and tyrosine  kinase activity . post-translational modification of proteins by phosphorylation plays an important regulatory role in virtually every signaling pathway in eukaryotic cells, modulating key biological processes associated with development and diseases including cancer, diabetes, hyperlipidemia and inflammation  <cit> . it is natural to expect that such well studied and functionally significant families of protein kinases are correctly annotated by genome-wide annotation efforts.

RESULTS
the initial aim of our experiments was to evaluate the effectiveness of machine learning approaches to automate sequence-based classification of protein kinases into subfamilies. because both the ser/thr and tyr subfamilies contain highly divergent members, some of which share less than 10% sequence identity with other members, they offer a rigorous test case for evaluating the potential general utility of this approach. previously, we developed hdtree  <cit> , a two-stage approach that combines a classifier based on amino acid k-gram composition of a protein sequence, with a classifier that relies on transfer of annotation from psi-blast hits . a protein kinase classifier was trained on a set of  <dig> human protein kinases from the ser/thr protein kinase  and tyr protein kinase  functional classes based on direct and indirect annotations assigned by amigo  <cit> , a valuable and widely used tool for retrieving go functional annotations of proteins. performance of the classifier was evaluated, using 10-fold cross-validation, on two datasets: i) the dataset of  <dig> human protein kinases, and ii) a dataset of  <dig> mouse protein kinases drawn from the same go functional classes. the initial datasets were not filtered based on evidence codes or sequence identity cutoffs.

using the amigo annotations as reference, the resulting hdtree classifier correctly distinguished between ser/thr kinases and tyr kinases in the human kinase dataset with an overall accuracy of  <dig> % and a kappa coefficient of  <dig> . in striking contrast, the accuracy of the classifier on the mouse kinase dataset was only  <dig> %; the correlation between the go functional categories predicted by the classifier and the amigo reference labels was an alarming - <dig> :  <dig> of the  <dig> mouse kinases were classified as ser/thr kinases,  <dig> as tyr kinases, and  <dig> as "dual specificity" kinases  .

assuming the amigo annotations were correct, these results suggested that either this particular machine learning approach is extremely ineffective for classifying mouse protein labels, or that human and mouse protein kinases have so little in common that a classifier trained on the human proteins is doomed to fail miserably on the mouse proteins. in light of the demonstrated effectiveness of machine learning approaches on a broad range of classification tasks that arise in bioinformatics  <cit> , and well-documented high degree of homology between human and mouse proteins  <cit> , neither of these conclusions seemed warranted. could this discrepancy be explained by the amigo annotations for mouse protein kinases? we proceeded to investigate this possibility.

a comparison of the distribution of ser/thr, tyr, and dual specificity kinases in mouse versus human  reveals a striking discordance: based on amigo annotations, mouse has many more tyr and dual specificity kinases than human and only 40% as many ser/thr protein kinases. in contrast, as explained below, the fractions of ser/thr, tyr, and dual specificity kinases based on uniprot annotations are very similar in mouse and human . furthermore, the predictions of our two-stage machine learning algorithm are in good agreement with the uniprot annotations for both human and mouse protein kinases .

examination of the go evidence codes for the mouse protein kinases revealed that  <dig> of  <dig> mouse protein kinases included the evidence code "rca," "inferred from reviewed computational analysis" , indicating that these annotations had been assigned using computational tools and reviewed by a human curator before being deposited in the database used by amigo. notably,  <dig> of  <dig>  mouse protein kinases with an evidence code other than rca  were assigned "correct" labels, relative to the amigo reference, by the classifier trained on the human protein kinase data. each of the  <dig> proteins with the rca evidence code had at least one annotation that could be traced to the fantom consortium and riken genome exploration research group  <cit> , a source of protein function annotations in the mouse genome database   <cit> . to further examine each of these  <dig> mouse protein kinases, we used the gene ids obtained from amigo to extract information about each protein from uniprot  <cit> . we searched the uniprot records for mention of "serine/threonine" or "tyrosine"  in fields for protein name, synonyms, references, similarity, keywords, or function, and created a dataset in which each protein kinase had one of the corresponding uniprot labels: "ser/thr kinase," "tyr kinase," or "dual specificity kinase" if both keywords were found. results of our comparison of uniprot labels with amigo annotations for each class in this dataset of  <dig> mouse protein kinases are shown in figure 2a: for  <dig> of the  <dig> cases with an rca annotation code, the uniprot and amigo labels were inconsistent. results of our comparison are shown in table  <dig> .

this result led us to test the ability of the hdtree classifier trained on the human kinase dataset to correctly predict the family classifications for proteins in the mouse kinase dataset, this time using uniprot instead of amigo annotations as the "correct" reference labels. strikingly, the classifier  achieved a classification accuracy of  <dig> %, with a kappa coefficient of  <dig> , on the mouse kinase dataset. as illustrated in figure 2b, the classifier correctly classified  <dig> out of the  <dig> mouse kinases into ser/thr, tyr or dual specificity classes compared with  <dig> out of  <dig> for amigo. a direct comparison of classifiers based on uniprot annotations and amigo annotations can be seen in table  <dig>  this performance actually exceeded that of the same classifier tested on the human kinase dataset, for which an overall classification accuracy of  <dig> %, with a kappa coefficient of  <dig> , was obtained 

the hdtree method uses a decision tree built from the output from eight individual classifiers. a decision tree is built by selecting, in a greedy fashion, the individual classifier that provides the maximum information about the class label at each step,  <cit> . by examining the decision tree, it is easy to identify the individual classifiers that have the greatest influence on the classification. in the case of the kinase datasets used in this study, the classifiers constructed by the nb algorithms using trimers and quadmers, nb and nb, were found to provide the most information regarding class labels. this suggests that the biological "signals" detected by these classifiers are groups of 3– <dig> residues, not necessarily contiguous in the primary amino acid sequence, but often in close proximity or interacting within three-dimensional structures to form functional sites , an idea supported by the results of our previous work  <cit> . notably, the nb and nb classifiers appear to contribute more to the ability to distinguish proteins with very closely related enzymatic activities than psi-blast. the psi-blast results influenced the final classification, however, when the nb and nb classifiers disagreed on the classification.

discussion
examination of the mouse kinome database  <cit>  reveals that the majority of annotated mouse kinases have a human ortholog with sequence identity > 90% . the results summarized in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  together with the assumption that the relative proportions of ser/thr, tyr and dual specificity kinases should not be significant different in human and mouse, led us to conclude that uniprot derived annotations are more likely to be correct than those returned by amigo for this group of mouse protein kinases with the rca evidence code. we have shared our findings with the mouse genome database  <cit> , which is in the process of identifying and rectifying the source of potential problems with these annotations.

identifying potential annotation errors in a specific dataset such as the mouse kinase dataset solves only a part of a larger problem. because annotation errors can propagate across multiple databases through the widespread – and often necessary – use of information derived from available annotations, it is important to track and correct errors in other databases that rely on the erroneous source. for example, using amigo, we retrieved  <dig> rat protein kinases for which annotations had been transferred from mouse protein kinases based on homology  with one of the  <dig> erroneously annotated mouse protein kinases. examination of the uniprot records for these  <dig> rat protein kinases revealed that  <dig> of those labeled as "ser/thr" kinases by uniprot had amigo annotations of "tyr" or "dual specificity" kinase, and  <dig> of those labeled as "tyr" kinases by uniprot had amigo annotations of "ser/thr" or "dual specificity" kinase .

a recent study found that the go annotations with iss  evidence code could have error rates as high as 49%  <cit> . this argues for the development and large-scale application of a suite of computational tools for identifying and flagging potentially erroneous annotations in functional genomics databases. our results suggest the utility of including machine learning methods among such a suite of tools. large-scale application of machine learning tools to protein annotation has to overcome several challenges. because many proteins are multi-functional, classifiers should be able to assign a sequence to multiple, not mutually exclusive, classes , or more generally, to a subset of nodes in a directed-acyclic graph, e.g., the go hierarchy, . fortunately, a number of research groups have developed machine learning algorithms for multi-label and structured label classification and demonstrated their application in large-scale protein function classification  <cit> . we can draw on recent advances in machine learning methods for hierarchical multi-label classification of large sequence datasets to adapt our method to work in such a setting. for example, a binary classifier can be trained to determine membership of a given sequence in the class represented by each node of the go hierarchy, starting with the root node . binary classifiers at each node in the hierarchy can then be trained recursively, focusing on the dataset passed to that node from its parent in the go hierarchy.

in this study, we have limited our attention to sequence-based machine learning methods for annotation of protein sequences. with the increasing availability of other types of data , there is a growing interest in machine learning and other computational methods for genome-wide prediction of protein function using diverse types of information  <cit> . such techniques can be applied in a manner similar to our use of sequence-based machine learning to identify potentially erroneous annotations in existing databases.

CONCLUSIONS
the increasing reliance on automated tools in genome-wide functional annotation of proteins has led to a corresponding increase in the risk of propagation of annotation errors across genome databases. short of direct experimental validation of every annotation, it is impossible to ensure that the annotations are accurate. the results presented here and in recent related studies  <cit>  underscore the need for checking the consistency of annotations against multiple sources of information and carefully exploring the sources of any detected inconsistencies. addressing this problem requires the use of machine readable metadata that capture precise descriptions of all data sources, data provenance, background assumptions, and algorithms used to infer the derived information. there is also a need for computational tools that can detect annotation inconsistencies and alert data sources and their users regarding potential errors. expertly curated databases such as the mouse genome database are indispensable for research in functional genomics and systems biology, and it is important to emphasize that several measures for finding and correcting inconsistent annotations are already in place at mgd  <cit> . the present study suggests that additional measures, especially in the case of protein annotations with rca evidence code, can further increase the reliability of these valuable resources.

