BACKGROUND
central and peripheral nervous system are composed of glia  and neurons. glia constitute 90% of the human brain cells; brain constitute up to 2% of total body weight, and consume about 20% of total body oxygen in the resting state. reduction in the amount of oxygen in the blood  lead to intracellular regulation changes in astrocytes and neurons  <cit> . glucose is usually considered the only carbon source for cerebral energy metabolism. only about 1% of the total body glycogen is in the brain and it cannot be used as carbohydrate reserve in the brain cells  <cit> . reducing the amount of glucose taken from blood to the brain leads to slow down of respiration and cerebral functions. brain tissues are more sensitive to hypoglycemia when compared to the other organs. glucose is taken to the brain cells from blood and catabolized to pyruvate and lactate in the cytoplasm, while oxidative respiration occurs in mitochondria. in recent years evidence implied that this compartmentalization may not be restricted to cytoplasm and mitochondrion only, but may also extend to the cellular level. recently proposed astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle hypothesis  suggests that the glial glucose metabolism is almost completely anaerobic, and that the generated lactate which is released is transferred to neurons  <cit> . recent studies have shown that the exogenous labeled lactate is a major substrate for oxidative metabolism in c <dig> neuronal cell lines  <cit>  and neurons are capable of utilizing glucose in addition to lactate, down to co <dig>  whereas astroglial cells mainly metabolize glucose to lactate and released into the medium  <cit> . it was further shown that neurons cannot increase their rate of glycolysis whereas astrocytes can, simply because they lack a crucial glycolysis-promoting enzyme phosphofructokinase/fructose bisphosphatase, isoform  <dig>  and glucose is utilized mostly through the pentose phosphate pathway generating glutathione and coping with oxidative stress, thus suggesting that glucose serves more as a survival factor than an energy source in neurons  <cit> .

there is, in fact, other shuttle systems operating in the organisms - in the bee retina, for example, glucose is metabolized exclusively in the glia, and mitochondria are found exclusively in neurons  <cit> . in this system, glia were found to supply alanine to the neurons, and neurons return ammonium to the glia, suggesting a neuron-glia alanine-ammonium shuttle, and this study further implies lactate as a potential fuel supplied from the glia to the neuron  <cit> . interestingly, enzymes that would be crucial to this shuttle, such as ldh, were shown to be regulated in a sleep-dependent manner: one of the many functions of sleep is supposed to be replenishing the energy stores in the brain; molecules that are potentially involved in regulating the lactate shuttle, such as ldh and glut <dig> in astrocytes, were shown to be activated during sleep deprivation, and similarly lactate shuttle was increased in wakefulness  <cit> .

lactate is a metabolite used also in hypoxia and normoxia in addition to anoxia, and lactate shuttle can be found in a variety of tissues including muscle, where there is a net flow of lactate from muscle to the blood, which is then recovered from the blood by the resting muscle cell and removed from the system by oxidation  <cit> . in the brain, lactate was reported to be an immediate energy source upon hypoxia; heart muscle is also an active consumer of lactate, and in muscle tissue lactate can also be taken up by the mitochondria by mitochondrial mct transporters to be converted into pyruvate and consumed in the citric acid cycle  <cit> . although not directly related to the anlsh, there is evidence that monocarboxylates can act as rich energy sources for cells: cleavage-stage embryos, for example, initially require pyruvate but they switch to glucose as the preferred energy source as the embryo develops into a morula  <cit> . lactate and pyruvate transport occurs via mct transporters in the embryo, and blastocysts actually demonstrate higher affinity to lactate than zygotes  <cit> . as for neuronal cells, exogenous 13c-labeled lactate was shown to be a major substrate for oxidative metabolism in c <dig> cell lines, and hypoxic conditions were found to accumulate lactate as a rich energy source  <cit> .

neurons and astrocytes both express glucose transporters , lactate transporters , and lactate dehydrogenases , however the different isoforms expressed by neurons or astrocytes seem to support the anlsh model  <cit> . mcts transport monocarboxylates such as pyruvate and lactate across plasma membrane or even mitochondrial membranes as in the case of mct <dig> or mct <dig>  <cit> ; mct <dig> is mostly ubiquitous, while mct <dig> is mostly found in muscle cells or other metabolically active cells including tumors, while mct <dig> is mostly found in kidney, neurons and sperm tails where rapid uptake of low concentration substrates is required  <cit> . mct <dig>  present in astrocytes, is known to be involved in preferential release of lactate, whereas mct <dig>  present in neurons, has been implied in the consumption of lactate. in a different study using hela and cos cells, it was shown that mct <dig>  but not mct <dig>  was upregulated by hif-1a in hypoxia. in adipocytes, hypoxia was seen to upregulate mct <dig> and mct <dig> message, while decreasing mct <dig> expression  <cit> .

neurons and astrocytes also express different glucose transporter isoforms - glut <dig> in neurons and glut <dig> in astrocytes, with different kinetic properties  <cit> . astrocytes were seen to increase glucose transport and utilization in response to glutamergic activation. likewise, neurons and astrocytes also express different ldh isoforms - astrocytes predominantly express ldh <dig>  which produces lactate, while neurons express mostly ldh <dig>  which essentially converts lactate to pyruvate, supporting the anlsh model. furthermore, lactate was shown to help maintain neuronal activity during periods of hypoglycemia and hypoxia  <cit> .

there are experimental and computational data for as well as against the anlsh - for example, some studies imply that neurons with basal activation show no net import of pyruvate or lactate  <cit> , while mangia and colleagues claim just the opposite of anlsh, that is, neurons shuttle the lactate into astrocytes, and the only way this would work in reverse  is when the astrocytic glucose transport capacity is increased 12-fold  <cit> . as a matter of fact, it was shown that glutamate can stimulate glycolysis in astrocytes, by stimulating glut <dig> activity  <cit> . in this study, we model the brain energy metabolism of neurons and astrocytes using a computational model, incorporating genetic regulation of key transporters and enzymes. since some key components  of the metabolic network are regulated in an oxygen-dependent manner , we have incorporated the hypoxia-dependent regulation of genetic networks to both neurons and astrocytes in our model. as a matter of fact, oxygen and glucose were shown to both act as signals for genetic regulation of certain regulatory molecules or enzymes in metabolic pathways - studies in liver, for instance, have shown that the glucose response element present within the pyruvate kinase  promoter acts as a convergence point for hif-1α, mediating crosstalk between glucose and oxygen signals  <cit> . it is successfully shown that hypoxia can in fact upregulate glucose transporters up to 12-fold in the astrocyte, as predicted by mangia et al  <cit> , supporting that anlsh is feasible under energy-demanding conditions such as hypoxia. under conditions of brain ischemia neurons were found to be more susceptible to damage than astrocytes, mainly because astrocytes tend to maintain large reserves of glycogen and can maintain glycolytic atp synthesis for a considerably longer time than neurons  <cit> . astrocytes were also shown to convert this glycogen into lactate, which is then transferred to neurons under periods of increased energy requirement or low glucose availability  <cit> . furthermore, ischemic conditions of myocardial were shown to yield less atp production and accumulation of intracellular lactate  <cit> .

in this study, we have modeled  both views separately and assessed their atp production potential from a genetic regulation perspective, focusing only on the production of atp and not consumption. it has to be emphasized that our model does not include any atp sinks that mimic use of atp in the cells, leading to non-physiological levels of atp building up of the cell: we have purposefully done so, in order to clearly observe the accumulation of atp over a period of time, since we are only comparing the conventional view vs lactate shuttle in terms of atp production efficiency. normally, neuronal cells use the atp in a number of processes including electrical activity, transcription and translation, enzymatic events, motor proteins in the cell etc, but none of these events are included in this study so as to observe the effects of the shuttle on atp production. it must be noted that hypoxia will also affect the metabolic rate of any cell, therefore atp will be used to different extents, which would have complicated the interpretation of the results if incorporated to the model.

in the first model, the classical view assumes that both neurons and astrocytes can take up glucose and use it in glycolysis and aerobic respiration . the pyruvate can choose two routes - some of it will be transported into mitochondria, converted into acetyl coenzyme a and enter the citric acid cycle, whereas some will be converted into lactate by lactate dehydrogenase  enzyme and secreted into the extracellular matrix through a generic monocarboxylate transporter, mct .

the second model, anlsh, assumes that glucose is mainly taken up by the astrocyte and used up in glycolysis, the resulting pyruvate is converted into lactate by the astrocyte-specific ldh, and secreted out to the extracellular matrix via astrocyte-specific mct. this lactate in turn is taken up by the neuron via the neuron-specific mct, and converted into pyruvate via neuron-specific ldh, which is then free to enter the citric acid cycle in mitochondria .

in both models, some of the key enzymes or transporters were modeled to be regulated in an oxygen-dependent manner through hypoxia inducible factor  both in neurons and astrocytes . available oxygen levels are quite important for the survival of cells, and as such cells have devised methods to sense oxygen levels and respond accordingly. heme-containing prolyl hydroxylase enzymes  sense the levels of oxygen, and under normoxic conditions interact with hif1-α and hydroxylate it on proline residues, labeling it for proteasome-dependent degradation  <cit> . under hypoxic conditions, phase cannot interact with hif1-α, which then accummulates and translocates to the nucleus, where it regulates many hypoxia-inducible genes  <cit> .

in this study we have investigated the effects of hypoxia-inducible transporters and enzymes, including glut, mct, hk, gapdh, pfk, pk and ldh , in the overall energetic output of either model. it should be emphasized again that this work focuses on the energetic output of the classical view vs anlsh in the presence of hypoxia-dependent regulation of key enzymes, irrespective of glutamergic activation or stimulation. our results show that the anlsh is more advantageous for the neuron in terms of atp produced, both under hypoxic and normoxic conditions, although it does not provide a significant advantage for the astrocyte. we therefore believe that rather than a "classical-or-anlsh" choice for the cells, neurons and astrocytes can switch between one model or the other, depending on the energy requirements of the neuron.

RESULTS
hypoxia-dependent regulation of key metabolic enzymes
hypoxia-responsive nature of some metabolic enzymes or transporters have been studied in different cell types such as liver cells, adipocytes, helas or cos cells, as discussed in background, however the behavior of many of these enzymes are still not completely known in cells of the nervous system. in order to understand how some of the key enzymes behave under hypoxic conditions in neuron-like cells, we have used the pc <dig> cells, which are commonly used as neuronal differentiation model as they can undergo neuron-like physiological and molecular changes in response to nerve growth factor  or other stimulants. to that end, we have studied enzymes such as pyruvate kinase , hexokinase , and the rate-limiting enzyme phosphofructokinase , as well as the first enzyme of the aerobic respiration, citrate synthase , that converts oxaloacetic acid and acetyl coa to citric acid in the cycle. intriguingly, all of these enzymes have shown hypoxia-induced upregulation in transcription, albeit to different extents . glyceraldehyde dehydrogenase  enzyme is generally used as an internal control in rt-pcr reactions, however since it is itself one of the enzymes of glycolysis, we have used two different internal controls, gapdh and β-actin, a cytoskeletal component. we have found, to great surprise, that widely-accepted internal control standard, gapdh itself, was hypoxia-induced, when the cdnas were normalized with respect to β-actin control .

for that reason, as well as other reports in the literature discussed above, we had incorporated such hypoxia-dependent regulation to the transcription module of many metabolic enzymes , and studied atp production under normoxic vs hypoxic conditions for the first time in this study. we have next confirmed that our model indeed gives us hypoxia-induced upregulation of these enzymes at both mrna and protein synthesis levels; the transcript and protein of these enzymes were confirmed to respond to hypoxia as expected . since at this point we do not have absolute kinetic parameters for the hypoxic regulation of each promoter separately, in the model we have assumed similar hypoxia-response kinetics, as shown in detail in additional file  <dig> and explained in materials and methods.

the energy efficiency of the classical view under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions
we first investigated the energy efficiency of the classical model under two different oxygen concentrations. under normoxic conditions in the classical model, glucose is readily consumed, within the first  <dig> min, in both astrocytes and neurons . this pathway results in the production of lactate in both cell types, but although lactate is quickly discarded out of the astrocyte within around  <dig> min, very little lactate can be transported out of the neuron due to the high amount of lactate buildup in neuronal cytoplasm . very little extracellular lactate accumulates under these conditions . it should be noted that, in our model, extracellular lactate is not shuttled into the vascular endothelial cells of the capillary, so as to focus on lactate shuttle between only two cell types, the neuron and the astrocyte. under normoxia, most of the atp is produced within the mitochondria around the same level in both neurons  and astrocytes  . the levels of atp produced in the cytoplasm of astrocytes and neurons, however, are different - neurons can produce up to  <dig> mm of atp in cytoplasm through glycolysis, whereas astrocytes can merely generate around  <dig>  mm of atp in their cytoplasm . this is not only a reflection of different volumes of cytoplasm in astrocytes and neurons, since mitochondrial volumes differ by a similar ratio between the two cell types and yet the amount of mitochondrial atp synthesis is not significantly different .

when both cells are exposed to hypoxic conditions, glucose consumption is not changed significantly  in spite of the fact that glut and other enzymes are overexpressed in an oxygen-dependent manner in the model , whereas lactate kinetics changes radically - very little lactate accumulates in both neuronal and astrocytic cytoplasm, but the amount of extracellular lactate rises to around  <dig> mm . although the conditions are hypoxic, the mitochondria can still carry out citric acid cycle to a large extent, but still the mitochondrial atp production in the neuron is slightly reduced to  <dig> mm in the neuron and  <dig> mm in the astrocyte at steady-state conditions . the cytoplasmic atp levels are unaffected by the oxygen levels, as expected from anaerobic glycolysis .

the energy efficiency of the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle hypothesis under normoxic, hypoxic, and glucose starvation conditions
next, the anlsh is modeled as described in figure  <dig>  where glucose is essentially taken up by the astrocyte and consumed in glycolysis until pyruvate, which is then converted into lactate and transported into the extracellular matrix . extracellular lactate is then taken up by the neuron, converted to pyruvate and entered into aerobic respiration in the neuron .

under normoxic conditions with normal levels of glucose, glucose intake is slightly increased in astrocytes  as compared to that in classical model . on the other hand, since lactate generated by the astrocytes are transferred to the neurons to be converted into pyruvate, there is no build-up of lactate in the neuronal cytoplasm, unlike the steady-state levels of around  <dig> mm cytoplasmic lactate in the classical view , and the relatively low levels of cytoplasmic lactate in neurons rapidly declines within  <dig> hr to tolerable levels with the anlsh model . under these conditions, the cytoplasmic atp production in the astrocyte  is higher than that in the classical view . the mitochondrial atp production within neurons, however, is enhanced by over 3-fold in the anlsh . it should be noted that neuronal mitochondrial atp levels reach the steady-state at  <dig> mm abruptly at around  <dig> min .

when the cells are simulated under hypoxic conditions with the anlsh model, it is observed that while glucose consumption in the astrocyte does not seem to be affected greatly , the amount of lactate produced declines slightly . the atp produced in the astrocyte cytoplasm does not change, reaching the same steady-state of  <dig> mm within  <dig> min . the amount of atp synthesized in the neuronal mitochondria has a slower rate, reaching  <dig> mm by  <dig> min , however when simulation is run for longer periods it is observed that even under hypoxic conditions the steady-state levels of  <dig> mm are reached but only at around  <dig> min .

when the cells are placed in normoxic conditions with glucose starvation, ie constant flow of  <dig> mm blood glucose, glucose transport into the astrocyte is largely compromised due to higher intracellular glucose levels, which is rapidly consumed , leading to also a lower level of lactate  and atp  production in the astrocyte as compared with figure 6c and 7c). however, when the amount of lactate taken up by the neuron is analyzed, the lactate levels are seen to peak at around  <dig>  mm under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions irrespective of blood glucose levels , albeit slightly lower than that in normoxic conditions . nevertheless, the mitochondrial atp production in the neuron shows a much different profile under hypoxic vs normoxic-starvation conditions: whereas under hypoxic conditions atp levels reach  <dig> mm at around  <dig> min, albeit with lower rate , under normoxic-starvation conditions the atp production shows a biphasic profile, with a rapid increase in the first  <dig> min, then accumulating with a slower rate up until  <dig> min, at which point it reaches a steady-state at  <dig> mm .

discussion
our results indicate that under all three conditions studied , anlsh model provides the neuron with on average around 3-fold more mitochondrial atp than under normoxia. cytoplasmic atp production in the astrocyte is also much more using the anlsh, around 2- to 4-fold, however it should be noted that in anlsh it is assumed that there is no mitochondrial atp production, hence the overall astrocytic atp production is significantly reduced . oxygen and glucose deprivation  was previously shown to decrease neuronal nadh levels but not astrocytic ones, and neurons were seen to be more susceptible to ogd-mediated cell death  <cit> . in the same study, it was shown that hypoxia was not detrimental to cells, but lack of glucose was more crucial - indeed in our simulations normoxia vs hypoxia does not change the levels of atp significantly, whereas decrease in glucose concentration has a serious negative effect.

it must be emphasized that in this model glucose is the limiting reactant, in other words it is not fed into the blood continuously; furthermore the model is a time course simulation not steady state, and there is no feedback inhibition on the glycolytic pathway. therefore at the end of the simulations glucose concentration decreases as atp gets produced. on the other hand, lactate accumulates in the extracellular matrix, therefore intracellular concentration decreases, or it shuttles into the neuron and gets converted to pyruvate hence its intracellular concentration decreases

astrocytes were indeed reported to have  <dig> or  <dig> mitochondria  <cit> , neurons have 10s of mitochondria  <cit> , which significantly increase the amount of atp produced in the neuron. in the present study all mitochondrial activity was considered to be concentrated in a single sub-compartment representing one mitochondrion per cell . it should be also noted that in the recent views of the shuttle hypothesis, astrocyte mitochondria are not considered to be completely inactive; however the kinetic parameters regarding this situation are not yet absolutely known at the single cell level, therefore we have considered complete shutdown of mitochondria in astrocytes. under these conditions, the amount of atp produced in the astrocyte with the anlsh under any condition is very low, this atp can not sustain normal astrocytic functions for very long, however it is certain that a temporary anlsh would benefit the neuron enormously even with a single mitochondrion; the output will be much higher for a neuron with multiple mitochondria seen in vivo. therefore, we would like to propose that there is no strict classical-or-anlsh model choice in the brain, but rather a switch based on energy demand of the neuron. it is also equally likely that unlike in this model astrocytes do not completely switch off their aerobic respiration, but rather change the ratio of pyruvate that is converted to lactate, thus using an intermediate system between the classical view and the anlsh.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have demonstrated that the anlsh is more advantageous for the neuron in terms of atp produced, both under hypoxic and normoxic conditions, although it does not provide a significant advantage for the astrocyte. we therefore believe that rather than a "classical-or-anlsh" choice for the cells, neurons and astrocytes can switch between one model or the other, depending on the energy requirements of the neuron. however, more detailed, genome-wide kinetic models will surely prove useful in analyzing these models in more detail as well as understanding such an energy demand-dependent switching  <cit> .

