BACKGROUND
variation in gene expression is observed between closely related species, even when the specific gene coding sequence is largely conserved, e.g.,
 <cit> . within a species, expression can fluctuate following a perturbation  and even in the absence of perturbations variation among individuals is found – this being often interpreted as disturbing noise
 <cit> . what molecular factors determine these fluctuations? are these factors subjected to selection pressures? and which general trends on expression variability can one identify at the genomic level?

partial answers to these questions were recently reached by using high-throughput experiments on the budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae. noise was measured in > <dig>  proteins using gfp-tagged yeast strains
 <cit>  and this validated the contribution of mrna dynamics to protein noise. both protein function  and chromatin dynamics  were also shown to correlate with noise. moreover, expression plasticity  and divergence  were also quantified with the use of a compendium of genome-wide expression profiles in four yeasts
 <cit> . genes presenting a tata box in their promoter showed higher interspecies variability, controlling for function, which suggested the influence of transcription re-initiation mechanisms and bursting expression
 <cit> . similarly, response to mutations  identified tata boxes and trans-mutational target sizes  as determinants of neutral variability. finally, the production of a complete nucleosome occupancy map covering ∼81% of the genome
 <cit>  helped identify how different  occupancy levels further controls variability.

these initial findings are leading to new questions. for instance, are all these aspects of variation  linked to a unifying promoter structure? this is clearly suggested in recent studies, with an emphasis on the role of chromatin regulation
 <cit> . this strategy could be positive in terms of the economics of regulation
 <cit> , but negative in terms of functional conflicts, e.g., need of bipolarity in genome-wide transcription
 <cit> , presence of gene classes requiring precise but plastic expression
 <cit> , etc. an additional question is to what extent a demand for variation acts as a central force for the organization of genomes and vice versa, i.e., whether structural genomic features constrain variation
 <cit> .

here, we first revisited the influence of chromatin regulation in the linkage of noise and plasticity. we observe that both regulatory strength and character modulates this linkage. plastic genes exhibiting relatively strong chromatin regulation can appear independent of noise, but an extra increase in plasticity associates plasticity with noise. this association –or the lack of it–is revealed in the type of chromatin control, with a contrast between global and specific regulation. while these patterns indicate transcriptional initiation as fundamental mechanism of modulation , we alternatively find that noise uncouples from plasticity in low-plastic genes due to changes in translational efficiency. these distinct modes are confirmed by the differential influence of genomic neighborhood on coupling depending on plasticity. interestingly, short intergenic distance and bidirectional promoter architecture can both be related to high and low noise.

RESULTS
chromatin regulation does not always link plasticity to noise
tata boxes and high nucleosomal occupancy at the proximal regions of transcriptional starting sites  have been recognized as fundamental promoter features leading to gene expression variability
 <cit> . both features were shown to couple two specific forms of variability, i.e., expression noise and plasticity. linkage between noise and plasticity was additionally associated to a highly dynamic chromatin, as quantified by histone exchange rates
 <cit> . however, histone exchange rates do not fully describe the many trans factors influencing nucleosome dynamics.

to better understand how such factors determine the noise-plasticity coupling, we used a score that assesses chromatin regulation effects , i.e., how much the expression of a given gene varies when deleting its trans-acting chromatin regulators
 <cit>  . cre correlated with plasticity as expected . we then grouped genes in terms of proximal nucleosome occupancy and computed mean plasticity for those genes exhibiting high or low cre within each group. notably, chromatin regulation can induce a relatively high level of plasticity independent of nucleosomal occupancy and presence of tata promoters . is it possible to identify genes with particularly strong plasticity? this distinguishes genes whose promoters present both high proximal nucleosomal occupancy –increasing sensitivity to regulation 
 <cit> – and presence of tata box –that results in bursting transcription and increased transcriptional efficiency
 <cit> – which in turn involves coupling to noise .

the crucial effect of the high  nucleosomal occupancy to enhance coupling is emphasized by the pronounced nucleosome depleted region  exhibited by a subset of tata-containing genes with low noise . moreover, if the noise-plasticity coupling had its origin in the stability of the transcriptional apparatus at the promoter, this would predict the presence of coupling in tataless genes with a saga-dominated initiation . this is indeed what we observed .

high plasticity implies different trans-regulation strategies when coupled/uncoupled to noise
to further appreciate what determines the coupling  of noise with plasticity, we inspected potential differences in the type of chromatin regulation. we computed the mean effect in expression of a compendium of mutations in regulators
 <cit>   on plastic genes. this analysis highlighted a strong anti-correlation between the effect of perturbations in low-noise high-plasticity genes  and high-noise high-plasticity genes . this confirms mechanistically a complementary program of regulation between these two groups of genes , to be added to the previously observed distinctions in promoter nucleosome occupancy , and histone modification enrichment
 <cit> .

more specifically, perturbations affecting lnhp genes commonly cause a decrease in expression , i.e., regulators activate expression, and dominantly correspond to general transcription factors . even if most of these perturbations involved mutations in taf <dig> –which is a general transcription factor  needed for the expression of nearly 90% of yeast genes–, its perturbation affected lnhp genes more significantly than low plasticity  ones . in contrast, a wider range of different regulators affected hnhp genes, and the majority of these were independent trans-acting chromatin regulators  whose deletion activated gene expression , i.e., regulators repress expression .

more specifically, perturbations affecting lnhp genes commonly cause a decrease in expression , i.e., regulators activate expression, and dominantly correspond to general transcription factors . even if most of these perturbations involved mutations in taf <dig> –which is a general transcription factor  needed for the expression of nearly 90% of yeast genes–, its perturbation affected lnhp genes more significantly than low plasticity  ones . in contrast, a wider range of different regulators affected hnhp genes, and the majority of these were independent trans-acting chromatin regulators  whose deletion activated gene expression , i.e., regulators repress expression .

we also found that some regulators whose deletion results in decreasing expression level in the majority of lnhp genes tends in comparison to increase it in the majority of hnhp . as expected, this is not related to general transcription factors, whose deletion reduce expression level, but to many specific chromatin regulators and, notably, to histones. as much as 81% of these histone deletions  caused an increase in the expression of most hnhp genes, while they decreased the expression level of the majority of lnhp. a recent result can help us understand this
 <cit> . namely, lnhp genes are greatly enriched in activating marks , a strong change in acetylation level being observed when repressed. therefore, acetylated histones are probably essential for the expression of these genes. on the contrary, hnhp genes do not show such changes in histone acetylation status, but they reduce their occupancy level when activated. histone deletion is in this case more likely to impede the formation of repressive nucleosomes, resulting in a more frequently open promoter and increasing expression level .
 <cit> . a ratio > <dig> thus implies that the corresponding subclass is more strongly influenced by certain regulator than the full hp group. a strong negative correlation is found indicating that many regulators are highly specific to either hnhp or lnhp genes. this confirms that these groups are enriched by complementary functional classes  which are generally regulated in opposite sense
 <cit> . dot colors denote the dominant effect of the regulator on the hp class  while sizes describe the strength of the dominant effect; e.g., lnhp genes are frequently affected by strong chromatin activators. b) we examined in detail the effects on lnhp genes . except rsc <dig>  all these mutations involved taf <dig>  which is part of the general transcription factor tfiid
 <cit> . this essential factor regulates ∼90% of the genes in the genome, not including most of hnhp  but including almost all lp genes . nevertheless, we observed that all these mutations affected significantly more strongly lnhp than lp genes .
 <cit> , we plot the fraction of genes in the hnhp group and in the lnhp group that decreased expression. consistently with that observed in figure
 <dig>  we find that mutating as much as ∼50% of chromatin regulators results in the de-activation of the majority of the lnhp genes, but de-repression of most of the hnhp genes. in addition, and perhaps more importantly, we observe that 81% of mutations in histones also exhibit this behavior. this is probably crucial, and indicates that histones by themselves are needed for repression of hnhp genes and, at the same time, activation of lnhp.

noise in low-plasticity genes arises from enhanced translational efficiency
we noted that lp genes also present differential coupling to noise. in contrast to hp genes, this disparity does not seem to respond to transcriptional-based determinants. lp genes hardly present tata promoters , display pronounced ndrs  and are poorly regulated by chromatin . a notable feature of these genes is their enrichment in histone h2a.z at promoters, which has been already noted
 <cit>  and is thought to help stabilizing the ndr . indeed, there are not observable differences in all these factors when considering low and high noise subgroups within the lp set .

we thus inspected if uncoupling could be associated in these genes to translation as this is known to control noise
 <cit> . our analysis shows that noise in lp genes is correlated with translational efficiency
 <cit>  and ribosomal density
 <cit>   while we did not observe this in highly plastic genes . if translation controls noise in lp genes, then noise should also covariate with factors influencing translation efficiency such as orf length or codon bias . in lp genes, translational efficiency correlated more strongly with orf length  than with frequency of optimal codons . consistently, noise correlated with orf length  but not so with fop . on the other hand, noise correlated with orf length in an opposite way in hp genes  which probably reflects complementary constraints on gene length .

genomic neighborhood modulates the noise-plasticity coupling
what other mechanisms could modulate the noise-plasticity coupling? the specific architecture of the genomic neighborhood of a gene appears as a possible candidate. indeed, it was recently found evidence for how bidirectional promoters  could reduce noise by favoring nucleosome depletion
 <cit> . we confirm this result for the full dataset  and validate as well that potentially noise-sensitive gene classes are enriched in bipromoters: essential  compared to nonessential  and genes coding for protein complex subunits  compared to the rest .

however, as we have shown, noise in low-plasticity genes is modulated mostly at the translational level, and consequently should not be affected by the presence of bipromoters. although  depletion is observed independently of plasticity, it does not seem to affect noise in the lp class. in contrast, the noise-reduction effect of bipromoters is observed in hp genes, as expected
 <cit>  . this is further corroborated by the enrichment of bipromoters observed in lnhp genes  compared to hnhp . consistently, this enrichment is not significant in lnlp genes  compared to hnlp . this pattern is confirmed in noise-sensitive genes: while they are enriched in bipromoters in the hp group , in the rest  there are no observable differences in bipromoter frequency . notably, low and medium plasticity  genes do exhibit a difference in noise . if not to bipromoters, this difference could be attributed, as we discussed, to differences in orf length .

reducing noise by bipromoters could additionally decrease expression plasticity due to their association to short intergenic distance and nucleosome depletion, and this we actually distinguished . this suggests then a limitation on the adequacy of bipromoters for reducing noise. interestingly, we detect a strong bipromoter-independent effect in noise-sensitive hp genes . we thus hypothesized that there could be a tendency to evolve noise-abating mechanisms that affect plasticity more weakly, thereby uncoupling it from noise. indeed, if we consider only bipromoter hp genes, we find that noise-sensitive ones tend to be tataless  compared to noise-tolerant . in agreement with this, the noise-sensitive group has significantly lower noise  while the difference in plasticity is not significant  indicating an effective uncoupling of noise from plasticity. can we identify further features illustrating that noise-sensitive bipromoter genes tend to maintain plasticity levels? intergenic distances suggest that this could be the case .

noncoding transcripts and modulation
the above can be complementary analyzed if we consider all possible local genomic architectures around a focal gene , i.e., parallel, divergent and bipromoters with a coding or non-coding transcript as upstream partner . we computed the coupling between noise and plasticity for each architecture. coupling is strong for genes with divergent transcripts  and weak for those with a bipromoter with a coding partner . this further validates the observed absence of bipromoters in hnhp genes and their enrichment in the other three classes  where they are associated, of course, to short intergenic distances . interestingly, bipromoters of plastic genes with low noise are the ones with the biggest  intergenic distance , which suggests again the requirement of a minimal distance to locate the regulatory demands associated to enhance plasticity . overall, this emphasizes bipromoters as noise-abating architecture only when noise and plasticity are transcriptionally modulated.

discussion
we analyzed the molecular determinants that adjust the linkage between gene expression plasticity and noise in s. cerevisiae. noise was confirmed to be connected to plasticity when genes exhibit particular modes of transcription initiation  related to the presence of tata boxes at the promoter and strong chromatin regulation
 <cit> . this could suggest a model in which intrinsic noise is a byproduct of the need for plasticity
 <cit> . we show, however, that noisy expression can be observed in genes with low plasticity. these genes are generally simple , small and poorly regulated by chromatin effectors, and they show a prominent nucleosome depleted region .

in this loose regulatory scenario, transcription is likely to be produced by single, isolated in time, initiation events
 <cit> . for such bacteria-like transcription, noise is anticipated to depend on translational efficiency
 <cit>   and this is indeed what we notice. in addition, orf length appears as a strong determinant of ribosome occupancy in this class and thus of translation efficiency 
 <cit> . following this model we expect essential genes –usually of low plasticity– to be large as we observe .

on the other hand, we also established that relatively high expression plasticity can be reached by chromatin regulation without necessarily coupling it to noise. these genes that are enriched in growth-related functions  depend strongly on taf <dig>  an essential subunit of tfiid, but less strongly on most of the more specific chromatin regulators . this indicates that they respond to general, rather than gene specific, regulatory strategies which partly explain the high degree of co-regulation previously observed
 <cit> . beyond this, the group exhibits a characteristic pattern of low nucleosome occupancy in both proximal and distal promoter regions
 <cit>  possibly caused by the strong enrichment in activating histone modifications
 <cit> , and particularly acetylations. we hypothesize that rather than a promoter-localized open-chromatin state these genes could be located at broader open chromatin domains. indeed, we distinguished that rp genes tend to be localized on broad open-chromatin domains that extend up to at least 40kb , supporting this view.

the low noise but highly plastic expression is therefore consistent with two  models previously proposed. firstly, it is consistent with a detailed model
 <cit>  in which low nucleosome occupancy at the promoter indicates a stable open state, allowing the high expression levels exhibited by these genes . the concomitant noise reduction would not be possible if the high expression level would be reached by an increase in transcription or translation efficiency
 <cit> . secondly, at a broader level, the localization in open chromatin, and consequently low noise, genomic regions could also contribute to the small level of noise detected
 <cit> .

finally, we determined how additional enhancement in plasticity fundamentally associates to strong intrinsic noise. this emphasizes two additional promoter features. firstly, a particular nucleosome located at the promoter
 <cit>  allows a fine-tuned –and gene-specific– control of open and close promoter states by external regulators. the repressive effect of this nucleosome is evidenced by the increase in expression level upon histone depletion, an increase only observed in these genes . we demonstrate that many specific chromatin regulators act on these genes, in contrast to their low-noise counterpart  that could reflect also in the lack of co-regulation reported
 <cit> . additionally, during the time lapses that the promoter is in open state, the presence of a tata box allows the pre-initiation complex to stay assembled firing continuous initiation events. this increases the sensitivity to changes –in the time the promoter stays in open state produced by chromatin remodeling– thereby allowing an increase in plasticity. moreover, and even when repressed, the nucleosome can occasionally be destabilized allowing strong bursts of transcription which result in the observed noise. that coupling is related to an efficient transcription initiation is confirmed by the strong coupling found in saga but tataless genes , what confirms the model in
 <cit>  to a genome-wide scale.

as the critical promoter-covering nucleosome is probably stabilized by particular dna properties, such as high bendability
 <cit> , this could potentially increase the number of phenotype-affecting mutational targets, which could be in turn the cause of the increased expression divergence in these genes . therefore, linkage between different types of variability is mechanistically a consequence of the sophisticated regulatory strategy involving promoter nucleosomes and tata boxes. this regulation also brings higher sensibility to chromatin regulation , to stochastic nucleosome fluctuations  and to mutational effects .

the action of these two distinct strategies to modulate noise and plasticity coupling is further emphasized by the structure of the genomic neighborhood of the focal gene under study. while a seemingly general architecture in which  reduction of intergenic distance and enrichment of bipromoters should indicate noise-plasticity uncoupling, this only applies to transcriptional-based modulation . indeed, both small integenic distance and bipromoter can be broadly related to high or low noise in poorly plastic genes, where uncoupling is rather associated to other mechanisms of modulating noise . moreover, we observe that genes particularly sensitive to noise  can separate noise from the requirement of high plasticity .

in view of the exposed implications, can we speculate about the evolution of bipromoters? firstly, the s. cerevisiae genome is highly gene-dense, averaging one gene each ∼ <dig> kb with a median intergene distance in our dataset  of  <dig> bp. a high bipromoter frequency seems then plausible in absence of selection. in addition, we observed a correlation between intergene distance and plasticity , stronger when only transcripts with divergently oriented upstream partners are considered . this relationship probably responds to the need of a greater genomic space to accommodate a more complex regulatory landscape, which is in turn needed to achieve controlled expression variability. we observed a strong bias in bipromoter frequency towards genes with low plasticity , indicating that these regulatory needs are a major force determining the absence of bipromoters. in contrast, we suggest that their presence could have an almost neutral origin, as it displays an expectable distribution in view of intergenic distances .

CONCLUSIONS
in sum, the results reported here reveal that transcriptional- and translational-based regulatory strategies are alternatively used to modulate the balance between noise and plasticity in eukaryotic gene expression . these strategies appear clearly associated to distinctive functional , and genomic constrains . future analysis of additional questions, e.g., role of post-transcriptional regulation , potential presence of condition-dependent variation
 <cit> , or level and relevance of coupling in higher eukaryotes, should ultimately expose the many aspects of gene expression variation and its evolution.

