BACKGROUND
discernible transposed elements  occupy about half of the human genome  <cit> . they integrate into host dna in waves of activity. in the face of increasing density, they frequently insert into each other. nested insertions encrypt valuable historical information about the relative age of the elements, comparable to fossils in distinct layers of earth. as old fossils are absent in young layers, older inactive tes are not inserted into younger elements. in contrast, young tes are able to occupy all strata of older elements as well as those active at the same time. hence tes active at different historical periods display characteristic insertion profiles. comprised as they are of a substantial fraction of tes, mammalian genomes are ideally suited for such analyses. moreover, even low genomic accumulations , are sufficient for distinct profiles of retroposon activity  <cit> .

over more than one hundred and sixty million years, mammals have accumulated elements from four major classes of transposons, long interspersed elements , short interspersed elements , retrovirus-like long terminal repeats , and dna transposons  <cit> . while members of the last group move via a cut and paste mechanism, the other three elements transpose by a copy and paste mechanism via an rna intermediate reverse transcribed into cdna. in humans such rna transposons represent more than 90% of all transposed elements  <cit> . active line and ltr elements encode the enzymatic machinery that is necessary for their own propagation, and in the case of lines also the co-propagation of sines or any other rna. for line1-mediated retroposition, there is a slight preference for a-rich integration sites known as kinkable sites  <cit> . such regions contain a ttaaaa consensus motif and are frequently found in the junction of dimeric retroposons such as alu elements in primates. alu elements are primate-specific, 7sl rna-derived sines that arose from fossil left and right alu monomers  <cit> .

a retrospective, sequence-based insight into deep evolutionary periods is feasible via inferences from sequence divergence, but is accompanied by uncertainties due to changing regional and temporal substitution rates, mutation saturation, and the occurrence of highly mutated cpg sites. especially older, highly diverged, and short elements lead to unreliable estimations. counting and comparing nested insertions, however, is less sensitive to such considerations.

there are currently two different approaches for calculating the relative activity periods of subtypes of transposed elements, both of which draw on repeatmasker annotations. the transposon cluster finder  estimates how often certain elements have been fragmented by the insertions of other elements over evolutionary time  <cit> . a compilation of representative subsets of interacting transposed elements is then presented in an adjacency matrix displaying frequencies of interruptions optimized for their potential chronological order. this interruptive matrix analysis  starts from a random chronological order of elements and systematically repositions them so as to minimize the number of nonzero entries in the part of the matrix defined by the artificial transposition of old elements into new ones.

at about the same time as the tcf application was developed, we developed the transposition in transposition  algorithm  <cit> , which also uses repeatmasker coordinates to compile interrupted and nested retroposons. the frequencies of fragmented versus nested elements are counted, assembled in a data matrix, and sorted by pre-selected retroposon types. this matrix applies a specific probabilistic likelihood model  to calculate the relative integration period for each retroposon subtype in relation to all other subtypes.

due to the high frequency and multiple interactions of different elements, both the tcf and the tint methods exhibit high intrinsic complexities and are neither easy nor self-explanatorily applicable for the scientific community. to compensate for these shortcomings, we have now developed an easy to use, web-based interface for the tint application. tints can be directly screened for in model organisms or in any allocated repeatmasker report data. to demonstrate and test the web-based tint method, we investigated the representative primate genomes of homo sapiens, macaca mulatta , callithrix jacchus , tarsius syrichta , and microcebus murinus  and their well-characterized, primate-specific alu dimeric elements. because of the well-known evolutionary histories of both the species and their retroposons  <cit> , primates represent an ideal test group for the tint application.

implementation
the tint application is implemented in a java environment  and executed from a bioinformatics web page that runs as an applet on the client computer. tint reads and optimizes repeatmasker information of nested transposons and transfers this information into a data matrix of transpositions in transpositions . the data matrix is than included in a probability calculation to derive a graphical framework of relative activity periods of transposed elements. the probabilistic model considers a simplified assumption with just one period of activity of elements and no specific target site preference. the applet calculates the relative activity periods of elements, but in the current version no time calibration is implemented. the usage of the web-based application is illustrated in additional file  <dig> 

RESULTS
principle of the tint
the first step in generating a tint profile is to detect nested retroposons. the local version of repeatmasker http://www.repeatmasker.org/rmdownload.html produces report files containing all necessary information about element types and coordinates of nested and interrupted elements . we considered an element to be unambiguously nested if  it is located at the same genomic region as the interrupted element parts,  its element index is higher than the identical indices of the interrupted element parts,  the starting and end-coordinates of all elements span ≥ <dig> nt each ,  the interrupted host sequences show the same orientation, and  the separated parts of the host element's consensus sequence are preferably ≥ <dig> nt , but at least ≥ <dig> nt  and include an overlap of ≤ <dig> nt . in cases where the separated host parts have been incorrectly assigned to different subfamilies , we adopted the name of the largest part. single elements  were excluded from analyses. nested integrations of identical elements were used only to tune the parameters of the model. all parameters shown in figure  <dig> were optimized by empirical data and can be changed individually. to relax the conditions, the element indexes can be ignored . with this setting, the tint application only considers whether the interrupted host fragments refer to the same class of elements. furthermore, the stringency can be altered if the minimal query length, the minimal repeat extension, and minimal repeat extension overlay and/or the maximal repeat overlay is changed. relaxed conditions are only recommended if the amount of data is reduced or rare elements are involved. if elements are considered that integrate without recognizable target site duplications, such as cr <dig> elements in birds, the maximal repeat overlay parameter can be reduced and the minimal repeat extension overlay proportionally increased.

after identifying nested retroposons, they were counted, sorted by element subtypes, and compiled in a data matrix. finally, we developed a symmetric probabilistic likelihood model based on a normal distribution of element activity that transforms the information of the tint matrix into a pattern of chronological integration periods indicating the probability of activity for each analyzed element type. the underlying mathematical model considers a simple scenario with only one period of activity for each element type and similar probabilities of insertions based on the following assumptions:

 <dig>  elements of type i inserted at time points τki .

 <dig>  in each of such points in time, inserted element of type i may fragment some elements of type j with a certain probability pi,j .

 <dig>  considering an identical probability of insertion into any preexisting element, denoted by α, then probability pi,j can be represented as pi,j=α⋅ηj, where η j  is the number of elements of type j preexisting at time point t.

 <dig>  function η j  is approximated using the normal  distribution with mean tj and standard deviation nj, e.g., ηj=nj2π∫−∞t−tjσje−y22dy, where σj = nj, and its derivative ddtηj=12πe−22nj <dig> has the maximum at time point t = tj. all details of the model are presented as additional file  <dig> 

web-based version of tint
the web-based version of tint is located at http://www.bioinformatics.uni-muenster.de/tools/tint and requires java version  <dig> . the application is written as a java applet and was developed using the multi-language software development environment eclipse, which is an integrated development environment with a repository system  in the background that keeps software changes disposable. there are two input options. first, any repeatmasker report file can be uploaded and variable subsets and combinations of elements can be selected for tint calculations. furthermore, pre-analyzed model organisms and specific elements can be selected for a tint analysis. currently,  <dig> pre-computed genomes are available for the tint analysis and the data  can be downloaded from http://www.bioinformatics.uni-muenster.de/tools/tint/download/repeatmasker/.dir. the tint activity pattern is then graphically displayed. it should be mentioned that the application is executed locally on the computer where it is accessed. optional parameters for reading repeatmasker data may be entered into a special dialog box. transpositions can be grouped and this information can be loaded from a file to provide flexibility for further analysis. printing or exporting the generated graphs is a basic part of the software, so the results can be used in other applications. exporting depends on the standard printer dialog of the computer system - if available the print is directed to a postscript file.

an example data set from primates
after selectively screening the human genome with repeatmasker, we detected  <dig> , <dig> dimeric alu elements,  <dig>  of which were considered to be unambiguous nested insertions. the frequencies of insertions extracted from the retroposon matrix  were used to calculate their activity probabilities . because of the multidimensional insertion pattern, the probable relative activity of each given element subtype is directly interrelated to those of the other subtypes. alujo appears as the first active alu dimer, followed by alujb. alusx shows the most expanded activity with the 75% interval of probable activity overlapping that of both the aluj elements and the other alus subfamilies. the aluy elements are clearly separated from the older elements and contain those that are currently still active representatives of alu dimers .

from the rhesus monkey  genome sequences we detected  <dig>  dimeric elements including  <dig>  nested, tints. the pattern of these alu dimers  is similar to that of human; but includes, in addition, rhesus monkey-specific, aluy-related alur elements  <cit> . because the resolution of individual aluyr elements was too low, the related aluyrb-d elements  were combined.

the  <dig>  nested elements from the  <dig> , <dig> alu elements detected in the new world marmoset  also show a distribution comparable to those of human and rhesus monkey. in addition, there are three new world monkey-specific aluta elements with the most recent activities  <cit> .

the  <dig> nested elements from the  <dig>  dimeric alu elements detected in the tarsius genomic sequences  comprise only the two known aluj elements. the tint analysis showed that alujo was older than the alujb. tarsius-specific alu elements have not yet been detected.

the repeatmasker screen of the gray mouse lemur  sequences  revealed a total of  <dig>  alu elements, of which  <dig>  were unambiguously nested. the mouse lemur lacks the alujb elements that are present in all other primate groups. in addition to other potential but as yet uncharacterized alu dimers, there are several recently described, lemur-specific alu elements with very dominant and recent distributions .

comparison to the tcf defragmentation pattern
giordano et al.  <cit>  presented their fragmentation analysis based on a transposon cluster finder  software package. the transposon defragmentation analysis included most known mammalian te classes and families but only the three main alu groups aluj, alus, and aluy. therefore a direct comparison to our tint activity pattern of alu elements is limited. furthermore, the tcf software is not freely available to derive a comparable set of data. the tcf pattern for alu elements roughly confirms the tint-derived succession of these elements, but indicates an artificial activity overlay of aluj with alus and aluy elements.

discussion
in light of the many ongoing genome sequence projects, the tint method should prove to be quite valuable for characterizing the retroposon-influenced architecture and evolutionary history of genomes and provides a basic aid in conducting efficient retroposon-based phylogenetic reconstructions. to test and demonstrate the advanced efficiency of the tint algorithm and to present a user-friendly web-based application, we performed a comparative analysis of nested primate specific dimeric alu sines, a group of elements with an established evolutionary history  <cit> . using standard consensus sequences of alu repeats  <cit>  to screen all available genomic sources of primates, represented by human and macaque , marmoset , philippine tarsius , and gray mouse lemur , we extracted and analyzed more than  <dig>  nested from  <dig>  million detected alu sines. the relative activity periods of alu elements revealed by the tint analyses coincide with our current knowledge of these elements in primates  <cit> .

it should be mentioned that a substantial proportion of the nested elements are ancestral insertion events and consequently are shared among different primate groups. such common tints lead to similar activity patterns of species, especially for older elements .

nine diagnostic mutations distinguish alujo from alujb  <cit> . the tint profiles support the activity of alujo having preceded that of alujb and, with the probable absence of alujb in strepsirrhines, indicate an origin of latter elements in the common ancestor of tarsius and higher primates. the phylogenetic affiliation of these two groups in a clade haplorrhini was previously significantly supported by four orthologous insertions of retroposed elements  <cit> . this relationship is now overwhelmingly supported with quantitative and chronological evidence from  <dig>  alujb elements specific for haplorrhini that are clearly absent in strepsirrhines. beside some few specific elements humans and macaques have nearly identical profiles of alu sine activity. similar activity profiles for older alu sines  were also detected in new world monkey . in contrast, the overlapping activity patterns of the younger alus and aluy sines vary among primate groups. the tint patterns of element activities  fit well to the sequence-based reconstruction of the evolution of alu elements  and to the commonly accepted phylogenetic tree of primates . three implications can be drawn from the tint patterns of alu sines:  several subtypes of alu elements were active during overlapping periods,  a significant change in alu activity took place after tarsius separated from a common ancestor with anthropoids, and  the tint activity profiles correlate perfectly with the well known activity patterns of alu elements  <cit> . comparing tint profiles of dimeric alu elements to the phylogenetic relationships of different primate species documents the correlation between the activity of retroelements and species evolution .

however, comparing the tint analysis of dimeric alu elements to the tcf defragmentation pattern  <cit>  demonstrates that the tint analysis provides a more accurate activity pattern and implements information about the number of elements in the genome. the tcf defragmentation analysis shows an aluj activity time span that overlaps with that of both alus and aluy elements. the tint profiles clearly indicate that aluj elements were already silent before the divergence of anthropoidea and before the appearance of most alus subtypes and aluy . furthermore, the tcf analysis requires that any given element type interact with at least 29% of all other analyzed element types. the tint model requires that a given element type interact with only two additional types. especially for small amounts of genomic data, this raises the sensitivity drastically.

for tint analyses it is important to carefully preselect and compile the elements of interest. large elements  have a higher chance of being occupied by other elements than do smaller ones  therefore, we advise users to analyze such groups separately . tint analyses of both monomeric and dimeric elements together should be interpreted with care. alu elements for example are composed of two monomers connected via an oligo sequence. such a-rich regions are preferred targets for insertions  <cit>  and can bias the insertion profile.

CONCLUSIONS
the insertion patterns of retroposed elements provide a homoplasy-free character set for tracing the evolutionary history of species  <cit> . the insertion of a given element at the same genomic location in two species and its absence in a reference species indicates a close relationship between the two sharing species  <cit> . however, randomly choosing retroposed elements for laborious phylogenetic analysis is highly inefficient, while preselecting specific informative element types  significantly raises the efficiency of downstream experimental analyses. the tint application provides a priori information about the relative activity periods of given elements . the phylogenetic application of tint-derived element activities significantly aided in resolving the evolutionary histories of galliformes  <cit> , marsupials  <cit> , and lagomorphs  <cit> .

it is well known that retroposed elements significantly influence genome evolution, architecture, and gene function; hence, a clear understanding of their insertion events is a key to understanding the genomic architecture of present-day genomes. therefore, in addition to a statistical compilation of such elements, tint affords an invaluable tool for analyzing the chronological activity of retroposed elements. because sine elements depend on the line retroposition machinery for their insertion, their activity is closely connected to line activity. as an example, mammalian-wide interspersed elements  coincide with the activity of line <dig> elements and presumably the propagation of mirs ended after the inactivation of such elements. to understand the dependence of sine-line associations, overlapping activity periods are a first indication of potential interactivity. a potential non-autonomous and autonomous element affiliation was shown for a novel sine-like snorte element and bovb_plat autonomous retroposons in platypus  <cit> .

genome-wide chronological analyses of transposed elements using tint build on the repeatmasker detection of elements or fragments thereof. the detection is based on sequence similarity to a predefined compilation of transposons. although tint performs a subsequent stringent quality-check of detected fragmented elements, miss-annotations, especially if old and thus highly diverged elements are involved, cannot be completely excluded. therefore, more sequence data leads to an increase in precision.

in future tint updates, we plan to implement two additional levels of complexity. by a genome-wide pre-screening of element-specific insertions, we intend to add empirical retroposon information of type-specific  insertion probabilities; thus, freeing the algorithm from the assumption that all elements have similar insertion probabilities. associated with this, we intend to improve the accuracy of tint analyses by introducing an asymmetric model of element activity, whereby elements will not necessary reach their highest probability of activity at the center of their activity range. furthermore, we plan to incorporate an absolute time scale of activity by incorporating divergence data of elements.

