BACKGROUND
coccidiosis is a diarrheal disease of chickens caused by protozoan parasites of the genus eimeria. it impairs mortality, feed utilization and growth of poultry and causes annual losses of us$  <dig>  billion to the poultry industry worldwide  <cit> . conventional disease control strategies depend on vaccination and prophylactic use of anticoccidial drugs. however, resistances against the anticoccidial compounds have already spread and coccidiostats as feed additives will be banned in europe by the year  <dig>  <cit> . vaccination strategies with avirulent or attenuated eimeria strains have been routinely used for  <dig> years, but the large scale production of parasites is relatively laborious and expensive. limited progress has been achieved towards the development of subunit or recombinant vaccines, the major hurdle being the identification of protective antigens and the delivery  of the recombinant vaccine to the chicken immune system  <cit> .

as an alternative strategy, coccidiosis could be prevented by oral delivery of antibodies that inhibit parasite invasion. the complex life cycle of eimeria comprises an exogenous phase in the environment during which the excreted oocysts undergo sporulation. after infection via ingestion of sporulated oocysts, an endogenous phase in the chicken intestine consisting of asexual reproduction  and sexual differentiation  takes place, followed by fertilization and shedding of unsporulated oocysts  <cit> . the key step in the disease process in the chicken is the invasion of gut epithelial cells by the parasite. gut epithelium invasion is accomplished by sporozoites and merozoites as the extracellular invasive stages which represent an attractive target for orally applied inhibitory antibodies. during the last years, numerous monoclonal antibodies against eimeria antigens have been generated, several of them showed an inhibitory effect on sporozoite invasion in the cell culture  <cit> . furthermore, some monoclonal antibodies, administered intravenously  or intraperitoneally  for passive immunization, were able to reduce significantly the oocyst output and/or the lesion scores in the chicken gut  <cit> .

there are a few major issues precluding use of monoclonal antibodies for preventive and curative passive immunization of the animals against infectious diseases:  the costs of antibody production and  the costs of treatment. the treatment costs could be significantly reduced by switching from i.v. or i.p. route of administration to the oral delivery of the feed additives. however,  the natural antibodies per se are the serum proteins which easily degrade in the gastrointestinal  tract before they reach their target. all mentioned issues have been addressed in the present study. using a phage display antibody library, we generated the anti-eimeria antibody fragments with high sporozoite-neutralizing activity. these antibodies were expressed in seeds of transgenic feed pea thus providing a cost-effective antibody production platform affordable for the animal health market. the pea seeds demonstrated the excellent antibody storage properties: dry seeds could be stored at room temperature for long time periods without any loss of antibody activity and they could withstand elevated temperatures during the preparation of feed pellets. moreover, pea seed content protects antibodies from degradation in the gi tract. the animal experiments demonstrated that ad libitum feeding of chickens with fodder comprising the shred prepared from the antibody expressing pea seeds led to a protective and/or curative effect on infection of chickens with eimeria parasite.

RESULTS
generation of a phage display antibody library and selection of eimeria-specific antibodies
to generate recombinant antibodies with eimeria parasite-neutralizing activity, mice were immunized with a mixture containing purified parasite material  of five avian eimeria species . spleens of mice with the positive immune response were used for mrna extraction and generation of phage displayed singe-chain fv  antibody library of diversity  <dig>  ×  <dig> individual clones. for isolation of antibody fragments binding to eimeria proteins, soluble protein extracts of oocysts, sporozoites and merozoites of e. tenella  were used as complex antigens for panning of the scfv library. after three rounds of panning, amplification, and re-panning,  <dig> clones expressing scfv were obtained that bound the oocyst extract,  <dig> clones which bound sporozoite protein,  <dig> clones that bound membrane proteins from oocysts and sporozoites and  <dig> clones that bound merozoite proteins . sequence analyses revealed that the selected clones comprise  <dig> individual scfvs. elisa demonstrated specific binding of all  <dig> selected scfv variants to immobilized eimeria antigens with signals significantly higher than the background;  <dig> scfvs bound to oocyst proteins,  <dig> to sporozoite proteins and  <dig> to merozoite proteins. some scfvs showed specificity to both oocyst and sporozoite or merozoite proteins, thus indicating that the recognized antigens are expressed in different live forms of the parasite .

n.t., not tested.

identification of scfv antibodies that inhibit invasion of eimeria tenella
to identify scfvs that interfere with sporozoite invasion,  <dig> scfv variants binding to oocyst extracts were selected for further analyses, since they demonstrated distinct sequence variations mainly localized in the complementarity determining regions . for selection of antibody fragments interfering with cell infection by parasite, the sporozoite invasion assay in vitro has been chosen. the method is based on observation that certain cultured mammalian cells, such as madin-darby bovine kidney  epithelial cells, are susceptible to invasion by sporozoites of e. tenella even though these cells are not natural hosts for this parasite. accordingly, the antibodies specifically binding sporozoite antigens involved in cell invasion can protect the cells from the eimeria infection  <cit>  . for each scfv, at least two independent invasion inhibition assays were performed. these "activity-screens" were set up to detect any scfv with evidence of inhibitory activity. the threshold that was defined for inhibitory activity was a = 10% reduction of intracellular sporozoites in both independent experiments. this requirement was met by six out of the  <dig> tested scfvs . the scfv inhibition of sporozoite invasion was found to be dose-dependent, as demonstrated by titration of purified antibody fragments .

 <dig> in each experiment,  <dig> μg bacterially expressed and purified scfv was used. means and sds of triplicates are shown.

 <dig> as determined by elisa.

 <dig> as estimated by comparison with molecular weight markers in western blot analyses.

 <dig> as determined by ifat and flow cytometry .

+, binding; -, no binding; n.d., not determined.

analyses of binding properties, antigen- and species-specificity of parasite-neutralizing scfvs
a detailed analysis of the antigen specificity of six selected antibody fragments with proven ability to inhibit cell invasion of e. tenella sporozoites  was performed using elisa, western blot analysis, flow cytometry and indirect fluorescent antibody test . for this purpose, the complex antigens were prepared from different live forms of the e. tenella parasites. in addition, a number of known most probable antigen candidates, such as immunodominant surface antigen etsag <dig>   <cit> ; microneme proteins etmic <dig>  <cit> , etmic <dig>  <cit> , etmic <dig>  <cit>  and etmic <dig>  <cit> ; eimepsin   <cit> ; merozoite antigen mzp 5- <dig>  <cit>  and a  <dig> kda antigen 3-1e   <cit>  were generated and expressed as recombinant proteins. since the etsag <dig> antigen as isolated from the parasite is composed of a  <dig> kda polypeptide  and a  <dig> kda polypeptide  linked by a disulfide bridge  <cit> , recombinant etsag <dig> protein was produced in bacteria as a  <dig> kda precursor without a signal peptide and a glycosylphosphatidylinositol  anchor. the results of analyses are summarized in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  out of six tested, four scfv candidates  demonstrated clear staining of the surface of e. tenella sporozoites . moreover, these four variants showed specific binding to the recombinant etsag <dig> precursor . sds-page and western blot analyses revealed that all etsag1-specific scfvs  recognized the large  <dig> kda subunit of etsag <dig> in oocyst and sporozoite extracts of e. tenella under non-reducing conditions . in contrast, no antibody binding was detected when the oocyst extract was reduced . interestingly, the etsag1-specific scfvs retained binding to the  <dig> kda precursor also under reducing conditions.

+, binding; -, no binding; n.t., not tested.

for analysis of cross-reactivity of the scfv fragments selected for inhibition of invasion of e. tenella sporozoites with other eimeria species, the complex soluble antigens were prepared from sporulated oocysts of three avian eimeria species  and two rodent eimeria species . as expected, all etsag1-specific scfvs showed reactivity only with e. tenella . the scfv variants ab <dig>  ab <dig>  ab <dig> and ad <dig> did not interact with the protein preparations from other species, thus indicating that they recognize etsag <dig> epitopes which are unique for e. tenella. in contrast, the scfvs aa <dig> and aa <dig> demonstrated fairly broad species cross-reactivity . however, these variants neither bound to sporozoite and merozoite extracts nor interacted with the surface of sporozoites .

oral application of tobacco expressed antibody fragments in chickens infected with eimeria
oral application of antibodies for prevention of eimeria infections in poultry would only be feasible if cheap sources of large amounts of recombinant protein were available. production in plants provides an economically attractive source of recombinant antibodies  <cit> . therefore, the recombinant anti-eimeria antibody fragments were first expressed in leaves of the tobacco plant nicotiana benthamiana as a quick source of large amounts of plant-made recombinant protein. typically, one-step purification yielded  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> mg of recombinant scfv variants aa <dig>  ab <dig>  ab <dig>  ab <dig> and ad <dig>  respectively, with purity above 90% from  <dig> kg wet weight of infiltrated tobacco leaves . comparison of the anti-sporozoite activity in vitro of the antibody fragments isolated either from tobacco or from e. coli demonstrated superior properties of the plant-produced material for most of the tested anti-eimeria scfvs .

animal studies were performed to assess whether the scfv-mediated inhibition of sporozoite invasion observed in vitro also prevents or mitigates eimeria infections in chickens upon oral delivery of the scfvs. for these experiments, we used purified antibody fragments produced and isolated from the tobacco leaves. the chickens were orally infected with a single dose of e. tenella oocysts . one day before infection, force-feeding was started with the scfv fragments and continued for  <dig> days. birds in the treatment group received  <dig> mg antibody isolated from the tobacco leaves in  <dig> ml pbs a day via gavage. the results of two independent animal trials performed in the same way are summarized in figure  <dig>  the untreated control groups showed oocyst shedding starting on day  <dig> after challenge and increasing throughout day  <dig>  at the same time points, treatment with the commercial anti-coccidian drug baycox® reduced oocyst shedding to marginal levels. animals that received scfvs experienced a partial  reduction in oocyst numbers in comparison with the untreated controls; however, there was no significant difference. the individual data sets of scfv-fed groups showed a fairly high variability between the experiments. nevertheless, all tested scfv variants demonstrated a somewhat positive effect on oocyst shedding with the highest inhibition rate of 60% observed for the group treated with a scfv ad <dig> 

pea plant transformation and expression of scfvs in pea seeds
although the transient expression of heterologous proteins in leaves of n. benthamiana allows relatively quick production of reasonable quantities of the scfv fragments for proof-of-concept  animal studies, application of antibodies as fodder additives in routine poultry feeding requires more efficient and cost-effective production systems. therefore, stable expression of single-chain antibody fragments was established in the fodder pea variety "eiffel". for generation of the transgenic pea lines, the genes of scfv fragments of two different specificities  were selected. the transgenic pea lines have been generated which express scfvs under the control of a seed-specific promoter. the results of characterization of ab28-expressing pea lines are summarized in additional files  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> & <dig>  similar analyses were performed for the aa28-transgenic pea lines. the tests demonstrated that scfv expression was restricted to seeds, where the scfv protein could unambiguously be detected by western blot analysis . for estimation of the expression levels, the scfv antibody fragments were isolated from the pea seeds and purified. three independent measurements yielded  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg extractable functional scfv ab <dig> per  <dig> g dry seed weight. furthermore, the scfv expression levels stayed the same over a number of following homozygous pea generations . head-to-head comparison of scfv ab <dig> preparations isolated either from the tobacco leaves  or from the pea seeds  demonstrated nearly identical molecular form compositions in different preparations. the scfv material from both tobacco leaves and pea seeds was mostly monomeric  with presence of a dimeric  fraction  and some minor quantities of higher molecular forms, most probably tetramers  . accordingly, the scfv preparations from the tobacco leaves and pea seeds demonstrated very close similarity  in their antigen-binding activities, with the calculated kd values of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm , respectively, as determined by elisa .

analysis of the proteolytic and ph stability in vitro
for an effective prevention of parasite invasion into the intestinal epithelium of chickens, the antibody fragments must survive the harsh conditions of the gi tract, in particular, high protease content and acidic ph, for a longer time. it is known that avians possess the same basic structures for nutrient extraction as other vertebrates but also exhibit specific features within their gi tract. these include a crop for storage of feed, a proventriculus , a gizzard and paired caeca. the ph values of specific sections of the chicken gi tract are the following: crop  <dig> , proventriculus  <dig> , gizzard  <dig> , duodenum  <dig>  to  <dig> , jejunum  <dig> , ileum  <dig> , colon  <dig> , caeca  <dig> , and bile  <dig>   <cit> . we, therefore, performed comparative analyses of influence of the expression system on the ph and proteolytic stability of the antibody fragments using as an example the etsag1-specific scfv ab <dig>  first, we tested the influence of different ph conditions separately on formation of the antibody-antigen complexes  as well as on dissociation of already preformed antigen-antibody contacts . the purified scfv ab <dig> preparations isolated either from tobacco leaves or from the transgenic pea seeds were compared. in addition, crude protein extract prepared from ab28-expressing pea seeds was included into the assay. the results presented in figure 6a,b demonstrate a fairly comparable effect of ph on all three antibody preparations. as expected from the general considerations, the marginal ph values had a more pronounced negative effect on the formation of the antigen-antibody complexes than on dissociation of the already bound antibody. in general, the found ph effect on formation and dissociation of the antibody /antigen  complexes rather reflects the stability of the ab/ag interface partly formed by the electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonds between the charged and polar amino acid side chains than the folding/unfolding stability of the antibody molecules themselves. in conclusion, all tested scfv ab <dig> preparations retained 70-100% of their maximal antigen-binding activity under the ph conditions prevalent in the caeca where the e. tenella sporozoite invasion takes place  <cit> .

to simulate the protease-rich conditions of the small intestine, activity and stability of different scfv ab <dig> preparations were tested in presence of enteric proteases present in the intestinal fluid  isolated from the small intestine of chickens. comparison of purified scfv ab <dig> preparations isolated either from the tobacco leaves or from the pea seeds demonstrated a three-fold higher resistance of pea-expressed material against proteolytic degradation in the small intestine . the scfv material present in crude pea seed extract appeared even more stable, 40-fold more resistant than scfv purified from pea seeds and 100-fold more stable than scfv from tobacco. this finding indicates a protective anti-protease effect of the pea seed content. to analyze whether this protective effect is seed-specific or just caused by the high protein content of the pea flour, we compared proteolytic stability of the tobacco-produced scfv ab <dig> in the presence of either wild-type  pea seed extract or irrelevant protein, such as bovine serum albumin . the final bsa concentration was 15% , as adjusted according to the measured protein content of the pea seed extract. the results presented in figure 6d and table  <dig> indicate that presence of excess of irrelevant protein had no effect on scfv degradation in chicken intestinal fluid and that the stabilizing effect could be attributed exclusively to the content of the pea seed extract . the tobacco-made scfv ab <dig> premixed with the wt pea seed extract proved nearly as stable as an extract prepared from the ab28-expressing transgenic pea seeds .

ed <dig>  effective dilution of chicken intestinal fluid leading to 50% loss of activity.

reduction of parasite shedding upon force-feeding of chickens with pea seed flour prepared from scfv-expressing seeds
to test whether pea seeds expressing protective scfvs can avert infection with e. tenella, the flour prepared from the ab28-expressing seeds was used for treatment of chickens infected with e. tenella oocysts. for comparison, expressed in tobacco and purified scfv ab <dig> and an irrelevant scfv ba <dig> raised against enterotoxigenic escherichia coli  as well as ba11-containing pea seed flour were used. the study was designed to mimic the normal housing conditions, such as keeping birds in clean stables where only a few oocysts could be present which survived the disinfection procedure. a preliminary dose finding study demonstrated that infection with a dose as low as 7- <dig> oocysts per chicken results in measurable oocyst shedding. in addition, lowering the infection dosages led to a significant reduction of deviation between the individual animals. therefore, the animals were infected with manually prepared individual doses of  <dig> ±  <dig> oocysts. the chickens were force-fed three times daily either with  <dig> mg in total of scfvs purified from the tobacco leaves or with the flour prepared from the scfv-expressing pea seeds. in latter case, the maximal delivered dose of functional scfv was estimated to be  <dig>  mg per bird a day .

the results of the study are shown in figure 7a. the average oocyst shedding was  <dig> -fold lower in birds treated with the expressed in tobacco and purified scfv against eimeria  in comparison to birds that were treated with the same amount of a purified irrelevant scfv , although the difference was not significant . however, treatment with ab28-containing pea seed flour resulted in a significant  <dig> -fold lower average oocyst shedding than in the animal group receiving ba <dig> pea flour . for groups treated with the pea material, the anti-eimeria scfv antibody ab <dig> showed an infection inhibition of  <dig> %. for groups treated with the purified material, essentially lower inhibition  was observed.

mitigation of eimeria tenella infection by application of scfv-containing pea seeds in chicken feed
for demonstration of the potential of fodder containing ab28-pea shred in prevention or mitigation of the coccidian infection caused by e. tenella, the controlled battery experiments were performed under normal ad libitum feeding conditions. to determine whether the transgenic pea shred is accepted as a part of the feed and readily taken up by chickens as well as to assess the digestibility of the pea shred, a preliminary feeding study was performed using a fodder containing 10% pea shred derived from the pea seeds expressing irrelevant anti-etec scfv antibody ba <dig>  the results shown in additional file  <dig> demonstrated no difference in weight gain and feed consumption between the ba11-fed chickens and the animals of the control group. the transgenic pea shred was well consumed by broiler chickens and was not shunned . elisa analyses demonstrated absence of the ba11-activity in extracts from the fecal material, thus indicating that the recombinant antibody present in transgenic pea seeds was completely digested .

in our feasibility studies, we evaluated high- and low-dose infection models. the high dose model was designed to get appropriate lesion scores for differentiation of infections. however, taking into account that the lesion score analysis is not always a reliable method to measure the efficacy of anti-coccidials  <cit> , the reduction of oocyst counts in caeca was determined as an endpoint of the study. broiler chickens were infected orally with individual doses of  <dig>  freshly prepared oocysts of e. tenella. three animal cohorts were formed; in two groups birds were infected and fed with the fodder comprising 10% pea shred derived either from ab28-expressing seeds  or from the wild-type pea . adapted from the preliminary feeding experiment, the average consumption of the scfv antibody by chickens of the treatment group was estimated as  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg antibody/kg body weight × day . the negative control group  comprised birds which were not infected and received conventional fodder. at the end of experiment, the lesion scores and the oocyst counts were determined in caeca of sacrificed birds. the results of the study demonstrated that there was no significant difference in the body weight gains  and severity of the lesions  between the infected groups. however, less animals in the ab28-treated group had blood in feces  and a higher proportion of the ab28-treated animals had lightweight lesions . accordingly, only 26% of the ab- <dig> treated animal had lesion score  <dig> versus 36% in the positive control group. although the mentioned differences were not statistically significant, the observed trend was confirmed when the oocyst counts from caeca were compared . the average oocyst counts were significantly lower in birds fed with the ab28-expressing pea seeds than in animals receiving conventional fodder . feeding with ab28-pea led to reduction of the oocyst counts in caeca to  <dig> % of the numbers found in the positive control group. therefore, the inhibition of invasion caused by the ab28-transgenic fodder could be calculated as  <dig> %.

the low-dose infection model was employed to mimic the real situation in barns for rearing commercial broilers where the chickens are spontaneously infected with relatively low dosages of eimeria oocysts. the feeding experiment was performed under nearly the same conditions as the high-dose infection experiment, only the infection dose has changed. in this study, the chickens were infected with the ten-fold lower oocyst doses, i.e.  <dig> oocysts per bird. due to the low oocyst doses, the vast majority of infected chickens had reduced lesion scores  <dig> and  <dig> . the animal cohort fed with ab28-pea seeds demonstrated significantly lower oocyst counts in caeca . however, about one third of animals in both infected groups stayed oocyst-free most probably due to the innate immunity against the pathogen. therefore, the effect of modified feed was also separately assessed only for the oocyst-shedders in each group. the results presented in figure 7c demonstrate very significant reduction of caecal oocyst counts in the birds fed with the ab28-containing fodder . in summary, feeding with ab28-pea seeds led to a reduction of the oocyst counts in caeca to a level of  <dig> % from the counts found in the positive control group. therefore, the inhibition of invasion caused by the scfv ab <dig> pea seed material could be calculated as  <dig> %.

discussion
in view of the spread of microbial resistance to antibiotics and the emergence of new pathogens, passive immunization by recombinant antibodies is considered as one of the most promising alternatives to combat infectious diseases  <cit> . although the market for therapeutic monoclonal antibody-based products is one of the fastest growing segments in the biopharmaceuticals industry, this market is heavily focused on oncology, autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. the role of antibodies for mitigation and therapy of infections is only slowly emerging, but is impeded by the high cost of goods . high cog also prevents successful introduction of antibodies into the animal health market. plant-based production provides a solution to these cost problems. in addition, plants can provide an adequate system for oral delivery of recombinant biomolecules as part of the diet. infrastructure and costs for downstream processing can thus be avoided, as well as the production losses which are often significant. although expression of recombinant antibodies and antibody fragments in plants  has been demonstrated two decades ago  <cit> , their introduction into the health and veterinary markets is still years away. in our knowledge, the present report is a first demonstration of feasibility to control poultry infections by feeding animals using a fodder supplemented with the antibody producing transgenic seeds.

the first objective of this study was generation of recombinant neutralizing antibodies against the economically important protozoan parasites of genus eimeria. an immune library was constructed by phage display and panned against the complex antigens prepared from the different live forms of e. tenella. since the orally delivered antibodies cannot rely on effector functions of circulating immunoglobulins such as fc-receptor mediated recruitment of the immune killer cells  or complement fixation  inside the gi tract, the only possible mechanism of action would be prevention of the parasite entry into the gut epithelium. therefore in contrast to the previously described approaches  <cit> , we introduced screening of binders for the parasite neutralizing activity early into the selection process. this strategy resulted in identification of six candidates; four of them appeared to be specific for etsag <dig>  sporozoite antigen of e. tenella. etsag <dig> has been found previously by us and others to be a molecular target for a number of sporozoite-neutralizing antibodies  <cit>  and seems to be closely involved into initiation of the infection process  <cit> . the antigen specificities of two neutralizing non-etsag <dig> binders and the mechanism of their infection-blocking activity are still unknown, since both these variants bound neither sporozoites nor merozoites.

the second goal of the study was testing the suitability of orally applied antibody molecules for controlling the eimeria infection. to make the product compatible with the already existing cost structures in the animal health market, the cost efficient plant production systems have been utilized. first, the selected antibody fragments were transiently expressed in agrobacteria-infiltrated tobacco leaves and purified. besides the higher production yields, the tobacco-derived antibody fragments demonstrated superior biological activity in vitro in comparison with the counterparts expressed and purified from bacteria. furthermore, the relatively small quantities of tobacco-made scfv fragments  were able to cause partial reduction of eimeria oocyst shedding by the infected animals.

although the transient and stable expression in tobacco leaves allows the cost-reasonable industry-scale production of heterologous proteins  <cit> , it requires fairly intense product purification strategies, to remove at least the toxic alkaloids from the tobacco extracts. in contrast, expression of the therapeutic proteins in crop seeds has a great advantage for oral administration since only minimal treatment is necessary to use seeds as the livestock fodder. the other advantages of crop plants include easy upscaling through field cultivation, established harvesting and processing technologies, as well as easy seed storage and distribution. seeds are natural storage organs, with the optimal biochemical environment for the accumulation of large protein amounts. in this form, proteins can be transported from farm to the production factories without any loss of stability. moreover, feasibility of high-level production and long-term storage of antibodies in seeds has already been demonstrated  <cit> . in our work, we have selected feed pea as a production plant on the basis of the following considerations. pea is an established field crop with available infrastructure and tools for large scale planting, weeding, harvesting, storage and processing. furthermore, the pea seeds are an established feed/food ingredient with high protein content . pea has a history of successful heterologous expression studies including field trials  and has excellent safety features. the safety aspects include strict self-pollination; lack of outcrossing; no dispersal of seeds by wind and, therefore, very low number of volunteers; lack of toxic substances in seeds. the eaten seeds get digested and thus are not able to germinate; the pea plants do not survive frost. in addition, the pea varieties are approved as crop plants for livestock fodder. due to the different sugar and glycopeptides contents, the feed pea has different taste and texture than the food pea, thus allowing easy discrimination to prevent potential entering of gmo into the food chain. in addition, using seed-specific promoter makes expression of the transgenic protein nearly totally restricted to the seeds  <cit> . the safety features are very important in view of tight regulatory control and surveillance of genetically modified  plants  <cit> .

we have, therefore, generated transgenic pea plants expressing two most promising scfv candidates in seeds. the highest producer, a homozygous pea line expressing anti-etsag <dig> scfv ab <dig> at yields of  <dig> - <dig> g extractable functional antibody per  <dig> kg dry seeds, was taken for the detailed analyses and feasibility studies in animals. comparison of the scfv fragments isolated from the pea seeds with the counterparts expressed in tobacco leaves  demonstrated no difference in the molecular form composition, antigen binding activity and ph stability, but a somewhat higher resistance of the pea seed derived material against intestinal proteases. comparative analysis of the proteolytic resistance revealed a key protective role of the pea seed extract in scfv stability. the stabilizing effect can be attributed to the well-known presence of the proteinase inhibitors in legume seeds  <cit> . the trypsin/chymotrypsin inhibitors found in pea seeds mainly belong to the bowman-birk protease inhibitor  family. bbis are stable at cooking temperatures and also towards acidic ph values in the digestive systems of humans and animals, most probably due to their large number of disulfide bonds  and the polar interactions between the sub-domains. the potential applications of bbis have recently attracted much attention. bbis are already used to defend against insects in transgenic plants, and they also have prospects in the prevention of cancer, dengue fever, and inflammatory and allergic disorders . these findings provide an additional argument for choosing the legume seeds as the production system suitable for passive immunization.

the controlled feeding experiments demonstrated statistically significant positive effect of using antibody-expressing transgenic pea seeds on mitigation of coccidial infection. in first instance, force-feeding with the pea flour suspension appeared to be more efficient than the oral administration of twice larger amounts of purified antibody fragments. the found effect was additionally confirmed by ad libitum feeding using both high- and low-dose infection models. the challenge doses of e. tenella oocysts that were used in the first model  may be considerably greater than the levels that commercial birds are likely to be exposed to in some production facilities. nevertheless, the observed endpoint of the study  was still significant. much better results were obtained by using the ten-fold lower challenge oocyst doses. therefore, the transgenic pea seeds may be useful for protection against coccidiosis in poultry raised under normal field conditions, as we demonstrated using the low-dose infection model.

although the results presented here are rather preliminary, they provide evidence that the recombinant antibodies produced in pea seeds have capacity to reduce the infectious loads in animals following oral administration. product-specific issues such as antibody stability in the gut, parasite neutralizing potency or even direct killing activity have to be addressed, as well as technical issues  and commercial applicability. for example, in the present study we used the scfv variants selected from the phage display immune library without any further optimization. affinity maturation of the scfv candidates and improving their proteolytic stability and folding efficacy in plants using either random or rational approaches  <cit>  may further contribute to the success of the described passive vaccination strategy. the antibody stability against intestinal proteases can also be enhanced by conversion of scfv into a bivalent single-chain antibody format without compromising the expression yields in plants that is normally observed for heterooligomeric full-length antibodies of igg and iga classes or fab fragments . alternatively, well expressed and proteolytically stable binding proteins selected from the non-antibody scaffold libraries can be used . in addition, further enhancement of anti-parasite potency can be achieved, for example, by grafting the killing antimicrobial peptides into the antibody cdr loops not involved into the antigen binding  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, this study demonstrated for the first time beneficial effect of using antibody expressing pea seeds for passive protection against avian coccidiosis in newly hatched birds. compared with methods of active vaccination either by live parasites  or using recombinant subunit or dna vaccines  <cit> , the passive immunization strategy described here is an easy and non-invasive method to use in commercial settings with the comparatively low cost of production utilizing current agriculture technologies and with the ability to be used in combination with other anti-parasitic agents.

