BACKGROUND
a cardinal characteristic of anxiety disorders is the so-called attentional bias  <cit> , which refers to alterations of attentional processes in response to emotional, especially threat-related, stimuli. the attentional bias of subjects with trait anxiety  <cit>  as well as anxiety disorders  <cit>  including ptsd  <cit>  has recently been described as a 'vigilance-avoidance reaction'. this model describes the tendency to initially attend to threat before this stimulus is avoided in a subsequent reaction. it is hypothized that while aversive cues evoke a rapid response, anxious subjects subsequently initiate attentional avoidance as an attempt to alleviate the fear reaction  <cit> . thereby, this model can reconcile the apparently contradicting findings of an increased allocation of attentional resources towards aversive stimuli in ptsd that has been found in some studies  <cit> , as well as an attentional bias away from threat reported elsewhere  <cit> . a recent magnetoencephalographic study indicated that the vigilance-avoidance pattern in ptsd consists of two distinct processes that are temporally and spatially dissociated  <cit> . ptsd patients showed a hyper-reaction to threatening stimuli in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex as early as  <dig> ms after stimulus onset, which was followed by an attentional avoidance reaction in occipital regions starting at  <dig> ms after stimulus onset. catani et al.  <cit>  found that the avoidant reaction to aversive pictures in ptsd, indicated by a reduced activity in the left occipital lobe, remained stable for at least the first four seconds after stimulus onset. this reduced activity in brain regions that are associated with elaborate visual processing, was interpreted as disengagement from a detailed visual stimulus exploration  <cit> . confronted with potential threats, subjects with anxiety disorders seem to focus on the initiation of a rapid flight reaction rather than concentrating on the attentive evaluation of the threat cue  <cit> . as it is plausible to assume that such a mechanism can contribute to the maintenance of anxiety symptoms, it could be a promising target for therapeutic interventions. however, the early onset of both the transient vigilant response as well as the prolonged avoidant reaction indicates that both reactions are automatic, stimulus driven bottom-up processes, which cannot be intentionally altered by verbal instruction.

accumulating evidence from treatment trials demonstrates that ptsd can be effectively treated with psychotherapy. a large number of randomized controlled trials have shown that variants of trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy  are the most successful interventions for the treatment of ptsd  <cit> . the active mechanism of therapeutic change is thought to be the imaginal exposure to the episodic memory of the traumatic event. in this procedure, the patient is instructed to overcome avoidant strategies and to narrate the traumatic experience in detail. the repeated re-experiencing is thought to reconstruct the distorted autobiographic memory of the trauma  <cit>  and to change pathological mechanisms of fear processing.

little is known about the neurobiological foundations of psychotherapy for ptsd. three uncontrolled, small-scale studies have examined neuronal changes over the course of psychotherapy. while no changes were found on a structural level  <cit> , felmingham and colleagues   <cit>  reported a change of activity of basic fear processing mechanisms in eight subjects who underwent cbt for ptsd. in particular, after therapy, amygdala activity declined while the activity of the anterior cingulate cortex, which is associated with a top-down influence on fear processing, increased. as this study lacked a control group however, brain changes could not be causally linked to psychotherapy. to our knowledge, there are only two randomized trials that assessed functional changes of neural correlates in ptsd. these studies reported a decrease of cortical activity in the right anterior hemisphere during exposure to trauma-related pictures  <cit>  and the right middle frontal gyrus during trauma script-driven imagery  <cit> .

although the primary intention of cbt is to target trauma memories rather than to change attentional processes, the interaction of episodic memory retrieval and attention supports the assumption that trauma focused cbt alters memory as well as attention processes. a cortical structure that might play an important role in the context is the parietal cortex. recently, cabeza et al.  formulated a theory that connects attentional and episodic memory processes. according to this theory, goal-directed memory retrieval can be regarded as an effortful process that involves voluntary top-down attention towards memory content. these goal-directed attentional processes are driven by parietal structures including the superior parietal cortex  <cit> . this finding is important in interpreting the role of the parietal cortex in ptsd considering the general assumption of a deficit in top-down regulation of fear in ptsd  <cit> , which may be modified by exposure therapy  <cit> .

in the present randomized controlled treatment trial, we wanted to investigate the influence of trauma-focused therapy on attentional processing of aversive pictures. we compared the effects of trauma-focused cbt with a waitlist control group in a population of severely traumatized victims of war and torture. in both groups, we assessed neurophysiological indicators of attention to threat cues before and after treatment or the corresponding waiting time. we used narrative exposure therapy  as a variant of trauma-focused cbt. net is a manualized short-term approach that has been adapted to meet the needs of traumatized survivors of war and torture  <cit> . net has been shown to be effective in the reduction of ptsd symptoms in various randomized controlled trials  <cit> . the advantage of net is that rather than combining various techniques such as cognitive methods and skills training, this treatment focuses exclusively on the reconstruction of episodic trauma memory by a detailed and emotional narration of the biography, with particular emphasis on the traumatic events. therefore, potential effects can be attributed to a specific intervention rather than to a mixture of various therapeutic methods.

we applied magnetoencephalography  to measure steady-state visual evoked fields  as an indicator of attention processes. here, we were interested in the processing pattern of threatening cues, which consisted mainly of pictures with trauma-related  or generally aversive  stimuli. the ssvef represents an ongoing cortical oscillatory neuromagnetic response elicited by a repetitive visual stimulus that is presented at a certain frequency  having the same fundamental frequency as the driving stimulus  <cit> . one major advantage of the ssvef technique is that a high signal-noise-ratio can be achieved even with a limited number of trials  <cit> . this technique has proven its efficiency in several studies investigating higher order attentional mechanisms during the processing of emotional stimuli in healthy participants  <cit> , and psychiatric patients  <cit> .

we expected that net would reduce attentional disengagement towards aversive stimuli  <cit> . therefore, we expected a relative increase of activity towards threat-related pictures in brain regions associated with elaborate visual processing. moreover, we aimed to explore potential changes in activity in the parietal cortex as a marker of enhanced top-down regulation of attention as well as episodic memory.

RESULTS
clinical data
within the sample of study completers, the time × treatment interaction revealed a significant difference of the development of both groups with respect to the caps score  =  <dig> , p < .001). in patients treated with net, ptsd symptom severity significantly declined at the 4-months posttest  while the wlc group showed no significant improvement . moreover, an interaction effect for time × treatment was found for the hamilton depression rating scale  =  <dig> , p < .005). the net group reported significantly less depressive symptom severity at posttest  while depressive symptoms stayed unchanged in the wlc group . table  <dig> provides an overview of ptsd and depression severity scores at pre- and posttest for each treatment group. four months after therapy, almost half of the net group  did not fulfill the diagnostic criteria of ptsd anymore. all patients of the wlc condition still met diagnosis of ptsd after matched waiting periods. in the net group, within-treatment effect sizes were d =  <dig>  for the caps score and d =  <dig>  for the ham-d score. in the wlc condition, effect sizes were d = - <dig>  for the caps score and d = - <dig>  for the ham-d score.

note: change scores were analyzed with repeated measures anovas.

changes in medication status from pre- to posttest were little: at posttest, only two treated patients still took antidepressants  and none still took anxiolytics . at posttest, four wlc-patients were medicated with antidepressants  and one was medicated with neuroleptics .

minimum norm estimates 
in a former study, we found a significant reduced activity towards aversive pictures in the left occipital cortex in ptsd patients compared to healthy controls  <cit> . as we found no differences of the cortical activation between healthy controls and ptsd subjects in response of pleasant pictures, only changes in the neural activity for the unpleasant picture are reported here. healthy controls, as mentioned in figure  <dig>  overlap to a great extent with the sample reported in the catani et al. sample.

at pretest, cortical source activation towards aversive pictures did not differ between net and wlc group at any dipole location .

with respect to the time × treatment interaction, the permutation test revealed a significant effect in the superior parietal cortex , which is shown in figure  <dig>  to illustrate the effects, unpaired t-tests were calculated within this region of interest for both recording sessions . means of the time effect in occipital regions and the threat effect in parietal regions are shown separately for net and wlc patients in figure  <dig> 

permutation statistics calculated within each group resulted in a significant time effect, only in the net group. patients treated with net showed an increase of cortical activity towards threatening stimuli at left occipital brain regions  from pre- to posttest. this effect was confirmed by paired t-tests . in the wlc group, cortical source activity did not differ in this cortical region between pretest and posttest . figure  <dig> shows time effects for each group separately.

discussion
the present randomized controlled treatment trial shows that narrative exposure therapy was effective for the treatment of ptsd symptoms and comorbid depression in traumatized survivors of war and torture. furthermore, net changed neural correlates of the processing of aversive stimuli. specifically, treatment increased the activity of the superior parietal cortex. in addition, patients treated with net showed an augmentation in occipital activation. these results point at potential neuronal mechanisms underlying effective psychotherapy for ptsd.

after therapy, treated ptsd patients showed a significant increase in parietal activity towards aversive pictures compared to the waitlist controls. even though some studies point to the involvement of the parietal cortex in ptsd  <cit> , until recently, no consistent theory exists about its specific role in this disorder. the parietal cortex is traditionally associated with attentional processes  <cit> . recent studies, however, showed that the parietal cortex is also relevant in episodic memory retrieval  <cit> . it can be speculated that the increase of parietal activity in treated patients in the present study, represents voluntary top-down episodic memory search that was trained through the procedure of net, which requires the detailed access to previously avoided episodic memory content. it seems that after the perception of a potentially threatening cue, this voluntary memory search is helpful in evaluating the dangerousness of the stimulus on the basis of previous experiences including the traumatic events. this assumption is in line with current theories of emotional processing in ptsd that attribute changes in exposure therapy to the increasing ability to disentangle past experiences and current threat  <cit> . accordingly, successful therapy counteracts attentional avoidance and enhances efficient memory retrieval so that patients are able to identify aversive stimuli as reminders of past experiences rather than as currently dangerous.

furthermore, a significant increase in activity in left occipital brain regions during aversive stimulation from pre- to posttest was only found in the net group. several studies have reported reduced cortical reactivity to threat cues in ptsd patients than non-traumatized control subjects in posterior brain areas. catani et al.   <cit>  demonstrated that ptsd patients showed a smaller affective modulation of occipital regions in response to aversive pictures than the control participants. moreover, felmingham et al.   <cit>  also found a reduced erp signal in ptsd in response to affective faces. these results were interpreted as attentional disengagement or cognitive avoidance of aversive stimuli in ptsd. the finding that only treated patients showed an increase of activity in occipital brain regions after therapy can be interpreted as an enhancement of visual processing of threat cues. as the increase of occipital activity, however, did not reach significance in the group × time interaction in the permutation analysis, we have to be cautious about the interpretation of this result. future studies are needed to replicate our findings with larger sample sizes.

interestingly, the increase of occipital activation in the net group was only present in the left hemisphere. this unilateral enhancement of cortical activity in treated patients is consistent with recent studies finding alterations of lateralization in ptsd  <cit> . while the left hemisphere is associated with approach motivation and verbal processing, the right hemisphere is associated with withdrawal motivation and nonverbal, perceptual processing  <cit> . in ptsd, trauma memory retrieval is mainly accompanied by right hemispheric activation explaining the nonverbal nature of intrusions and the fragmented, incoherent nature of trauma narratives  <cit> . according to brewin's dual representation theory of ptsd, our finding of increased left hemispheric activation in posterior areas after therapy might reflect the activation of higher order, verbally mediated processes that reduce intrusions  <cit> .

there are a number of limitations of the present study, which illustrate the challenges of studying neural correlates in a sample of severely traumatized participants. one limitation is the loss of meg data sets of  <dig> participants after randomization procedure. these dropouts were mostly related to participants' refusal of meg assessment, poor quality meg data, and participants' inability to complete the study as a result of deportation due to a denial of asylum by the german authorities. importantly, these participants did not differ in any clinical variable compared to the study completers. moreover, none of the participants dropped out of net treatment voluntarily. compared to average dropout rates of 20% during ongoing therapy reported in treatment studies using exposure and non-exposure treatments of ptsd  <cit> , this finding is particularly noteworthy and shows that net is well tolerated even by severely traumatized refugees with an unstable asylum status. however, we cannot rule out that with a larger sample size we might have found other involved brain areas. another limitation of this study is that a significant number of patients took antidepressant and neuroleptic medication. however, as there were no differences between treatment groups with respect to intake of medication, pharmacological effects as an alternative explanation for net induced changes are improbable. while we found a simultaneous reduction in ptsd, depression as well as neuronal indicators of the attentive system, we are not able to interrelate these changes on an individual basis due to our small sample size. larger trials are needed to test whether the change of the attentive system is causally related to a reduction of ptsd as assumed by our theoretical foundation. moreover, without an active control condition, we cannot rule out the contribution of unspecific treatment ingredients for the causation of any effects. finally, based on the results of the present study, we cannot determine whether the cortical activity reflects a specific response towards trauma-related stimuli or towards high arousing aversive pictures in general. as the majority of pictures showed human attacks, war scenes or injuries, most of them might have triggered memories related to the individual traumatic experiences. it remains a challenging task for future investigations to disentangle these responses.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our findings indicate that narrative exposure therapy causes an increase of parietal cortical activity related to the processing of aversive pictures that can be interpreted as a re-establishment of cortical top-down regulation of attention towards these stimuli. net seems to induce an improvement in episodic memory retrieval that prevents treated patients from being overwhelmed by their own traumatic memories when confronted with aversive or threatening stimuli. patients treated with net are able to rely on more elaborate episodic memory contents. they are therefore enabled to re-appraise the direct danger of the current situation, thereby interrupting their former pathological defensive reaction.

