BACKGROUND
alternative splicing  is suggested to be a major source of transcriptome/proteome complexity and gene function diversity  <cit> , and highly relevant to several human diseases  <cit> . as is also reported to alter important protein features, such as phosphorylation, glycosylation, and transmembrane helices  <cit> . bioinformatics studies based on expressed sequence tag  database estimate that between 30% and 60% of all human genes undergo as  <cit> . however, the exact extent of as in the human genome remains uncertain and est/mrna information in mammals other than human and mouse is still very limited. therefore, it is likely that a considerable number of human as transcripts remain unknown, and even more as variants are to be discovered in other est-scanty mammals. moreover, adequate information of as variants in more mammalian species other than human and mouse can further our understanding on the evolution of as and its implications in functional divergence. hence, it is desirable to identify unannotated as variants and evolutionarily meaningful as events in mammals, particularly in species of which as events have remained largely undiscovered.

as exons are suggested to evolve fast in mammals  <cit> . the high evolution rate of as exons may have caused remarkable inter-species divergence of as patterns, which in turn can result in different protein structures and functions. to further understand mammalian functional divergence in view of as evolution, it is important to analyze species-specific as exons  and conserved as exons . species-specific as variants can result in functional novelty by changing the length, composition, structure, and/or transcriptional and translational regulation of proteins in the affected species, leading to remarkable functional disparity between orthologous proteins  <cit> . on the other hand, conserved as variants represent functionally important transcripts that tend to preserve such features as length, exon-intron boundaries, number of exons, reading frame, introns flanking as exons, and so on  <cit> . in other words, conserved as variants serve to form the framework of critical biological functions across species, while species-specific as events constitute a mechanism to develop novel protein functions that occur only in the affected species. therefore, it is important to perform a systematical analysis to identify potential species-specific and conserved as events in mammals.

the simplest way of determining species-specificity of as events is to check inter-species differences in as patterns based on est information. however, the limited availability of est information seriously restricts the application of such approaches. in contrast, comparative computational approaches can circumvent this shortcoming and identify as events without est data. nevertheless, previous comparative computational studies mainly focus on identification of cassette-off exons  based on sequence features of conserved as variants  <cit> . meanwhile, cassette-on exons  and retained introns  have remained relatively unexplored. note that these cassette-on exons and retained introns represent not only novel as events but also novel exonic sequences, which are different from cassette-off exons because the latter represent novel as events formed by known exons. these two as exon types are important because they can insert additional amino acids into existing proteins and potentially can alter the structure and/or function of the affected proteins. in particular, retained introns may cause drastic changes by changing the number of exons and eliminating existing exon-intron boundaries. therefore, it is desirable to identify these less studied as exons and infer their functional and evolutionary implications in mammals. with the combination of cassette-on exon, retained intron, and cassette-off exon, a more complete view of as evolution in mammals can be obtained than if only one of these as exon types is studied.

in this study, we propose a new cross-species est-to-genome approach named enace , which extracts novel exonic sequences of one species  from ests of another species . the extracted exons are compared with existing est libraries to confirm that they do not overlap any ests of the target species. as three species  are considered here, the study consists of six enace identification processes: eh-m, em-h, eh-r, er-h, em-r, and er-m, where the uppercase subscript stands for the target species and the lowercase subscript for the source species. for example, eh-m indicates the enace process for extracting human  novel exonic regions based on mouse  ests. we denote the enace predicted novel exonic regions as the "enace exons". here "novel" indicates lack of annotations in public databases  or supporting evidence from the-same-species ests for the existence of enace exons. note that all the enace exons are either cassette-on exons or retained introns. for the novel exons identified, it is of primary interest to understand their biological and evolutionary significance. two functional features of enace exons, including potential protein domains and gene ontology  categories, are analyzed. in addition, two evolutionary analyses, namely the nonsynonymous-to-synonymous substitution ratio test  and calculation of the conservation level of enace exons among human, mouse, and rat, are performed. since enace is a comparative approach, we are able to study species-specific exons or exon gain/loss events that occurred during mammalian evolution by analyzing enace results. the evolutionary implications of enace results are also discussed.

RESULTS
outline of the enace strategy
enace makes use of cross-species est-to-genome conservation to extract novel exonic sequences in human, mouse, and rat. the novel exonic sequences identified can be also regarded as as events. figure  <dig> illustrates the enace design. this study includes six enace as identification processes as stated above . here we take the eh-m process as an example to describe the enace system. as shown in figure 1b, the proposed enace process consists of two major steps:  <dig>  identification of novel exonic regions; and  <dig>  analyses and validation of the as variants identified. for the first step, we use the psep annotator  <cit>  to identify mouse est fragments conserved in the human genome . ests thus obtained are compared with known human transcripts  and human ests. the matching ests that overlap with known human transcripts/ests are discarded. thus, the remaining exonic sequences are defined as novel exons with est evidence from a non-human species but not from human itself. note that, see figure 2a for an example, enace rules that the flanking exons  of the newly identified exon  must overlap with a known human transcript  to avoid false positive detections. therefore, the enace system can only identify internal exons. in addition, the enace-identified novel exons are either cassette-on exons  or retained introns . the extracted cassette-on exons are further processed because the est-to-genome matching procedure  requires high level of sequence identity  <cit> , which may considerably reduce the alignable lengths and make the annotated cassette-on exons shorter than they should be. therefore, the mouse ests that support enace-identified cassette-on exons are blasted against the corresponding human introns to obtain the maximal alignable sequences . if the extended sequences cover the full range of the corresponding introns, they are annotated as retained introns rather than cassette-on exons.

the potential novel exonic regions have to pass the following rules: for cassette-on exons, they must be flanked by ag-gt/ag-gc legal splicing sites ; for both cassette-on exons and retained introns that are located in coding sequences , they must not disrupt the reading frame  and must contain no premature stop codons . note that a novel exon is referred to as "located in cds"  if such an exon is located in an intron flanked by coding exons of the target species. on the other hand, if a novel exon is located between an untranslated region  and a coding exon, or between two utrs, it is referred to as "located in utr" .

exons that pass the three rules mentioned above are further analyzed for functional and evolutionary features, and experimentally validated using rt-pcr-sequencing . the functional analyses include protein domain analysis and go classification, whereas the evolutionary analyses include the ka/ks ratio test and cross-species conservation analysis that determines, for example, whether the identified eh-m exons are conserved in the rat genome or ests. the workflow stated above also applies to the other five enace processes: em-h, eh-r, er-h, em-r, and er-m.

novel exonic regions identified by enace
the numbers of novel exonic regions identified in the six enace processes are shown in table  <dig>  more than  <dig>  novel exonic regions  are extracted by enace initially, and  <dig> of them pass the three filtering rules. of these  <dig> enace exons,  <dig>  are located in cds, and the other  <dig>  in utr . note that the number of identified retained introns is much smaller than that of cassette-on exons . the reason may be that intron retention is responsible for only a very low percentage  of all as events  <cit>  and it exhibits in less than 5% of all genes  <cit> . on the other hand, it is noteworthy that the majority of extracted retained introns in cds do not pass rules  <dig> and  <dig>  a possible explanation is that a substantial number of retained introns may be derived from aberrant or artefactual est data  <cit> . nevertheless, it is also likely that such retained introns have been preserved in the source species while lost in the target species, or they may be gained by the source species after lineage divergence. either way, these potential lineage-specific retained introns may be evolutionarily important because they may change the number of exons in the affected genes and may influence expression regulation mechanisms such as nonsense-mediated decay  <cit> . meanwhile, the number of enace utr exons is smaller than that of enace cds exons because enace identifies only internal exons. whereas enace cds exons are functionally important by inserting extra amino acids, enace utr exons may be critical to transcriptional and translational regulation  <cit> . therefore, the large number of novel exons identified in this study may lead to new findings in transcriptomics and proteomics studies on the three species involved.

in summary, as many as ~80% of meta-enace exons , which exist in the source species, are observed to lack canonical splicing signals or have disrupted reading frames or premature stop codons in the target species. these exons can be regarded specific to the source species, which may have evolved fast and play a unique part in evolution by increasing the rate of evolutionary changes  <cit> . on the other hand, the enace exons  represent both newly identified exons conserved between the target and source species and novel as events in the target species. such novel as events are either specific to the target species  or they may be conserved between the target and source species . the two scenarios can be distinguished by using existing tools  <cit>  to check whether these exons also undergo as in the source species.

our results also indicate that two major factors, namely inter-species divergence and est coverage level, may determine the number of novel exons identified  in the enace system. taking cassette-on exons as an example , although the number of est entries for human  is larger than that for mouse , the number of novel exons identified in eh-m  and em-h  are very close. therefore, it is the divergence between human and mouse  that determines how many novel exons can be identified in this case. another evidence is found in the comparison of cassette-on exons identified in eh-r  and em-r , in which the same est data set  is applied but eh-r yields a much smaller number of exons because of the longer divergence time between human and rat than between mouse and rat. on the other hand, an example for the influence of est coverage level can be seen in the comparison between eh-r and er-h. only  <dig> novel cassette-on exons are identified in eh-r, which is much smaller than that for er-h , though the two species involved are the same in the two processes. the observation indicates that the number of enace exons is positively related to the number of est entries available. the same situation is also observed in the different results of em-r  and er-m . meanwhile, the large number of  <dig> novel rat exons identified is noteworthy. it shows the value of this cross-species approach because we can identify a considerable number of novel as transcripts and exons for a species that has only limited est information  by comparing its genomic sequences with the abundant est information from a closely related species .

characteristics of enace cds exons
for protein-coding retained introns, it is noteworthy that the average length of the "new" exons that include enace retained intron and the flanking exons previously annotated is fairly large . the reason is that approximately half of these retained introns are located either between the first and the second coding exon, or between the last and the second last coding exons. the first and the last coding exons are often part of a large exon that also contains utrs. therefore, a newly identified retained intron serves to connect such a utr-including exon and their neighboring coding exon, resulting in a single large exon. it is also worth noting that six of the enace retained introns connect the exons of originally two-exon transcripts to make single-exon transcripts . moreover, enace retained introns  are significantly shorter than nonretained introns , which is consistent with previous observations  <cit> .

functional analyses of enace cds exons
for protein domain preservation, as shown in figure 3b, the majority of enace exons do not overlap any protein domains according to the interpro annotation  <cit> . the finding is consistent with the results of kriventseva et al.  <cit>  and yeo et al <cit> , who observed that as tended not to locate within protein domains. this observation implies that the addition of enace exons to the affected transcripts may not alter the functional domains in the original protein architecture. therefore, the normal functions of the affected proteins can be preserved and at the same time the newly added sequences may be allowed to evolve and develop new functions.

evolutionary analyses of enace cds exons
to probe the evolutionary significances of the enace cds exons, two analyses are performed: the ka/ks ratio test and conservation of enace exons in the ests or genome of "the third species" .

in figure 4a, it is clear that the majority of enace exons  do not pass the ka/ks ratio test  in all enace processes. the observation indicates that most of enace exons are not subject to stringent selective constraint. the proportion of the enace exons that fail the ka/ks ratio test is much larger than that of overall human-mouse orthologous exons  observed by nekrutenko et al.  <cit>  the difference can be ascribed to two reasons. first, enace exons are likely minor-form exons both in the target and the source species. such exons are suggested to have higher rates of evolution and may be under relaxed negative selection or positive selection pressure  <cit> . second, the lengths of enace exons tend to be short. the short lengths of enace exons may provide insufficient information for the ka/ks ratio test to be effective  <cit> . in addition, it is worth noting that the percentages of enace cassette-on exons that fail the test in em-r and er-m  are considerably larger than those in the other four enace processes. the reason may be that rodents have a higher mutation rate than human because of their shorter generation time  <cit> . furthermore, the percentage of enace retained introns that fail the test is also larger than 90%. this is because  <dig> of the  <dig> retained introns are identified from mouse-rat comparisons. in brief, though the ka/ks ratio test is very powerful in detecting evolutionarily conserved regions, it is not suitable for identifying short and fast-evolving exonic regions such as those identified by enace.

for the three-species conservation study, we analyze three cases: case  <dig>  rat vs. eh-m and em-h exons; case  <dig>  mouse vs. eh-r and er-h exons; and case  <dig>  human vs. em-r and er-m exons . for each case, enace exons are assigned to one of three conditions:  the exons are conserved in both the ests and the genome of third species, or  they are conserved only in the genome of the third species; or  they are not conserved in the third species. note that an enace exon is assigned to condition  only when the exon and its flanking exons are all conserved in the third species. this criterion can reduce the possibility of non-specific matching between an enace exon and the genome of the third species. also note that the enace exons in condition  can be regarded as exons specific to the target and source species . for example, as shown in figure 4b, the proportion of the mouse-rat specific enace exons  is significantly larger than those of human-mouse and human-rat  specific enace exons . the reason is clear: mouse and rat are more closely related to each other than they are to human. it is noteworthy that the ~20% of human-mouse  specific exons probably had existed in the common ancestor of human and rodents but were lost in rat  after the divergence between mouse and rat. meanwhile, the 61% rodent-specific exons could be either gained or lost in the rodent lineage after the divergence between human and rodents. in either case, these lineage-specific exons may be evolutionarily important in conveying inter-lineage protein structural or functional divergence.

also worth noting is the observation that the proportion of condition  enace exons in case  <dig>  is significantly larger than those in both cases  <dig> and  <dig> . the reason of the difference between cases  <dig> and  <dig> may be the larger est coverage in mouse than in rat. hence a large portion of human-rat enace exons can find matches in mouse ests, while only a relatively small percentage of human-mouse enace exons can find matches in rat ests. on the other hand, the difference between cases  <dig> and case  <dig> may be ascribed partly to the longer divergence time between human and rodents than that between rodents. overall, our results show that enace is capable of identifying not only novel exons but also lineage-specific exons that are involved in as events, which makes enace a convenient tool for as and evolutionary studies.

experimental validation of enace cds exons
to experimentally test the predicted exons, nine sets of enace cds exons are chosen for rt-pcr-sequencing validation. these include cassette-on exons from six enace processes, retained introns from human-rodent comparisons , and retained introns in em-r and er-m . an example of rt-pcr results is given in figure  <dig>  and the validation results are summarized in table  <dig>  eighty-three percent of enace cassette-on exons from human-mouse comparisons are experimentally validated. similarly, 50%, 67%, 75%, and 58% for eh-r, er-h, em-r, and er-m, respectively, are experimentally verified. for retained introns, 80% for both human-rodent comparisons and em-r, and 60% for er-m are validated. overall, the experiments indicate that at least 50% of the enace exons tested are observed to be novel exons as well as novel alternatively spliced exons in tissues of the target species. these experimental results support the high rates of presence of enace exons .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we identify as many as ~ <dig> novel exons with a comparative algorithm based on cross-species est-to-genome comparisons. these novel exons also represent novel as events because they are either cassette-on exons or retained introns with no previous transcript evidence. subsequent experimental validation shows that more than 50% of the predicted novel exons are actually included in the transcripts of the target species. the algorithm is different from existing ones because it can identify exons that will otherwise be omitted in other approaches such as the ones based on the-same-species est information  <cit> , computational properties  <cit> , or evolutionary properties . in addition, the cross-species approach has a unique advantage that it can detect as events and novel exons for est-scanty species by applying rich est data from a closely related species. the mouse-rat comparisons exemplify how mouse ests can effectively help identify as exons in rat. furthermore, the enace algorithm is capable of identifying species-specific, lineage-specific and conserved exons, and exons that may be gained or lost in one of the compared species. these exons may be interesting targets for evolutionary and biomedical studies.

