BACKGROUND
species in the genus xiphophorus  are small live-bearing freshwater fish that are distributed from northern mexico to belize and honduras  <cit> . poeciliids have been widely studied in fields ranging from ecology, evolution, genetics, and genomics to systematics  <cit> . these fish have been investigated in an effort to improve our understanding of the evolution of several life-history and behavioral traits including viviparity  <cit> , the placenta  <cit>  and female mating preference for exaggerated male traits such as the sword. the sexually selected sword trait is generally assumed to have arisen through “sensory exploitation” and a “pre-existing bias”  <cit> . more recently, fish of this group have also been the foci of studies aimed at uncovering the genetic mechanisms underlying evolutionary processing during speciation  <cit> .

the genus xiphophorus is particularly interesting from an evolutionary perspective because several of its species have a unique morphological feature, the “sword”. the “sword-bearing” species of xiphophorus, are called swordtails, and the others, that lack the sword, are called platyfish. their males lack this male specific trait - a conspicuously colored elongation of the ventral rays of the caudal fin  <cit> . the investigation of this unique feature has provided many interesting evolutionary insights, particularly in regards to open issues in the field of sexual selection. the evolution of this exaggerated male trait appears to be detrimental to the males’ survival, since, although it is attractive to females, it also makes them more conspicuous to predators  <cit> .

the pre-existing bias hypothesis  <cit>  was proposed to explain best the evolution of the sword  <cit> . this is based on a traditional phylogeny of the genus that places the platies basal to the more derived swordtails and laboratory choice experiments that showed that platy females prefer heterospecific sworded males over their non-sworded conspecific males  <cit> . the traditional phylogenetic hypothesis therefore suggested that the females’ preference for the sword arose before the trait itself, and hence, the female preference might have driven the subsequent evolution of the males’ trait. the pre-existing bias hypothesis relies on an explicit phylogenetic hypothesis and can therefore be tested  <cit> .

however, recent molecular phylogenetic studies suggested that the swordless platy species may instead be more derived than the more basally-placed sworded lineages  <cit> . this tree topology called the applicability of the pre-existing bias hypothesis for the evolution of the sword into question since the reconstruction of the evolution of the sword based on the molecular phylogeny suggested that the sword originated in the ancestor of this genus and was lost repeatedly and independently during the evolutionary history of this genus  <cit> . this topology further suggests that the females’ bias for swords might have been retained in the derived, but non-sworded platyfish species  <cit> . but subsequent testing of female preferences for swords among poeciliid species outside the genus xiphophorus, namely of priapella, showed that females of these species also preferred sworded males  <cit> . since priapella is one of the closest genera to xiphophorus <cit>  and priapella, just as all other poeciliid males do not have swords, their females’ preference for swords, would tend to lend support again to the pre-existing bias hypothesis as the best explanation for the initial evolution of the sword.

obviously, the correct phylogeny for the genus is important for the inferred history of the sword. several previous studies have performed analyses of ancestral state reconstruction of the sword in the genus xiphophorus to understand its evolutionary history and to test for the pre-existing bias hypothesis. some studies differed from each other in terms of how the sword was scored since some species are polymorphic in length or coloration of the sword. this, as well as whether parsimony or maximum likelihood was used, could somewhat alter results of the ancestral state reconstruction  <cit> . based on the molecular phylogeny “sworded” was inferred to be the ancestral condition for all xiphophorus species when caudal extension  was considered a sword  <cit> , whereas its ancestral state was inconsistent - when short extension was assigned to another state   <cit> . wiens and morris  <cit>  argued that uncolored “protrusion” should not be scored as a sword since the pre-existing bias was demonstrated through female preference for colored caudal extension  <cit> . they also demonstrated that “swordless” is an ancestral condition in their parsimony analysis supporting the pre-existing bias for the evolutionary origin of the sword. however, a likelihood reconstruction using the same description of the sword  favored by basolo  <cit>  and wiens and morris  <cit> , again resulted in an uncertain ancestral state  <cit> . since the evolution of female preferences for swords has become a textbook example for the pre-existing bias hypothesis we, therefore, revisited this issue here based on the most comprehensive phylogeny, so far, most comprehensive, both in terms of taxa and markers.

many of the previous phylogenetic analyses of this genus have been conducted solely  based on either mitochondrial or morphological characters and the recently described four new species  were not included in any phylogenetic analysis so far. since ancestral state reconstructions need to be performed based on the most comprehensive phylogeny using different sword descriptions and different reconstruction methods  to understand the origin of the sword more clearly we set out to do this here.

hybridization has been claimed to be one of the major modes for the origin of new species in some evolutionary lineages  <cit>  and natural hybridization events between distinct populations or closely related taxa have been reported in various plants and animal taxa . introgressive hybridization has been observed also in some lineages of freshwater fishes, for instance, whitefish  <cit> , lake tanganyikan cichlids  <cit>  and cyprinid fish  <cit> . hybrid speciation by comparison, has been documented only rarely  <cit> . the role of natural hybridization in speciation is still debated due to the general observation of decreased fitness and sterility of hybrids  <cit> .

it turns out that xiphophorus fish are an excellent model system for examining the role of hybridization in speciation since we previously discovered that one species of this genus might be of hybrid origin  <cit> . discordance between different types of molecular markers is routinely recognized as evidence for hybridization events, and such discordance has been uncovered, for example, in flies  <cit> , goats  <cit> , leaf monkeys  <cit>  and vipers  <cit> . previously, meyer et al.  <cit>  found a discrepancy in the placement of the swordtail species, x. clemenciae, in mitochondrial versus nuclear marker based phylogenetic trees. xiphophorus clemenciae, a southern swordtail, grouped with the southern swordtails in the nuclear phylogeny  <cit> , but was assigned to the southern platyfish lineage in the mitochondrial phylogeny. meyer et al.  <cit>  suggested that x. clemenciae originated in a relatively ancient hybridization event between a swordless female platyfish from a geographically widespread lineage such as x. maculatus, and a similarly widespread southern swordtail species, such as x. hellerii. additional lines of evidence, including laboratory mate choice trials, the intermediate length of the sword in x. clemenciae and artificially produced hybrids relative to the two putative close relatives of the parental species, x. maculatus and x. hellerii <cit> , further support the hypothesis of a hybrid origin of x. clemenciae. interestingly, on-going hybridization has been reported to occur between the northern swordtails x. malinche and x. birchmanni <cit>  and hybrids can be produced under laboratory conditions for most species in this genus  <cit> .

although the origin and evolution of the sword  <cit>  and the role of hybridization in the genus xiphophorus <cit>  have been addressed before, some of the phylogenetic relationships in this genus still remained uncertain. traditionally, the genus xiphophorus has been suggested to consist of four major lineages based on their geographical distributions and other phenotypic traits   <cit> . the monophyly and the relationships among those four lineages are not consistently supported in phylogenetic studies using molecular or combined molecular and morphological traits. for example, it has been difficult to assign x. andersi <cit>  to any specific lineage and inconsistent phylogenetic placements were found based on morphological characters and molecular based phylogenetic analyses  <cit> . xiphophorus andersi has some platy as well as some swordtail features – it is an elongated – swordtail-like – species, but lacks the pronounced, colored ventral extension of the caudal fin. also, geographical distributions of some species are inconsistent with those of other members of the lineages to which they were assigned; for example, a southern platyfish, x. xiphidium occurs further north than the northern swordtails  <cit>  .

the northern swordtail lineage has received much attention from researchers because of its remarkable diversity in sexual and ecological traits  <cit> , but the phylogenetic relationships among some of its nine described species remain incompletely resolved as well, hindering the interpretation of data in a phylogenetic context. rauchenberger et al.  <cit>  presented a comprehensive phylogeny using morphology, pigmentation and electrophoretic characters and suggested that there are three clades within this group – the montezumae clade , the pygmaeus clade  and the cortezi clade . however, these clades have not been consistently supported in subsequent phylogenetic studies using morphology, molecular data or a combination of those   <cit> .

recently, four additional species have been described in this genus: x. kallmani, x. mayae, x. mixei and x. monticolus . all these four new species are southern swordtails based on their geographical origins and phenotypic characteristics  <cit> . yet, their molecular phylogenetic relationships to the other xiphophorus species have not been examined so far.

here, we conduct a comprehensive molecular phylogenetic analysis of the genus xiphophorus that includes also these four newly described species. by using more informative nuclear markers, we aim to provide a better understanding of the phylogeny of this entire genus, its evolutionary history, and the evolution of the sword. we discovered that one of the newly described species, x. monticolus, is likely to have originated from an ancient hybridization event, as we found x. clemenciae to be the case before.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses
we reconstructed the phylogenetic relationships of the genus xiphophorus, including four newly described species, using four different methods . two mitochondrial  and eleven nuclear loci  were used for phylogenetic analyses. since mitochondrial and nuclear dna have different evolutionary histories, mitochondrial and nuclear phylogenetic trees were separately reconstructed. the total lengths of the aligned sequences used for the mitochondrial and nuclear phylogenies were  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp, respectively; of which  <dig>  nucleotide sites were variable and  <dig>  of those were parsimony informative for the mitochondrial loci, whereas  <dig>  nucleotide positions were variable and  <dig>  of those were informative for the nuclear loci. in addition, we reconstructed the phylogeny using a combination of the mitochondrial and nuclear data  to provide an overall view of evolutionary relationships of xiphophorus using all data . this combined tree showed nearly identical phylogenetic relationships among the major lineages  with the nuclear tree. two species, priapella compressa and p. olmecae, were selected as outgroups considering previously published phylogenies of the family poeciliidae  <cit>  as well as our recently reconstructed poeciliid phylogeny . both previous poeciliid phylogenies  <cit>  independently support several different species as closely related taxa to xiphophorus, although with very low support and conflicting relationships. our recent poeciliid phylogeny , which is based on several mitochondrial and nuclear dna markers combined  and is the largest data set so far and provides support for the genera heterandria and priapella being the most closely related taxa to xiphophorus; however, heterandria showed a longer branch than priapella in the phylogeny, which is also consistent with a recent rad-marker based xiphophorus phylogeny from the meyer laboratory . genetic diversity indices and evolutionary models for each locus are shown in table  <dig> 

nucleotide diversity  and standard error  estimate were calculated using mega  <dig>   <cit> . nucleotide diversity indicates estimates of average sequence divergence across all sequence-pairs. se was estimated by a bootstrap procedure . the best-fit evolutionary model was selected for each gene as well as for combined entire sequences of mitochondrial and nuclear genes using jmodeltest under the akaike information criterion  <cit> .

mitochondrial phylogeny
the phylogeny based on the mtdna markers placed the northern swordtails as the sister group to the clade formed by southern swordtails and platyfish , which is consistent with previous mitochondrial phylogenies  <cit> . but the sister group relationship between the platyfish and the southern swordtails was supported by only moderate bootstrap values  in all phylogenetic estimations  .

whereas xiphophorus monticolus, although clearly phenotypically a southern swordtail, was placed with the southern platy group, the other three newly described species  were placed in the southern swordtail clade. the monophyly based on mtdna of the southern swordtails, except x. clemenciae and x. monticolus, was supported with high bayesian posterior probabilities  and quite convincing bootstrap values , but the phylogenetic relationships within this southern swordtail group could not be resolved with high phylogenetic confidence.

the monophyly of the northern swordtail lineage was supported, albeit only with moderate bootstrap values , but the phylogenetic positions of x. birchmanni and x. pygmaeus were not consistent among the four different phylogenetic analysis methods. overall, the recovered phylogeny of the  <dig> species of xiphophorus was almost identical to our previous 22-taxa mtdna-phylogeny  <cit> .

nuclear phylogeny
the phylogeny based on eleven nuclear loci  provided good evidence for the monophyly of the platyfish plus x. andersi with high bayesian posterior probabilities  and high bootstrap values  for maximum likeli-hood . the monophyly of the northern platies was invariably strongly supported in all types of phylogenetic inferences, whereas the monophyly of the southern platyfish was not supported .

the monophyly of the northern swordtails was strongly supported by all phylogenetic analyses , whereas the southern swordtails were resolved as paraphyletic in some analyses. we found that the position of the two major lineages of swordtails in relation to the platies was differently resolved between the nuclear dna and mtdna phylogenies – and hasten to note, that the alternative topologies were relatively weakly supported only. specifically, the platies  were more closely related to the southern swordtails than the northern swordtails in the mtdna phylogeny, whereas the northern swordtail clade was identified as the sister group to the platies in the nuclear dna phylogeny .

although the monophyly of the northern swordtails was strongly supported by all phylogenetic analyses , within the northern swordtails, only two clades  were well-supported. both sets of markers supported the monophyly of the northern swordtails, however, internal relationships were not clearly resolved in whole species phylogenies.

contrary to the mtdna-based tree, all four newly described species were grouped with previously recognized southern swordtail species  <cit> . our data provide high support for both the clemenciae and hellerii clades  including all the newly described species in all phylogenetic methods . two of the newly described species, x. mixei and x. monticolus, group together with x. clemenciae , whereas the other two new species, x. mayae and x. kallmani, group with the remaining southern swordtails including x. hellerii  .

the analyses of the nuclear dna data suggest that the hellerii clade is basal to all other swordtails and platies, and – tentatively – the clemenciae clade is the sister group to the northern swordtails plus the platies. while bi and ml  methods suggest that the southern swordtails are paraphyletic, nj and mp methods support their monophyly with bootstrap values of  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. we stress that the hypothesis of monophyly of the southern swordtails could not be rejected  and we  have a very large radseq data set that also supports the monophyly of southern swordtails and their basal placement in the genus as sister to the platies+northern swordtails. therefore, we continue to regard the monophyly of the southern swordtails to be more strongly supported. our radseq  data set  on this issue provides the strongest phylogenetic support yet for the monophyly of the southern swordtails based on a data set of about  <dig>  snps. it remains an open issue why these four phylogenetic methods suggest a different basal node for the genus based on mtdna and nuclear data sets.

discrepancy between mtdna and nuclear dna phylogenies: indication for a hybrid origin of xiphophorus monticolus
our extended phylogenetic analyses, including six new nuclear loci  and four new species, now provide evidence for the hypothesis of a hybrid origin of two xiphophorus species, x. clemenciae and x. monticolus. incongruence was found in the placement of both of these southern swordtail species between the mitochondrial and nuclear phylogenies  in that mitochondrially those two species were placed among the southern platies and, based on nuclear dna sequences, these two species of southern swordtails were resolved to be part of the southern swordtail clade – a rather distant lineage of the genus they clearly belong to phenotypically. these results confirm the previously reported discrepancy in the placement of x. clemenciae <cit>  and suggest that an additional species, x. monticolus, also arose through similar mechanisms.

therefore, the observed incongruence was further analyzed to determine whether the mtdna phylogeny is indeed different from the nuclear tree with respect to the positions of x. monticolus and x. clemenciae. we compared both best mitochondrial and nuclear ml unconstrained trees  with their best ml constrained trees. in the mitochondrial data set, the best ml unconstrained tree  was strongly favored in comparison to the constrained tree, which placed: 1) x. monticolus with x. mixei and 2) x. monticolus with x. mixei and x. clemenciae, similar to the nuclear tree   <cit> . in the nuclear data set, the best ml unconstrained tree  was significantly better at “explaining” the nuclear data set than the best ml constrained tree, which assigned to 1) x. monticolus with the platies or 2) x. monticolus with the platies, apart from x. maculatus . both phylogenetic hypotheses that place x. clemenciae and x. monticolus with the platies in the nuclear phylogeny, and that group these species with the southern swordtails in the mitochondrial phylogeny were strongly rejected .

p-values were estimated by au  and sh  tests implemented in consel  <cit>  .

if x. monticolus arose by hybridization, closely related extant taxa might be genetically close to the putative maternal and paternal species. in the mitochondrial phylogeny, x. monticolus is closely related to platies such as x. evelynae, x. variatus, x. milleri and x. maculatus with  <dig> %,  <dig> %,  <dig> % and  <dig> % sequence divergence, respectively. in the nuclear phylogeny, x. monticolus was grouped however, with x. clemenciae and x. mixei . the taxa most genetically similar to x. monticolus, apart from the clemenciae clade , in the nuclear tree were x. mayae and x. signum with  <dig> % and  <dig> % sequence divergence. these data provide some hints as to the timing, species identity of the maternal and paternal lineages, and phylogeography of the hybridization event .

northern swordtail phylogeny
the relationships among the nine northern swordtail species differed more between the mtdna and nuclear dna phylogenies . because species of the northern swordtail lineage are used by several laboratories for behavioral ecological work and as model for study of evolutionary questions, we, therefore, conducted additional analyses on the northern swordtails only - based on the nuclear and mitochondrial data sets separately and also combined both data sets  – in an effort to resolve the phylogenetic relationships among the species in this lineage. for these analyses, two platyfish species  were used as outgroups . aligned nucleotide sequences of the mitochondrial loci contained  <dig> variable sites and  <dig> of those were parsimony informative with  <dig>   of average p-distance, whereas the nuclear loci exhibited  <dig> variable sites and  <dig> of those were informative with  <dig>  . the best-fit evolutionary models chosen  for the mitochondrial and nuclear loci were tpm1uf+i+g and tpm1uf+g, respectively. the combined mitochondrial and nuclear alignments contained  <dig> variable sites and  <dig> of these were parsimony informative with  <dig>   of average p-distance and trn+g was determined as the best-fit evolutionary model.

analyses of the northern swordtails based on the nuclear and mitochondrial separate data sets  revealed almost identical tree topologies compared to the whole nuclear and mitochondrial phylogenies with all species . nevertheless, those analyses provided much higher bootstrap values and all four different phylogenetic estimations  agree on the majority of nodes. in the nuclear phylogeny , we recovered the pygmaeus and montezumae clades, but not the cortezi clade, which is consistent with several previous studies using different markers and morphological characters  <cit> . the mitochondrial and nuclear combined data set  showed similar phylogenetic relationships to the nuclear phylogeny, and still could not recover the cortezi clade. in the mitochondrial phylogeny  however, some phylogenetic relationships are incongruent with the nuclear phylogeny. for example, two strongly supported clades  in the nuclear phylogeny were not recovered in the mtdna analyses. here x. birchmanni might be basal to all other northern swordtails, but this remains unresolved in the nuclear phylogeny. the clade of x. nigrensis and x. multilineatus, which was strongly supported in our mtdna, nuclear and combined phylogenetic analyses, and also previous studies  <cit> , is grouped with x. cortezi and x. malinche in the mitochondrial dna phylogeny, whereas it is more closely related to x. pygmaeus in the nuclear dna phylogeny. these better resolved mitochondrial and nuclear phylogenetic analyses clearly show many incongruent phylogenetic positions between two types of molecular marker based phylogenies in the northern swordtails.

para- or monophyly of the southern swordtails
we found conflicting support for monophyly  or paraphyly  of the southern swordtails based on the four phylogenetic methods used for the nuclear markers . but, the hypothesis of monophyly could not be rejected  and was very strongly supported by our unpublished radseq data set . to further investigate the phylogenetic relationships among the southern swordtails, we compared the topology of trees constructed using each gene individually . two classes of genes suggest different evolutionary hypotheses regarding monophyletic or paraphyletic relationship of the clemenciae and hellerii clades. seven nuclear loci  support a paraphyletic relationship of the southern swordtails, but three loci  show monophyly and one locus  could not show their relationship clearly . further phylogenetic analyses based on the combined set of those seven markers inferred the paraphyly  and four markers  supported the monophyly of the southern swordtails  with higher bootstrap values than when the eleven markers were combined. clearly, there are partially conflicting phylogenetic signals in this set of eleven nuclear markers. overall, our data does not strongly discriminate between, or statistically reject, monophyly or paraphyly of the southern swordtails. further studies are required to determine the evolutionary history of the southern swordtails, yet our radseq markers and strongly support the monophyly of the southern swordtail clade and their basal placement  in the genus.

ancestral state reconstructions of the sword
we constructed the ancestral state of the sword using our nuclear marker based phylogenetic tree that places the southern swordtail clade basal in the genus.

several factors were considered in selecting a nuclear tree topology for the ancestral state construction of the sword. for the platies, we implemented a tree topology where x. andersi is basal to all platies, a topology also inferred by a previous study  <cit> . for the northern swordtail group, a tree topology based on the combined mtdna and nuclear data sets was applied since it was always strongly supported at every node using different phylogenetic methods . monophyly of the southern swordtails was implemented .

the definition of the sword and composite traits has long been debated and, on occasion differently interpreted in various species descriptions  <cit> . also previous studies of ancestral state reconstruction have shown inconsistent ancestral states for the sword, depending on both how the sword was scored and which reconstruction methods were used  <cit> . here, a comprehensive set of reconstructions of ancestral state was conducted by applying different sets of scoring of the sword  and by including other sets of sword traits , using both maximum likelihood  and parsimony approaches . detailed descriptions of the sword characters and sword scorings are given in the methods .

in our maximum-likelihood analyses, the possession of a sword was always recovered as the ancestral state at the base of the genus xiphophorus with high proportional-likelihood  in all character states . however, in the parsimony analyses the ancestral states were not consistent since the ancestral state of the sword changed based on 1) how we treated the transition state of swords as ordered or unordered  and 2) how we defined the sword  . the ancestral state of the sword was more ambiguous when the sword was coded as colored caudal extension  rather than if only length of an extension of the caudal fin was considered to be a “sword” . however, clearly, none of the characters in any analysis ever supported “swordless” as the ancestral condition in the genus xiphophorus. other sword traits  could not be reconstructed clearly because the absence or presence of these state of those traits was inferred to be equally parsimonious.

the sword clearly was lost at least once  in this genus, but the repeated evolution of the sword could not be inferred strongly . it was lost once in the southern platy lineage when the sword was considered as a two-state character of sword extension . the sword appears to have “shortened” four times from a sword to short protrusion  during the evolution of this genus and it was inferred to have been lost completely once in the platy lineage under the definition of the sword as a three-state character of sword extension . another two-state character of the sword, the colored extension , was lost twice in the northern swordtail lineage and once in the platyfish. these results suggest that the ancestral state at the root of the genus is “sworded”. furthermore, loss of sword or colored sword traits occurs much more frequently than their gain.

discussion
hybrid origin of xiphophorus monticolus
we show that one of the recently described xiphophorus species, x. monticolus, is likely to have arisen through an hybridization event, similar to what has been shown before for x. clemenciae <cit> . the hybrid origins of the species, x. monticolus and x. clemenciae, are the most likely explanation for several reasons including, but not limited to their incongruous placement in the mtdna and ndna trees . however, we cannot completely rule out that the discrepancy between phylogenetic placements based on different marker types does not result from other biological processes such as incomplete lineage sorting   <cit> . however, we regard this as a much less plausible hypothesis. if ils were the explanation for this discrepancy, a particular locus or group of loci would be expected to lead to different phylogenetic relationships from others. to evaluate whether particular loci have a particularly strong effect on the phylogenetic results, eleven separate nuclear trees were reconstructed by subtracting one locus at a time. yet, we did not find evidence for strong locus-specific phylogenetic relationships among all the eleven independent phylogenies analyzed with regard to the positions of the two hybrid species. hybridizations among several species of xiphophorus have been observed in the wild  <cit>  and laboratory-hybrids can be produced for most species of xiphophorus <cit> . all of these observations suggest that hybrid origins of species in this genus are feasible and appear to best explain the origin of these two species in this genus.

if x. monticolus and x. clemenciae indeed arose by hybridization it would be of great interest to know where and when this hybridization took place and which species are likely to be the parental lineages. we would like to point out that the sword indices  of x. clemenciae and x. monticolus are identical  whereas it is  <dig>  for x. mixei <cit> , the closest relative of both x. monticolus and x. clemenciae   <cit> . the high similarity in sword length and gonopodium  structures particularly in ray  <dig> or  <dig> between x. clemenciae and x. monticolus might further suggest that both species arose from hybridization between a platyfish and the same paternal species.

in the case of x. clemenciae, the discrepancy in the phylogenetic position was parsimoniously explained by an ancient hybridization event between a swordless platyfish, such as x. maculatus , as the maternal species, and a sworded southern swordtail as the paternal species, such as x. hellerii in the previous studies  <cit> . meyer et al.  <cit>  proposed that relatives of x. maculatus and x. hellerii might be parental species for x. clemenciae because those two species are closely related to x. clemenciae  and have wide and overlapping geographic distributions. in addition, meyer et al.  <cit>  found that laboratory crosses between female x. maculatus and male x. hellerii resulted in hybrids with intermediate sword lengths. they argued that because x. clemenciae has an intermediate sword length between x. maculatus  and x. hellerii , x. clemenciae may have arisen from two species such as those.

here we suggest that x. monticolus may also have originated from a hybridization event between a southern platy and a southern swordtail, and again species such as x. maculatus  may be the maternal species and x. hellerii or alternatively x. mixei  may be paternal species. although other platies  are genetically more closely related to x. monticolus , as is the case of x. clemenciae, x. maculatus  is deemed to be the more likely maternal species because of its wider geographic distribution . we caution that, of course, the current distributions may not necessarily resemble ancient distributions and therefore inferring parental lineages using current geographical information may not be reliable. additionally, our comparative morphological study of xiphophorus species revealed that x. maculatus has more similar gonopodial structures to the species in the clemenciae clade  than other platies . if the gonopodial lock-and-key hypothesis applies, i.e. that genital morphology may prevent mating between different species  <cit> , similar gonopodial structures between maternal  and paternal species  might also lend further support to x. maculatus as a potential maternal species. our favored hybridization scenario involves repeated backcrossing of hybrid females into the parental species with the longer sword which would explain that in terms of nuclear genes the hybrid species much more resemble their paternal species, as is clear shown in the nuclear dna trees.

a xiphophorus mixei-like fish is a likely alternative paternal lineage because it is the most closely related species to x. monticolus and x. clemenciae  and the monophyly of “clemenciae clade” was strongly supported both phylogenetically and morphologically . the three species in the clemenciae clade  all have orange lateral stripes that are produced by carotenoid pigments, whereas members of the hellerii clade exhibit red stripes where the pigment is produced by drosopterin  <cit> . the spots  in the proximal portion of the caudal fin in adult males were only detected in the clemenciae clade, but not in any other species in the genus xiphophorus <cit> . the species within each of the clemenciae and hellerii clades have more similar gonopodial structures to one another  <cit> , in particular, the distal part of the gonopodia, including hook shape, spine numbers and slightly anteriorly angled tip of the ramus is more similar between species in the clemenciae group in comparison to species in the hellerii group  <cit> . furthermore, an ongoing comparative study of the gonopodium of the genus xiphophorus further supports the hypothesis that the distal structures of x. mixei are similar to both species of hybrid origin in the clemenciae clade than any other species in the hellerii clade .

xiphophorus monticolus may have arisen from a “local” hybridization event since it is restricted geographically to headwater streams of the rio jaltepec, a major rio coatzacoalcos tributary, in oaxaca, mexico  <cit>  . hence, x. monticolus, similar to what we believe to be the case for x. clemenciae as well, is likely to have arisen from a hybridization event at a single locality. thus, genetic similarity, shared morphological traits, and their sympatric distributions  further support the hypothesis of a hybridization event between the species related to x. maculatus and x. mixei.

combined all phylogenetic, phenotypic and distribution data point towards x. mixei as a likely paternal lineage for the two independent hybridization events within the x. clemenciae clade. further genetic studies of x. mixei are warranted to uncover more genetic traces of this species that might support the hypothesis that it was involved in these hybridization/speciation events. for example, distinct genetic mechanisms such as hemi-clonal lineages found in poeciliopsis monacha may be analogous to the genesis of new hybrid species in the genus xiphophorus <cit> . poeciliopsis monacha has an all-female system of reproduction, where females produce hybridogenic progeny that carry the maternal genome of p. monacha and replace it with a paternal nuclear genome of sexually reproducing species  in each generation  <cit> . further research on ecological and behavioral aspects of x. mixei  might provide interesting insights into the role of this species in the hybrid origin of its two closest relatives.

phylogenetic relationships among the northern swordtails
combined mitochondrial and nuclear data  provide a more resolved phylogeny compared to previous phylogenetic analyses. however, these results should still be regarded as tentative. for instance, the monophyly and relationships within the coterzi clade, and their relationships to other lineages remain unresolved, as examined in several previous investigations  <cit> .

many incongruent relationships identified by the two types of marker-based phylogenies might provide a hint for another putative hybrid origin from the northern swordtail species. for example, the mitochondrial data set indicates a well-supported sistergroup relationship between x. nezahualcoyotl  and x. continens , whereas the nuclear dna set suggests that x. nezahualcoyotl could be closely related to x. montezumae . however, the nuclear tree could not provide strong support for the grouping of x. nezahualcoyotl with x. montezumae, so further analyses using additional nuclear markers are required to confirm this relationship. if this relationship is supported by future analyses, as it actually is by our radseq data , then it is likely that x. nezahualcoyotl might be of hybrid origin as well, on the basis of the incongruence of mitochondrial and nuclear trees. further support for this hypothesis is provided by the notable morphological differences between the sister species x. nezahualcoyotl  and x. continens  in the mitochondrial tree . this might suggests that hybrid speciation is not that uncommon within the genus xiphophorus with hybrid origins for two of the  <dig> xiphophorus species. further studies are required to investigate the prevalence of hybrid origins and its overall role in speciation within the family poeciliidae. however, several natural hybrid zones have been reported for some species-pairs  in the northern swordtail clade  <cit> . possibly some specimens in this group might have been collected from hybrid zones, although we lack detailed information about the sampling localities for some specimens of this study . therefore, phylogenetic placements of those species need to be interpreted with caution.

evolutionary history of the sexually selected trait: the sword
the  loss of the most conspicuous aspects of the sword - its length and its coloration  - might suggest that the selective forces of natural selection repeatedly won over the forces of sexual selection that would tend to favor more obvious and exaggerated traits. the evolution of the sword clearly shows periods of reversals where a conspicuous long sword secondarily became less conspicuous and or shorter or was lost completely as at the origin of the platyfish. in future work it would be interested to investigate under what environmental conditions or biotic conditions natural selection might act most strongly against conspicuous and long swords. several abiotic and biotic factors might play a role:  flow velocity of streams as longer sworded males would be expected to be at a hydrodynamic disadvantage, particularly in faster flowing streams,  water clarity and thereby visibility to females, but also predators, might also tend to select against males with particularly colorful or contrast swords ,  particularly if the abundance of predators, in the water or from the air, that hunt visually or whose capture method might select against males with particularly long swords, that would tend to have a slower fast-start performance, is high.

the ancestral state of the sword remained disputed  <cit> . previous character state reconstructions, based on the parsimony method  <cit> , illustrated that the ancestral state reconstruction of the sword varied, depending on how the sword was categorized , and whether the transition between the two states  was treated as ordered or unordered. the use of likelihood reconstruction methods has similarly not provided a clear reconstruction of the ancestral state of the sword  <cit> . in the latter analysis the authors suggested two possible factors that might lead to uncertainty. one is that the “sword” was coded as a single trait with only two character states  instead of three character states . the other is possibly a higher rate of changes in sword character states in priapella  than in xiphophorus although the latter clade may have higher transition rate  <cit> . the ambiguity of the ancestral states in previous studies might also be affected by incomplete phylogenies since all previous analyses on the reconstruction of the evolution of the sword were conducted based on morphology-based phylogenies, where platies are basal to swordtails, or mtdna-based trees where the four new species could not yet be included  <cit> . mitochondrial phylogenies in particular were certainly misleading due to the incorrect placement of x. clemenciae among the platies as well as uncertainty about the topology of the tree in the deepest nodes and among the northern swordtails.

our trait reconstructions using likelihood analyses covering all plausible sword scorings that have been used in several previous studies, implemented based on the nuclear marker based tree, show a consistent ancestral state, regardless of the different definitions of what constitutes the composite trait “sword”. these results clearly indicate that the sword very likely originated in the common ancestral lineage of the entire genus xiphophorus, and that the sword has been lost completely  or partially  in different lineages independently and repeatedly  .

by comparison, the parsimony analyses still showed ambiguous ancestral states under the three character states   although the same character state codings as in the likelihood method were applied and both sets of analyses used the identical comprehensive nuclear phylogeny. of course, the maximum parsimony method reconstructs the ancestral state that requires the smallest number of state changes. it has been suggested that ecological traits are prone to being biased because of the assumption of low rate of character changes or a stochastic element in parsimony analysis itself  <cit> . the ambiguous state reconstruction might therefore result from the method per se because changes in the characteristics of the sword are, apparently not that rare in xiphophorus. nevertheless, “swordless” was not found to be the ancestral state for the genus based on the parsimony analyses .

our analyses further suggest that the evolution of the sword is tending towards a reduction in length or even complete loss of the trait rather than secondary gains. although the evolutionary origin of swords through female preference has been a central focus in the literature  <cit> , little attention has been paid to the ‘loss’ or ‘reduction’ of the sword or other characteristics of the sword such as its coloration or the black stripe. the brightly coloration of sword will increase the conspicuousness of its bearers not only to females, but also to predators and therefore be disadvantageous for survival  <cit> . additionally, increased sword length is costly for fast start  and endurance swimming  <cit> . if female preference is a major driver for the evolution of the sword, a change or loss of female preference might also equally affect the loss of the sword traits , or since female preferences for the sword seem to have been retained in species, such as platies, in which their males had lost their swords, natural rather than sexual selection might have played a decisive role in that  <cit>  . alterations in female preference for the sword have been reported – for example, females prefer swordless conspecifics over sworded heterospecific males in x. birchmanni <cit> , and a change in female preference for the sword has been shown also for x. nigrensis <cit> .

if changes in female preference for the sword have indeed occurred frequently in response to different/changing environments or other factors impacting on mate choice, then our hypothesis that x. mixei constitutes the closest relative to the putative paternal lineage of x. monticolus  would gain further plausibility. this still needs to be tested in x. mixei females. it is also interesting to note that x. mixei, with its very short sword, is consistently nested within the clemenciae clade. so, despite being genetically closest to the hybrid species, and the putative “parental” lineage, x. mixei’s sword is very different from that of both x. clemenciae and x. monticolus. this observation, again, supports the notion that sword evolution can be fast and the phenotype is labile.

future studies on the evolutionary relationships among xiphophorus species would benefit from the inclusion of alternative outgroups since distant outgroups can possibly generate reconstruction artifacts. a robust phylogeny of the entire family poeciliidae would help to clarify which species or genera are most closely related to the genus xiphophorus. further studies on ecological and behavioral features affecting the evolution of particular sword traits and the genetic compositions of hybrid species will help to unravel the origin of the repeated ancient hybridization events in the genus xiphophorus. in a broader context, our study provides information on the long-standing controversy over the role and significance of hybridization in contributing to speciation and evolution in animals.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we reconstructed the phylogenetic relationships of all known  <dig> species in the genus xiphophorus using eleven nuclear loci and two mitochondrial loci. we show that an additional  southern swordtail species, xiphophorus monticolus, is likely to have arisen through hybridization. our mitochondrial and nuclear marker based phylogenetic analyses showed discordance in the position of this species, similar to previous analyses of x. clemenciae. the other three other recently described species - x. mixei, x. kallmani and x. mayae - group together with the southern swordtail species in both sets of trees. among the northern swordtails, while the monophyly of the montezumae and pygmaeus clades was strongly supported in the nuclear phylogeny, our data also suggest incongruent phylogenetic relationships between two types of marker-based trees. the ancestral state reconstruction of the sword, in particular using maximum likelihood approaches, strongly suggests that the common ancestor of the genus xiphophorus already possessed a sword and that it was lost completely secondarily again in the derived platy lineage of the genus. our complete molecular phylogeny of the genus xiphophorus provides a comprehensive phylogenetic framework within which the results of all studies on this genus can now be interpreted.

