BACKGROUND
teleost fish exhibit astonishing examples of adaptive evolution, such as observed in the african cichlids  <cit> , the neotropical midas cichlids  <cit> , and the limnetic and benthic stickleback morphs  <cit> . in general, the colonization of new environments allows rapid diversification  <cit>  as a by-product of adaptation to divergent selection regimes  <cit> , and can finally lead to reproductive isolation  <cit> . well known examples of this process in the northern hemisphere include the formation of distinct ecotypes in many species pairs of postglacial freshwater fish  <cit> . evidence for ecological speciation in these species pairs includes the rapid evolution of reproductive isolation  and the parallel evolution of inherited morphological differences that indicate specialization for different niches  <cit> . ecotype divergence in the northern hemisphere is apparent in numerous species pairs of freshwater fish  <cit> , and also includes some anadromous  and freshwater resident pairs  <cit> . in contrast, published examples of ecotype divergence in the southern hemisphere are sparse  <cit> .

evolutionary processes comparable to those observed in the northern hemisphere postglacial lakes have also likely occurred in oceanic island groups , where recently formed lakes with a depauperate freshwater fauna were secondarily colonized by diadromous  fish species that then lost their migratory behaviour  <cit> . compared to the northern hemisphere, in the southern hemisphere anadromy is much less common  <cit> , and the majority of diadromous species are amphidromous – a special form of diadromy in which only larvae drift to sea and early juveniles  return to freshwater  <cit> . the adaptive significance of amphidromy is the maintenance of dispersal between isolated, tectonically active island land masses, thereby maintaining gene flow among geographically distant populations  <cit> . accordingly, the loss of migration in amphidromous species leads to geographic isolation and is believed to have initiated genetic and morphological diversification in many taxa  <cit> . well known examples of this process are the freshwater radiations of galaxiid fishes, the diversifications of which have likely been driven by landlocking  <cit> . consequently, extensive genetic population structuring is observed in several non-migratory species  <cit> , including the new zealand endemic gobiomorphus breviceps  <cit> . of seven new zealand endemic gobiomorphus species, three are obligatorily freshwater resident, three are obligatorily amphidromous  <cit> , while only the widespread and facultatively amphidromous  <cit> gobiomorphus cotidianus mcdowall readily establishes non-migratory populations  <cit> . one of the obligatorily freshwater resident species  arose within the last  <dig>  years  <cit> , and is closely related to g. cotidianus  <cit> . all new zealand representatives of the genus gobiomorphus represent a radiation within the basal gobioidei  <cit> . this island gobiomorphus complex forms a monophyletic group  <cit> , whose ancestor most likely arrived by means of oceanic dispersal . the extensive genetic structuring observed in the non-migratory g. breviceps  <cit> , as well as the non-migratory and recently evolved g. alpinus clearly suggest that the loss of the marine larval life stage facilitates diversification in the new zealand gobiomorphus complex.

in gobiids, the structure of the peripheral lateral line canals is an important taxonomic character  <cit> . in addition, the morphological patterns of these canals can be correlated with particular hydrodynamic stimuli that have direct fitness consequences for fishes   <cit> . canal reduction is thought to be an adaptation to distinct microhabitats with slow-flowing water conditions  <cit> , and the congruence between genetic structure and geographic distribution of oculoscapular canal morphotypes in the tidewater goby eucyclogobius newberry suggests that these variations can be partly inherited  <cit> . gobiomorphus cotidianus with predominantly superficial lateral line neuromasts exhibit better detection of moving objects in the absence of background flow  <cit> . the structure of the oculoscapular lateral line canals in g. cotidianus is highly variable, including complete absence in some lake populations  <cit> . furthermore, all obligatorily amphidromous new zealand gobiomorphus species have fully developed oculoscapular canals, while these canals are completely absent in all obligatorily non-migratory species  <cit> , a pattern suggesting parallel evolution.

the north island of new zealand contains numerous recently-formed lakes  <cit>  that have a diverse history of catastrophic events  that have allowed subsequent colonisations by amphidromous taxa  <cit> . one of these lakes is lake tarawera , a large  and deep  oligotrophic lake located in the geologically highly active central okataina dome. lake tarawera was formed about  <dig>  years ago  <cit> . it drains into the tarawera river, which is characterized by fast-flowing upper river reaches, including a waterfall  that represents a significant upstream dispersal barrier for fish into the lake. however, dispersal out of the lake is possible, and major pulses of downstream transport of fish caused by the collapse of lava flows have likely occurred  <cit> . about  <dig> km downstream of the waterfall the river enters an extended area of flat land before reaching the pacific ocean. no physical barriers limit downstream dispersal of fish within the tarawera river, whereas upstream dispersal may be limited  <cit> . the kaituna river, which originates in the nearby lake rotoiti, drains into a coastal area before also reaching the pacific ocean. the river mouths of the tarawera and kaituna rivers are separated by  <dig> km of coastline . the tarawera and kaituna river systems share no freshwater connections. like lake tarawera, lake rotoiti was also affected by volcanic activities. the rangitaiki river originates from a separate geographic area and drains into the sea about  <dig> km away from the tarawera river . prior to modifications for flood protection  the tarawera and rangitaiki rivers likely shared freshwater connections under flood conditions. following several volcanic eruptions  that eliminated most freshwater fauna from lake tarawera and the surrounding lakes  <cit> , forage fish for trout were introduced into lakes rotorua and rotoiti  and from there into lake tarawera . these fish likely included g. cotidianus specimens obtained from the waikato river, a river system originating in the central north island lake of lake taupo .

the loss of the migratory life stage is a key process driving speciation in island freshwater fish species  <cit> . we hypothesize that the loss of the migratory life stage in facultatively amphidromous taxa facilitates intraspecific morphological, behavioural, and genetic differentiation between migratory and non-migratory ecotypes, thereby providing a mechanism for incipient speciation. to date, most studies have focused on interspecific relationships among diadromous species and their non-migratory sister taxa, while little attention has been given to incipient speciation occurring as a result of intraspecific evolutionary processes. accordingly, the facultatively amphidromous g. cotidianus offers an excellent opportunity to study morphological, behavioural, and genetic diversification between amphidromous and freshwater resident  populations.

to test for morphological, reproductive, and genetic diversification between migratory and non-migratory stocks, we collected g. cotidianus from one lake and two river sample sites in the tarawera system . outgroup samples from the nearby kaituna and rangitaiki rivers  were included to examine possible differences between river systems . otolith microchemical analyses of 88sr, 137ba and 43ca isotopes were used to distinguish migratory and non-migratory stocks. the analysis was complemented with analyses of 137ba/43ca ratios, as changing levels of this isotope across the otolith indicate diadromy  <cit> . to test for possible morphological differences between migratory types, the otolith data were contrasted with the distribution of oculoscapular canal morphotypes . previous work suggested the presence of distinct summer and winter spawning populations in the tarawera river  <cit> . thus, we included data on the gonadal development  to test for temporal reproductive isolation among migratory and non-migratory stocks. all analyses were contrasted with the genetic structure as inferred by amplified fragment length polymorphisms , a selectively-neutral, high resolution marker system that can generate a high number of markers distributed genome-wide  <cit> . aflps are capable of resolving recent evolutionary splits  <cit> , such as expected between different ecotypes. this multidisciplinary approach was applied to reveal patterns of diversification occurring in the new zealand gobiomorphus complex as a consequence of loss of migration, and, therefore, the role of this process in driving speciation of island freshwater fish species.

lt = lake tarawera, ut = upstream tarawera, dt = downstream tarawera, rr = rangitaiki river, kr = kaituna river. nm = samples included in meristic analyses, no = samples included in otolith analyses, %nd = percentage of non-diadromous fish, nr = female samples included in reproduction-type comparisons, %s = percentage of summer spawning females, stat. = significant differences  in spawning type composition, shared letters indicate no significant difference at p <  <dig> . ng = samples included in genetic analyses, %p = percentage polymorphic fragments , hsw = shannon-wiener diversity index.

RESULTS
meristic analysis
all fish included here were sexually mature , so their canal formation was complete. no differences in canal formation between sexes were observed. in all individuals, the anterior section of the lateral oculoscapular canals was reduced, exposing a row of primary neuromasts that terminate at pore la . no specimens were found with median pores present and lateral pores lacking. hence, the median pores were always reduced first, followed by a gradual reduction of the lateral canals, spanning between pores la and lp  from anterior to posterior. canal development was most pronounced  in samples from the downstream tarawera  and the rangitaiki river  samples . only the individuals with paired median pores absent but lateral pores present  were present in all sample locations, with highest proportions  in upstream tarawera  and the kaituna river . nearly all individuals in lake tarawera and upstream tarawera exhibited degraded oculoscapular canals  or had lost all canals . the highest mean proportion of fish without canals was found in lake tarawera . morphotype composition differed significantly among sample locations . results of pair-wise post hoc comparisons are given in table  <dig>  asymmetrically reduced lateral pores  were only observed in the lake tarawera and upstream tarawera sites .

lt = lake tarawera, ut = upstream tarawera, dt = downstream tarawera, rr = rangitaiki river, kr = kaituna river. nm = number of individuals per sample site included in meristic analyses. type  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> = proportion of the respective morphotype  in sample site. stat. = significant differences in morphotype compositions between sample sites, shared letters indicate no significant difference at p <  <dig> .

otolith isotope profiles
elevated 88sr/43ca ratios in fish otoliths are widely accepted as proof of occupation of marine habitats  <cit> . similarly, in amphidromous g. cotidianus, elevated 88sr/43ca ratios in the otoliths nucleus indicate a marine larval life stage  <cit> . obligatorily amphidromous g. gobioides sampled in the tarawera river were used to establish reference isotope profiles for amphidromous individuals, allowing migratory and non-migratory g. cotidianus to be distinguished. thus, distinct differences among individual isotope profiles permitted all samples to be grouped into one of two distinct categories:

 non-diadromous individuals have low 88sr/43ca ratios in the nucleus  with a small range . their freshwater residency was also supported by a constant level of normalised 137ba/43ca from nucleus to edge.

 diadromous individuals have higher 88sr/43ca ratios in the nucleus  and a larger range between the nucleus and the edge , illustrating a marine or estuarine larval life stage. in these profiles, the larval migration was also reflected in a characteristic signature of decreasing 88sr/43ca ratios and increasing 137ba/43ca ratios from the nucleus to the otolith edge .

the 88sr/43ca ratios in the otolith nucleus were lower in non-diadromous fish  than in diadromous individuals . comparisons of the individual nucleus isotope patterns can be seen in figure  <dig>  a few individuals could not be confidently allocated to either category based on the descriptive characters used in the scatter plot . however, all amphidromous g. cotidianus exhibited a characteristic increase in 137ba/43ca from nucleus to the edge, while all freshwater resident individuals showed a constant level of 137ba/43ca across the otolith . therefore, the relative differences in individual isotope profiles were used to allocate these individuals to one of the two categories. all lake tarawera and upstream tarawera specimens cluster together  and possess non-diadromous isotope profiles, confirming a complete freshwater life history . similarly, all kaituna river samples were non-diadromous, as no otolith from this site showed evidence of a marine larval life stage . in the downstream tarawera site, 66% of specimens were diadromous, while from the rangitaiki river, 73% were diadromous .

distribution of spawning types
the proportions of female spawning types are given in table  <dig>  significant differences in spawning type proportions among sample sites are observable . pair-wise post hoc comparisons are given in table  <dig>  specimens in lake tarawera, upstream tarawera and kaituna river spawned predominantly in summer . gonads of the lake tarawera females captured in september  were translucent and homogenous in colour with no sign of recent spawning. this differed significantly  to the downstream tarawera and rangitaiki river sites, which were dominated by winter spawners. their gonads were consistently in a refractory period of reproductive development during late spring or summer, supporting their status as winter spawners.

genetic structure
a large number of aflp fragments were scored , 92% of which were polymorphic. the number of fragments scored and the degree of polymorphism is similar to other studies utilizing aflps to distinguish recent evolutionary splits  <cit> . both fst and θb consistently indicated significant genetic differentiation between most sample sites, except between downstream tarawera and the rangitaiki river, and between the kaituna river and the rangitaiki river . within the tarawera system, genetic differentiation between the upstream tarawera river and lake tarawera sites  was approximately threefold smaller than between the upstream and downstream tarawera sites . the population dendrogram  shows two distinct clusters , with the kaituna river samples in an intermediate position. in the structure analyses, multiple runs with the same k lead to virtually the same result. the method of evanno et al.  <cit>  revealed a global maximum of Δk for two clusters , therefore we present the bar plot for two clusters . the bar plot clearly indicates a high genetic similarity between the lake tarawera and the upstream tarawera population  as well as between the downstream tarawera and the rangitaiki river sample site . the kaituna river is dominated by the blue genotype. the inferred structure agrees with the dendrogram .

lt = lake tarawera, ut = upstream tarawera, dt = downstream tarawera, rr = rangitaiki river, kr = kaituna river. below diagonal fst, above diagonal θb, significantly distinct at *p <  <dig> , **p <  <dig> , ns = no significant difference.

comparisons of the different analyses
the results of all analyses are graphically summarized in figure  <dig>  populations with dominance of the migratory ecotype  are characterized by a high proportion of the green genotype and a dominance of fish with full canals that predominantly spawn in winter. in contrast, the populations dominated by non-migratory fish  exhibited a high proportion of the blue genotype and individuals with reduced canals  that predominantly spawn in summer.

discussion
canal reduction in non-migratory populations
the clear differences in migratory behaviour and canal morphotype proportions between the downstream and upstream tarawera river sites – which are separated by less than  <dig> km – is remarkable. the absence of migratory fish in upstream tarawera could be explained by limited upstream migration through the paper mill effluent outfalls  <cit> , or by inherited behavioural patterns. the substantial variations observed in the oculoscapular canal system are clearly not evenly distributed across the sample sites. notably, fish without oculoscapular canals  are largely absent from the migratory downstream tarawera and rangitaiki river sites, whereas specimens with fully developed canals  are nearly absent from the lake-locked lake tarawera, and the non-migratory upstream tarawera and kaituna river sites. in g. cotidianus without canals, detection of moving objects is most sensitive in the absence of background flow, with sensitivity substantially decreasing as flow velocity increases  <cit> . furthermore, reduced oculoscapular lateral line canals can be found in various unrelated fish species that occupy low noise environments  <cit> . the pattern of canal reduction in the non-migratory populations is consistent with canal reduction in many lake populations of g. cotidianus, and closely resembles the absence of oculoscapular canals in all freshwater resident new zealand endemic gobiomorphus species  <cit> , a pattern suggesting parallel evolution. similar patterns of parallel evolution can be observed in the northern hemisphere limnetic and benthic forms of gasterosteus aculeatus  <cit> , and in the trophic morphs of salvelinus alpinus  <cit> , with both forms of each species having evolved repeatedly in different lakes. repeated evolution of similar traits in closely related species that are consistent with similar transitions in the environment strongly suggests convergent evolution  <cit> . thus, the high proportion of fish with reduced canals in our non-migratory populations is most likely an adaptation to a low-noise environment, and has likely been paralleled by the transition to a non-migratory life cycle.

evidence for inherited morphological differences
if the observed canal formation were caused solely by a phenotypic plastic response to the environment then we would expect greatest canal formation in the upstream tarawera river site, because these fish are exposed to faster flowing water than any other river population examined. however, we observe that the upstream tarawera population contains the highest proportion of fish with reduced canals among all river populations. moreover, the kaituna river samples also exhibit a higher proportion of reduced canals than the downstream tarawera and the rangitaiki river populations. additionally, the majority of the kaituna river fish spawn in summer and retain a non-migratory behaviour. it is remarkable that the kaituna river fish possess these non-migratory attributes, given they have open access to the sea. the parallel pattern of reduced canals in the upstream tarawera and kaituna river fish could be explained by both these populations originating from non-migratory lake fish that have been washed out from lakes tarawera and rotoiti respectively . there is a trend, however, that the fish from upstream tarawera and kaituna river  develop more canals than their lake counterparts, although they do not develop the full set of canals.

the large number of scored aflp fragments  enables us to resolve the genetic structure within and between sample sites , even with relatively small sample sizes from the kaituna and rangitaiki rivers. these analyses clearly indicate genetic similarity between the lake tarawera, upstream tarawera and kaituna river sites . in all three sample sites, the genetic similarity is paralleled by a dominance of fish with reduced canals . of all non-migratory individuals, the kaituna river samples have been collected closest to the sea. accordingly, the higher proportion of the green genotype in the non-migratory kaituna river fish might also indicate ongoing hybridization of non-migratory lake  and migratory river ecotypes. this is consistent with the dendrogram results  and the genetic distances . this intermediate position of the kaituna river samples is also reflected in a higher proportion, compared to the upstream tarawera site, of fish with full canals . in contrast, the downstream tarawera and the rangitaiki river sites, that are genetically close to each other but genetically distinct from the upstream tarawera and lake tarawera sites , are dominated by a high proportion of individuals with full canal development  that are amphidromous .

collectively, the concordance of the canal morphotypes with the genetic structure and the reproductive timing suggests that the observed canal morphology is partly inherited rather than a completely plastic response to the environment. but, as in other gobiids  <cit> , we expect that canal development in g. cotidianus is controlled by the interplay of both environmental and genetic factors. hence, the intermediate pattern of canal formation observed in the upstream tarawera and the kaituna river populations may be affected by both a phenotypic plastic response to the ambient river environment, and unidirectional downstream gene flow of non-migratory lake stocks  followed by hybridisation with migratory river stocks.

although we cannot conclude with certainty whether the documented ecotypes are continuing to diverge or are collapsing , we hypothesise that they are more likely to be diverging because of the apparent temporal reproductive isolation of the two ecotypes. accordingly, incipient speciation may be occurring, particularly in the lake-locked lake tarawera population.

temporal reproductive isolation
the female reproductive data presented here and in previous work  <cit>  document an approximately six month shift in spawning time between upstream tarawera  compared to downstream tarawera and rangitaiki rivers . all female fish from lake tarawera exhibited gonadosomatic indices greater than  <dig> , accompanied by homogenous and translucent ovaries indicative of the pre-spawning vitellogenic stage. this indicates resource accumulation for spawning during summer. additionally, the lake tarawera samples collected in january showed clear signs of recent spawning, while samples from june  <dig> and  <dig> did not indicate any gonad development , further supporting their status as summer spawners. this is consistent with summer spawning of other lake populations of g. cotidianus  <cit> . both kaituna river and upstream tarawera populations were collected in january during the peak time of summer spawning of g. cotidianus in that region. in contrast, the downstream tarawera and rangitaiki river populations spawn in winter. hence, the pattern of reproductive timing parallels the patterns of canal reduction, migratory behaviour, and the genetic structure. a similar difference in reproductive timing has been found between diadromous and non-diadromous populations of galaxias truttaceus   <cit> . in that study, the non-diadromous lake-locked population spawns in spring, whereas the diadromous river population spawns in autumn. the authors suggest this shift in spawning time is a precursor to loss of diadromy, as the larvae no longer drift to sea for feeding and may not survive the cold, unproductive lake during winter. the abundance of g. cotidianus in the lakes of the north island of new zealand is related to lake productivity and therefore food availability  <cit> . thus, the observed shift in spawning of our non-migratory populations may be a necessary adaptation to seasonal differences in food availability, but may also provide a prezygotic mechanism to reproductively isolate the non-migratory and migratory populations.

evidence for distinct ecotypes
the canal reduction observed in the non-migratory populations of g. cotidianus parallels reduced oculoscapular canals in all obligatorily non-diadromous new zealand gobiomorphus species . thus, the pattern we observe may be the result of equivalent evolutionary processes that have occurred repeatedly during the formation of non-migratory gobiomorphus species in new zealand. additional support for this hypothesis can be found in the closely related g. alpinus, a recently  evolved sister taxon  <cit>  of g. cotidianus that likely originated from a diadromous stock  <cit> . the two taxa are indistinguishable based on mtdna sequences but can be separated using aflps , suggesting a recent diversification. similar to g. alpinus, our lake tarawera and upstream tarawera river specimens exhibit reduced counts of rays and spines in the first and second dorsal and anal fin , consistent with another pattern of parallel evolution. within the gobioidei, the reduction of morphological features  is characteristic of a more derived evolutionary state  <cit> , and the canal reduction observed in our study resembles convergent evolution observed in other derived gobiid  <cit>  and teleost taxa  <cit> .

based on the current data, it is not possible to establish whether the observed morphological and behavioural differences evolved within lake tarawera, or in the lake taupo/waikato river system, because it is possible that the non-migratory ecotype originates from the waikato river and has been introduced into lakes tarawera and rotorua/rotoiti via anthropogenic fish introductions  <cit> . it is also not yet possible to establish the age of divergence of the two ecotypes. while we cannot rule out that the non-migratory ecotype evolved elsewhere, prior to its introduction, our data clearly support morphologically, reproductively and genetically distinct ecotypes that are derived from distinct migratory and non-migratory stocks.

CONCLUSIONS
our data are congruent, and provide clear and independent lines of evidence for distinct non-migratory and migratory ecotypes on a geographically small scale along a river. the morphological changes observed in the non-migratory populations closely resemble evolutionary patterns repeatedly observed during formation of freshwater resident gobiomorphus species in new zealand as well as in other derived gobiid species. these patterns suggest parallel evolution. the present study is, to our knowledge, the first example that clearly suggests that distinct intraspecific ecotypes of an amphidromous fish species  may be formed as a consequence of loss of migration and subsequent divergence. hence, if the reproductive isolation is maintained, these processes could, in the long term, result in the formation of new island freshwater fish species. future research could focus on several intriguing aspects, including establishing the age of divergence of the ecotypes, exploring the role of landlocking and evolutionary mechanisms  in promoting phenotypic and genetic divergence between the ecotypes, identifying the drivers of parallel evolution in new zealand gobiomorphus, and determining the extent to which the patterns observed here are found in other g. cotidianus populations.

