BACKGROUND
holometabola  are, given their evolutionary age, by far the most species-rich subgroup of insects  and comprise more than 60% of all described metazoan species  <cit> . within the holometabola, the mega-diverse orders coleoptera , diptera , lepidoptera , and hymenoptera  comprise together almost  <dig>  species  <cit>  and therefore more than 95% of the total species diversity of the entire lineage. the smaller orders are neuroptera , megaloptera , raphidioptera , trichoptera , mecoptera , and siphonaptera . complete metamorphosis, which is characterized by the presence of a more or less inactive and non-feeding pupal stage between a feeding larva and a reproducing adult, is the most striking difference between holometabola and other hexapods. whereas the monophyly of holometabola and of all its orders  has been consistently recovered , the interordinal relationships are still insufficiently resolved. this impedes our understanding of the ancestral holometabolan morphology and life history and the modifications that occurred during the subsequent diversification of this highly successful lineage.

a reliable reconstruction of evolutionary transformations within holometabola requires a well-founded hypothesis of the phylogenetic relationships of the major included groups. the first comprehensive reconstruction of holometabolan phylogenetic relationships was presented by hennig  <cit> , although a substantial contribution had already been made earlier by hinton  <cit> . alternative concepts to hennig’s proposal were presented by rasnitsyn and quicke  <cit>  and kukalová-peck and lawrence  <cit> , with the main difference that hymenoptera were not placed as sister group of mecopterida , and lepidoptera and trichoptera ) , but as the first diverging extant holometabolan insect order. a distinctly different view was presented by wheeler and colleagues  <cit>  : they discussed a sister group relationship between hymenoptera and mecopterida , a sister group relationship between strepsiptera and diptera , and paraphyletic mecoptera, with the mecopteran boreidae as sister group of siphonaptera. based on entirely new molecular and morphological datasets, wiegmann et al.  <cit> , mckenna and farrell  <cit> , and beutel et al.  <cit>   congruently revived the view that hymenoptera are sistergroup of all remaining holometabola; strepsiptera were recovered as closely related to coleoptera, and mecoptera were found monophyletic. recently, these hypotheses gained additional support by a phylogenetic analysis of nucleotide sequence data from whole genome sequencing projects  <cit> . however, several interordinal relationships within holometabola remained elusive. despite remarkable progress, the genomic depth of published molecular sequence data, which potentially offers a plethora of phylogenetically informative characters, is still very low: large-scale transcriptome or genome data have been only available for representatives of less than half of all recognized holometabolan orders, with most studies so far dealing with model species. consequently, the aim of our study was to present the first reconstruction of holometabolan relationships based on transcriptomic data of representatives of all currently recognized orders.

in this study, we address the following phylogenetic questions:

 <dig>  are hymenoptera the sister group of mecopterida  or of all other holometabolan insect lineages ?

 <dig>  are neuropteroidea  monophyletic? neuropteroidea were found monophyletic by wiegmann et al.  <cit>  but not found by wheeler et al.  <cit> , kukalová-peck and lawrence  <cit> , and beutel et al.  <cit> .

 <dig>  are megaloptera monophyletic? and  <dig>  are neuroptera and megaloptera sister groups? proposed relationships of the groups of neuropterida  are incongruent, and nearly all possible topological arrangements concerning this problem have been published over the last years .

 <dig>  are coleopterida  monophyletic? the whole genome-based analyses by niehuis et al.  <cit>  inferred strepsiptera as sister group of coleoptera, but did not include representatives of neuropterida.

 <dig>  are mecopterida monophyletic? this group was neither found monophyletic by kukalová-peck and lawrence  <cit>  nor by some of the analyses in beutel et al.  <cit> , but was monophyletic in wiegmann et al.  <cit> , though not well supported.

 <dig>  what are the phylogenetic relationships within antliophora? contradicting phylogenetic relationships among diptera, mecoptera, and siphonaptera have been published, and the monophyly of mecoptera has been questioned .

in order to address the above questions, we generated transcriptomic data of at least one representative of each holometabolan order. for transcriptome sequencing, we selected species mostly characterized by plesiomorphic morphological character conditions and representing taxa that presumably diverged early in the evolutionary history of each group . in our molecular phylogenetic analyses, we used specific decisive datasets for each of our phylogenetic questions. following the arguments put forth by dell’ampio et al.  <cit> , a dataset is deemed “decisive” if information of each gene is available from each taxonomic group of interest and thus can contribute to resolving the relationships among these groups. in addition to maximum likelihood  based tree inference, we applied four-cluster likelihood mapping   <cit>  to study potential incongruent signal in our datasets that might not be revealed by a phylogenetic multi-species tree.

we mapped a comprehensive set of morphological data  <cit>  on the transcriptome-based phylogeny, and addressed the following issues regarding the evolutionary history of holometabola:

•major morphological features of the ancestral larva and the ancestral adult of holometabola  

•ancestral larval and adult life habits of holometabola 

•major transformations of larval and adult characters within holometabola 

•ancestral mode of ontogenetic development of holometabola 

in summary, we aimed to trace evolutionary changes of phenotypic features and to reconstruct groundplans for holometabola and well-established clades within the holometabola tree. an evolutionary history based on a solid phylogenetic background represents an important step toward a better understanding of the unparalleled diversification of this exceptional group of organisms.

RESULTS
the phylogeny of holometabola
we analyzed a total of  <dig>  1: <dig> orthologous genes ) and, by including also published data, data from a total of  <dig> species . the seven specifically designed decisive datasets that we analyzed to address our seven phylogenetic questions each consisted of a subset of taxa and genes from the complete dataset, except for dataset  <dig> which is identical to the complete dataset. the seven questions, the taxonomic groups that we selected as relevant for answering the questions, and the numbers of species and ogs for each dataset are shown in table  <dig>  for each dataset we performed 1) ml tree reconstruction, and 2) four-cluster likelihood mapping  . results are summarized in figure  <dig> .

shown are taxonomic classification, number of contigs after assembly ), and number of assigned single-copy orthologous genes in the complete dataset .

for each dataset, we selected four taxonomic groups , assigned species to one of the groups, and extracted only those ortholog groups  that contained a sequence of at least one representative of each group. all species that were not assigned to either of the groups were excluded. coverage  all species: coverage of the dataset in terms of presence of ogs considering all species. coverage  addressed groups: coverage of the dataset in terms of presence of ogs considering the four groups defined for each dataset, which is, by definition, 100%.

for the four groups  that were selected for each of the seven datasets, three unambiguous topologies are possible . for details which species are included in the groups for each dataset see additional file  <dig>  the number of drawn quartets is the product of the numbers of species in each group. in bold print: topology that gained the highest support . results of partitioned analyses of dataset  <dig> in parentheses.

the analysis of dataset  <dig> yielded hymenoptera as sister group to all remaining holometabolan orders in both ml tree reconstruction and fclm . this relationship had already been recovered in several multiple gene studies , and based on whole genome data but a limited taxon sampling  <cit> . previously published analyses of morphological data yielded contradictory results, such as for instance hymenoptera + mecopterida in beutel and gorb  <cit> versus hymenoptera + remaining holometabolan orders in beutel et al.  <cit> . potential problems of topological artifacts in these analyses that are caused by convergent reductions in many morphological character systems were discussed in detail by friedrich and beutel  <cit>  and beutel et al.  <cit> . the placement of hymenoptera as sister group to all remaining holometabolan orders implies that presumptive synapomorphies of hymenoptera and mecopterida  are in fact homoplasies.

our analyses of dataset  <dig> yielded monophyletic neuropteroidea  with maximal support in the ml tree reconstruction and strong support in the fclm . neuropteroidea was not supported as a clade in beutel et al.  <cit> , but was found monophyletic in many previous studies  <cit> , even though in most cases with weak or without support.

we did not find any signal for paraphyletic megaloptera as discussed by beutel et al.  <cit>  and winterton et al.  <cit>  . within neuropterida, our ml analyses maximally supported a sister group relationship between raphidioptera and neuroptera + megaloptera, which was also supported by more than 2/ <dig> of all quartets in the fclm . phylogenetic relationships among neuropterid orders have been discussed controversially with two alternative hypotheses: raphidioptera + megaloptera being monophyletic  or neuroptera + megaloptera being monophyletic . our results strongly support the latter hypothesis.

analysis of dataset  <dig> yielded ambiguous results with respect to a possible clade comprising coleoptera and strepsiptera  . resolving this longstanding problem is difficult due to the extremely modified morphology  and the distinctly derived genomic features  <cit>  of the endoparasitic strepsiptera . in most recent contributions, evidence was found for monophyletic coleopterida . however, the studies based on molecular data remained ambiguous in their results. coleopterida were not supported by all datasets analyzed by mckenna and farrell  <cit> . the results of wiegmann et al.  <cit>  were based on a relatively small set of genes and showed only weak support for this clade. niehuis et al.  <cit>  analyzed whole genome nucleotide sequences of holometabolous insects and found well-supported coleopterida but the taxon sampling did not include any neuropterid orders. in our study, coleopterida is supported in the ml tree , but not in the fclm analyses . in the ml tree, strepsiptera are placed within coleoptera , however, with poorly supported relationships . we further analyzed whether the incongruence between ml tree reconstruction and fclm analyses vanished considering partitioned ml and fclm analyses using different models on different partitions. partitioned analyses might reduce potential model misspecifications and might yield congruent topologies. however, the incongruence between ml and fclm analyses did not disappear . this implies that model misspecifications due to unpartitioned analyses are not the source of incongruence . apparently, the data and analytical procedures of our study did not yield an unambiguous solution of the question whether or not coleopterida is a monophyletic group. however, evidence from morphology clearly suggests monophyletic coleopterida  as the most plausible result.

in order to test the monophyly of mecopterida, a clade comprising amphiesmenoptera  and antliophora , we analyzed two versions of dataset  <dig> to account for two possible hypotheses . both analyses recovered monophyletic mecopterida with strong support . monophyletic mecopterida, as proposed by hinton  <cit>  under the name panorpoidea , was not well supported in kjer et al.  <cit>  and wiegmann et al.  <cit> , and only supported in the bayesian analyses of morphological characters in beutel et al.  <cit> . niehuis et al.  <cit>  found tentative support for this clade based on whole genome data but the incomplete taxon sampling – genomes of neuropterida, trichoptera, siphonaptera, and mecoptera have not been sequenced yet – diminished the decisiveness of this dataset concerning the question of monophyletic mecopterida.

our analyses clearly corroborated the monophyly of amphiesmenoptera  . however, we did not test this hypothesis with a specifically designed dataset because it has never been seriously disputed  <cit> .

within antliophora, which showed maximal bootstrap support in the ml tree, we found a sister group relationship of mecoptera and siphonaptera, also with maximal bootstrap support and with maximal support in the fclm . this result corroborates views put forward by beutel and gorb  <cit> , mckenna and farrell  <cit> , and wiegmann et al.  <cit> , though the clade mecoptera + siphonaptera was not well supported in the latter study. a sister group relationship between diptera and siphonaptera as retrieved in beutel et al.  is highly unlikely based on our analyses.

with this study, we do not contribute to the question whether mecoptera are a monophyletic group as only one species, nannochorista philpotti, was part of our taxon sampling. however, morphological data  <cit>  and analyses of nine nuclear genes  <cit>  strongly suggest that mecoptera indeed form a monophyletic group.

in summary, we inferred a solid phylogenetic backbone of holometabola, with three maximally supported mega-diverse clades hymenoptera, neuropteroidea, and mecopterida, with approximately  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  described species, respectively. for the well-defined unit comprising neuropteroidea and mecopterida we suggest the name aparaglossata . the name refers to the loss of the paraglossae, one of the most conspicuous apomorphies of the group .

plesiomorphic groundplan characters are marked with an asterisk *. for a full list and for apomorphies found for additional subgroups see additional file  <dig>  chapter  <dig>  characters apply to adults if not mentioned otherwise. for groups marked with § behind taxon name, no selection but rather all obtained apomorphies are listed. groundplan characters and apomorphies were inferred from the morphological datamatrix of beutel et al.  <cit>  and the interordinal topology of the ml tree of dataset  <dig> by formal character mapping in mesquite  <cit> .

our compilation of molecular sequence datasets and our design of the phylogenetic analysis exhibit some major differences compared to earlier studies on the phylogeny of holometabola. specifically, i) we used a massive amount of data generated with illumina next generation sequencing . ii) we ensured decisiveness of our datasets by specifically designing datasets for each of our seven research questions  . decisiveness means that all genes included in a dataset are covered by at least one representative of all taxonomic groups that are relevant for the specific phylogenetic relationship under study. accordingly, each dataset has a coverage of 100% in terms of presence of genes, with respect to the relevant taxonomic groups. by ensuring decisiveness, we alleviate the potentially misleading effects of missing data. missing data can lead to inference of highly supported but wrong topologies . iii) we performed fclm  <cit>  for each of our seven datasets . we re-implemented fclm in raxml to cope with these large-scale data matrices and complemented the method by newly-written scripts that map respective results into 2d simplex graphs. bootstrap support in phylogenetic trees alone is of limited conclusiveness in analyses of very large datasets  <cit> . fclm is a method to identify possible support for alternative topologies in a dataset, i.e., a method to display incongruent signal that might not be observable in phylogenetic trees. this study is the first to apply fclm to large phylogenomic supermatrices. finally, iv) we checked all datasets for rogue taxa. rogue taxa are taxa that assume multiple phylogenetic positions in a set of bootstrap trees. they decrease resolution and/or support, for example, when building bootstrap consensus trees. removing rogues may produce a more informative bootstrap consensus tree  <cit>  . all our datasets were free of rogues.

with a compilation of datasets as presented here  we also ensured that inferred topologies were not based on an arbitrary selection of genes with respect to their inherent phylogenetic signal. dell’ampio et al.  <cit>  showed that the selection of genes – if not driven by considerations concerning decisiveness of a dataset – can generate topologically different trees that may nonetheless all exhibit high support. furthermore, simon et al.  <cit>  showed that genes involved in different biological pathways can support different topologies for a specific phylogenetic relationship. it can therefore be concluded that phylogenetic trees inferred from studying only a set of few to several genes are easily biased and thus might not reflect the correct species tree. while the currently best approach to address this problem is to include the maximum feasible amount of potentially informative data, we will have to further disentangle the contributing factors of topological incongruences in datasets .

phylogenetic studies exclusively based on morphology  also yielded problematic groupings in some cases. the authors addressed and discussed apparent artifacts that were mainly caused by parallel reductions in character complexes . however, the problems turned out as intractable given the data and analytical procedures at hand  <cit> . with our molecular datasets we were able to provide reliable solutions for most interordinal phylogenetic relationships within holometabola . for tracing evolutionary changes on the phenotypic level we used the most extensive morphological dataset presently available, including  <dig> characters of representatives of all holometabolan orders and of carefully selected outgroup taxa  <cit> . the characters were mapped onto the transcriptome-based phylogeny in a formal approach . this allowed us to trace and re-interpret evolutionary changes of numerous characters and to conduct parsimony-based groundplan reconstructions for all clades of the tree .

the evolution within holometabola
larvae and development
our phylogenetic results suggest that the ancestral larva of holometabola was terrestrial, orthognathous, equipped with moderately simplified but distinctly developed compound eyes, and well developed thoracic legs. abdominal prolegs and cerci were absent . the muscle system was generally well developed. distinct simplifications of the antennae and labial endite lobes and associated muscles are larval autapomorphies of holometabola. the orthognathous head in the groundplan suggests that the earliest holometabolan larvae were feeding externally on plant material or fungi and not burrowing in substrate or penetrating narrow crevices .

the ancestral aparaglossatan larva was likely prognathous and equipped with stemmata. whether these larvae were of the agile campodeid type, like the larvae of many beetles , strepsiptera , neuropterida, and some groups of trichoptera , remains unclear. it is conceivable that this larval type is an apomorphic condition characterizing neuropteroidea, with parallel evolution in trichoptera. prognathism is often linked with carnivorous feeding habits , but can also be related with penetrating narrow crevices or burrowing in substrates, as it is the case in the wood-associated larvae of archostemata , but also in early lepidopteran lineages . thus, it is unclear whether or not the ancestral aparaglossatan larvae were predaceous. larvae of mecopterida display some simplifications , and a distinct trend towards reductions characterizes antliophoran larvae, especially those of siphonaptera and diptera. both have entirely lost their thoracic legs  and are characterized by simplifications of cephalic structures, especially of the muscle system  <cit> . this reflects the widespread larval life history in antliophora, with larvae living in the upper soil layer, leaf litter, moist substrates, or different water bodies, feeding mainly on soft substrates or small particles. the important question whether ancestral antliophoran larvae were terrestrial  or aquatic  remains ambiguous.

our phylogenetic results clearly indicate that a typical holometabolous development with larvae completely lacking external wing buds  and also lacking cerci belongs to the groundplan of holometabola . the conditions characterizing strepsipteran primary larvae  and secondary larvae  are apparently the result of reversals, like the early appearance of the prospective compound eyes . largely immobilized pupae with immobilized mandibles  have almost certainly evolved several times independently. it appears likely that a mobile pupa with movable mandibles as it is characteristic for raphidioptera is ancestral for holometabola even though this is not confirmed by a formal character analysis.

adults and egg deposition
the ancestral holometabolan adult apparently differed only slightly from the neopteran groundplan . cephalic structures, the entire muscle system, the flight apparatus, and abdominal structures appear largely unmodified  <cit> . the most profound apomorphies in adult holometabolan insects are related to the invagination of the pterothoracic sternites   <cit> . our data do not lead to a reliable assessment of ancestral feeding habits of holometabolan adults, but it is apparent that feeding in the adult stage played a minor role compared to feeding in the larval stages. exceptions to this rule are for instance predaceous beetles  with a very rapid postembryonic development and long-lived adults.

distinct morphological character transformations characterize the rise of aparaglossata: the reduction of the labial endite lobes , including muscles, the distinct modification of the orthopteroid ovipositor, and possibly the reduced number of malpighian tubules )  <cit> . our results do not allow for an unambiguous reconstruction of the ancestral condition of the flight apparatus for holometabola and aparaglossata. it appears plausible that approximately equally sized pterothoracic segments  are plesiomorphic for aparaglossata, but the reconstruction of the ancestral state of this character in the formal analysis remained ambiguous. as pointed out above, the question whether or not coleopterida is a monophylic group is not completely settled. however, it appears plausible to assume that posteromotorism evolved only once in a common ancestor of strepsiptera and coleoptera, with a suite of related features, such as the size reduction of the mesothorax, a distinct reduction of the mesothoracic muscle system  <cit> , and an increased size of the metathorax. a distinct anteromotorism as it is present in hymenoptera, trichoptera, “higher” lepidoptera, and diptera is possibly ancestral in holometabola, but it is conceivable that this condition has evolved  several times independently .

wing coupling mechanisms have apparently evolved independently in hymenoptera , trichoptera, lepidoptera, and some families of neuroptera .

the primary mode of egg deposition in holometabola was very likely endophytic, as it can be assumed for the groundplan of hymenoptera . this mode of egg deposition is arguably maintained in the groundplan of neuropteroidea. raphidioptera have a modified, elongated ovipositor which they use to deposit eggs under bark or into ground litter. this resembles egg deposition as assumed for the groundplan of holometabola and hymenoptera; however, it might also be a derived character. the complete or nearly complete reduction of elements of the primary ovipositor is a characteristic of mecopterida and obviously related with superficial egg-deposition or oviposition in soft substrates. our results mostly confirm an evolutionary scenario for the female postabdomen and egg-deposition as outlined in detail in hünefeld et al.  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our transcriptome-based phylogenetic results allowed a reconstruction of transformations of morphological characters of larvae and adults. to summarize our findings, we show a hypothesized ancestral holometabolan larva in figure  <dig>  and a selection of adult and larval groundplan features in table  <dig> . the ancestral state of the adult thorax remained ambiguous. three main holometabolan types are shown in figure  <dig> . a selection of apomorphic features of the major subgroups of holometabola whose phylogenetic origins have now been elucidated is presented in table  <dig> .

for the first time in insect systematics a scenario for transformations on the phenotypic level is based on a strictly formal procedure, using a well-documented comprehensive morphological data-set in combination with analyses of phylogenomic data. our combined approach may lead to a new level of reciprocal enlightenment between researchers with a main focus on morphology and molecular data, respectively, and eventually to new and well-founded insights into the evolution of hexapoda and other groups of organisms.

