BACKGROUND
synchronization between neurons in motor cortex and motor units has been extensively investigated since the early 90s. a major break through was a study on monkeys showing that cortical and motor oscillations were synchronized with the motor units of the contralateral muscles  <cit> . conway et al. <cit>  showed for first time this mechanism in humans: using one meg channel they recorded the cortical motor activity and the surface electromyogram  of a contralateral active muscle during maintained voluntary contraction. applying coherence analysis, these authors demonstrated coherence between cortical rhythms and rectified emg confined to the beta  frequency range. they interpreted this beta-range synchronization as evidence for the involvement of the cortical motor neurons in the motor units' synchronization.

for the last ten years, research on the beta-range cmc has shown that it is task dependent  <cit> , that it reflects attention and precision  <cit> , compliance of the gripped objects  <cit> , displacement  <cit> , magnitude of force  <cit>  and learning processes  <cit> . a major step towards understanding the functional significance of the beta-range cmc during steady-state force was provided only recently: kristeva, patino & omlor  <cit>  demonstrated that the cmc correlates with motor performance, namely that increased beta-range cmc improves motor performance. therefore, the authors suggested that the beta-range cmc reflects effective corticospinal interaction.

although the studies mentioned above have extended our knowledge about motor control, the investigation of the cmc was restricted mainly to steady-state motor output . this contrasts with the existence of many dynamic processes in daily life, which generally require constant adaptation of the motor outputs. moreover, it has been suggested that static and dynamic force can be controlled by fundamentally different processes within the central nervous system  <cit> . these arguments call for the investigation of cmc under dynamic condition. in a recent study of us the eeg-emg coherence during a steady-state motor output was compared to a periodically modulated dynamic isometric force output  <cit> . in the static condition, significant coherence was confined to the beta-range. in the dynamic condition, the most distinct coherence occurred in the gamma-range and the significant beta-range coherence was strikingly reduced. we concluded that during dynamic force the corticospinal oscillation mode shifts towards higher  frequencies for the rapid integration of the visual, somatosensory and cognitive information required to produce the appropriate motor command.

the aim of the present study was to investigate the modulation of the cmc by the amplitude of the periodically modulated dynamic force. two dynamic force amplitudes were selected for this purpose. the periodically modulated target force, which had to be compensated isometrically by the subject, had the same frequency but different amplitudes. static force was used as the control condition. additionally, we investigated cortical spectral power  and the motor performance during all three conditions.

we confirmed our previous result  <cit>  that cmc is predominantly confined to gamma-range during dynamic force condition. moreover, we show that the gamma-range cmc during dynamic force output is amplitude independent, i.e. that gamma-range cmc is not modulated by changes in target force amplitude, at least for the range of amplitude modulation and level of force investigated.

RESULTS
behavioral performance
all subjects performed the task according to the instructions. none of the subjects reported fatigue during the experimental session.

the lowest absolute performance error was observed in the static force condition  and the highest one in the large dynamic  force condition. the absolute performance differences between the three conditions were statistically significant . in detail, the pair-wise comparisons yielded statistical significance between sf than small dynamic  condition , between sf and ld condition , and between sd and ld condition . the mean absolute performance error across all  <dig> subjects is shown in fig.  <dig> .

however, no significant difference between both dynamic conditions was observed for the relative performance errors .

corticomuscular coherence 
significant broad-band coherence during sf and during both dynamic conditions was observed. for subjects  <dig> to  <dig>  coherence was most pronounced over the left motor cortex contralateral to the active right index finger  with the flexor digitorum superficialis and, for subjects  <dig> and  <dig>  with the first dorsal interosseus. cmc during sf output was observed as expected in the beta-band. during both dynamic conditions, cmc was principally in the gamma band, which confirms our previous findings  <cit> . inter-individual differences were however found. figure  <dig> displays original curves of cmc in the three conditions , as well as the grand average for all eight subjects.

subject  <dig>  representative of the majority of the subjects , showed as expected beta-range cmc with a maximum peak at  <dig>  hz in the sf condition. in the sd force condition, cmc was observed predominantly in the gamma-range , with some significant beta-range cmc which was however lower than in the sf condition. in the ld condition, only a prominent gamma-range cmc peak at  <dig>  hz was observed.

two other subjects  displayed quite different patterns. subject  <dig> had cmc at higher beta frequencies during sd as compared to sf and, in the ld condition, cmc predominantly in the gamma-range without any beta. it is important to note that for this subject during the sf output the predominant peak occurred at  <dig>  hz which was reduced in sd condition. the second subject with a different cmc pattern  showed during sf condition cmc in high beta and low gamma band. during both, sd and ld conditions, the main cmc occurred at higher frequencies in the gamma band.

when the results were pooled for all subjects  the following picture occurred: in the sf condition a significant broad-band beta cmc was observed with maximum amplitude ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  across subjects. in the sd condition, the most prominent cmc occurred in the gamma-range with two predominant peaks at  <dig>  and  <dig> hz. this gamma-band cmc yielded amplitude values from  <dig>  to  <dig> . one significant peak also remained in beta-range at  <dig>  hz but was smaller than in the sf condition . in the ld condition, only one significant cmc peak in the gamma-band  was obtained with an amplitude in the range from  <dig>  to  <dig> . the beta-range cmc decreased significantly compared to that in the sf condition .

in general terms, we observed a shift of the cmc from lower to higher frequencies  when comparing static and dynamic conditions  which is in accordance with our previous study  <cit> . this shift is best visualized on the display of the individual cmc centres of gravity .

in  <dig> subjects, the centre of gravity was shifted from beta- to gamma-range, between the sf and sd condition, the extent of this shift varying between  <dig> and  <dig> hz. in subject s <dig> we did not obtain any shift over the frequency range 15– <dig> hz and subject  <dig> showed the shift within gamma-range. the cmc frequency shift between sf and ld force occurred in all subjects and ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> hz. the difference in the dominant frequencies of the cmc among the three conditions was statistically significant . the shifts to higher frequencies between sf and sd as well as between sf and ld were highly significant . in contrast, we did not find any statistically significant difference in cmc frequency between both dynamic force conditions .

cortical motor spectral power 
we calculated eeg spectral power for the channel of maximal coherence. fig.  <dig> shows the eeg spectral power for all subjects investigated and the grand average. we observed a beta-range sp decrease in six out of the eight subjects investigated  in sd condition and in five subjects  in ld condition, as compared to sf. however, the beta- and gamma-range sp differences among the three conditions were not statistically significant.

emg spectral power
fig.  <dig> shows the emg spectral power data. we observed statistically significant differences among all three conditions in both frequency ranges, beta  and gamma . the highest emg sp was observed during ld condition and the lowest emg sp during sf . the paired wilcoxon test revealed significant differences for both frequency ranges in the comparisons between sf and sd , between sf and ld , and between sd and ld .

discussion
the main goal of the present study was to determine whether the amplitude modulation of dynamic force output has an influence on the cmc. our results show that the frequency range of synchronization and the amount of cmc during the two dynamic conditions with different amplitudes are similar. consistent with our previous work  <cit>  we found a cmc shift from lower frequency  during static force output to higher frequency  during dynamic force output.

comparison of motor performance between sf, sd and ld
slobounov, hallett & newell  <cit>  hypothesize that the increase in performance error corresponds to task difficulty. in our case, the lowest absolute error was during sf condition and therefore, we conclude that sf was the easiest task to control and perform. the finding that the error in ld is significantly higher than in sd suggests that large dynamic force condition has a higher level of difficulty. however, the similar relative errors indicate that sd and ld conditions were controlled by the subjects in a similar way. this means that the two dynamic conditions have the same level of difficulty for the subjects.

cortical and spinal neurons are synchronized at gamma frequency during dynamic force conditions
our results clearly show that during isometric compensation for a periodically modulated force with two amplitudes the cmc is in a similar frequency range, predominantly at gamma frequencies, and also occurs with similar amplitude. this demonstrates that the amplitude of dynamic force does not modulate the cmc. the following aspects make both dynamic conditions similar:  both dynamic forces have a similar temporal pattern, as the modulation frequency is the same.  thus, both dynamic tasks require the same level of prediction and therefore, readiness to respond should also be the same.  thus, we can hypothesize that both sd and ld conditions required from the subjects a similar level of attention.  if the amount of attention and prediction are similar, the complexity of processing involved in motor planning should be also similar  <cit> .

during both dynamic conditions, neurons in motor cortex and spinal motoneurones are synchronized at higher frequency  compared to the static force condition. moreover, the degree of this shift was the same for both dynamic conditions. therefore, we conclude that both sd and ld force conditions require the same level of sensorimotor and visual integration. this is well in line with the similar motor performance in both dynamic conditions, revealed by the similar relative errors.

taking the frequency range of cmc into account, we found large inter-individual differences for both beta- and gamma-band . this is the reason for the low strength of cmc in the grand average . these large inter-individual differences in the beta-range correspond to previous results in humans  <cit>  and monkeys  <cit> . the large inter-individual differences in the gamma-range also are in accordance to our previous findings  <cit> . these present data support the assumption that frequency and strength of cmc are characteristic for every single subject.

our findings about eeg spectral power confirm the complicated relationship between spectral power and cmc described by others  <cit>  and ourself  <cit> . in this respect, it is important to note that the cmc increase in our experiment is not associated with higher eeg power. for example subject  <dig> in fig.  <dig> shows in sf high sp in beta and gamma range while the cmc in this condition was restricted to beta range. the clarification of this relationship surely requires further exploration, e.g. using electrocorticogram.

possible function of gamma cmc activity
a number of previous studies suggest that the gamma-range cmc could be the consequence of greater attention to the task  <cit>  and that it is connected to the readiness to respond  <cit> . in  <cit>  we showed that during the control of a more complex task like our visuomotor dynamic force modulation the sensorimotor system is synchronized at gamma frequencies to rapidly integrate visual, proprioceptive, tactile and cognitive  information.

an investigation on the deafferented patient gl showed that the proprioceptive feedback is mandatory for the genesis of gamma-range cmc  <cit> . our present observation that the amplitude of the dynamic force does not modulate the cmc suggests that changes in proprioceptive input during dynamic forces in the range from  <dig>  to 4% mvc were not distinct enough for this modulation.

CONCLUSIONS
to conclude, during the control of dynamic forces, the brain engages into a neural state characterized by synchronization at gamma range to rapidly integrate visual, prioprioceptive, tactile and cognitive information and timely recalibrate the motor system to generate the required force, independently of its magnitude.

