BACKGROUND
the origin of genetic novelty is of great interest in evolutionary biology. as mutation is the ultimate source of all genetic variation, understanding the mutational processes that lead to novel genomic features such as new genes, expression patterns or system interactions is paramount. the most commonly invoked mutational source of genetic novelty  is either segmental or whole genome duplication  <cit> . more recently, the role of duplicative transposition – the copying and pasting of particular dna sequences from one part of genome to another – has been shown to play an important role in the evolution of new genes . evidence from the human and mouse genomes indicates that, in addition to providing the source of the transpositional machinery, transposable elements   <cit>  can also provide the template dna for new genes or regulatory sequences  <cit> . however, to understand the general role of te domestication in eukaryotic genome evolution, it is important to assess the acquisition of functional te sequences by host genomes in a variety of different species, and to understand in greater depth the population dynamics of these mutational events.

here we have investigated the incorporation of tes into mature transcripts in the fruitfly drosophila melanogaster, a species about which much is known in terms of the sequence and function of genic and intergenic regions. to do so, we searched for potentially domesticated "chimeric" transcripts  backed by experimental support in the form of expressed sequence tag  evidence . the focus of this study is gene-te associations contained within mrna transcripts , so here we do not consider tes that are either wholly contained in introns or located in the immediate vicinities of genes. an advantage of our approach is that the gene-te chimeras identified are supported by experimental evidence rather than just by coordinate overlaps or mere proximity , and thus enriches for a subset of te insertions that may contribute to functional gene evolution in the host.

in addition, we have assessed the presence in wild populations of gene-te chimeras identified using the genome sequence, to gain insight into the evolutionary forces acting on these mutations in nature. using a pooled-pcr strategy, we estimated population frequencies for a sample of chimeric te insertions in north american strains of d. melanogaster. by comparing population frequencies of chimeric tes to those of non-chimeric tes of the same family from similar genomic contexts, we evaluated whether chimeric tes generally segregate either at unusually high frequencies  or at unusually low frequencies . these results also revealed which of the gene-te chimeras detected in the genome sequence are likely to be constitutive components of the d. melanogaster transcriptome.

by comparing our set of gene-te chimeras to the entire set of annotated genes and tes in the d. melanogaster release  <dig> euchromatin, we show that a chimeric te insertion has a much lower probability than a non-chimeric te insertion of existing in the sequenced strain. this extreme paucity of chimeric tes can be explained by the simple fact that te insertions generating chimeric transcripts are likely to be strongly deleterious for the host. however, we find that the population frequencies of observed chimeric tes are generally indistinguishable from similarly paired non-chimeric te insertions, and we find that some chimeric te insertions can be found at high frequency in north american populations. this pattern indicates that chimeric te insertions observed in the genome sequence do not differ substantially from non-chimeric tes in their selective effects, and that the d. melanogaster transcriptome permits a low-level flux of chimeric transcripts that may contribute to the formation of new gene sequences. finally, we discuss the possibility that chimeric transcripts explain the curious phenomenon of regulated somatic expression of te transcripts in the developing drosophila embryo.

RESULTS
identification of chimeric gene-te transcripts in the d. melanogaster genome
in order to study the functional integration of te sequences into host genes, we identified te insertions present in mature transcripts of the d. melanogaster euchromatic release  <dig> genome sequence. we call such transcripts "chimeric" as each of them has one component from a host gene and one from a te insertion. in addition to using the standard methods in the field for directly finding genes and tes that share overlapping coordinates or querying annotated transcripts directly for te sequences  <cit> , we also sought evidence for chimeric transcripts using a novel three-step process based on expressed sequence tags  . this indirect method of identifying gene-te chimeras was necessary to avoid annotation biases resulting from the fact that "coding exons were not annotated in sequences with homology to transposable elements"  <cit>  in the d. melanogaster genome.

in total, we found  <dig> protein-coding genes that produce chimeric transcripts supported by est evidence . these chimeric transcripts involve  <dig> different te insertions, but the relationship is not simply one-to-one: in two cases, te insertions  occur in overlapping 3'utrs of convergently transcribed neighboring genes producing two separate chimeric transcripts each ; and in one case, three te insertions are found in a chimeric transcript for a single gene  on the 4th chromosome. in addition, we found one noncoding transcript, the αγ-element  <cit> , which is generated by two te insertions within a larger nest of tes situated between the hsp <dig> ba and bbb genes. our screen appears to have high sensitivity as evidenced by the fact that we identified four of the five exonic te insertions previously reported in  <cit>  ; the single exonic jockey insertion in the gene cg <dig> reported in  <cit> ; and the chimeric transcript generated by a doc insertion into the gene chkov <dig>  reported in  <cit> . we did not identify the bari- <dig> insertion in cyp12a <dig> recently reported in  <cit> , which is supported by est evidence, since the region of overlap  does not pass our length threshold.

we note that six of the  <dig> chimeric te insertions identified by blast-based methods do not have corresponding tes in the release  <dig>  annotation. however, unannotated tes of the correct family can be found in the genome sequence for these chimeric te insertions . this result indicates that an unknown proportion of real te insertions has not been annotated in the release  <dig> genome sequence . to be able to analyze aspects of chimeric tes in the context of the genome annotation, we excluded these six te insertions from the "annotated set" of  <dig> te insertions, although we do consider them to be bona fide members of the "total set" of  <dig> potential gene-te chimeras in the d. melanogaster genome.

properties of chimeric gene-te transcripts
most of the  <dig> genes generating the total set of chimeric transcripts are of unknown function, but we did identify chimeric transcripts in  <dig> characterized protein-coding genes including brown , a gene that appears to be a hot-spot for natural te insertions  <cit>  and is known to carry a viable mutation  in the sequenced strain  <cit> . our in silico screen also identified a chimeric te insertion generated by the serine protease encoding gene tequila that has recently been shown to impair the transcription of this gene, but with no apparent phenotypic consequences  <cit> . a general analysis of the molecular function and cellular localization of the total set of genes with chimeric transcripts, however, did not indicate a significant enrichment of any particular gene ontology  category .

relative to other non-chimeric tes inserted in transcribed regions , the annotated set of tes present in chimeric transcripts is significantly enriched for ltr insertions . this observation largely accounts for the fact that the annotated set is also enriched in long tes , since ltr insertions tend to be longer than other classes of te insertion in the genome  <cit> . furthermore, chimeric tes have a greater tendency to be present in high-recombination areas of the genome than non-chimeric, intronic te insertions . however, the overabundance of chimeric tes in regions of high recombination is not caused simply by the fact that chimeric transcripts are preferentially formed by ltr insertions, since high-recombination te insertions are over-represented among the chimeric non-ltr  elements even more strongly than among the chimeric ltrs .

te sequences are found in utrs in most of the chimeric transcripts they generate:  <dig> of the  <dig> te insertions are found in 3'utrs,  <dig> in the 5'utrs and  <dig> in coding exons. we note that these numbers total more than  <dig> because two te insertions  fall into multiple categories. the higher incidence of tes in utrs and specifically in 3'utrs parallels findings in the human and mouse genomes  <cit> . the increased prevalence of te insertions in 3'utrs may be attributed to the increased average length of 3'utrs  relative to 5'utrs  in drosophila  <cit>  , or to the lower density of functional signals in 3' regions relative to 5' regions of genes. this pattern does not appear to result from biases in the est libraries, since over  <dig> times more 5' ests were analyzed than 3' ests  <cit> .

surprisingly, the genes involved in chimeric transcripts are not always those nearest to the sites of the corresponding te insertions. four chimeric transcripts skip one or more genes between the gene and te components of the transcript , thereby creating nested or intercalated gene arrangements. the process of gene- or exon-skipping in chimeric transcript formation suggests a novel mutational mechanism to explain the surprisingly large proportion of nested genes in the d. melanogaster genome   <cit> , as well as the evolution of complex intercalated gene structures that cannot arise via simple mechanisms of gene duplication.

paucity of tes in mature transcripts indicates that chimeric te insertions are generally strongly deleterious
of the  <dig>  valid tes in the release  <dig>  annotation of the d. melanogaster genome sequence, we estimate that  <dig> are chimeric te insertions with some component co-transcribed in an exon,  <dig> are transcribed but entirely contained within spliced intronic sequences, and  <dig>  are entirely contained within intergenic sequences not currently annotated as transcribed. a similar rank order pattern of te abundance in different functional compartments has been observed in the arabidopsis thaliana genome  <cit> . these numbers of te insertions deviate significantly from their expected proportions based on the genome annotation of the  <dig>  mb release  <dig> sequence  . this deviation from expectations is the result of two factors: there are fewer tes in transcribed regions than in intergenic regions   <cit> , and there is a further reduction in exonic regions relative to intronic regions . the reduction in transcribed regions, however, is not solely caused by under-representation in exonic sequences, since the number of intronic te insertions is reduced relative to the number in intergenic regions . together, these results indicate that there is a paucity of chimeric te insertions in the genome, and that the causes of this paucity go above and beyond the effects of simply being transcribed.

to estimate the extent to which the number of exonic te insertions is reduced while controlling for the effect of transcription per se on the distribution of tes, we use the number of intronic tes and the length of the intronic compartment of the genome to estimate the proportion of unobserved chimeric te insertions. the total length of intronic regions in the d. melanogaster genome is approximately  <dig>  mb and the total length of exonic regions is  <dig>  mb  <cit> . if the selective pressures on exonic tes were similar in magnitude to those on intronic tes we would expect to find approximately 414* =  <dig> te insertions in the predicted exonic  regions of the genome. the fact that we detect only  <dig> chimeric tes out of an expected  <dig>  indicates that a chimeric te insertion is much more likely to be highly deleterious to the organism than a non-chimeric te insertion that is spliced out of a mature transcript. these results are consistent with previous findings in the human genome, that the proportion of te-derived sequence increases with increasing distance upstream from the start of transcription  <cit> .

these calculations are based on a comparison of the annotated set of chimeric te insertions relative to the total set of annotated te insertions. as noted above, however, our results reveal that an unknown proportion of tes in the release  <dig> sequence were not annotated in  <cit> . if we assume that the frequency of unannotated tes in intronic regions is proportional to that of the unannotated te insertions in our sample , the expected number of te insertions in exonic regions would increase to 310* <dig>  =  <dig>  thus, using the total set under this proportionality assumption, the percentage of chimeric te insertions detected relative to expectation is little changed . to the extent that the number of unannotated te insertions in introns is proportionally higher than in our sample, the percentage of observed chimeric te insertions decreases even further, strengthening the claim for a paucity of chimeric te insertions relative to expectation.

observed chimeric tes are not under unusual selective pressures
we estimated that ~80% of the tes that have been inserted into mature genic transcripts are immediately purged from the genome by strong purifying selection, and therefore are not observed in the sequenced strain. what about the remaining ~20% of chimeric te insertions that we do detect? we can envisage three scenarios to explain the existence of these chimeric te insertions: 1) they are under strong purifying selection, like the te insertions we do not observe; 2) they are adaptive, contributing useful sequences to the host genome; or 3) they are neither particularly deleterious nor particularly advantageous in comparison to the observed non-chimeric te insertions in the genome.

in order to evaluate these possibilities, we surveyed the frequencies of chimeric te insertions in wild d. melanogaster populations. the presence of each te was tested in six pools of 8– <dig> north american strains  using a pcr procedure custom-designed for each chimeric te . pool frequencies were used to estimate confidence bounds on population frequencies using a maximum likelihood procedure .

we were able to generate population data for  <dig> of the  <dig> annotated chimeric te insertions. twenty-seven chimeric te insertions were found only in the sequenced strain, seven were found in all six-strain pools and  <dig> had intermediate pool frequencies. these proportions of absent  and polymorphic  chimeric tes are very similar to a combined, non-random sample of  <dig> non-chimeric te insertions with previously reported population frequency data that map to annotated release  <dig> tes: absent  and polymorphic   <cit> . the negative effects of intronic te insertions on transcription do not strongly affect this non-chimeric sample, since similar proportions of absent and polymorphic te insertions are observed in intronic  and intergenic  regions.

to determine whether the chimeric te insertions are, on aggregate, subject to unusual selective constraints, we compared each of their pool frequencies to those of similar, non-chimeric te insertions . by "similar," we mean that these te insertions came from the same family as their chimeric counterparts, that they had similar lengths, and were inserted in areas with similar recombination rates . since the selective constraint on a te insertion is expected to increase with its length and the recombination rate of its genomic neighborhood  <cit> , we tried to bracket each chimeric te with a pair of similar non-chimeric family members: one with slightly higher, and one with slightly lower, length and recombination rate . our null hypothesis was that the chimeric te insertions are neither particularly deleterious nor particularly advantageous in comparison with their non-chimeric counterparts. if this null hypothesis is true, we expect the pool frequencies of non-chimeric te insertions in column  <dig> of table  <dig> to be no higher, and the pool frequencies in column  <dig> to be no lower, than those of the chimeric te insertions in column  <dig> 

for the set of  <dig> te insertions for which we have population data, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no difference in pool frequencies between chimeric and non-chimeric te insertions. neither the wilcoxon one-sided test nor the kruskal-wallis test reject the null hypothesis in favor of the alternative that pool frequencies of chimeric tes are significantly higher than those of their counterparts with greater lengths and recombination rates . this indicates that, in general, the fact that a te insertion is chimeric does not increase the likelihood that it is at higher population frequency and is therefore potentially adaptive. similarly, we find no evidence that chimeric tes in general have pool frequencies lower than those with shorter lengths and lower recombination rates . thus, the fact that an observed te insertion is chimeric does not increase the likelihood that it is deleterious.

while we do not provide evidence for unusual selection pressures acting on chimeric te insertions overall, we do find a few exceptions to this general rule when te insertions are analyzed on an individual basis. as shown in figure  <dig>  by comparing pool frequencies of chimeric tes to those of the two types of non-chimeric counterparts, we detect evidence for two exceptional chimeric te insertions. one, a doc insertion , which creates a truncated version of the putative choline transferase gene chkov <dig> , has a significantly elevated population frequency  and has been reported previously to be a putatively adaptive te insertion  <cit> . the second, a pogo  insertion into the fructose-bisphosphate encoding gene fbp, has a significantly decreased population frequency  and is likely to be more deleterious than similar non-chimeric pogo insertions.

discussion
we conducted a thorough search for te insertions in the mature transcripts of genes in the sequenced d. melanogaster genome. to do so we used three different computational methods, including a novel, indirect est-based approach . as with all est-based bioinformatics methods, this new approach to finding gene-te chimeras is subject to biases in est library composition. such an approach was necessitated by annotation biases in the drosophila genome that would have caused any direct analysis of annotated transcripts to underestimate the number of putative chimeric transcripts in the genome. despite these conflicting biases, most of the  <dig> genes generating chimeric transcripts were identified by more than one method , although each method revealed unique chimeric te insertions. thus, multiple complementary approaches should be used in genome-wide studies of te domestication to overcome both annotation and methodological biases.

even using multiple methods for detecting chimeric transcripts, we estimate that only  <dig> % of protein coding genes in drosophila generate chimeric transcripts. clearly the number of chimeric genes would be expected to increase somewhat with better annotation and/or increased est coverage. nevertheless, the number of chimeric transcripts in the drosophila genome is likely to be more than an order of magnitude less than in the human and mouse genomes, where an estimated 27% and 18% of genes contain te sequences  <cit> . these results together also suggest a rank order relationship between the proportion of chimeric genes and the amount of te dna in a genome   <cit> ; however, further studies are needed to evaluate the strength and generality of this trend. even a low number of gene-te chimeras, such as presently observed in the d. melanogaster genome, may in the long-term contribute to the evolution of new transcripts and help explain unusual aspects of genomic organization structures such as nested or intercalated genes.

the low number of chimeric transcripts observed is not just the result of random effects of sparse te insertion or the deleterious effects of tes on transcription in the d. melanogaster genome. in fact, we found far fewer chimeric te insertions in the genome than expected, relative to the number of non-chimeric te insertions found in introns. this result indicates that the majority of te insertions that occur in mature gene transcripts have a much higher probability of being deleterious than non-chimeric, intronic ones. the paucity of chimeric te insertions in exons relative to introns demonstrates that the deleterious effects of chimeric te insertions must exceed the cost of simply being transcribed, and probably results from improper translation or disruption of other functions of the mrna such as localization or stability. many of these unobserved events may contribute to the genome-wide load of deleterious mutations found in natural populations of d. melanogaster  <cit> .

population frequencies of the chimeric te insertions observed in the genome sequence of the isogenized y; cn, bw, sp strain on the whole do not differ significantly from those of their non-chimeric counterparts. this does not imply that chimeric te insertions found in the sequenced strain have no effects on fitness; rather that the distribution of their fitness effects is not substantially different from that of the non-chimeric te insertions located elsewhere in the genome. at worst the observed chimeric te insertions may be weakly deleterious and counter-selected, in contrast to the unobserved chimeric te insertions, which are presumed to be strongly deleterious and purged rapidly from the population.

there is, however, some indirect evidence that chimeric te insertions may in fact be less weakly deleterious on average than non-chimeric te insertions. if te insertions are weakly deleterious, we expect a skew towards genomic regions of lower recombination where natural selection is less effective due to increased linkage between alleles of opposing selective effects  <cit> . this effect can be observed in the distribution of non-chimeric, intronic te insertions, but is not observed in the distribution of chimeric te insertions . thus, a typical observed chimeric te insertion may in fact have a smaller negative effect on fitness than a typical non-chimeric te insertion. this conclusion is supported by a lack of detectable fitness effects in direct experimental challenges on flies carrying the chimeric te insertion detected in the tequila  gene  <cit> .

the one te insertion we did identify as putatively adaptive  was previously identified in a randomly chosen set of ~ <dig> tes  <cit> . we conclude that, in a search for adaptive te insertions, selecting chimeric te insertions is no better than selecting tes from the drosophila genome at random. this is perhaps not surprising, considering our finding that there is nothing unusual about the fitness effects of observed chimeric te insertions. it is possible, however, that our inability to detect a significant difference in selection pressures resulted from the relatively small sample of both chimeric and control te insertions studied here. consideration of a larger number of strain pools will provide us with more statistical power and might show effects of chimerism on te fitness that were not detected in this study.

regardless of the forces that may have governed their history, we did identify seven chimeric te insertions that appear to be at high frequency or possibly even fixed in north american populations of d. melanogaster. the existence of high frequency or fixed chimeric transcripts in the genome may provide a possible explanation for the curious observation of complex patterns of somatic gene expression exhibited by many ltr retrotransposons in d. melanogaster  <cit> . these largely-unexplored patterns of transcription are typically explained either by the existence of regulatory elements internal to the te  or by the co-option of external cellular regulatory elements in the vicinity of a te insertion   <cit> . the presence of chimeric transcripts in the d. melanogaster genome demonstrated here suggests a third possible mechanism for the observed pattern of somatic te expression: read-through transcription of a host gene into a te and cross-hybridization to a te specific probe. under this model, regulated expression of a host gene that produces a chimeric transcript could be interpreted as regulated expression of the te included in the chimeric transcript.

we sought evidence for the possibility of read-through transcription as an explanation for regulated te expression by querying the second release of the bdgp in situ database  <cit>  for embryonic expression patterns of the tes and genes involved in chimeric transcripts detected in this study. remarkably, as shown in figure  <dig>  we found that the embryonic expression pattern for developmental stages 11– <dig> of the gene cg <dig> is almost identical to the expression pattern determined directly for the  <dig> element that is involved in the chimeric transcript generated by this gene.

can read-through transcription from cg <dig> explain the pattern of expression of the  <dig> element? we believe the answer to this question is no, for the simple reason that the probe used to determine the expression patterns of the  <dig> element  shares no sequences for potential cross-hybridization with the chimeric cg <dig> transcript . in addition, the te insertion in cg <dig> is not fixed, whereas the pattern of  <dig> element expression is similar among different strains , suggesting that the presence of the  <dig> element insertion in cg <dig> is not required for embryonic expression pattern of the  <dig> element.  thus in the case of the  <dig> element, we conclude that the best candidate gene in the d. melanogaster genome cannot explain somatic te expression by production of a read-through chimeric transcript. clearly more data will be necessary to evaluate the generality of this conclusion, but the lack of a role for read-though transcription in this case is generally consistent with the paucity and low population frequencies of the chimeric te insertions in the d. melanogaster genome  and with growing evidence for internal enhancer elements controlling regulated te transcription  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in contrast to mammalian genomes, we found that fewer than 1% of drosophila genes produce mrnas that include bona fide te sequences, and that the vast majority of potential chimeric te insertions are likely to be deleterious and therefore unobserved in the genome sequence. of those chimeric te insertions that have weak enough negative fitness effects to have been observed in the sequenced d. melanogaster genome, over half are restricted to the sequenced strain and fewer than ~15% are likely to be fixed and therefore contribute to the origin of new gene sequences in the d. melanogaster genome. the relatively low numbers of fixed chimeric te insertions also argue against read-through transcription as a predominant mechanism for generating patterns of somatic te transcription in drosophila embryos. these results also highlight the need to establish the fixity of putative cases of te domestication identified in other genome sequences in order to demonstrate their functional importance, and indicate that the process of te domestication may vary drastically among animal taxa.

