BACKGROUND
translational power is the rate of protein synthesis of a cell or culture, normalized to the amount of biomass invested in the protein synthesis machinery. we are introducing the term 'translational power' to describe precisely the same concept  that was originally defined as 'ribosome efficiency'  <cit> . in recent years, this concept has more commonly been called 'translational efficiency'  <cit> , particularly in discussions of codon usage bias  <cit> . although we are reluctant to depart from established terminology, we do so to avoid an inconsistency with the meaning of 'efficiency' as it is used in many other areas of science and in common parlance. in the physical sciences and in many areas of biology, the efficiency of a process refers to a comparison of output to input, in particular to the fluxes of useful energy and/or mass . these scientific meanings of 'efficiency' are consistent with the common notion that a process obtaining the desired output with little waste is highly efficient.

according to these conventions, calculations of efficiency make no direct reference to the rate at which a process occurs. physicists and engineers use a distinct term, 'power,' to refer to the rate of energy consumption or the rate at which work is performed  <cit> . the semantic distinction between power  and efficiency is important, because in many real and idealized physical systems, the laws of thermodynamic result in an inherent tradeoff between power and efficiency  <cit> . in biology, several attempts to argue for the universality of power-efficiency tradeoffs  <cit>  have justifiably been criticized for the misapplication of thermodynamic arguments  <cit> . nonetheless, many specific tradeoffs have been demonstrated in a wide range of organisms that can be described as evolutionary choices between power  and efficiency   <cit> . among bacteria, comparisons of coexisting species or strains have also provided evidence for power-efficiency tradeoffs  <cit> , as have comparisons of engineered mutant strains  <cit> . however, the absence of apparent tradeoffs in some carefully designed studies of bacteria demonstrates that such tradeoffs are not inevitable  <cit> . even if power-efficiency tradeoffs occur only in some biological contexts, it is valuable to maintain a semantic distinction between power  and efficiency .

however, the terms 'ribosome efficiency' and 'translational efficiency' blur this distinction, because they refer to a rate – the quantitative measure of ribosome efficiency  <cit>  is expressed in units of . we prefer the term 'translational power', which refers to the rate of protein synthesis of a cell or culture, normalized to the mass of the translational apparatus, in a manner that is more consistent with the connotations of 'power' and 'efficiency' derived from other areas of science and from colloquial usage. translation rate  is one component of translational power, but translational power reflects other properties of the protein synthesis system as well, most notably the fraction of ribosomes that are active . intuitively, translational power measures the capacity of the protein synthesis subsystem to drive replication of the cell, the protein-dominated autocatalytic system to which it belongs.

the concept and a quantitative metric of translational power were first introduced to facilitate comparisons of translational performance between different growth rates within a single bacterial strain  <cit> . the initial belief that translational power is nearly constant in a strain across a wide range of growth rates, based both on empirical data and theoretical arguments  <cit> , has gradually given way to the current understanding that translational power increases with growth rate, at least in e. coli  <cit> . the question of whether translational power varies between microbial species has been investigated only rarely, in four studies that each compared a single slowly-growing microbial species to e. coli  <cit> . in each case, translational power was found to be higher in e. coli than in the slowly growing comparison strain. although each of these studies discusses this unexpected result, only one of them references the same result from another study. in previous work, the consistent association of low translational power with slowly growing microbes appears to have escaped notice; however, our reanalysis of the data from these four studies as well as additional published data  suggests that the association is robust.

one factor capable of affecting translational power is the biased usage of synonymous alternative codons. in the standard translational code,  <dig> of the  <dig> amino acids are encoded by more than a single codon, but in many microorganisms, synonymous codons are not used with equal frequency. the pattern first found in e. coli and bacillus subtilis turns out to be common: the majority of genes within an organism show a preference for the same subset of codons, but the degree of bias towards the preferred subset is correlated with the expression level of the gene  <cit> . for some time, the consensus has been that such a pattern reflects selection for translational power  <cit> . codon bias increases translational power because preferred codons tend to be translated more rapidly than synonymous alternatives  <cit> . this effect can be attributed to the high abundance of trnas cognate to the preferred codons, to a canonical base pair interaction at the codon wobble position between preferred codons and their cognate trnas, or to both these factors  <cit> . codon bias resulting from selection for translational power  is correlated with gene expression level because the benefit accrues during each instance of translation, so the selective pressure for preferred codons is stronger in more highly expressed genes  <cit> .

in contrast to the codon bias caused by translational selection, codon bias that is consistent in both magnitude and direction in genes that vary widely in expression level is explained most easily by mutational bias acting on dna  <cit> . while the effects of both translational selection and mutational bias are evident in some microbial genomes with moderately biased g+c content  <cit> , organisms with strong mutational bias  have been reported to show very little  <cit>  or no  <cit>  evidence of translational selection. theoretical calculations indicate that if the strength of mutational bias exceeds a certain critical threshold, any pre-existing codon preferences that conflict with the mutational bias will be reversed  <cit> . in this case, codon use is almost entirely determined by the mutational bias, which influences genes equally regardless of expression level. note that while the degree of codon bias and the gene expression level would not be correlated among genes from such a genome, this does not necessarily imply that deviations from the average  codon usage would be selectively neutral, nor that the fitness effects of any such deviations would be independent of gene expression level.

the absence of a correlation between codon usage and gene expression level has also been reported in some organisms with moderate g+c content, in particular the spirochete treponema pallidum  <cit>  and the proteobacteria helicobacter pylori  <cit> . the lack of evidence for translational selection in these organisms requires an explanation, since they lack a strong mutational bias that could obscure such evidence. it has been suggested that rapid exponential growth confers little or no fitness benefit in these strains  <cit> , consistent with their slow growth rate and other characteristics of their ecological niche. if so, these organisms would not experience selection for translational power.

if variation in the strength of selection for translational power leads to differences in the degree of codon bias between microbes , we wondered whether differences in codon bias could in turn explain the observed differences in translational power between microbes. an estimate of the effect of biased codon use on the overall rate of translation would depend on knowledge of absolute or relative translation rates in vivo for each codon. unfortunately, these data are incomplete even for e. coli, and are not available for other microbes. therefore, we approach the issue by framing the following question: how much faster is the translation rate of e. coli than the expected translation rate of a hypothetical organism that has the same proteome composition and the same investment in translational machinery as e. coli, but which lacks codon bias? here we report results from a simple mathematical model developed to address this question.

for convenience, we will refer to the hypothetical e. coli-like organism with uniform use of synonymous alternative codons as 'uni'. by 'same proteome composition', we mean that over a cell generation, each amino acid is incorporated into protein the same number of times in uni and in e. coli, although for the  <dig> amino acids specified by multiple codons, the individual codons will differ in frequency. by 'same investment in translational machinery', we mean that the total biomass of the translational apparatus is the same in uni and in e. coli, although ideally the allocation of that biomass among various components of the apparatus in uni would be optimized for unbiased codon usage. however, in order to apply empirical codon-specific translation rate data, we will impose a more stringent requirement on uni, that the abundance of each individual component of the translational apparatus will be unchanged in comparison to e. coli. due to this restriction, and due to the incomplete data for codon-specific translation rates, we make no claim to be able to answer our question precisely. however, our approximations are adequate to conclude that differences in codon bias alone are unlikely to account for differences in translational power of the magnitude inferred from macromolecular analysis of slowly growing and rapidly growing microbes.

RESULTS
comparisons of translational power among microbes
we know of  <dig> studies that have made explicit comparisons of translational power between different microbial species; in each case, the comparison was made between e. coli and a single slowly growing strain  <cit> . one of these studies relied on original measurements of e. coli  <cit> ; the remaining studies made comparisons using the e. coli data of bremer and dennis  <cit> . although growth rates and translation rates vary with temperature  <cit> , at least  <dig> of the  <dig> studies  <cit>  compared data from strains grown at different temperatures without compensating for temperature effects. one of  <dig> studies that made comparisons based on the number of ribosomes per cell volume appears to have assumed that e. coli cell volume is constant over a range of growth rates  <cit> , which is unlikely. we have reanalyzed the data from these studies  to provide consistent comparisons of translational power between e. coli and other strains. in addition, we applied the same comparative methodology to every microbial species for which we could find the requisite data in the literature. the list of species that could be included is surprisingly short; most studies reporting both the protein and rna content of microbes growing at known rates have involved e. coli or closely related enteric bacteria. table  <dig> summarizes the comparisons of translational power between e. coli and all other species.

the comparisons of translational power in table  <dig> are based on the fastest growth rate for which data are available for each of the comparison organisms, because at submaximal growth rates, there may be a reduction in the average translation rate  <cit> , in the active fraction of ribosomes  <cit> , or both. either of these phenomena would reduce translational power. however, the comparisons to e. coli are not always based the fastest e. coli growth rate, but rather on the growth rate at which e. coli makes a comparable investment in the translational apparatus as the comparison organism. a comparison at similar investment levels reflects the expectation that the selective pressure to maximize translational power increases with the biomass invested in the apparatus  <cit> . if the comparisons had always been made to the fastest e. coli growth rate , the disparity in translational power would be greater for most of the comparisons shown.

even with the conservative comparisons displayed in table  <dig>  the published data suggest that translational power varies considerably between strains, particularly for comparisons between microbes adapted to different ranges of growth rates. while translational power is higher in e. coli and other rapidly growing organisms, it is lower in slowly growing organisms, ranging from less than 17% to 42% of the value for e. coli. hence, if differences in the degree of codon bias are to explain these differences in translational power, we would expect codon bias to be capable of accelerating the rate of translation by  <dig> -fold to 6-fold. in summarizing the comparisons of table  <dig> as a contrast between slowly growing and rapidly growing microbes, we are not relying on the actual growth rates shown in the third column, especially since chemostat growth rates are necessarily constrained below the maximal growth rate for a strain. instead, we have relied both on well-recognized growth characteristics for some species , and on the number of copies of the ribosomal rna  operon per genome. high rrn copy number is an adaptation permitting rapid growth  <cit> , while low rrn copy number is characteristic of microbes adapted for slow growth  <cit> .

estimates of the translation rate benefit of codon bias
we define the translation rate benefit of codon bias in e. coli as sbias, the fractional increase in the time required to replicate the e. coli proteome if the actual codon bias of e. coli were to be replaced with uniform use of synonymous codons  in methods). our estimates of sbias depend on the relative translation rates of individual codons in vivo, and on the frequency with which each codon is used in synthesizing the proteome. the sources we have used for these data, and the details of several adjustments made to the source data, are described in the methods section. all data used in our estimates of sbias are presented in table  <dig>  because the codon-specific translation rate data are incomplete even for e. coli, we have explored  <dig> different scenarios  for extrapolating from the empirical rate data to obtain an estimate of sbias over all codons. scenarios 1– <dig> are increasingly complex, and represent deliberate attempts to assign translation rates to the unmeasured codons in a way that increases sbias while remaining consistent with patterns found in the empirical data. furthermore, in scenario  <dig>  we apply a theoretical approach  <cit>  for predicting optimal codon-specific translation rates that does not rely on empirical translation rate measurements at all, but only on codon frequency and trna abundance data.

estimates of sbias for all scenarios are presented in figure  <dig>  the empirical translation rate data used in scenarios 1– <dig> reflect ternary complex selection at the ribosomal a-site, but not translocation of the newly-formed peptidyl-trna from the a-site to the p-site  <cit> . thus, for these scenarios we show two estimates of sbias that are based on different assumptions regarding the relative duration of translocation and ternary complex selection. the white bars of figure  <dig> are based on the assumption that the duration of translocation is negligible for all codons in comparison to the duration of ternary complex selection. the cross-hatched bars of figure  <dig> are based on the assumption that translocation requires a finite amount of time that is constant for all codons, but short in comparison to the time required for ternary complex selection  <cit> . in scenario  <dig> the duration of translocation is not treated explicitly, but the theoretical rate predictions refer to the entire cycle of translational elongation. hence, we have grouped the estimate from scenario  <dig> with other estimates that account for the duration of translocation. our estimates of the benefit of codon bias in e. coli relative to the complete absence of codon bias range from  <dig>  –  <dig>  if translocation time is neglected, or from  <dig>  –  <dig>  with the more realistic assumption that translocation requires a short amount of time.

we have also estimated the benefit of codon bias in e. coli relative to the limited degree of codon bias that might be found in an actual low-bias organism, rather than making a comparison to the biologically unrealistic standard of strictly uniform synonymous codon use. we took t. pallidum as our example of a microbe with limited codon bias, since it is a slowly growing bacterium with little mutational bias  that has also been reported to lack translational selection  <cit> . the t. pallidum genome has the second-most uniform codon use over all predicted genes  among  <dig> bacterial and archaeal species for which complete genome sequences were available in june,  <dig> . our method for generating a set of low bias codon frequencies from t. pallidum genome codon frequencies is described in methods. estimates of the translation rate benefit of codon bias for e. coli relative to low bias codon frequencies are shown by the black bars of figure  <dig>  again assuming a short, invariant duration of translocation. the estimated benefits range from  <dig>  –  <dig> ; as expected, these estimates are smaller than estimates derived from a comparison to strictly uniform codon usage. because the theoretical estimates of scenario  <dig> fall in the middle of the corresponding ranges of empirical estimates from scenarios 1– <dig>  we are confident that our results are not merely an artifact of unrecognized errors in the empirical rate measurements.

the benefit of codon bias calculated for individual amino acids
our definition of sbias can be applied over any subset of codons, in particular, it can be applied to the codons of each amino acid separately. while all amino acids with multiple codons except proline contribute positively to sbias in all scenarios, the magnitude of that contribution is highly variable between amino acids . codon bias accelerates the translation of most amino acids only slightly in e. coli, because most non-preferred codons are not particularly rare in the e. coli proteome, compared to the preferred synonym. for example, among the  <dig> amino acids encoded by  <dig> codons, on average the preferred codon is  <dig> -fold more abundant than the non-preferred codon. of these amino acids, asparagine shows the greatest difference between preferred and non-preferred codon frequencies, with gac being  <dig> -fold more abundant than gau. even if the disparity in codon-specific translation rates is unrealistically large, the ratio of the frequencies of preferred to non-preferred codons in e. coli constrains the maximum possible value of sbias. for asparagine, even if the preferred codon were translated instantaneously , the difference between using the non-preferred codon at 16% of asparagine residues in e. coli instead of at 50% of asparagine residues in uni corresponds to only about a 3-fold acceleration of translation  for this amino acid. with more realistic disparities between the translation rates of preferred and non-preferred codons, the largest estimate of sbias for asparagine in any of our scenarios is less than  <dig> . in other words, we estimate that codon bias in e. coli leads to no more than a 20% decrease in the time required to translate all asparagine codons in the proteome .

the amino acids with the largest values of sbias are leucine, isoleucine, and arginine . although these amino acids are not rare, they possess between them the six rarest codons in e. coli, each encoding less than  <dig> % of the proteome.  the frequencies of the most and the least abundant synonyms for leucine, isoleucine and arginine differ by 74-fold, 83-fold, and 1460-fold, respectively.  since the translation rates measured or assumed for the  <dig> rarest codons are quite slow, their increased abundance in uni accounts for the much of the additional time required for replicating the uni proteome. if these six codons remained as rare in uni as they are in e. coli, while all other synonymous codons were used without bias in uni, the translation rate benefit estimated under scenario  <dig>  would be reduced by almost half . the influence of these  <dig> codons is such that the estimate of sbias is quite sensitive to the translation rates assigned to them, in contrast to the relative insensitivity of sbias to the exact translation rates assigned to most codons.

discussion
we want to know whether reduced codon bias could account for the lower translational power measured in at least some slowly growing bacteria, in comparison to e. coli. we approach this issue by its converse, calculating how much faster the proteome is replicated in e. coli than it would be in the complete absence of codon bias. if we take our estimates at face value, we would conclude that even during rapid growth when the proteome is most biased and translation is fastest, sbias is unlikely to be much larger than  <dig> , which corresponds to a 2-fold increase in the average translation rate. an effect of this magnitude approaches the smaller disparities in the comparisons of translational power between e. coli and slowly growing strains shown in table  <dig>  but could not explain the roughly 5-fold difference in translational power between e. coli and s. alaskensis, r. prowazekii, halobacterium cutirubrum, or sulfate-reducing strain pt <dig>  however, there are two reasons to think that the benefit of codon bias for e. coli, in comparison to most actual slow-growing organisms, is even less than this estimate.

the first reason is that we have prevented our hypothetical uni from adapting to the codon frequencies we have assigned to it, by keeping the abundance of each component of the translational apparatus fixed. the data do not suggest that maximizing translational power has been the only selective pressure influencing codon use in e. coli  <cit> . if it had been, the codon with the highest rate constant for ternary complex selection among synonymous alternatives would always be the preferred codon, since it would permit faster translation with a lower biomass investment in cognate trna. of  <dig> amino acids with multiple codons for which codon-specific translation rate measurements exist  <cit> , leucine, serine and proline are not consistent with this prediction. on the other hand, it seems clear that selection for rapid translation has exerted some, and perhaps the major influence on the coevolution of codon frequencies and trna abundance in e. coli. the codon with the highest rate constant is the preferred codon for  <dig> of the  <dig> amino acids for which data are available. other considerations  may have been more influential than the inherent characteristics of the codon-anticodon interactions for determining the preferred codons encoding leucine, serine and proline. however, the importance of rapid translation remains evident in that e. coli still translates the preferred codons quickly for  <dig> of these  <dig> amino acids, albeit with a larger investment in trna than would be necessary if the interaction between the preferred codon and its cognate trna occurred more readily.

at a larger scale, the correlation across all codons between frequency and cognate trna abundance  <cit>  is best explained as a response to selection for rapid translation, as is the pattern of increased bias towards rapidly translated codons with increased levels of gene expression  <cit> . without asserting that the distribution of trna abundance in e. coli necessarily produces the fastest possible translation rate for the e. coli codon frequency distribution, it is clear that selection for translational power has been a significant factor in the coevolution of codon frequencies and cognate trna abundances in e. coli. thus, it is very unlikely that we have attained the maximum possible translation rate for uni by matching the e. coli distribution of trna abundance values  to the very different codon frequency distribution of uni. for this reason, our estimates confound the translation rate benefit of codon bias in e. coli with the penalty of a suboptimal allocation of translational resources in uni.

the second reason that our approach overstates the relative benefit of codon bias for e. coli in comparison to actual slow-growing organisms is that actual microbes are not completely devoid of codon bias. assessing sbias in e. coli in comparison to a biologically plausible standard for low codon bias, instead of in comparison to the implausible standard of no codon bias whatsoever, reduces the estimated benefit in e. coli by about half . only a slight bias in codon use is sufficient to obtain a substantial benefit of faster translation because only a few codons in e. coli are translated much more slowly than the median rate . moderate avoidance of only these few codons can provide a considerable acceleration of the average translation rate without generating a dramatic bias in overall codon use.

our estimate of a biologically plausible standard for low bias codon frequencies is deliberately conservative, underestimating the degree of bias expected in most slowly growing microbes, for two reasons. first, our low bias codon frequencies are based on the genome codon frequencies of t. pallidum, as if all predicted genes in the genome were expressed equally. correspondence analysis performed at the level of individual genes failed to uncover evidence that codon use varies with expression level in t. pallidum  <cit> . if this were true, the proteome codon frequencies would indeed be similar to genome codon frequencies, regardless of variability in gene expression levels. however, a more sensitive analysis using codon frequencies summed over a set of putative high expression genes indicates that codon use in such genes is more biased than codon use in the genome as a whole. this conclusion is based on a comparison of wright's effective number of codons  <cit>  calculated for codon frequencies summed over all predicted genes annotated as ribosomal proteins or translation elongation factors  or calculated for codon frequencies summed over all predicted genes in the genome   <cit> . the failure to observe this low level of codon bias in the previous analysis based on individual gene sequences  <cit>  can probably be attributed to high gene-to-gene variability in codon frequency estimates based on the small samples of codons represented by individual genes. thus, even for t. pallidum, the proteome codon frequencies appropriate for estimating the benefit of codon bias will be more biased than the genome-derived low bias codon frequencies shown in table  <dig> 

the second reason our low bias codon frequencies underestimate the degree of codon bias in most slowly growing microbes is that t. pallidum is essentially free of the influence of mutational bias, with a genome g+c content of  <dig> %. in contrast, many slow-growing microbes have more extensive codon bias that can be attributed mostly or entirely to the biased nucleotide composition of the genome . if codon bias derived from mutational bias, like codon bias derived from translational selection, permits more rapid translation for the same investment in translational machinery, the use of low bias codon frequencies derived from t. pallidum will underestimate the translation rate of many slow growing strains. we believe that codon bias derived from mutational bias does, indeed, have the potential to accelerate translation.

the translation rate benefit of codon bias depends on matching preferred codons with cognate trnas that are abundant and/or that form  <dig> canonical base pairs  <cit> . even when codon use is determined by mutational bias in the dna replication and repair systems  <cit> , not by selection acting simultaneously on codons and their cognate trnas via translation-associated effects, selection for translational power can influence the relative abundance and anticodon sequence of trna species. relatively few mutations are sufficient to influence the identity and abundance of trna molecules in an organism, in comparison to the number of mutations required to influence proteome codon frequencies.  hence, the mutation-selection balance argument invoked to explain diminished codon bias in genes expressed at low levels in many strains  <cit>  also suggests that the distribution of trnas can be influenced by translational selection that may be too weak to create a dramatic effect on codon usage. in fact, if codon use is biased in the same direction in all genes , instead of being biased only in highly expressed genes, it would increase the selective pressure for adaptation of the trna pool. hence, it would be very surprising if the anticodons and the relative abundances of trna molecules in organisms with high or low g+c content did not reflect their biased use of codons.

this prediction is confirmed by the only two studies we have found of trna abundance in microbes with extreme g+c content, involving mycoplasma capricolum   <cit>  and micrococcus luteus   <cit> . m. capricolum, but not m. luteus, can be considered a constitutively slow-growing strain. as expected, cognate trna abundance in both organisms is correlated with codon frequency, both across all codons and within synonymous codon families  <cit> . for m. capricolum, this is accomplished largely without the trna gene dosage effects that are important for e. coli  <cit>  and b. subtilis  <cit> , since  <dig> of the  <dig> m. capricolum trna genes are present in only a single copy  <cit> . these examples indicate that selection for translational power is operative even for organisms in which the codon bias is determined by mutational bias instead of translational selection, and even for slowly growing organisms. because codon bias from any source can be exploited to obtain higher translational power, the estimates of sbias for e. coli compared to codon frequencies derived from t. pallidum will overstate the benefit that exists for e. coli relative to most other slowly growing microbes that have greater mutational bias.

in summary, we believe the translation rate benefit of codon bias in e. coli is likely to be less than  <dig>   relative to an actual slow-growing organism that shows limited codon bias, such as t. pallidum, and substantially less than  <dig>  relative to a slow-growing organism with more extensive codon bias. we do not mean to suggest that the advantage of translating as much as 60% faster than a competitor is unimportant. clearly, the benefit of codon bias for e. coli must be substantial, considering that it arises from the aggregate effect of many thousands of preferred codons that are stably maintained in the e. coli genome, despite the randomizing influence of mutation acting at each individual codon. on the other hand, the influence of codon bias on the average translation rate is far smaller than the differences in translational power observed between microbes adapted to different ranges of growth rates. for differences in codon bias to explain the difference in translational power between e. coli and s. alaskensis, sbias would have to be about 5; to explain the difference between e. coli and r. prowazekii, sbias would have to be about  <dig> 

is it possible that the comparisons of translational power presented in table  <dig> are flawed? the colorimetric assays used for rna and protein measurement in these studies are indeed dependent on procedural details, such that comparisons between laboratories and between studies are less reliable than comparisons within a study. nonetheless, variation between species in the estimates of translational power presented in table  <dig> do not appear to result simply from large random errors around a common mean. estimates of translational power for slowly growing species with few rrn operons cluster around low values; the reverse is true for species capable of rapid growth with higher numbers of rrn operons. in addition, our own measurements of  <dig> bacterial species  reproduce the same pattern; we have found differences in translational power that are comparable in magnitude to those shown in table  <dig> <cit> . hence, we believe the comparisons in table  <dig> are an adequate representation of the differences in translational power between rapidly growing and slowly growing microbes.

CONCLUSIONS
because codon bias influences translational power, and because the degree of codon bias due to translational selection may differ systematically between rapidly growing and slowly growing strains, we investigated the parsimonious hypothesis that observed differences in translational power between microbial species could be explained by differences in the degree of codon bias. however, based on the analysis reported here, such an explanation is not plausible. instead, differences in translational power between rapidly growing and slowly growing species suggest that the translational apparatus itself has different performance characteristics in rapidly growing and slowly growing microbes.

