BACKGROUND
rates of molecular evolution often correlate positively with taxonomic diversity in angiosperms  <cit> . however, it has been difficult to distinguish among the many competing hypotheses for why clades with fast rates of nucleotide substitution  also seem to be more speciose than clades with relatively conserved non-coding dna regions. hypothesized causes of the positive relationship between molecular evolution and diversification may be divided into two categories. hypotheses for extrinsic causes suggest that aspects of a clade's ecology  affect rates of both molecular evolution and diversification, but these rates do not directly affect each other . hypotheses for intrinsic causes suggest that speciation or extinction events directly influence the average rate of molecular evolution for a clade, or conversely, suggest that rates of molecular evolution directly influence speciation or extinction events . a large body of previous work indicates that extrinsic, ecological effects are likely important contributors to the relationship between rates of diversification and molecular evolution. for example, shifts in environment, life history, or key innovations may subsequently influence both diversification and substitution rates  <cit> . however, it remains unclear whether there also remains a direct effect of diversification on rates of molecular evolution, or vice versa, when major ecological traits are accounted for. if such a direct relationship linking diversification and speciation rates does exist, then the form of this relationship may reveal evolutionary genetic processes involved in historical speciation events  <cit> , potentially improving our understanding of when and how speciation and extinction will occur.

previous studies focused on establishing the ubiquity of the positive correlation between diversification and molecular evolution across plant clades, but often were unable to distinguish among the four major, published hypotheses for what drives the relationship . these previous studies of evolutionary rates commonly employed sister group comparisons, obtaining the result that the more speciose sister clade has longer branches, on average, than its species-poor sibling. this measure is limited because it does not discriminate between the effects of speciation vs. extinction on extant diversity, leaving uncertainty in which of these two evolutionary processes are actually correlated with nucleotide substitution rates. without controlling specifically for each of these factors, it is impossible to determine whether a direct relationship exists between the processes of either speciation or extinction and rates of nucleotide substitution. furthermore, using sister group comparisons, it is impossible to directly test for variation in the tempo of evolution within clades . if populational processes occurring during speciation directly cause the increases in average substitution rates observable across a phylogeny , then substitution rate heterogeneity should also be observable across a phylogeny, with shorter branches  exhibiting higher substitution rates than longer branches. however, previous studies have not tested for this. with sister-group comparisons, it is also difficult to rule out a confounding statistical artifact that affects the relationship between diversification and substitution rates, known as the node density effect . in sister-group comparisons, the response variable  is often correlated with the confounding variable . hugall and lee  <cit>  discuss methods to correct for this, and find that only by extensive resampling of the sister clades can one detect and account for nde using sister group comparisons.

instead of performing sister group comparisons, i constructed molecular-clock dated phylogenies for  <dig> angiosperm clades using internal transcribed spacer  regions of nuclear ribosomal dna. based on the generated phylogenies, i estimated speciation and extinction rates, the mean rate of nucleotide substitution, and the coefficient of variation in nucleotide substitution within each clade. these parameters were then compared across clades using phylogenetically independent contrasts . by choosing  <dig> diverse angiosperm genera as independent clades for units of comparison rather than sister groups, i was able to determine if the correlation between diversification and substitution rates is robust and generalizable across a range of plants. with sister-groups, each clade can only directly be compared with its sibling. however, regression analysis of multiple, independent clades allows estimation of the general form of the relationship across angiosperms, which can be used to make general predictions.

i selected clades for comparison that exhibit similar life histories and environments, where ecological similarities across compared clades are not due to common ancestry . although it is impossible to completely control for ecological differences, such an approach can reduce their magnitude of effect and allow me to determine if, after minimizing major differences in habit, geography, and life history, a relationship remains between substitution rates and speciation. if such a correlation exists, then i can tentatively rule out extrinsic, ecological explanations for variation in evolutionary rates  for the purposes of this study . if no relationship between speciation and substitution rates is detected after controlling for habitat and life history, i can reject an intrinsic, causal explanation .

within each of the  <dig> clades under consideration, i calculated speciation and extinction using a birth-death diversification model, which calculates rates of speciation and extinction as independent parameters and allows for incomplete sampling of clades  <cit> . this method maximizes the likelihood of obtaining the observed tree, given particular values for speciation  and extinction  rates. because μdepends on λ, i calculated the relative extinction rate  for use in further analyses. if substitution rates are positively correlated with speciation and uncorrelated with extinction, hypotheses  <dig> or 3a  would be supported. if, instead, substitution rates are negatively correlated with extinction and uncorrelated with speciation, this would rule out both hypotheses  <dig> and  <dig> and would require a new, alternative hypothesis. if substitution rates correlate positively with both speciation and extinction, this would rule out hypothesis  <dig> and most strongly support hypothesis 3b. maximum likelihood birth-death estimates of speciation and extinction rates, unlike other diversification measures, are not directly derived from the numbers of nodes over time, and should therefore be immune to nde. these estimates can be compared to the effects of node density on substitution rates, thus directly controlling for hypothesis  <dig> 

using substitution rates derived from calibrated molecular clocks rather than from sister groups, i was also able to determine if the among-branch variation in the mean its substitution rate for each clade is correlated with increased speciation. if so, this would support hypothesis  <dig>  suggesting that populational processes associated with speciation events cause accelerated bursts of molecular evolution and therefore increase the average rate of its substitution on short branches relative to the average rate for longer branches. if the regularity, or clock-like behavior, of its evolution is unaffected by the rate of speciation, this result would be more consistent with hypothesis  <dig> 

RESULTS
values for λ, ε, and its substitution rates for each clade are listed in table  <dig>  across clades, mean its substitution rate  was positively correlated with log: least squares regression of contrasts , r <dig> =  <dig> , slope =  <dig> , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> . using branch lengths of  <dig>  which corresponds to a punctuational  model of trait evolution  <cit> , least squares regression of contrasts , r <dig> =  <dig> , slope =  <dig> , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> . for the non-phylogenetic correlation , r <dig> =  <dig> , slope =  <dig> , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig>  . this positive relationship suggests that the correlation between diversification and rates of molecular evolution is due to a process of enhanced speciation rates in faster-evolving lineages, rather than decreased extinction. in further support of this conclusion, the mean its substitution rate was also marginally positively correlated with transformed values of relative extinction, ε2: least squares regression of contrasts , r <dig> =  <dig> , slope =  <dig> , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> . for the pic correlation assuming punctuated rate changes, r <dig> =  <dig> , slope =  <dig> , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> . for the non-pic correlation, r <dig> =  <dig> , slope =  <dig> , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig>  . this marginally positive correlation suggests that faster substitution rates also promote or are otherwise associated with the process of extinction. a positive correlation between its rate and ε is inconsistent with hypothesis  <dig>  and consistent with hypothesis  <dig> 

estimates for speciation rate , extinction rate , relative extinction rate , mean rate of nucleotide substitution at the its <dig> and its <dig> loci , and the coefficient of variation  in mean substitution rate . confidence intervals  for diversification rates were calculated from their likelihood profiles. 95% hpd  intervals for its rates are from beast  analysis of mcmc output.

variation among branches of the same tree in its sequence evolution  was not correlated with log  nor with ε <dig> , suggesting that neither increased speciation nor extinction events introduced increased deviations from the background pace of non-coding molecular evolution. this result , in addition to the suggested positive relationship between substitution rates and extinction, refutes hypothesis  <dig> 

in contrast to the positive relationship between its substitution rates and log, substitution rates were uncorrelated with node density . this lack of correlation confirms that the positive relationship between maximum likelihood speciation and extinction parameters and substitution rates calculated by beast are not artifacts of nde, ruling out hypothesis  <dig>  furthermore, the number of sequences used in constructing each tree did not affect the mean substitution rate  or the c.v. in substitution rate , ruling out the possibility that the positive relationship between log and mean its rate was spuriously generated by sampling more sequences in some clades, which could increase the chances of sampling a lineage with a high substitution rate by chance. finally, clade age was uncorrelated with mean substitution rate , indicating that the significant correlations reported here were not spuriously caused by calibration date uncertainty.

discussion
my choice of clades was designed to minimize effects of the most-commonly reported potential ecological drivers of this relationship, habit and biogeographical range. after partially controlling for these predominating ecological drivers of diversification and mutation rate, a relationship exists between its substitution rates and both speciation and, marginally, extinction. these results suggest that a direct, potentially causal, intrinsic relationship exists between the average rate of molecular evolution within a clade, and the rate of both speciation and extinction within that clade.

the hypothesis best supported by these results is 3b, indicating that clades with higher rates molecular evolution at non-coding loci  likely also experience higher rates of molecular evolution at coding loci . an increase in mutational genetic variation causes increases in phenotypic variation that can facilitate both speciation  and extinction . these results do not rule out hypothesis 3a, however. although hypothesis 3a does not explain the marginally significant relationship between substitution and extinction rates , it is also possible that a fast rate of molecular evolution increases the rate at which genetic incompatibilities accumulate between populations. further studies incorporating information on mating system and the hybridization abilities within these clades are needed to determine if this is the case.

these results provide evidence to falsify hypothesis  <dig>  suggesting that rates of molecular evolution may not provide a 'signature' of past speciation events  <cit> . therefore, analysis of rate heterogeneity may not allow us to distinguish historical processes of speciation . when testing specifically for a relationship between speciation rates and the coefficient of variation for substitution rates , the relationship was found to be absent in this data set. this indicates that while substitution rates might briefly increase during speciation events, these interludes cannot be detected in the phylogeny using current methods; overall higher rates of substitution observed across the tree for speciose clades are not caused by punctuated increases at speciation. these results suggest that the result of faster evolution in more speciose clades is not sufficient evidence to support the punctuated evolution model of speciation .

because these results suggest that the rate of nucleotide substitution is a cause rather than an effect of speciation, this leaves the causes of variation in rates of substitution to be explained. substitution rates are in part determined by the efficiency of dna replication and repair mechanisms  <cit> . potential explanations for the differences in substitution rates among clades are that substitution rates are phylogenetically conserved, or that they are correlated with genome size . however, using this data set, i did not detect a phylogenetic signal for substitution rate  or any correlation of substitution rate with average genome size within each clade . finally, finer distinctions between the ecologies of these clades than what i was able to control for here likely also affect the reported relationships. in future work with these clades, i will examine fine-scale ecological effects on diversification.

CONCLUSIONS
plant species from clades characterized by high nucleotide substitution rates tend to both speciate and go extinct at higher rates than species from more slowly-evolving clades. high substitution rates are due to large mutational genetic variance experienced at the population level, which increases both adaptive potential within populations and reproductive isolation between populations, which can facilitate the process of speciation. however, elevated mutational genetic variation also leads to extinction, likely via the genetic load it imposes. the causes of substitution rate variation across clades with similar ecologies are not well known.

one important question generated by these results is whether substitution rates can be applied to predict these and other clades' responses to environmental change. the ability of a population to adapt to a rapidly changing environment is directly proportional to its mutation rate  <cit> , which provides the necessary phenotypic variation to allow populations to respond to novel selection pressures. the results reported here suggest that high mutation rates also allow clades to speciate more rapidly, diversifying into new niches . clades exhibiting fast substitution rates may therefore be more likely survive rapidly changing or novel environments, in spite of the fact that they otherwise have increased chances of extinction because of their relatively higher levels of mutational genetic load.

