BACKGROUND
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies  or prion diseases are a group of fatal neurodegenerative disorders which include creutzfeldt–jakob disease  and kuru in humans, bovine spongiform encephalopathy  in cattle, scrapie in sheep and goats and chronic wasting disease  in deer and elk. experimental evidence supports the concept that the causative agent is comprised of a misfolded isoform  of the normal, ubiquitously expressed cellular protein, prpc <cit> . the two proteins are of identical primary sequence and share the same posttranslational modifications yet are distinct in their physicochemical properties. the detection of accumulated prpsc following post-mortem is a reliable marker for the presence of infection and forms the basis of the majority of diagnostic tests. currently there is no cure or treatment for these diseases and the development of high throughput diagnostics to detect disease prior to the onset of clinical signs are still required. to date there are no validated blood tests for sheep scrapie and the most promising pre-mortem tests involve biopsy of lymphoreticular tissue and immunohistochemical  examination  <cit> .

conversion of prpcin vivo is presumed to occur following direct interaction with the pathogenic protein, which acts as a template to drive the conformational change to prpsc. sustained propagation, largely in the central nervous system, results in the accumulation and deposition of the pathogenic protein. this conversion can be reproduced in vitro using the technique protein misfolding cyclic amplification  which was pioneered by soto and colleagues  <cit> . pmca allows propagation of prpscin vitro from very small amounts of undetectable seeding material to quantities sufficient for detection by western blot or plate-based immunoassays. this ultra-sensitive method has been previously applied to identify prions in a wide range of tissues and fluids from scrapie-infected sheep  where only small amounts of the infectious agent reside  <cit> . given its unique ability to detect prions in readily accessible tissues and at preclinical stages of the disease it presents a viable method for a live animal, preclinical test for prion disease.

the application of pmca to detect prpsc from infected sheep had previously been focused on infected sheep with highly susceptible genotypes and from a single endemic scrapie infected flock. the data from these studies showed that pre-mortem and pre-clinical testing for prion diseases could be achieved  <cit> . however, these studies were not representative of the diversity of scrapie strains or prnp genotypes observed in sheep. within the present study we aimed to determine whether scrapie from diverse locations and prnp genotypes in great britain  could be amplified in vitro and therefore whether pmca could be used universally as a putative diagnostic tool for a wide range of primary isolates of classical scrapie.

RESULTS
amplification of classical scrapie field isolates by pmca
prions derived from brain tissue from sheep infected with classical scrapie of  <dig> different prnp genotypes  were used to seed pmca reactions. these amplifications used either vrq homozygous and/or arq homozygous brain substrates from prion-free sheep as a source of prpc for conversion. a total of  <dig> sheep were initially tested from diverse geographical regions of gb and from at least  <dig> different farms . all field cases were from 1997– <dig> and were confirmed as scrapie-positive by three independent diagnostic tests; the bio-rad tesee immunoassay, the hybrid western blot developed at the ahvla  <cit>  and immunohistochemistry  of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections. all of these cases displayed characteristics of classical scrapie when analysed by western blot and ihc .


*s. england: south of england, n. england: north of england, w. england: welsh borders and west country, e. england: east of england. all samples were analysed in duplicate after four rounds of pmca and those marked + were positive in at least one replicate. #nd, not done.

all  <dig> samples amplified in vitro by serial pmca in either the vrq or the arq substrate or both  after  <dig> rounds. samples from sheep possessing at least one vrq allele  amplified in a vrq substrate. furthermore, with the exception of arh/vrq sheep, none of these samples amplified in an arq homozygous substrate . this observation indicates that homology for the amino acid at position  <dig> between seed and substrate may be required for the amplification of some isolates as previously suggested  <cit> . the arh/vrq infected sheep, prpsc amplified in both vrq and arq homozygous substrates . it is unclear whether this is related to the presence of the arh allele or the identity of the isolate, given that these samples all came from the same farm. however, the effects of the arh genotype appears the more likely explanation as the presence of the arh allele  promoted amplification of prpsc in both vrq and arq substrates irrespective of the presence of a heterologous allele. this included arh samples from geographically distinct farms.

samples from seven arq/arq sheep were tested and all amplified readily in the arq substrate in agreement with previous observations  <cit> . however, when the arq/arq scrapie samples were tested in the vrq substrate, heterogeneity of amplification was observed. three out of six samples were also amplified in vrq substrate. these samples were evaluated several times in order to verify this heterogeneity. no variation in the amplification pattern was seen when three pmca substrates of the same genotype but from different sheep were used. the farms from which the two patterns emerged were not geographically close. the two ahq/ahq samples tested amplified only in the arq substrate.

western blot analysis was performed on selected samples and showed that the molecular mass profiles remained unchanged following amplification of classical scrapie isolates of distinct prnp genotypes in either arq or vrq homozygous substrate . the distinct three-band pattern corresponding to the di-, mono- and un- glycosylated pk resistant prpsc moieties were clearly observed and the molecular mass of the un-glycosylated bands were indistinguishable.


the distinct patterns of amplification observed for the arq/arq seeds, i.e. ability to amplify in vrq and arq or arq alone, were investigated further. four farms were identified where additional samples were available; three for which the arq/arq scrapie samples amplified in both arq and vrq substrates  and one farm where the original tested isolate amplified in arq substrates alone . interestingly,  <dig> of  <dig> additional scrapie infected farm/flock mates tested maintained the amplification profile of the initial cases . the sheep were from geographically distant farms and from seven different sheep breeds. furthermore, flock/farm mates carried prions with similar in vitro amplification characteristics. there was one exception to this observation. isolate 210/ <dig> amplified in both substrates whereas the other  <dig> sheep tested from this farm only amplified in the arq substrate. moreover, upon further analysis of sheep from this farm, two scrapie infected arq/vrq sheep  produced prion that was amplified in arq but not vrq substrate. this is different from the pattern of amplification that we observed for arq/vrq scrapie sources as shown in table  <dig> 


*farms  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were located in gloucestershire, aberdeenshire, devon and oxfordshire respectively. samples were analysed after  <dig> rounds of pmca.

#each sample was amplified twice using a single substrate of each genotype and a positive sample was recorded when positive in at least one replicate.

wb analysis of pk-resistant prpsc from the sheep from farm  <dig>  in which heterogeneity was observed, either before or after pmca amplification was not able to distinguish these scrapie field isolates from each other . furthermore, the molecular masses of the amplified products from sample 210/ <dig> amplified in either substrate were indistinguishable. overall, the pmca data suggest that the amplification patterns in distinct prpc substrates are likely to be influenced by the specific isolate or strain as well as complementarity of the seed and substrate at specific residues. evidence from bioassays in wild type and transgenic mice from scrapie isolated from several gb farms suggests that more than one strain is present in some flocks  <cit>  and this could also explain the heterogeneity of amplification observed from this farm.


amplification of classical scrapie in arq/vrq substrates
as part of the evaluation of pmca as a potential diagnostic we also addressed the possibility of a universal substrate. since all isolates tested replicated in vrq or arq or both substrates we tested the amplification of four of each of the arq/arq and vrq/vrq homozygous prpsc samples in an arq/vrq substrate. as shown in table  <dig> the vrq/vrq isolates amplified readily in the heterozygous substrate. however, the arq/arq seeds did not amplify consistently. it is unclear whether this is an inhibitory effect of the vrq prpc on amplification of arq prpsc or whether the reduction in the amount of arq prpc available in heterozygote substrates decreased the efficiency of amplification. the results of amplification studies using homozygous substrates mixed in different ratios were ambiguous and were not able to clearly identify a cause . what is evident is that the arq/vrq brain substrates cannot be consistently used as a universal source of prpc for pmca studies or diagnostics.


*for each of the amplifications performed using the heterozygous substrates four different scrapie sources were used and tested once in each of the substrates.

#the control amplifications performed in homozygous substrates used only one of these seeds. +/− symbols show the amplification outcome for each animal.

in vitro amplification characteristics of known scrapie strains
the observation that the amplification of some scrapie field isolates is not exclusively determined by a match at codon  <dig> between seed and substrate suggested to us that the scrapie strain my also influence in vitro prpsc replication. others have reported more than  <dig> distinct scrapie strains in the gb national flock, mostly identified only by disease characteristics following passage in congenic mice  <cit> . currently no diagnostic tests are able to identify these strains in the original host. previously we demonstrated differences in amplification patterns between experimental bse and the scrapie strain ch <dig>  <cit>  providing evidence that different prion strains influence replication patterns in vitro. whether other scrapie strains also influence the amplification pattern was assessed here using known strains/sources of ovine prions . the classical strains, dawson, ssbp <dig> and mri suffolk scrapie display the typical classical scrapie molecular phenotype; a high relative molecular mass un-glycoslyated band, which is reactive to the n- terminal antibody p <dig>  dawson and ssbp <dig> scrapie, propagated in vrq/vrq sheep, amplified readily in vrq substrates but not the arq substrates. this is consistent with the observations made with the vrq/vrq field isolates. all amplified samples retained their molecular phenotypes upon amplification by pmca . however, a scrapie strain from the moredun research institute  suffolk flock that propagates in arq/arq sheep that has characteristics consistent with a single strain  <cit>  did not amplify readily in either the vrq or the arq substrates . this strain has very distinct transmission characteristics in rodents  <cit>  and is indistinguishable from a previously reported italian strain  <cit> . these characteristics were not identified in any of the field isolates we tested here. these data support observations that this strain of scrapie is poorly represented in the gb flock  <cit> . we were also unable to detect amplification of samples from  <dig> sheep with atypical scrapie. the animals tested had arq or arr homozygous prnp genotypes.


n = number of animals tested. samples were tested in duplicate in separate assays *afrq/afrq substrate where f represents amino acid at position  <dig>  the afrq/afrq genotype is more commonly associated with atypical scrapie  <cit> . nd = not done. +/− symbols show the amplification outcome for each animal.

in vitro amplification of sources of ovine scrapie refractory or weakly amplified by the standard pmca method
to determine the amplification requirements of the strains that did not amplify in vrq or arq substrates, we attempted amplifying in the presence of poly and in arq, vrq and ahq homozygous prnp genotype substrates. successful amplifications were observed for mri scrapie in arq/arq and ahq/ahq but not vrq substrate with the addition of poly . to date we have been unable to confirm amplification of atypical scrapie in vitro even with enhanced pmca protocols.


n = number of animals tested. poly was added to the amplification reactions and the amplifications were carried out for  <dig> rounds. all analyses were in duplicate except for atypical scrapie samples amplified in arq and ahq substrates which were analysed in single reactions. +/− symbols show the amplification outcome for each animal.

ch <dig> scrapie is an experimental strain with similar molecular traits to rare field isolates, termed ch1641-like, and is typified by a low molecular mass un-glycosylated band upon pk- digestion that is bound weakly/not at all by p <dig> antibody  <cit> . in our previous study we demonstrated that ch <dig> scrapie was refractory to pmca amplification in ahq and vrq substrates over  <dig> pmca rounds  <cit> . here, amplifications of this strain in arq substrate also failed to yield prpsc over  <dig> rounds . however, ch <dig> was amplified in arq, vrq and ahq substrates with the addition of poly retaining the molecular phenotype after amplification in all substrates . these data further support the observation of distinct prpscin vitro amplification characteristics, which are likely to be influenced by the scrapie strain.

discussion
in this study we sought to determine whether the prpsc from scrapie infected sheep with diverse prnp genotypes and from different locations in great britain could be amplified in vitro using the highly sensitive technique pmca. all  <dig> of the individual field isolates of classical scrapie initially tested, with a further  <dig> flock mates, amplified in vitro in the presence of either a vrq/vrq or an arq/arq substrate or both. the physicochemical properties of the amplified products appeared to remain unchanged upon in vitro replication thus facilitating a reliable diagnosis on analysis of the converted product. these data indicate that pmca could be a useful means of diagnosis in the field despite the variation of prnp genotypes affected and the reported high variation in scrapie strains. however, it should be noted that two experimental scrapie strains, mri and ch <dig>  were not amplified efficiently using the standard pmca methodology and when using distinct prpc genotype substrates. this may indicate that whilst the more common scrapie strains found in great britain can be detected by this methodology, other more infrequent strains are not detected. the addition of poly to the pmca reactions is known to increase the sensitivity of the method for ovine scrapie  <cit> , this enhanced pmca did indeed yield positive amplifications for both mri and ch <dig>  these data indicate that in order to use pmca to screen for a wide range of common and rare scrapie isolates when present within multiple distinct prnp genotypes, the use of vrq and arq substrates as well as enhanced amplification techniques may be required.

the data illustrate obvious effects of both substrate and seed prnp genotypes on the ability to amplify in different in vitro conditions. prpsc from sheep with one or more vrq alleles was efficiently amplified in vrq substrate but not in arq substrate. the exception was arh/vrq prpsc, which amplified efficiently in both substrates. indeed, this appears to be a trait of prpsc produced in sheep with at least one arh allele, as all such prpsc was consistently amplified in both substrates.

the amplification of prpsc from animals with an arq genotype produced two distinct amplification patterns, some isolates amplified efficiently in both arq and vrq substrates whilst others amplified only in arq prpc. 14/ <dig> flock/farm mates of four of these sheep with arq/arq genotypes had prpsc with the same amplification characteristics supporting the hypothesis that in vitro replication could be influenced by the strain or source of scrapie. this supports the previously published observation that ovine bse and ch <dig> scrapie have distinct pmca-amplification patterns in distinct substrates despite sharing almost indistinguishable molecular characteristics  <cit> .

as mentioned, the data show that some isolates can display promiscuous conversion within either arq or vrq substrates while others display a preference for one or the other. further investigations might determine whether this preference, or lack of, also occurs in vivo and whether conversion of prpc in the host is reflected by the observation in vitro.

sheep are known to have been infected with classical scrapie in great britain for over  <dig> years. much research, based on transmission characteristics to inbred mice, has identified more than  <dig> classical scrapie isolates with distinct pathologies  <cit> . a proportion of this diversity could be accounted for by the large number of polymorphisms within the prnp gene in the sheep population. differences in in vitro efficiency of conversion could mirror in vivo conversion as previously described  <cit> . from the strains analysed in the present study, it is interesting that both ch <dig> and mri scrapie are poorly transmitted to inbred laboratory mice  <cit>  and neither amplified in vitro under standard conditions. mri scrapie transmits to mice transgenic for both ovine arq and vrq but with prolonged incubation times while dawson and ssbp <dig> transmit to vrq transgenic mice with short incubation periods of approximately  <dig> days . bse, however, has been transmitted to sheep with arq, arr and vrq genotypes, to inbred mice and mice transgenic for ovine arq and vrq alleles. in vitro, ovine bse is readily amplified under standard pmca conditions in arq, vrq and ahq substrates  <cit> . thus there is some conformity between biological characteristics and in vitro amplification efficiencies of distinct strains.

currently only bse, to which sheep are known to be highly susceptible experimentally, is known to be zoonotic but fortunately only a small number of cases have been identified in small ruminants, and these were in goats  <cit> . however, in the absence of precise tools to identify a strain in the natural host it is unclear what scrapie diversity could represent in terms of cross species transmission and zoonosis. pmca could prove a useful tool to aid strain identification as a primary investigation prior to bioassay. in addition, the presented data indicate that pmca could be a valuable method for the rapid diagnosis of classical scrapie in field isolates of a wide range of genotypes. given the exquisite sensitivity of pmca and its applicability to readily accessible biological samples, the technique may well provide a pre-mortem, preclinical test for classical ovine scrapie.

CONCLUSIONS
prpsc from  <dig> classical scrapie gb field isolates amplified in vrq or arq or both substrates and supports the use of pmca as a rapid assay for the detection of a wide range of ovine classical scrapie infections involving multiple prnp genotypes and scrapie strains.

