BACKGROUND
the charcot-marie-tooth diseases  are among the most common inherited neurological disorders, with an estimated prevalence of  <dig> in  <dig>  <cit> . cmt is associated with progressive degeneration of peripheral nerves, leading to muscle wasting and weakness, sensory deficits and limb deformities causing significant morbidity across populations  <cit> .

peripheral nerves are composed of two main functional anatomical structures: axons and schwann cells. axons convey electrical signals to and from the central nervous system and peripheries, while schwann cells are neural crest-derived cells that engulf peripheral axons providing structural and trophic support. furthermore, schwann cells can also be stimulated to wrap multiple layers of plasma membrane around larger axons to form the insulating myelin sheath, a process known as myelination. consistent with this anatomical and functional dichotomy, cmt can additionally be classified into ‘axonal’ and ‘demyelinating’ forms, reflecting the main sites of cellular dysfunction as the axon or schwann cell, respectively  <cit> .

with the advent of next-generation dna sequencing, mutations in more than  <dig> genes have now been shown to be associated with cmt, highlighting key genes essential for peripheral nerve function  <cit> . of the genes associated with demyelinating cmt, where schwann cell dysfunction is thought to be the primary underlying pathology, the encoded proteins can be classified into three main groups: structural proteins of the myelin sheath, transcription factors that activate the myelination programme and, interestingly, proteins that are known or predicted to function in intracellular membrane traffic  <cit> . while schwann cell-specific expression of cmt-associated proteins explains particular subtypes of demyelinating cmt  <cit> , most cmt-associated genes with known or predicted roles in membrane traffic are widely expressed across diverse tissues and species. therefore, understanding why mutations in these widely expressed genes lead to isolated demyelinating peripheral neuropathies requires further study at the molecular level.

cmt type 1c  is an autosomal dominant demyelinating peripheral neuropathy associated with mutations in litaf   <cit> . litaf, which is also known as simple, encodes a 17 kda protein that targets endocytic structures and contains an n-terminal proline-rich region predicted to modulate protein-protein interactions, and a c-terminal region predicted to encode a ‘litaf domain’  consisting of conserved cysteine residues separated by a  <dig> residue hydrophobic region  . litaf domains are conserved in eukaryotes. initial reports had proposed that litaf functions as a transcription factor  <cit> ; however, a consensus has now emerged that litaf targets to intracellular membranes and is therefore likely to play a role in endocytic membrane trafficking . furthermore, litaf has been shown to interact with proteins involved in receptor trafficking and degradation in tissue cell lines  <cit> . despite the evolutionary conservation and widespread tissue expression, no structural data currently exist concerning the litaf domain. on the contrary, conflicting models regarding the topology and fold of this domain have been proposed, without supporting experimental data  <cit> .fig.  <dig> the domain organisation of litaf. schematic diagram to illustrate the domain organisation of the litaf protein. the n-terminus is characterised by a proline-rich region which is followed by a litaf domain at the c-terminus. the litaf domain consists of two pairs of cysteine residues  either side of a hydrophobic region. the amino acid sequences of selected litaf domains taken from a variety of eukaryotes are shown to highlight the high degree of conservation of critical amino acid residues across species. residues are numbered according to the human litaf sequence and coloured according to the clustalx scheme as implemented in the jalview program to highlight conserved amino acid properties. shading indicates the degree of conservation. the position of known cmt1c-associated pathogenic mutations are shown below the alignment.




here, we present the membrane topology, metal binding and structural features of the human litaf protein. the biophysical and cell biological effects of the recruitment of interacting proteins to litaf are then reported, demonstrating the importance of short peptide sequence motifs in the n-terminal proline-rich region for litaf’s intracellular localisation. finally, we show that distinct residues contained within the litaf domain interact with phosphoethanolamine  head groups and that the alteration of these interactions leads to protein aggregation in the presence of a pathogenic cmt1c mutation, providing molecular insights into the underlying pathogenesis of a subtype of this currently incurable, common, inherited disease.

RESULTS
litaf domains are evolutionarily conserved
litaf domains are found throughout the eukaryotes, suggesting ancient conserved functions , with multiple instances of expansion, especially in the metazoa. of relevance to the current study, one particular duplication appears to have occurred in the common ancestor of the jawed vertebrates , leading to the eventual existence of two litaf domain-containing genes in humans: the so-far uncharacterised cdip <dig> gene, and the cmt1c-associated gene, litaf . intriguingly, and despite the large lineage-specific expansions seen in the litaf domain gene family as described, the canonical domain architecture – that is, a proline-rich domain at the n-terminus followed by a c-terminal litaf domain – is conserved across eukaryotes , highlighting the likely requirement for both regions to be present for correct intracellular protein function .

with the aim of identifying key conserved features that are likely to be of critical functional importance, we gathered a cohort of broadly representative litaf domain sequences from which a comprehensive sequence alignment was derived. this alignment revealed that two pairs of cysteines, located either side of a predicted hydrophobic helix with amphipathic properties, are strictly conserved . these cysteine pairs, in the absence of the intervening helix, are reminiscent of metal-ion coordinating residues found in zinc-finger-like structures  <cit> . six additional cysteine residues are present in the predicted hydrophobic helical region of the human litaf domain, but are less well conserved across our alignment. as their sequence positions are not consistent with the typical known cysteine-containing metal coordinating motifs , it appears unlikely that these additional cysteine residues are involved in coordinating a metal ion.

given that the luminal, transmembrane and cytosolic domains of proteins are conserved to a different extent in evolution  <cit> , the absolute conservation of these residues in tandem led us to hypothesise that the n- and c-termini of the litaf domain are very unlikely to be separated by a phospholipid bilayer-traversing transmembrane domain as has been previously postulated  <cit> . furthermore, most cmt1c-associated pathogenic mutations fall at conserved residues in this pan-eukaryotic alignment of litaf domains, again highlighting key residues likely to play critical roles in maintaining the function of this ancient domain.

with these points in mind, we set out to re-examine the role of the litaf domain in targeting the protein to membranes and to experimentally characterise the topology of the human litaf protein.

litaf targets to membranes via the hydrophobic helical region
the targeting of litaf to membranes has previously been shown to be via the c-terminal litaf domain  <cit> . consistent with previous reports, we found that litaf predominantly targeted endocytic vesicles, colocalising with marker proteins of both early and late endosomes . this endosomal targeting and association with membrane can be prevented by either deleting the predicted hydrophobic helical region within the litaf domain  or by mutating eight hydrophobic residues contained therein  . these eight hydrophobic residues mutated in the n-helix construct are found on one side of the predicted helix according to our helical wheel analysis, consistent with an amphipathic character . by mutating only eight hydrophobic residues to arginine in generating the n-helix construct, the predicted helical nature of this region is preserved, leading us to hypothesise that, while the protein is rendered more soluble, the overall folding and architecture of the expressed molecule is maintained and remains similar to wild type. endogenously expressed litaf also possesses the biochemical properties of an integral membrane protein, as shown by the differential extraction of the protein with the detergent tx <dig> . thus, our data suggest that litaf is targeted and anchored to membranes via pivotal hydrophobic residues found within the predicted central hydrophobic helical region of the c-terminal litaf domain.fig.  <dig> litaf is anchored to membranes via hydrophobic residues contained within the litaf domain. a amino acid sequences of the hydrophobic regions present in the protein constructs used to determine membrane insertion. residues are numbered according to the full length human litaf sequence. hydrophobic residues are coloured red, while acidic residues are coloured blue. residues retained in all three constructs are indicated by asterisks below the sequence. the grey box denotes the serine–glycine linker added in place of the predicted helix in the Δ114– <dig> construct. b the ha-tagged litaf constructs were transiently expressed in hela cells and the localisation determined by immunofluorescence microscopy. the endosomal targeting of endogenously expressed vps <dig> is shown in the left panels for comparison. the middle panels show that the endosomal membrane targeting of litaf is dependent on key hydrophobic residues within the hydrophobic region. scale bar denotes 20 μm. c membrane fractionation from hela cells expressing endogenous litaf and transiently expressed ha-tagged litaf constructs. while both endogenous and ha-tagged wild type litaf is found in the membrane pellets , the litaf constructs harbouring hydrophilic mutations  and a deletion in the vicinity of the hydrophobic region  are found in the soluble fraction . calnexin and tubulin were used as integral membrane and soluble protein controls, respectively. d wild type litaf displays the characteristics of an integral membrane protein as determined by the extraction of the endogenous protein from hela cells using tx <dig>  the integral membrane protein, calnexin, and vps <dig>  which associates with, but does not insert into membranes, were used as controls




both the n- and c-termini of litaf are found on the cytosolic surfaces of vesicles
by analysing the sequences of litaf domains from drosophila, ponting et al.  <cit>  first postulated that the predicted hydrophobic helical region probably inserted into, but did not traverse, membranes. however, lee et al.  <cit>  later assumed that this hydrophobic region within the litaf domain was a transmembrane helix, thereby concluding that litaf must be c-terminally inserted into membranes. importantly, neither hypothesis was supported by experimental data. we therefore used two complementary experimental approaches to determine the membrane topology of litaf.

firstly, we used a cellular semi-permeabilisation assay to determine whether the n- and c-termini of litaf were located on the cytosolic or luminal membrane surfaces of endosomes, respectively  <cit> . to do this, we generated hela cells stably expressing litaf epitope-tagged with ha on the n-terminus and myc on the c-terminus . following selective permeabilisation of plasma membranes with 20 μm digitonin, both n-terminal ha and c-terminal myc epitope tags were detected by indirect immunofluorescence, concurrently with the cytosolic surface endosomal marker protein vps <dig>  in contrast, the lamp <dig> epitope, found on the luminal side of endosomes and lysosomes, was not detected, confirming the maintained integrity of endocytic compartment membranes under these conditions . on the contrary, higher concentrations of digitonin  permeabilised both plasma membranes and intracellular organelles/vesicles, exposing epitopes found on both the cytosolic and luminal surfaces of endosomes. these data are consistent with the hypothesis that the hydrophobic region of the litaf domain does not traverse membranes, meaning that both the n- and c-termini face the cytosol.fig.  <dig> membrane topology determination of litaf. a schematic diagram illustrating the litaf protein tagged with ha at the n-terminus and myc at the c-terminus used in the experiments to determine the membrane topology. b selective permeabilisation of the plasma membranes of hela cells stably expressing ha-litaf-myc was achieved using 20 μm digitonin. immunofluorescence microscopy was performed following incubation of the digitonin-permeabilised cells with antibodies towards ha and myc in addition to the control proteins, vps <dig> and lamp <dig>  located on the cytosolic and luminal sides of endosomal membranes, respectively. the representative images show that both the n-terminal ha and c-terminal myc epitopes were detected concurrently with vps <dig>  indicating that both termini of litaf are located on the cytosolic surface of membranes. in contrast, lamp <dig> was not detected under these conditions. permeabilsation of both plasma membrane and endosomal membranes was achieved at higher concentrations of digitonin as seen in the lower panel. c representative graphs of a selective permeabilisation experiment illustrating the proportion of cells staining positive for ha  and myc  compared to vsp <dig> and lamp <dig>  at increasing concentrations of digitonin. note that all cells staining positive for ha were also positive for myc and that even at 100 μm digitonin, not all cells stained positive for lamp <dig>  indicating incomplete permeabilisation of endocytic vesicle membranes under these conditions. d ha-litaf-myc was expressed using a rabbit reticulocyte lysate expression system in the presence of microsomal membranes to allow membrane insertion. a protease protection assay was then performed using proteinase k to determine the topology of the litaf protein. in the presence of proteinase k, both n-terminal ha and c-terminal myc tags were digested, indicating that these epitopes are present on the surface of microsomal membranes . β-lactamase, containing a signal peptide that allows the translocation of a processed form to the interior of microsomal membranes, and hence protection from proteinase k digestion, was used as a control 




secondly, to verify our findings from the cellular semi-permeabilisation assay, we used a rabbit reticulocyte lysate cell-free system to express ha-litaf-myc in the presence of microsomes  <cit> . once incorporated into microsomal membranes, the susceptibility of both the n- and c-terminal ha and myc epitope tags to protease digestion was ascertained. using the protection of the processed form of β-lactamase within the microsomal lumen as control, we observed that both the ha and myc tags of litaf were degraded following incubation with proteinase k . these data are therefore consistent with the semi-permeabilisation assay, and are strongly supportive of the hypothesis that both the n- and c- termini of litaf are found on the cytosolic surface of membranes, and that the litaf domain is embedded into membranes via the predicted hydrophobic helical region adopting an in-plane membrane anchor configuration  <cit> .

the litaf domain coordinates zinc
with the two well-conserved cysteine-containing ‘knuckles’ either side of the hydrophobic helical anchor , reminiscent of intracellular zinc-binding motifs  <cit> , we next asked whether litaf is indeed a zinc-interacting protein. to address this question unequivocally, we performed micropixe  analysis to determine the metal binding characteristics of litaf protein constructs expressed and purified from e. coli. these experiments showed that wild type litaf, litaf n-helix and litaf Δ114– <dig> contained  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ±  <dig>   and  <dig>  ±  <dig>   zinc atoms/protein molecule , respectively . notably, litaf constructs where one or more of the conserved cysteine residues had been replaced with alanine were all insoluble when expressed in e. coli, and also appeared as large puncta and could not be solubilised with tx <dig> when transiently expressed in hela cells, consistent with them being proteins prone to aggregation . when not playing a direct functional or catalytic role, metal ions  often stabilise very small protein domains, enabling them to interact with other proteins or biomolecules  <cit> . these data therefore strongly suggest that the correct folding of the litaf domain is dependent on the coordination of a zinc atom.fig.  <dig> micropixe analysis of litaf Δ114– <dig>  top panels: elemental maps  of the sulfur and zinc content of the litaf Δ114– <dig> sample obtained from the proton induced x-ray emission . the protein dries to the outside of the drop, giving an arc of sulfur which correlates with the zinc signal. the positions for the three-point spectra collected are marked. bottom panel: x-ray energy spectrum for one of the points, showing the sulfur and zinc in the protein and the bromine from the buffer. note the logarithmic scale on the y-axis




the litaf domain consists of cysteine-containing β-hairpins either side of the predicted hydrophobic helical anchor
we next set out to determine the structural characteristics of litaf. the first nmr experiments of wild type litaf in an extensive range of membrane-mimicking detergent environments highlighted the crucial importance of the correct choice of solubilising conditions. under all conditions tested, we observed no signals that we would associate with a structured protein domain. based on the assumption that these structured residues would be in close association with the membrane, and the high tendency of these samples to form oligomers and aggregate , we refocused on the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct, where the hydrophobic anchor had been removed, thereby rendering this construct soluble in the absence of detergents. 13c/15n-labelled litaf Δ114– <dig> protein was straightforwardly expressed and purified from e. coli with an estimated molecular weight of 17 kda, as determined using a 1d proton transverse relaxation experiment, consistent with a monomeric species in solution.

initially, we performed standard nmr triple resonance backbone experiments to assign and analyse the individual amino acid residues within the litaf Δ114– <dig> protein. the best-trosy experiments focus on the backbone nh bonds of the protein, with each cross peak displayed corresponding to a specific assigned amino acid . as mentioned above, the n-terminal region of litaf contains multiple proline residues , and therefore the assignment of these amino acids also required the use of supplementary experiments . using these approaches, and despite missing assignments for the glycine-serine linker that replaces the hydrophobic region in the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct, an 89% assignment  was achieved.fig.  <dig> assignment of the 15n best-trosy of the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct. cross-peaks assigned to the structured litaf domain have a wide proton distribution  consistent with the secondary structure of β-strands. in contrast, cross-peaks assigned to the unstructured n-terminal proline-rich arm occupy the narrower random coil central region of the spectrum 




unsurprisingly, the litaf n-helix construct also remained soluble in the absence of detergent. however, similarly to wild type litaf, the assignment experiments on this construct were also unsuccessful, likely due to the tendency for the n-helix construct to form higher molecular weight oligomers . nevertheless, considerable overlap was evident between the n-helix and Δ114– <dig> constructs in the best-trosy experiments , suggesting that both litaf constructs contain very similar secondary structure elements, implying that further interpretation of the Δ114– <dig> construct would enable key structural motifs of the wild type litaf protein to be defined.

building on the near complete assignment of the protein, we proceeded to determine which secondary structural elements are present in the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct. this particular approach exploits the exquisite sensitivity of the backbone amino acid chemical shifts to their related secondary structure environment. by using the chemical shift analysis program, talos+  <cit> , we established that the litaf domain of the Δ114– <dig> construct is composed of  <dig> β-strands: 3 n-terminally to the Δ114– <dig> deletion site  and two forming a β-hairpin at the c terminus . supporting these data, the residues assigned to the litaf domain displayed greater 1h chemical shift distributions , typical of β-sheet residues , compared to the residues assigned to the n-terminal proline-rich region, which, in contrast, displayed a narrower 1h chemical shift pattern , suggesting the adoption of a random coil character.

the dynamic qualities of the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct were next analysed by performing heteronuclear noe  experiments. these experiments measure the motion of each assigned residue on a picosecond time scale. positive hetnoe values close to the value of  <dig>  represent slow picosecond motion, which is typically seen when protein domains adopt rigid secondary structure motifs, while small, or even negative, hetnoe values result from fast picosecond motion as seen in unstructured loops and at the flexible termini of proteins. the hetnoe analysis of the Δ114– <dig> construct, illustrated in , demonstrated that four of the five β-strands within the litaf domain are rigid in the picosecond time scale, while in comparison, the first, most n-terminal β-strand, showed increased motion, and hence flexibility. in contrast, the proline-rich n-terminus showed mainly fast picosecond motion reminiscent of an unstructured protein domain. interestingly, these analyses also revealed an area of reduced flexibility between residues  <dig> and  <dig>  a region known to recruit interacting proteins to the litaf molecule   <cit> .

nmr-based structural model
in order to further characterise the structure of the litaf domain, nuclear overhauser effect spectroscopy  spectral data were collected. these experiments probe the proximity of amino acids through space, thereby providing indicative data concerning the tertiary structure of the protein. we used rosetta, the protein structure prediction suite of programs, to produce a structural model of the litaf domain as only a limited number of noesy cross-peaks were collected. although rosetta can be used in its most basic form to predict a protein structure based only on its primary sequence  <cit> , more advanced rosetta applications allow additional restraint information to be applied during the model calculations, making it possible to build a structural model that satisfies all our experimental data, including metal coordination, secondary structure boundaries, topology and noe restraints  <cit> . after fragment selection for the model calculation, completed using rosetta-cs and the nmr-defined secondary structure boundaries, rosetta metalloprotein relax protocols were implemented as previously described  <cit> , where the four conserved cysteine residues fixed for zinc coordination were c <dig>  c <dig>  c <dig> and c <dig> . a total of  <dig> decoys for each of the two sequences, wild type and the Δ114– <dig> construct, were calculated and the quality of the models analysed by clustering using calibur  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the structural models of the litaf Δ114– <dig> and full-length litaf domains, representing the largest clusters of similar structures.fig.  <dig> rosetta structural models of litaf. a rosetta model of the c-terminal litaf domain region of the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct. the residue numbers correspond to the wild type human sequence. the zinc-coordinating cysteine residues are coloured yellow and the zinc atoms are illustrated by purple balls. b rosetta model of the wild-type c-terminal litaf domain. the zinc-coordinating cysteine residues are coloured yellow and the zinc atoms are illustrated by purple balls. the models calculated satisfy the known structural data: zinc coordination, noe restraints and β-strand boundaries, with both models adopting a rubredoxin or zinc ribbon fold




the nmr-based model of the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct , generated from the experimentally determined restraints, illustrate the five β-strands of the litaf domain: three in an antiparallel orientation at the n-terminus and a β-hairpin at the c-terminus. the conserved cysteine residues, which reside within loops located between β-strands  <dig> and  <dig>  and between β-strands  <dig> and  <dig>  are shown to coordinate a zinc atom. although the five β-strands do not form a continuous sheet, they are in close proximity and are part of an overall compact domain. the glycine/serine linker, that has replaced the predicted hydrophobic in-plane membrane anchor in the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct, has been modelled as a short helix by rosetta. the secondary structure elements are again maintained in the wild type model of the litaf domain , with the predicted hydrophobic in-plane membrane anchor modelled as a single helix by rosetta. as the coordination of the zinc atom has been maintained, this structure is not as compact as the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct, and results in the β-strands lying parallel to the predicted membrane-anchoring helix. the critical coordination of the zinc atom by two pairs of cysteine residues, as shown in both models, is consistent with the rubredoxin, or ‘zinc β-ribbon’ family of zinc finger structural motifs  <cit> . efforts to crystallize the litaf constructs for further structural analysis were unsuccessful.

recruitment of proteins to the n-terminal proline-rich region directs litaf to specific endosomal structures
specific protein domains are known to interact with particular sequence motifs present in the litaf n-terminal proline-rich region . thus, the ppxy motif can bind the ww domains of the ubiquitin ligase, nedd <dig>   <cit> , while the overlapping pap motif is predicted to interact with the uev domain of the escrt-i component, tsg <dig>  <cit> . our hetnoe data suggest that the n-terminal region of litaf is mostly flexible, in contrast to the relatively rigid c-terminal membrane-anchoring litaf domain. we next asked what effect the recruitment of proteins to the n-terminal proline-rich region has on the litaf protein.fig.  <dig> recruitment of proteins to the proline-rich region determines the intracellular targeting of litaf. a the first ppsy motif of litaf  interacts with the ubiquiting ligase, nedd <dig>  gst-litaf 1– <dig> constructs , were recombinantly expressed and purified from e. coli, before incubation with cellular lysates prepared from retinal pigment epithelial  cells. a pull-down experiment was performed and the interacting proteins were separated by sds-page followed by western blotting. b the chemical shift perturbations seen in the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct following incubation with recombinantly expressed nedd <dig> 596– <dig> . a number of peaks are line-broadened indicating the interaction of the nedd <dig> ww domains with these discrete regions of the litaf proline-rich n-terminus. the interaction of nedd <dig> with the proline-rich region had no effect on the c-terminal litaf domain. c representative images of confocal immunofluorescence microscopy of rpe cells stably expressing ha-litaf wild type  and ha-litaf y23a/y61a. while ha-litaf wt predominantly targets to endocytic vesicles, ha-litaf y23a/y61a is mislocalised to the plasma membrane, labelled with wheat germ agglutinin . the merged images contain wga coloured green and ha-litaf coloured purple with areas of colocalisation appearing white. scale bars denote 10 μm. d the colocalisation of ha-litaf constructs with wga was quantified using volocity  and a pearson’s correlation calculated; 10– <dig> images  were taken from three biological replicates per cell line stably expressing the litaf constructs. the pearson’s correlation was calculated by the volocity software with the threshold applied as previously described  <cit>  . the graph shows the mean values with error bars denoting sem. a p value of  <dig>  was calculated using an unpaired two-tailed t-test. significantly greater amounts of the ha-litaf y <dig> a protein colocalised with wga compared to wild type, confirming mislocalisation of the mutated construct towards the plasma membrane




based on the near complete  assignment of the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct, we probed the local interaction of litaf with the ww domains of nedd <dig>  a comparison of the best-trosy spectra of the 15n-labelled litaf Δ114– <dig> in the presence and absence of recombinantly-expressed nedd <dig> 596– <dig>  revealed the loss of a subset of amide cross peaks , most often caused by line broadening as a result of micromolar binding affinities. the missing signals correspond to residues 22– <dig> of the litaf protein, which contain the ppsy motif known to interact with the ww domains of nedd <dig>  and are within a region of the n-terminal domain found to be less flexible in the hetnoe experiments. of note, a second region between residues  <dig> and  <dig> of litaf, which contains a second ppsy motif, showed peak broadening representing a potential additional nedd4-ww domain interacting site. however, the functional significance of this second ppsy motif is uncertain, since it could not compensate for the loss of the first n-terminal ppsy motif in our pull-down experiments of endogenous nedd <dig> from cellular lysates . significantly, we did not detect any consequent structural changes to the c-terminal litaf domain upon binding of nedd <dig> to the n-terminal proline-rich region, showing that these regions of litaf are structurally independent.

with no apparent structural effect on the c-terminal litaf domain, we next asked whether the intracellular localisation of litaf is influenced by the potential recruitment of proteins in vivo. ha-tagged litaf constructs harbouring mutations that disrupt the ppsy motifs  were expressed in retinal pigmented epithelial cells  and analysed by immunofluorescence microscopy . we found that disruption of the ppsy motifs led to significantly greater colocalisation of litaf with the plasma membrane marker, wheat germ agglutinin, compared to the wild type protein . these data lead us to speculate that, while litaf domains function as membrane anchors, the specific intracellular localisation is potentially influenced by the recruitment of interacting proteins to the relatively flexible and cytosol-facing n-terminal poly-proline arm.

litaf interacts specifically with pe head groups
as a zinc-binding structure anchored to the surface of membranes, distinct residues within the litaf domain would be predicted to be in close proximity to phospholipid head groups. we therefore asked whether particular residues contained within the litaf domain are able to interact with phospholipid head groups in solution. to this end, 15n-labelled litaf Δ114– <dig> was incubated with phosphoglycerol , phosphocholine , pe, phosphoserine  and the polyphosphatidylinositol head group mimic, inositolhexakisphosphate  , and analysed by nmr in molar ratios up to 1: <dig> protein:head group . while no interaction was seen between litaf and pg, pc, ps or ip <dig>  we identified discrete interactions between specific residues located in the c-terminal litaf domain and pe head groups. as expected from the structural model, these pe-interacting residues reside within regions of the litaf domain that would be predicted to be in close proximity with the surface of membranes , lending further support to the validity of our model.fig.  <dig> litaf interacts with pe head groups and leads to protein instability in the v144m cmt1c-associated protein construct. a the position of residues displaying chemical shift perturbations greater than  <dig> standard deviation of the mean observed in the presence of pe head groups are coloured orange on the structural model of the litaf domain. the illustration also shows the possible orientation of the litaf domain as it inserts into a membrane containing phosphotidylethanolamine and phosphatidylcholine  <cit> . a cartoon diagram of the topology of the litaf protein embedded in a lipid membrane bilayer , additionally showing the position of the flexible n-terminal proline-rich region , is shown in the inset. b the location of the residues displaying chemical shift perturbations greater than  <dig> standard deviation from the mean following the introduction of the v144m mutation are shown in blue on the structural models of the litaf domain . the position of valine  <dig> is shown in red. c equal amounts of litaf Δ114– <dig> were incubated with increasing concentrations of pe for 2 hours at room temperature before centrifugation at  <dig>  × g for 10 minutes to obtain soluble  and insoluble  fractions, respectively. the fractions were then separated by sds-page prior to staining with coomassie blue. in contrast to the wt construct , the v144m mutation rendered the protein unstable in the presence of higher concentrations of pe, leading to precipitation . d retinal pigment epithelial cells stably expressing either ha-litaf wt or ha-litaf v144m were incubated with 300 μg/ml cycloheximide and incubated at 37 °c for the times indicated. cellular lysates were prepared and the amount of ha-litaf protein was determined by western blotting




the v144m cmt1c-associated mutation leads to subtle changes in the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct and disrupts the interaction with pe
all known cmt1c-associated pathogenic mutations in litaf are found in the c-terminal litaf domain. most mutations reside within the predicted hydrophobic anchor region and are predicted to disrupt the helical propensity of this specific part of the protein  . however, as stated above, experimental study by nmr spectroscopy of constructs containing the predicted hydrophobic helical region were not possible. nevertheless, the litaf Δ114– <dig> construct used to generate the structural model does contain valine at position  <dig>  a residue that, when mutated to a methionine , is known to cause cmt1c  <cit> . the v144m mutation does not affect membrane association and its punctate staining pattern by immunofluorescence microscopy is consistent with retained endosomal targeting . we therefore set out to characterise the effects of this pathogenic mutation by solution nmr spectroscopy. additional file 11: figure s11b shows the chemical shift perturbations that are manifested by the v144m mutation in the Δ114– <dig> construct when compared to the wild type counterpart. if the amino acid substitution had little effect on the construct, we would expect that only signals corresponding to residues in close proximity to the site of mutation would be perturbed. however, dispersed chemical shift perturbations were seen as a result of this cmt1c mutation, including within the region of the n-terminal β-sheets on the opposite side of the deleted hydrophobic anchor. these data therefore suggest that the v144m pathogenic mutation causes subtle biochemical and biophysical changes whilst maintaining the overall secondary structure of the litaf domain, pointing towards an additional factor that must lead to clinical disease.

by analysing the residues that show the greatest chemical shift perturbations following the introduction of the v144m mutation, we noted that these residues correspond to those that interact with pe head groups . we therefore asked whether the interaction of the litaf domain with pe is altered by the introduction of the v144m mutation. indeed, we found that litaf Δ114– <dig> v144m interacts with pe at lower head group concentrations  than the wild type construct whilst utilising the same specific residues . however, while the v144m construct – similarly to the litaf Δ114– <dig> wt protein – remained soluble and un-degraded for periods of many months when stored in isolation, this mutant construct became rapidly insoluble when incubated with pe at 1: <dig> molar ratio, leading to the disappearance of the assigned peaks from the nmr spectra and visible precipitation . in contrast, wild type litaf Δ114– <dig> remained consistently soluble and folded at these concentrations of pe. to determine the effect of the v144m mutation on the stability of litaf in vivo, we performed cycloheximide chase experiments in retinal pigment epithelial  cells stably expressing either wild type ha-litaf or ha-litaf v144m. in keeping with our in vitro findings, ha-litaf harbouring the v144m mutation was degraded more rapidly compared to the wild type construct . these data therefore suggest that the v144m pathogenic mutation alters the interaction between the litaf domain and pe head groups, pointing towards an acquired misfolded state on the surface of membranes, and potentially deleterious effects on intracellular membranes involved in endocytic traffic.

discussion
despite the extensive architectural conservation of litaf domains across eukaryotes, our report is the first to characterise this ancient domain structurally. in contrast to the assertion made by lee et al.  <cit>  that litaf domains are c-terminally inserted into membranes, our data show that the hydrophobic region does not traverse membranes, demonstrating that both the n-terminal and c-terminal halves of the litaf domain reside on the cytosolic surface of membranes, in agreement with an earlier proposal made by ponting et al.  <cit>  in  <dig> and the recent publication by qin et al.  <cit> . the litaf domain consists of five β-sheets, three n-terminal and two c-terminal to the predicted hydrophobic anchor region, and is stabilised by the coordination of a zinc atom by two pairs of evolutionarily-conserved cysteine residues. in contrast, the n-terminal proline-rich region is mostly unstructured and behaves independently of the c-terminal litaf domain. we show that, far from being an inert component of the full length protein, the ability of the proline-rich region to bind to other cytosolic proteins appears to have a significant influence on intracellular targeting. these data therefore support the notion that, while litaf domains serve as intracellular membrane anchors, the precise function and localisation is determined by the proteins that interact with the proline-rich n-terminal arm. this last point might help explain the many contradictory data that currently exist concerning the specific intracellular localisation of litaf-domain-containing proteins in a variety of cell types .

consistent with a protein domain that resides in close proximity to membranes, we also show that specific residues within the litaf domain interact with pe head groups. pe is the second most abundant phospholipid  in mammalian cells, accounting for, on average, approximately 25% of cellular phospholipids. pe is found across all intracellular membranes and, as a consequence of its cone-shape, has been proposed to play an essential role in membrane fusion and curvature  <cit> . by accommodating and interacting with pe head groups, it is tempting to speculate that litaf domains might therefore play further roles in the regulation of membrane invagination and tubulation, which are essential for the sorting and recycling of membranous cargoes on endosomes  <cit> .

our data are consistent with litaf being a monotopic membrane protein anchored to membranes via an in-plane helical membrane anchor, present within the litaf domain  <cit> . however, efforts to analyse the full length litaf protein, or the predicted hydrophobic helical anchor region in isolation, either by solution nmr or crystallography, were unsuccessful, likely due to the inability of the tested detergent and lipid micelles to mimic the membrane environment found intracellularly. furthermore, the molecular weight of litaf remains too small for current cryo-em techniques  <cit> . this again highlights the general issue in structural biology that, despite the fact that membrane proteins make up approximately 30% of all eukaryotic cellular proteins  <cit>  and constitute around 60% of current drug targets  <cit> , membrane proteins still account for less than 1% of structures in the protein data bank  <cit> . moreover, none of these current membrane protein structures contained within the database demonstrate in-plane membrane anchoring domains as we propose for litaf. in the absence of a predicted helix-loop-helix ‘hairpin’ motif that inserts into the lipid bilayer as postulated for other integral membrane proteins  <cit> , we can therefore only speculate at present on how precisely the predicted hydrophobic helical anchor associates with membranes. however, our data regarding the loss of membrane association following the substitution of eight hydrophobic amino acids within the predicted helix, in conjunction with our structural data, lead us to speculate that this anchoring-region embeds into the cytosolic-facing monolayer of the membrane bilayer by adopting an amphipathic character  <cit> .

schwann cells are predicted to be the principal site of pathology in the demyelinating subtypes of cmt. due to the significant number of genes associated with demyelinating cmt that are predicted or known to encode proteins that function on endocytic pathways  <cit> , the critical importance of intracellular membrane trafficking in maintaining peripheral nerve myelination by schwann cells has been brought to the fore. most mutations in these demyelinating cmt genes associated with membrane trafficking cause disease in an autosomal recessive manner, pointing towards loss of cellular function as the underlying pathogenic mechanism in these instances. in contrast, cmt1c associated with mutations in litaf is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. previous reports have confirmed that the expression of litaf is not critical for peripheral nerve myelination in mice  <cit> , making the ‘dominant-negative’ hypothesis, due to the possible formation of non-functional litaf hetero-oligomers , less likely. on the contrary, a more probable pathogenic mechanism involves a ‘toxic gain-of-function’ resulting from the altered molecular and cellular properties of mutant litaf when expressed in vivo  <cit> . significantly, the litaf protein is known to be widely expressed across tissues  <cit> , suggesting that, while compensatory mechanisms must exist in most cell types, the intracellular membrane trafficking pathways in schwann cells must be distinctly susceptible to the presence of a mutant copy of litaf.

but how do cmt1c point mutations cause toxicity? thus far, all proven cmt1c-associated pathogenic mutations in litaf are found in the c-terminal litaf domain and previous reports have suggested that these mutations might disrupt the association of litaf with membranes  <cit> , although the precise mechanism remained unclear. here, we show that the cmt1c-associated pathogenic v144m mutation in litaf leads to chemical shift perturbations across the litaf domain that sits in close approximation to the surface of membranes, whilst maintaining an overall secondary structure similar to the wild type protein. however, when the v144m construct was incubated with pe head groups, the disease-associated protein became misfolded, leading to precipitation in vitro, in complete contrast to wild type litaf. furthermore, cycloheximide chase experiments in vivo suggested that the v144m construct was degraded more rapidly compared to wild type. it is therefore tempting to speculate that all cmt1c mutations might lead to similar structural alterations within the litaf domain, resulting in an unstable and toxic interaction with lipid head groups and consequent endocytic membrane disruption  <cit> . this aberrant association of litaf with membranes might lead to the dysfunctional trafficking of schwann cell membrane receptors, including growth factor receptors  <cit>  and cell adhesion molecules  <cit> , with consequent disruption of the critical endocytic pathways that maintain the integrity of peripheral nerve myelin. such mistrafficking would, in turn, lead to instability of the myelin sheath, demyelination, secondary axonal degeneration and, eventually, the motor and sensory deficits that characterise patients affected by a diagnosis of cmt1c.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we present the first structural protein model of litaf based on experimental data, and describe the biophysical and biochemical consequences of a cmt1c-associated pathogenic mutation. we anticipate that this work will form a platform for the future study of litaf, and litaf-domains in general, and their role in intracellular membrane trafficking. in the absence of any current treatments for cmt, we believe that such investigation will not only lead to the identification of future therapeutic strategies for cmt1c, but will also highlight molecular and cellular dysfunctional pathways common to more than one subtype of this common, currently incurable, neurological disorder.

