BACKGROUND
shewanella species belong to the class gammaproteobacteria and are widely distributed in nature, including marine and freshwater sediments  <cit> . a few members of this genus have attracted considerable attention due to their importance in the biogeochemical cycling of metals  <cit>  and utility in biotechnology processes, such as bioremediation  <cit>  and bioelectrochemical systems  <cit> . shewanella species are able to respire a wide variety of organic and inorganic compounds, including oxygen, fumarate, nitrate, nitrite, thiosulfate, elemental sulfur, trimethylamine n-oxide, dimethyl sulfoxide , and anthraquinone- <dig> -disulphonate, as well as both soluble and solid metals, such as iron, manganese, uranium, chromium, cobalt, technetium, and vanadium  <cit> . this respiration electron acceptor plasticity implies that members of this genus have evolved flexible respiratory mechanisms in order to survive in redox-stratified environments, such as oxic/anoxic interfaces in sediments. supporting this speculation, comparative genomic analysis among gammaproteobacteria revealed that shewanella have a relatively large number of signal-transduction proteins containing pas domains, which are involved in the detection of various environmental signals, such as light, oxygen, and redox potential  <cit> , suggesting that they have well-developed environment-sensing and regulatory systems. however, little is known about how shewanella species regulate respiratory activity at the molecular level in response to changes in environmental conditions.

s. oneidensis mr- <dig> is the most extensively studied strain of shewanella because of its annotated genome sequence  <cit> , ease of genetic manipulation  <cit> , and capability to directly transfer electrons to extracellular substances, such as metal oxides and electrodes, without exogenously added mediator  <cit> . five primary component proteins, cyma, mtra, mtrb, mtrc, and omca, comprising the extracellular electron transfer  pathway  have been identified in strain mr- <dig>  <cit> . omca and mtrc are outer membrane cytochromes  containing  <dig> heme-binding sites, and play key roles in transferring electrons to extracellular electron acceptors  <cit> . it has been proposed that mr- <dig> releases electron from these om-cyts through both direct eet pathways, in which electrons are directly transferred from om-cyts that attach to solid metals  <cit> , and indirect eet pathways, in which electrons are transferred from om-cyts to distant solid metals via secreted electron-shuttle compounds, such as flavins  <cit> . although biochemical studies indicate that both mtrc and omca are able to transfer electrons to solid fe oxides  <cit> , mtrc appears to play a dominant role in electron transfer to electrodes, whereas omca plays an greater role in attachment of cells to solid surfaces  <cit> , indicating that functional differences exist between these two om-cyts.

despite extensive biochemical characterization of mtrc and omca, limited information is available on how mr- <dig> regulates these om-cyt genes at the transcriptional level. in the mr- <dig> genome, four genes encoding the proteins comprising the mtr respiratory pathway are organized in a cluster oriented in the same direction . previous studies of mr- <dig> have demonstrated that a cyclic amp  receptor protein  and adenylate cyclase  responsible for camp production play key roles in transcriptional activation of the mtr genes, as well as the anaerobic respiratory genes involved in nitrate, fumarate, and dmso reduction  <cit> . although these genes are up-regulated under anaerobic  and electrode-respiring conditions  <cit> , the molecular mechanisms and signal transduction pathways underlying the camp/crp-dependent transcriptional activation of the mtr genes remain to be elucidated, as crp does not contain pas or other known redox-sensing domains. in addition, although two different transcription start sites  have been identified in the upstream regions of omca and mtrc  <cit> , the regulatory mechanisms, including the role of crp, in the transcription of the mtr genes have not been determined.figure  <dig> 
the organization and transcriptional units of the
mtr
genes.  schematic illustration of the organization of the mtr genes. solid arrows indicate the location and direction of the transcriptional promoters upstream of omca  and mtrc . the bidirectional arrows indicate the target regions of the rt-pcr analysis. the open boxes indicate the crp-binding regions identified by the emsa analysis.  rt-pcr analysis of the mtr genes. wt cells were grown anaerobically in lm containing 10 mm fumarate until the early stationary growth phase. the lane number corresponds to the target regions shown in panel a. the molecular sizes  of the marker  are indicated to the left of the gel.



in the present study, we investigated the regulatory mechanisms that control expression of the mtr genes, particularly focusing on regulatory differences between omca and mtrc and the involvement of crp in the regulation of these genes. the findings presented here provide new insight into the complex regulatory mechanisms of the mtr respiratory pathway in shewanella.

RESULTS
transcriptional units of the mtr genes
previous studies have identified two independent tsps for the mtr genes  <cit>  . beliaev et al.  <cit>  detected a tsp located 119 bp upstream of the atg start codon of mtrc  using 5′ race pcr, and more recently, shao et al.  <cit>  identified a tsp located 93 bp upstream of omca  among the total of  <dig>  tsps detected in s. oneidensis mr- <dig> using 5′-end rna sequencing. although these experiments were conducted using cells grown under aerobic  <cit>  and unclear  <cit>  conditions, the present 5′-race pcr analysis detected the identical tsps  in both aerobically grown cells and cells cultured anaerobically with 10 mm fumarate. the presence of tspmtrc was also confirmed by primer extension analysis . the 5′ race pcr using the mtra- and mtrb-specific primers detected no tsps other than tspmtrc , indicating that mtrc, mtra, and mtrb were co-transcribed as an operon, as suggested by beliaev et al.  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
intergenic sequences upstream of
omca
 and
mtrc
. the positions of tspomca and tspmtrc are shown. the nucleotides are numbered relative to each tsp  and the positions of the 5′ ends of the pme series plasmids  are indicated above the nucleotide sequences. boxed sequences indicate the conserved sequences found upstream of the tsps. a putative crp-binding motif is italicized, putative − <dig> and − <dig> promoter sequences are underlined, and putative transcriptional terminator sequences predicted by the gester program  <cit>  are shaded. the arrows indicate palindromic sequences in the predicted terminators.



a common sequence  that was weakly similar to the escherichia coli consensus − <dig> sequence  was present upstream of tspomca and tspmtrc, although a consensus − <dig> sequence was not conclusively identified upstream of either gene . notably, highly conserved sequences were found in the upstream regions of tspomca  and tspmtrc  . the former sequence contained a putative crp-binding motif   <cit>  based on its similarity to the consensus sequence for crp binding in e. coli   <cit> , suggesting that crp directly binds to the dna region upstream of tspomca. however, the corresponding sequence in the upstream region of tspmtrc  contained only half of the crp-binding consensus sequence.

we also performed rt-pcr analysis to investigate the transcriptional units of the mtr gene cluster using total rna extracted from mr- <dig> cells grown anaerobically with 10 mm fumarate . no transcripts were detected when the intergenic region between mtrf and omca was analyzed , suggesting that the transcription of mtrf is terminated by the putative terminator sequence downstream of mtrf  and does not affect the transcription of omca. although a terminator-like sequence was also predicted downstream of omca , a weak band was detected when the omca–mtrc intergenic region was amplified , indicating that the transcription from tspomca is not completely terminated within this intergenic region. a transcript containing the mtrc–mtra and mtra–mtrb intergenic regions was also amplified , demonstrating the polycistronic transcription of these three genes.

differential expression of omca and mtrc
the identification of tspomca and tspmtrc suggested that omca and mtrc  were regulated by different regulatory mechanisms, leading to different expression patterns. to test this hypothesis, mr- <dig> cells were grown aerobically and under anaerobic conditions with 10 mm fumarate until the early stationary phase, and the expression levels of omca and mtrc were then determined by quantitative rt-pcr analysis . the expression level of omca under anaerobic conditions was  <dig> -fold higher than that under aerobic conditions, whereas the expression level of mtrc under anaerobic conditions was  <dig> -fold lower than that under aerobic conditions. we also measured the expression levels of omca and mtrc in an in-frame crp-deletion mutant . when ∆crp cells were grown under aerobic conditions , the expression levels of omca and mtrc were markedly decreased as compared with wild-type mr- <dig>  cells . taken together, these results demonstrate that, although crp is essential for the transcriptional activation of both omca and mtrc, these genes are differently regulated in response to culture conditions.figure  <dig> 
qrt-pcr analyses of
omca
and
mtrc
in wt and ∆
crp
cells. cells were grown in lm with oxygen  or 10 mm fumarate  as an electron acceptor until the early stationary growth phase. results are expressed as relative values to mrna levels in the wt cells grown with oxygen. the error bars represent the standard deviation calculated from at least three measurements. nd, not determined; expression levels under fumarate-reducing conditions were not determined in ∆crp because the cells did not grow under anaerobic conditions.



to further characterize the expression patterns of omca and mtrc, we constructed the lacz reporter plasmids pmeomca- <dig> and pmemtrc- <dig> , which contained nearly all of the intergenic regions upstream of omca and mtrc, respectively , and compared the activity of promoters for omca  and mtrc  in wt cells under several different growth conditions . in this experiment,  <dig> and 50 mm fumarate were used for anaerobic cultivation to expose cells to electron acceptor- and electron donor-limited conditions, respectively , as it was reported that the electron donor to acceptor ratio affects the c-type cytochrome content and eet activities of mr- <dig> cells  <cit> . when cells were grown anaerobically with  <dig> and 50 mm fumarate, similar patterns of lacz expression from pomca  and pmtrc were observed . specifically, under 10 mm fumarate-added conditions, the activities of both promoters were increased in the early stationary phase compared to those in the mid-logarithmic phase, whereas the opposite trend was observed under 50 mm fumarate-added conditions. in contrast, under aerobic growth conditions, pmtrc activity was highest in the early stationary phase , whereas pomca activity was only slightly elevated . these results suggest that pomca and pmtrc exhibit differential transcriptional responses in the presence of oxygen, but respond similarly to changes in the ratios of electron donors and acceptors under anaerobic conditions. the ratios of the expression levels under aerobic and 10 mm fumarate-added conditions were in good agreement with those observed in the qrt-pcr analysis , indicating that transcription from pomca does not significantly affect expression of the downstream mtrcab operon in vivo. it is therefore likely that omca transcription is largely attenuated due to the putative terminator sequence downstream of omca .table  <dig> 
bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study



strain or plasmid
relevant characteristic
source or reference

bacterial strains
 
escherichia coli
q
ompt hsdr <dig> gal dcm f−, ompt, hsds
 
shewanella oneidensis
 ∆crp

plasmidslacz expression from p
omca
 and p
mtrc
. wt cells harboring pmeomca- <dig> or pmemtrc- <dig> were grown with oxygen , 10 mm fumarate  or 50 mm fumarate  as the electron acceptor, and their lacz activities were measured in the mid-logarithmic  and early stationary  growth phases. the error bars represent the standard deviation calculated from at least three measurements. the lacz activity in wt cells harboring pmelacz  was below  <dig> miller units under all of the tested conditions .



upstream regulatory regions of pomca and pmtrc
to determine the dna regions involved in the transcriptional regulation of omca and mtrc, we performed 5′-deletion analysis of the sequences upstream of tspomca and tspmtrc in the reporter plasmids pmeomca- <dig> and pmemtrc- <dig> . mr- <dig> strains harboring the reporter plasmids with promoter region deletions were grown aerobically or anaerobically with 10 mm fumarate until the early stationary phase, and lacz activities were then measured and compared . under aerobic growth conditions, the lacz activity of cells transformed with pmeomca- <dig>  in which the dna region from − <dig> to − <dig> relative to tspomca was deleted, was increased to a comparable level to that in anaerobically grown cells , suggesting the deleted dna region was involved in the negative regulation of pomca under aerobic conditions. the lacz activities of cells transformed with pmeomca- <dig> under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions were decreased to the same level as those of pmelacz , demonstrating that the region from − <dig> to − <dig> relative to tspomca, which contained the conserved upstream sequence and putative crp-binding site , was essential for the activation of pomca.figure  <dig> 
5′-deletion analyses of the upstream regions of
omca
 and
mtrc
. wt or ∆crp cells harboring the indicated pme series plasmids were grown aerobically  or anaerobically with 10 mm fumarate , and their lacz activities were measured in the early stationary growth phase. the error bars represent the standard deviation calculated from at least three measurements.



in the 5′-deletion analysis of the sequence upstream of tspmtrc , stepwise increases of lacz activities were observed under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions when the dna regions from − <dig> to − <dig> and from − <dig> and to − <dig> were deleted. however, the lacz activities in the aerobically grown cells were consistently higher than those found in the anaerobically cultured cells. this finding suggests that the dna region from − <dig> to − <dig> relative to tspmtrc contains sequences that constitutively repress the activity of pmtrc. as only low levels of lacz activity was detected in cells harboring pmemtrc- <dig>  the region from − <dig> to − <dig>  which also contained the conserved sequence upstream of tspomca and tspmtrc , was required for the activation of pmtrc.

direct activation of pomca and pmtrc by crp
to investigate the involvement of crp in the activation of pomca and pmtrc, we measured the lacz activities of ∆crp cells transformed with the 5′-deletion reporter plasmids . no significant lacz activity was detected for any of the reporter plasmids in ∆crp cells grown aerobically, demonstrating that crp was essential for the activation of both pomca and pmtrc. we also performed electrophoretic mobility shift assays  to investigate whether crp directly binds to the regions upstream of omca and mtrc . when a labeled dna probe containing the region from − <dig> to − <dig> relative to tspomca  was incubated with purified crp protein, shifted bands corresponding to crp-dna complexes were observed in a camp-dependent manner . however, no shifted bands were detected when a probe containing the region from − <dig> to + <dig> relative to tspomca  was used , demonstrating that the sequence between − <dig> to − <dig>  which contained the conserved upstream sequence and putative crp-binding site , was required for the specific binding of crp to the upstream region of tspomca. in emsa performed with probes containing upstream regions of mtrc , camp-dependent shifted bands were observed with pbmtrc <dig>  but not with pbmtrc <dig>  demonstrating that crp can bind to the region from − <dig> to − <dig> relative to tspmtrc . the weaker intensities of the shifted bands observed with pbmtrc <dig> compared with those with pbomca <dig> are likely attributable to the lack of an obvious crp-binding motif upstream of tspmtrc . taken together, these results indicate that crp directly binds to the upstream regions of tspomca and tspmtrc, and up-regulates the transcription of the corresponding genes.figure  <dig> 
binding of crp to the upstream regions of
omca
and
mtrc
by emsa.  dna fragments used as probes are indicated with bars. the positions of the 5′ and 3′ ends of the fragments relative to tspomca or tspmtrc  are shown. the open boxes indicate the consensus regions upstream of tspomca or tspmtrc shown in figure  <dig>   binding of crp to each probe in the presence  or absence  of camp. the probes were generated by pcr and labeled with cy <dig> at the 5′ termini. the quantities of crp are indicated above.



discussion
in this study, we demonstrated that two independent transcriptional promoters, pomca and pmtrc, differentially regulate the expression of omca and mtrc, although both promoters require crp for transcriptional activation. crp is a global transcriptional regulator that plays a key role in regulating carbon metabolism in enteric bacteria  <cit> . in shewanella, evidence suggests that crp is involved in the regulation of anaerobic respiration  <cit> . for instance, the camp/crp-dependent regulatory system was reported to be essential for regulating anaerobic arsenate reduction in shewanella sp. strain ana- <dig>  <cit> . crp appears to be required for transcriptional activation of the genes involved in the reduction of fe, mn, fumarate, nitrate, and dmso in s. oneidensis mr- <dig>  as a crp-deletion mutant of this strain exhibited decreased ability to reduce these electron acceptors  <cit> . consistent with this finding, markedly reduced expression of several anaerobic respiratory genes  were also observed in crp knockout mutants of mr- <dig>  <cit> , although it remains unclear whether crp directly or indirectly regulates these genes. in the present study, we confirmed that the expression from pomca and pmtrc was markedly decreased in a crp-deletion mutant  by qrt-pcr and lacz reporter analyses . in addition, emsa experiments revealed that crp directly binds to the regions upstream of omca and mtrc , demonstrating that the crp/camp-dependent regulatory system directly activates both pomca and pmtrc. taken together with the results of the 5′-deletion analysis , it is likely that the conserved sequences found upstream of tspomca and tspmtrc  are critical for crp binding and transcriptional initiation at these tsps.

the mechanisms underlying the crp/camp-dependent regulatory system have been extensively studied in e. coli k- <dig>  when complexed with camp, crp binds to a target dna sequence, resulting principally in the transcriptional activation of the downstream gene  <cit> . the camp–crp complex binds as a dimer to the consensus sequence 5′-tgtga-n6-tcacaa-3′, which is typically found in the flanking regions  of associated core promoters, and activates transcription by interacting directly with rna polymerase  <cit> . although crp-dependent promoters exhibit great structural diversity, they are classified based on the position of the central base of the crp-binding site  <cit> . the putative crp-binding site upstream of tspomca  and the corresponding site in the conserved sequence upstream of tspmtrc  are centered at − <dig>  and − <dig>  relative to the respective tsps, positions that closely correspond to those of the crp-binding sites for class i crp-dependent promoters   <cit> . although pomca and pmtrc lack a typical − <dig> sequence, it is known that − <dig> sequences are poorly conserved in most cpr-dependent promoters, whereas their − <dig> regions show relatively high similarity to the consensus sequence  <cit> . it is therefore conceivable that the camp–crp complex in s. oneidensis activates transcription at pomca and pmtrc in a similar manner to the well-characterized mechanism in e. coli, although the crp target sequences appear to differ between these bacteria. a previous study reported that the addition of camp to aerobic cultures of mr- <dig> resulted in significant induction of fumarate reductase activity  <cit> , suggesting that intracellular camp concentration is a key determinant of the ability of mr- <dig> cells to reduce anaerobic electron acceptors. however, although e. coli cells grown under fermentation or anaerobic respiration conditions produce more camp than cells grown under aerobic conditions  <cit> , it is currently unknown how intracellular camp concentrations are regulated in shewanella. further investigation is therefore needed to elucidate the signal transduction mechanisms underlying the crp/camp-dependent activation of pomca and pmtrc.

similar transcriptional responses were observed for pomca and pmtrc when cells were grown under fumarate-reducing conditions . however, the transcriptional activities of these promoters were dependent on the concentration of fumarate in the culture medium, suggesting that the balance of electron donors and acceptors strongly influences the activities of pomca and pmtrc. in medium supplemented with 10 mm fumarate, cells experience electron acceptor limitation during the stationary growth phase, because the fumarate is completely oxidized by the 15 mm lactate in the growth medium. the increased activities of pomca and pmtrc under these conditions  suggest that the mtr genes are up-regulated in response to electron acceptor-limiting conditions. in contrast, when cells were grown with excess electron acceptor , the activities of pomca and pmtrc were decreased in the early stationary phase, suggesting that the mtr genes are down-regulated following the depletion of electron donors under anaerobic conditions. these notions are supported by the previous observation that mr- <dig> shows higher reduction activity toward an extracellular substance  when grown in continuous culture under electron acceptor-limited conditions compared to electron donor-limited conditions  <cit> . it is therefore conceivable that the ratio of electron acceptors to electron donors influences intracellular redox status, such as the redox states of the nad and quinone pools  <cit> , resulting in the altered expression of the mtr genes. however, in mid-logarithmic phase, the activities of pomca and pmtrc in cultures containing 50 mm fumarate were higher than those in cultures supplemented with 10 mm . although the reason for this difference is not clear, it is possible that other factors, such as cell density, determine the transcriptional activities of pomca and pmtrc in the logarithmic growth phase, in which sufficient electron donors and acceptors are readily available.

the transcriptional activities of pomca and pmtrc differed in the presence of oxygen . although the mtr genes exhibit increased expression under anaerobic conditions compared with aerobic cultures  <cit> , here, we found that cells grown under aerobic conditions until the early stationary phase displayed markedly higher transcriptional activity of pmtrc compared to that observed under fumarate-reducing conditions . in the mid-logarithmic phase, however, the activity of pmtrc in the presence of oxygen was lower than that in anaerobic cultures supplemented with 50 mm fumarate, but was slightly higher than that under the 10 mm fumarate-added condition, indicating that the ratios of aerobic and anaerobic expression from pmtrc are strongly influenced by the growth phase and anaerobic electron acceptor concentration. in contrast, the activity of pomca was maintained at lower levels than that of pmtrc under aerobic conditions , demonstrating a clear difference in the regulation of pomca and pmtrc. this finding suggests that although pomca and pmtrc are both dependent on crp, additional mechanisms are also likely involved in the regulation of these promoters. notably, the activity of pomca in aerobically grown cells was increased by deleting the dna region from − <dig> to – <dig> relative to tspomca, suggesting that this region is involved in the negative regulation of pomca. in e. coli, the cytr regulator acts as a transcriptional repressor for several crp-dependent promoters, including deop <dig>  by binding to an operator region located upstream of a crp-binding site  through protein-protein interactions with the camp-crp complex, resulting in transcriptional repression  <cit> . therefore, it is possible that under aerobic conditions, an unknown regulator binds to the upstream region of pomca and represses the transcription of omca.

5′-deletion analysis demonstrated that deletion of the dna regions upstream of pmtrc significantly increased the activity of this promoter under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. although the reason for this increase remains unclear, it is possible that a non-specific repressor, such as a homolog of e. coli h-ns  <cit> , which binds preferentially to at-rich dna sequences, binds to the upstream region of pmtrc and constitutively represses expression from this promoter. this speculation is supported by the fact that positions − <dig> to − <dig> relative to tspmtrc have a very low gc content, and that relationships between h-ns and crp-dependent promoters have been found in e. coli  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the results of the present study indicate that transcription of the mtr genes is regulated by the crp/camp-dependent regulatory system and yet-unidentified negative regulatory mechanisms, suggesting that shewanella exploit multiple signal transduction pathways to control eet activity in response to environmental conditions and intracellular energy status. the differential expression of omca and mtrc under aerobic conditions  indicates that redox-sensing regulators, such as pas domain-containing proteins, are involved in the expression of these om-cyt genes, thereby tuning the composition of the om-cyts to the environment. as the expression of mtrc under aerobic conditions was markedly up-regulated in the early stationary phase, growth phase-dependent regulatory mechanisms might also be involved in mtr gene transcription. further studies are needed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulatory differences between pomca and pmtrc, and to explore the functional relationship between the om-cyts of shewanella.

