BACKGROUND
historic events such as climatic and topographic changes have triggered current patterns of biodiversity  <cit> . the pleistocene glaciations, in particular, are considered as a major driving force of intraspecific divergence, diversification and speciation . the pleistocene epoch experienced important climatic oscillations  <cit>  that have deeply modified the geographic range of temperate species within the palaearctic region . during the ice ages, changes in species distribution occured as the ice sheets advanced to reach climatically more favourable regions, called refugia  <cit> . at the end of each ice age, some populations expanded from these refugia to recolonize previously glaciated areas  <cit> .

geographic isolation between conspecific populations  is recognised to play an important role in allopatric speciation . when gene flow has been limited, or absent, among populations, different or identical alleles can become fixed depending upon the forces of natural selection and/or genetic drift  <cit> . thus genetic divergence occurs over a long period, imparting reproductive isolation and possibly leading to speciation  <cit> . when reproductive isolation is incomplete and formerly isolated lineages meet as a result of range expansion, further mating between the populations produces hybrids, resulting in the formation of a hybrid zone , genetic introgression  or reinforcement speciation through pre-zygotic isolation mechanisms .

sexual selection is well recognized for its important role in promoting speciation through its variation among allopatric populations  <cit> , either through the local features of a mating signal  <cit> , or different signals in different environments that confer local adaptations  <cit> . divergence in mating preferences that parallel divergence in mating signals give rise to discrimination against foreign mates, and can ultimately result in reproductive isolation and speciation . this phenomenon may dramatically increase the consequences of climatic oscillations on species. notwithstanding, the divergence in reproductive traits has not been approached in the context of climatic oscillations and migration of populations. previous studies have mainly focused on the consequences of climatic oscillations on genetic traits  while the consequences on reproductive traits and comprehensive integrative analyses of reproductive traits, geographical variation, and genetic differentiation are lacking.

here we investigated the phylogeography, population structure, and geographical variation of a reproductive trait  in the red-tailed bumblebee, bombus lapidarius. bumblebees are an excellent system for exploring historical biogeographic patterns of holarctic groups and the evolution of the courtship signal . these bees live in the coldest areas inhabited by insects and have been able to recolonize areas depopulated by ice ages in the last three million years  <cit> . their early historical biogeography  has already been explored  <cit>  while their recent history  has received comparatively far less attention . b. lapidarius is a widespread temperate west-palaearctic bumblebee that includes several subspecies which ex-hibit different colour patterns :  b. lapidarius lapidarius in the european plains, balkans and west anatolia,  b. lapidarius decipiens in the iberian and south italian peninsulas,  b. lapidarius caucasicus and b. lapidarius eriophorus in n.e. anatolia and the caucasus, and  b. lapidarius atlanticus in the moroccan atlas.

the courtship signal of bumblebee males includes both behavioural and chemical features . here, we focus on the most commonly studied trait, the male marking secretions . most bumblebee males patrol along paths where they scent-mark objects with their mms that attract conspecific virgin females  <cit> . the mms consist of a complex mixture  with several major components and with intraspecific variation . mms are produced de novo by cephalic labial glands  <cit>  from saturated fatty-acids by the action of species-specific esterases, desaturases and reductases in cephalic labial glands  <cit> .

in this study, we used a phylogeographic approach based on five genes  along with comparative chemical analyses of mms to determine the consequences of historic events on the chemical composition of male courtship signals. our purposes were  to infer the phylogeographic pattern of this widespread european pollinator,  to detect a putative divergence of mms across its distribution range, and  to compare the phylogeographic pattern and the reproductive trait variation pattern.

RESULTS
genetic divergence and phylogeography of the red-tailed bumblebee
patterns of sequence variation
the final molecular dataset spanned  <dig> aligned nucleotides: 1056 bp from coi , 465 bp from cytb , 791 bp from ef-1α f <dig> copy containing a ~200 bp intron , 711 bp from lwrh , and 910 bp from pepck . alignments did not require additional indels. lwrh was monomorphic across all b. lapidarius populations while other loci were polymorphic . therefore, we excluded the lwrh from the following results. in total,  <dig> unique haplotypes were observed for coi,  <dig> for cytb,  <dig> for ef-1α, and  <dig> for pepck among  <dig> european and east turkish individuals . for geographic groups, haplotype diversity ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  and nucleotide diversity ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  . our results displayed endemic haplotypes or haplogroups from :  gotland island, great britain, ireland, southern italy, east turkey and spain for coi;  great britain, east turkey, and southern italy for cytb;  southern italy, east turkey, and spain for pepck.

phylogeny and haplotype relationships
all phylogenetic analyses and mjm networks performed on the same genetic dataset led to quite similar topologies . phylogenetic analyses based on ef-1α did not show genetic divergence between geographic groups and failed to support strongly the relationship with outgroups. in the same way, despite the distinctive haplotypes of some geographic groups, phylogeny based on pepck failed to resolve relationships between haplogroups while trees based on coi and cytb resolved the relationship between haplogroups. phylogenetic analyses based on nuclear genes  failed to resolve the relationship between genetic groups while analyses based on mitochondrial genes  and all genes combined  resolved the relationship between genetic groups. phylogeny based on all genes combined showed a large-scale structuring in main groups that have a predominantly non-overlapping geographic distribution . b. lapidarius is split into three major lineages: an east turkey lineage , a southern italy and se european lineage , and a large group including all other european populations  . the lineage l <dig> included two sub-lineages: a southern italian lineage  and a se european lineage . inside l <dig>  three distinct geographic groups were distinguished: a gotland group , a british isles group , and a spanish group  but they were poorly supported. however there is evidence for divergence between islands, peninsulas and other populations and for maintenance of distinct genetic structure over time. due to the large genetic divergence of the east turkey lineage , its very restricted geographic distribution, and the lack of mms data, we chose to exclude these samples from our analyses of population structure.

divergence times
based on the coi data, the estimated divergence between east turkish  and european populations  was within a range of  <dig>  -  <dig>  mya, with a mean of  <dig>  mya and median of  <dig>  mya  while estimated divergence between european haplogroups  was within a range of  <dig> - <dig>  mya, with a mean of  <dig>  mya and median of  <dig>  mya . correspondingly, average simple pairwise divergence  between l <dig> and l2 + l <dig> was  <dig> % or ~  <dig>  mya based on the 2% divergence per million years clock commonly applied to insect mitochondrial dna  <cit> , and  between l <dig> and l <dig> was  <dig> % or ~  <dig>  mya.

population structure
geographic structuring among coi, cytb and pepck haplotypes within european populations was significantly supported by amova results ,  <dig>  ,  <dig>  , p-value <  <dig> ). these results suggested a potentially low level of gene flow between several adjacent populations. ef-1α and lwrh datasets were discarded from samova due to their poor genetic structuring . in samova, the Φct value increased asymptotically with increasing number of groups, levelling out at: seven groups for coi  with local Φct maximum at five groups  and three groups , five groups for cytb , nine groups for pepck  but above five groups , additional groups represented single sampling sites making little biological sense. all samova clustering  split the southern italian populations and most of the se european populations from other populations while only pepck clustering split spanish populations from other populations . clustering based on mitochondrial genes split some insular populations . these samova results were quite congruent to geographic groups observed in mjn and phylogenetic results.

inter-individual genetic distance and genetic variability
the interpolation map based on multi-loci genetic distances showed larger local divergence in dna sequences in sympatric areas between l2b and l <dig>  and l2a and l <dig> . nucleotide and haplotype diversities calculated for each geographic group  showed:  a higher diversity for coi in south italy and central-eastern europe ,  higher diversities for cytb in central-eastern europe ,  a higher diversity for ef1α in central-eastern europe and italy ,  higher diversities for pepck in central-eastern europe, south italy and spain . interpolation maps based on averaged genetic diversity for all markers confirmed the trend of a larger diversity in south italy and central-eastern europe .

mms variation of the red-tailed bumblebee
mms composition
 <dig> compounds were detected in the mms of b. lapidarius . the five main compounds detected were aliphatic compounds: hexadec-9-en-1-ol , hexadecane-1-ol , hexadecenoic acid , hexadecenyl hexadecenoate , and hexadecyl hexadecenoate . hexadec-7-enoic acid was only detected in south italian populations while hexadec-9-enoic acid was detected in other populations. the north italian populations displayed specific compounds hexadecenal and hexadecanal. the mms compositions of b. lapidarius lapidarius were similar to the previous studies  <cit>  except for two minor components .

mms divergences
the nmds  and permanova analyses separated the european populations into two main groups: southern italian populations  and all other european populations  . g <dig> corresponded to the lineage l2a while g <dig> corresponded to the lineages l2b + l <dig> . the indval method reveals  <dig> significant indicator compounds for g <dig> and seven for g <dig> 

inter-individual mms distance and mms variability
the interpolation map based on the mms distance showed larger local divergence in mms composition in the alps, central italy, eastern europe, and western france . the mms variability interpolation map  revealed  the lowest variability in central italy,  low variability in west pyrenees and carpathian region, and  high variability in ne europe, the alps and central europe. comparison of the mms variability showed significant differences between all geographic groups  and between pairwise geographic groups confirmed these observations .

comparative statistical analyses between geographic origin, colour pattern, genetic and mms
mantel tests showed significant positive low correlations between  genetic distances versus geographic distances ,  mms distances versus geographic distances ,  colour distances versus geographic distances ,  genetic distances versus mms distances ,  genetic distances versus colour distances , and  mms distances versus colour distances . partial mantel tests showed significant positive low correlations between  genetic distance vs. mms distance ,  genetic distances versus colour distances ,  mms distances versus colour distances .

our correlation analysis showed no linear correlation between genetic diversity and mms variability .

discussion
phylogeography of the red-tailed bumblebee
phylogeographic structure is usually consistent with long-term isolation in multiple refugia during climatic oscillations . in this way, the quaternary glacial events have been shown to explain the intraspecific genetic pattern of many european species  <cit> . during ice ages, the ranges of most european temperate species contracted to the southern peninsulas of iberia, italy and balkans . glaciers, european mountains or repeated marine-flooding during the pleistocene have constituted major vicariant barriers between these southern refugia leading to allopatric genetic divergence in many species . interglacial and postglacial recolonizations of europe have arisen from these mediterranean glacial refugia and principally from the balkans  <cit> . therefore, it is to be expected that populations of temperate species surviving in mediterranean refugia display higher genetic variability in the southern peninsulas  <cit> .

here, our results  detect an intraspecific phylogeographic structure within b. lapidarius with three major lineages . the roughly estimated molecular clock analyses date divergences between european lineages  to the quaternary while the divergence of east turkish populations takes place earlier . therefore, the divergence of european lineages can be considered as a consequence of allopatric differentiation during ice ages.

a previous study based on morphology has hypothesized that b. lapidarius has survived up to the last ice age in iberia, italy, balkans, and turkey prior to a post-glacial recolonization of europe from the balkans  <cit> . our results suggest an alternative scenario of the recent history of b. lapidarius .

the four lineages seem to arise from four regions: east turkey, south italy, the balkan region, and central-eastern europe .  east turkey hosts largely differentiated and long-term divergent populations . these populations do not contribute to the european genetic pool.  south italy has acted as a refugium as shown by its large genetic diversity  and its endemic haplotypes gathered in one distinct lineage l2a .  the balkan region has acted as a refugium according to its specific haplotypes gathered in one distinct lineage l2b . the low genetic diversity of the balkan region could be due to repeated bottlenecking of populations in this region and/or a prolonged bottleneck during past glacial oscillations .  c.e. europe has a large genetic diversity  and many distinct haplotypes gathered in one specific lineage l <dig> . even if the genetic diversity is increased by admixture with an allopatric lineage l2b , c.e. europe hosts the largest diversity of specific haplotypes . therefore, this region seems to have been a major glacial refuge for b. lapidarius. this evidence fits well with the theory of cryptic refugia in central, northern or eastern europe, an alternative to the classic theory, observed in other temperate species .

the status of iberia remains confused according to the slight differentiation/low diversity in mitochondrial markers and the higher differentiation/high diversity in nuclear markers of iberian populations . the poorly resolved relationship with the lineage l <dig>  makes it impossible to know if iberia acted as a refugium  or has been secondarily colonized by populations from c.e. europe.

european refugia have probably been isolated by alpine glaciers, the alps, carpathians, dinaric alps or repeated marine-flooding of the crati-sibari plain  during the pleistocene period leading to allopatric divergences of european lineages. in contrast, the frequent drops in the level of the adriatic sea during the quaternary ice ages  <cit>  probably allowed gene flow between the balkans and italian peninsula leading to a close relationships between these lineages as observed in rodents  and in turtles . according to our results, most of europe has been recolonized from the c.e. europe at the end of the last ice age . the c.e. european lineage has experienced allopatric differentiation  probably by reduction of the gene flow  <cit>  resulting from natural sea barriers separating the british isles and gotland. the balkan lineage also dispersed from its refugium and largely mixed with the c.e. european lineage in central europe , a common suture zone in many species . in contrast the south italian lineage did not contribute to the postglacial colonization, and geographically slightly overlapped the c.e. european lineage in a narrow area in central italy . this was most likely caused by the invasion of north italy by c.e. european lineage and a competitive exclusion process  <cit>  between lineages in this region.

mms differentiation
reproductive traits are generally assumed to be mainly shaped by  intraspecific interactions to maximize encounter rates among conspecific mates  and  interspecific interactions to maintain isolation barriers and decrease the likelihood of hybridization events among syntopic sister species  <cit> . this results in a stabilizing selection on reproductive traits to promote a species-specific signal . across species distribution, local reproductive trait variations , promoted by selection for specific optimized reproductive traits  <cit> , can appear due to changes in factors that affect communication systems:  mutation of genes involved in reproductive traits ,  intraspecific interactions like local preferences of the receivers  <cit> ,  the presence/abundance of species with a similar courtship signal which would result in selection for releasers with the most distinct, optimized reproductive traits . these changes in factors that affect communication can happen through allopatric differentiation as observed in insular bumblebees where genetic divergence  and local specific sexual selection  lead to mms divergence from other populations  <cit> . this reproductive trait differentiation can persist in secondary sympatry if the differentiation has led to the establishment of a reproductive  isolation barrier . alternatively, reproductive trait divergence can happen when formerly isolated lineages meet as a result of range expansion at a secondary contact zone . reinforcement leads to local adaptations in secondary contact zones .

our statistical analyses  support mms quantitative as well as qualitative differentiations of southern italian populations from other european populations of b. lapidarius. these qualitative changes  have probably arisen from enzyme change  by mutations of enzyme genes  or by activation of a non-functional enzyme gene transcript present in a common ancestor, as observed in moths  <cit> .

the mms differentiation is poorly explained by geographic distance but displays an obvious geographic pattern . the mms divergence is also weakly correlated with the genetic distance but strongly matches the divergence of the lineage l2a . this suggests that the south italian mms differentiation is related to the divergence of the south italian lineage. moreover, the lack of gene flow without an obvious geographic barrier between northern and southern italy  suggests a reproductive isolation fostered by species intrinsic isolation mechanisms, probably by mms differentiation leading to pre-zygotic isolation barriers between populations. therefore we expect that the mms divergence has appeared subsequent to  allopatric divergence during ice ages and persistence during current interglacial period  or  a reinforcement process during the range expansion and the admixture with the c.e. lineage . the southern italian mms differentiation seems due to allopatric divergence during glacial isolation rather than reinforcement in secondary contact zone. this is because the southern italian mms pattern is spread over the whole area of the southern italian lineage while reinforcement should mainly lead to local adaptations in secondary contact zones as observed in flies  <cit> .

our statistical analyses demonstrate that the intrapopulational mms variability is not correlated to the intrapopulational genetic diversity. the geographic areas of high/low intrapopulational mms variability do not match with areas of high/low intrapopulational genetic diversity . the mms variability map shows the lowest intrapopulational mms variability in the contact zone between c.e. european and southern italian lineages. we hypothesise that this local decrease of intrapopulational mms variability could be due to the intensification of the stabilizing selection on mms for local specific optimized reproductive traits further to new interaction between closely related taxa  during the postglacial range expansion. this local reinforcement process is also supported by the divergence of northern italian populations of c.e. european lineage from other c.e. european lineage populations in mms composition which increases the mms divergence with southern italian populations .

the comparisons of the phylogeographic patterns, mms pattern distribution and mms variability distribution suggest that the mms divergence leading to pre-zygotic isolation between southern italian and c.e. european lineages has been fostered by past allopatry between refugia and persists in the current interglacial period . the post-glacial range expansion of these lineages differentiated in mms seems to have led to a reinforcement process in the secondary contact zone. further studies in contact zones  are needed to check this hypothesis.

colour pattern variation
the genetic distances and lineages only partially reflect the colour patterns  <cit>  . the colour pattern b. lapidarius caucasicus fits with l <dig> while other colour forms  spread in l <dig> and l <dig> . the mms distance is also poorly correlated to the colour pattern distance. the mms and colour patterns are only congruent for the south italy individuals . this incongruence between colour patterns, mms and phylogeny should be a consequence of local müllerian mimicry processes  as observed in other bumblebees  <cit> .

speciation
the consequence of genetic and mms divergences between populations fostered by species range contraction during climatic oscillations can range from simple regional variations , to a speciation processes between allopatric refugia . several pieces of evidence strongly suggest an incipient speciation between southern italian and other european lineages of b. lapidarius contrary to the current literature :  the concordance of genetic divergence in tree topologies derived from mitochondrial and nuclear genes  <cit> ,  the persistence of the genetic divergence through time despite the current secondary contact zone  <cit> ,  the divergences in chemical reproductive traits  which can lead to discrimination by receivers and to pre-mating isolation  <cit>  as observed in moths  and in bumblebees  <cit> . therefore, southern italy could be a speciation centre for b. lapidarius as observed in amphibians  <cit>  or in reptiles . in the same way, the large mitochondrial and nuclear divergences observed in east turkish b. lapidarius strongly suggest that they are a different species . in contrast, the speciation process has not happened in other lineages according to current gene flow and the lack of mms and morphological differentiations. however, these speciation hypotheses need to be checked with further integrative taxonomy, including morphologic, chemical, ethologic and genetic criteria  based on an adapted species concept  <cit>  in order to assess the taxonomic status within the b. lapidarius complex.

CONCLUSIONS
quaternary climatic oscillations seem to have led to the european b. lapidarius population contraction in three main refugia. these refugia were localized inside mediterranean peninsulas  and in central-eastern europe. inside the southern italian refugium, populations have experienced allopatric mms differentiation and an incipient speciation process from other lineages. at the end of ice age, the range expansion of lineages have led to secondary contact zone between the c.e. europe lineage and southern italy lineage where a reinforcement process on local mms patterns seems to take place.

this study suggests that the population movement during quaternary climatic oscillations can lead to divergence in reproductive traits by allopatric differentiation during ice age and by reinforcement during post-glacial recolonization.

