BACKGROUND
the incidence of intrapartum asphyxia was recently determined to be  <dig> % in a large population of singleton pregnancies  <cit> . even so, the occurrence of adverse neurological outcome following delivery is actually much lower. there are undoubtedly a number of reasons why greater numbers of infants do not suffer lasting neurological impairment, but one of the reasons may be the formation of new cells in the damaged tissue. recent studies have demonstrated the presence of multipotent neural stem cells in the subventricular zone and the subgranular zone of the hippocampus  <cit> . hippocampal stem cells from the adult brain have been demonstrated to proliferate and differentiate into neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes  <cit> , as a response to multiple factors, including hypoxic-ischemic  injury, or trauma  <cit> .

new neuronal growth has been demonstrated in several studies of adult h-i models, including in humans  <cit> , but this finding has received less attention in neonatal animals. the pluripotent stem cells found in the neonatal brain have not been characterized as completely as those in the adult brain. as this process may be relevant to the recovery of the neonatal brain from h-i injury, we sought to determine whether new cells arose in the neonatal brain following this type of injury. bromodeoxyuridine  is a thymidine analog incorporated into the dna of dividing cells, rendering them detectable by immunohistochemical means  <cit> . we employed a neonatal mouse h-i brain injury model with brdu injection to determine what types of brdu-positive cells are present in the hippocampus after an h-i event and to determine if this response if different than that due to hypoxia alone.

RESULTS
regional differences
the dg on the hypoxic-ischemic side of the brain exhibited significantly higher numbers of brdu-positive cells at p <dig>  p <dig>  and p <dig> than either ca <dig> or ca <dig>  brdu/rca-positive cells were significantly higher at p <dig> in the dg. the morphology and location of the brdu/rca-positive cells suggested that they were endothelial or microglial cells. brdu/neun-positive cells were higher at p <dig> and p <dig> in the dg .

hypoxia alone versus hypoxic-ischemic side differences
discussion
the hippocampus has been the focus of much research involving h-i injury, both for its susceptibility to h-i injury and its regenerative capacity due to the adult neural stem cells found there. the bulk of this work has been compiled using adult models of h-i injury. in the neonatal mouse, the degree of damage to the hippocampus from this type of injury has been found to be variable, based on multiple factors, including the strain of mouse used  <cit> . in addition, the timing of the insult has been demonstrated to affect the severity of damage. the mouse hippocampus is remarkably resistant to h-i injury at 2– <dig> post-natal days but becomes progressively vulnerable, and by age  <dig> post-natal days hippocampal damage exceeds that of cortex  <cit> . scheepens et al  <cit>  found an increase in proliferation of hippocampal cells following global asphyxia in the newborn rat, much as we found in the model we used, but these investigators did not assess maturation of the proliferating cells into neurons and other cell types. in one study neonatal hypoxia alone triggered neurogenesis in a neonatal rat model  <cit> . the changes they noted were mainly in the ca <dig> region, as opposed to the dg, where we found the primary changes. because the hippocampus is vulnerable to h-i damage and has the potential for neurogenesis, yet has not been extensively examined in a neonatal model, the hippocampus was the focus for this study.

we can summarize the regenerative process as follows: the initial phase is characterized by comparatively large numbers of incompletely differentiated cells, primarily in the dg , followed rapidly by the appearance of brdu/rca-positive cells, again mainly in the dg, and then by brdu/neun-positive cells  developing only in the dg . there were minimal numbers of brdu/gfap-positive cells observed at all points.

ischemia has been shown to increase neurogenesis in several adult animal models of brain ischemia. following global cerebral ischemia in adult gerbils, neurogenesis has been shown to increase in the hippocampal sgz, while newly born neurons were demonstrated in the ca <dig> pyramidal cell layer  <cit> . in another study of adult gerbils, after  <dig> minutes of bilateral carotid occlusion, newborn cells with a neuronal phenotype were first seen  <dig> days after injury  <cit> . in the adult rat, ischemia has been shown to increase the incorporation of brdu-positive cells co-expressing neuronal markers in both the dg and the svz  <cit> . furthermore, this effect was more prominent on the side of ischemic insult  <cit> . similar studies in the adult rat demonstrate that up to  <dig> percent of the new cells found after this type of ischemic brain damage demonstrate neuronal characteristics. in adult mice, after transient forebrain ischemia, brdu-positive cells have been demonstrated to significantly increase in the dg  <cit> . in view of the fact that we observed the brdu/neun-positive cells to increase only in the dg, it seems probable that the regenerative process in neonates is similar to that in adult animals.

the data strongly suggested that the development of oligodendrocytes  was impaired in the dg on the hypoxic-ischemic side of the brain, with significantly fewer of these cells observed in the hypoxic-ischemic side as compared to the hypoxia alone side at  <dig> days. this finding is in contradiction to findings reported by zaidi et al  <cit> , who demonstrated that neonatal h-i injury in rats led to increased numbers of oligodendrocytes ipsilateral to h-i injury. there are several possible explanations for this discrepancy. in our study, oligodendrocytes were found to be decreased on the side of the brain ipsilateral to carotid ligation at p <dig>  in the zaidi study, they were found to be increased at p <dig>  it is possible that oligodendrocytes proliferate at the site of damage after p <dig>  it is also possible that the oligodendrocytes are at the site of damage at p <dig>  but are not mature enough to stain with cnpase. lastly, the zaidi group evaluated the svz, while we reported dual staining in the hippocampus. there could be regional differences between the two.

white matter damage in neonates is thought to be in part due to vulnerability of the immature oligodendrocyte to h-i damage  <cit> . in several neonatal animal models, oligodendrocytes have been demonstrated to be susceptible to h-i injury  <cit> . this effect seems to be dependent on both the degree of h-i damage  <cit>  and the timing of the injury, with late oligodendrocyte progenitors being more susceptible than early oligodendrocyte precursors or more mature oligodendrocytes  <cit> . our results were consistent with these reports. this window of vulnerability of the oligodendrocyte coincides with the human population at high risk for the development of pvl. this vulnerability of the immature oligodendrocytes might explain the paucity of new, mature oligodendrocytes in our model on the hypoxic-ischemic side  <cit> .

we found a significant, early increase in brdu-positive cells expressing rca, an endothelial cell marker and microglial marker, on the side of the brain affected by hypoxic-ischemic injury. the mechanisms of angiogenesis in the brain after h-i injury are not well understood, and there is also little known about angiogenesis in neonatal animal models. vascular endothelial growth factor  is endothelial cell specific and has been implicated in hypoxia-mediated angiogenesis  <cit> . vegf has also been demonstrated in microglial cells after cerebral infarct in adult rats  <cit> . in the rat brain, angiogenesis is not completed until about post-natal day  <dig>  <cit> . therefore, it remains a possibility that the increase in cells co-labeling for brdu and rca after h-i injury in our study partly represents the normal brain maturation process. however, the increase of these cells on the hypoxic-ischemic side of the brain would imply that the injury led to this effect. further studies will be needed to more accurately identify if there are changes in angiogenesis following h-i injury. the majority of these brdu positive/rca positive cells appeared morphologically to be activated microglia, which are thought to play a role in the damage to immature oligodendrocytes  <cit> .

the present study did not demonstrate an increase in brdu-positive cells co-labeling for an astrocyte marker, gfap, after h-i injury. astrocytes have been demonstrated to express apoptotic enzymes within hours after h-i injury in neonatal rats  <cit> . in neonatal piglets, gfap-positive cell bodies were reduced by roughly 50% at  <dig> hours after h-i injury, but subsets of astrocytes were subsequently shown to proliferate later after the insult  <cit> . in adult rats, the number of astrocytes was shown to remain unchanged after traumatic brain injury in one study  <cit> , while in another similar study, there was loss of gfap reactivity in the ipsilateral ca <dig> region of the hippocampus  <dig> minutes after injury with progressive astrocyte loss over the next  <dig> hours  <cit> .

as evidenced by the variability reported in the astrocytic response to h-i brain injury, the response of this cell in this environment needs to be better characterized. because astrocytes help to maintain the extracellular milieu needed for neuronal formation and function, it is possible that their early loss after h-i injury may contribute to subsequent neuronal degeneration. future studies in our neonatal mouse model could be geared towards better understanding the early response of astrocytes. postponing evaluation until three days post-injury in this model likely resulted in underestimation of the astrocytes' role in this injury repair process. chronic hypoxia has been demonstrated to induce astrocytes into more immature phenotypes, which do not express normal levels of gfap  <cit> . the ability of acute hypoxia to cause this effect is not well understood. therefore, it remains a possibility that evaluating for immature astrocytes in this model would have resulted in the visualization of more astrocytic cells.

although the brdu-positive cells in our study were co-labeled with stains identifying four separate types of cells, there were many brdu-positive cells that were not identified by these four stains. the co-labeling studies we performed accounted for only about 20% of all the brdu-positive cells. the brdu labeling protocol we used consisted of brdu injections over the course of the experiment, rather than a one time injection at the time of h-i injury, which resulted in the staining of more cells than would be found following a single injection. in this manner, we were able to evaluate how each cell type varied its number and location at different intervals after the injury. this provided information about the cellular response to hypoxic-ischemic brain injury in both the acute and long-term settings. the role and identity of the non-co-labeled cells remains unclear. it is probable that these were immature cell types, not yet expressing the markers for which we evaluated.

the validity of cells staining for brdu representing new or dividing cells versus apoptotic or necrotic cells is also an issue to be considered. as a result, tunel staining was performed on several hippocampal sections. at p <dig>  three days after h-i injury, tunel staining does reveal apoptotic and necrotic nuclei. however, by p <dig>  this finding is virtually non-existent, suggesting that any brdu-positive cells are present due to cell proliferation or growth.  previous studies have indicated that neurons subjected to h-i injury do, indeed, incorporate brdu, but that these injured neurons which undergo apoptosis have disappeared by  <dig> days  <cit> .

a possible criticism of the present study is that we did not count the cells with stereological methods. as a result, our findings might be due to increased cell density due to surrounding tissue loss as opposed to an increase in the absolute number of new cells present. however, the cell counts were conducted in non-overlapping sections within a very short segment of the anterior hippocampus, in which the sections' thickness remained constant. no gross differences were observable in brain size in either the coronal or sagittal planes. furthermore, hippocampal volume on both the hypoxia alone and hypoxic-ischemic sides of the brain did not vary noticeably histologically. lastly, confocal imaging revealed cell density on each side of the brain to be roughly equivalent, although exact volumetric measurements can not be made without stereologic techniques.

CONCLUSIONS
neuronal and other cell regeneration was significantly increased in the dg on the side of the brain exposed to h-i injury, as opposed to hypoxic injury alone. this study addresses the neonatal mouse brain's ability to repair h-i damage and can serve as a platform to determine if interventions can be made to augment these inherent repair mechanisms. the rate of neuronal regeneration found in our study, while showing a significant increase in the dg, was not robust. perhaps the stimulus was insufficient to result in a great degree of neurogenesis. the degree of brain injury was not stratified in this study. neurogenesis might prove to be proportional to the degree of injury. it is also possible that this regeneration could increase further with time, but this is unlikely because new cell production was decreasing by the final time point after the injury in our study. stem cell transplantation or manipulations of factors affecting intrinsic stem cell activity could be applied to this system in the future.

