BACKGROUND
the vertebral column is the defining character of vertebrates providing the organism with a unique ability of movement, form and function. obviously, abnormalities to this organ can lead to severe and often painful pathological conditions. spinal disorders are a major cause of disability for humans and an important health problem for intensively farmed animals. a number of animal models have been used to further explore the pathology and revealed that vertebral deformities present a complex but comparable cross species etiology  <cit> . morphological changes like altered bone formation and cell density, thinning of osteoblasts along with increased cell proliferation and cell death are changes found in spinal deformities and intervertebral disc degeneration  in mammals  <cit> . discs from patients with spinal deformities further have ectopic calcification of the vertebral endplates and sometimes in the disc itself  <cit> . cells of the mammalian disc are derived directly from the phylogenetically conserved notochord  <cit> . whereas only remnants of the notochord exists in the nucleus pulposus  in humans by the age of  <dig>  the notochord persist throughout all life stages in teleosts. spinal disorders in teleosts like sea bass, sea bream, rainbow trout, halibut and salmon  <cit>  have mostly been descriptive and few molecular studies have been carried out. however, in atlantic salmon  compression  and/or vertebral fusion  accounts for  <dig> out of  <dig> recently described vertebral deformities  <cit> . spinal fusions involves transformation of intervertebral notochord tissue into cartilage, shape alterations of vertebral body endplates, mineralization of the intervertebral cartilage and replacement of intervertebral cartilage by bone  <cit> , pathological processes resembling those of idd in mammals.

skeletogenesis in salmon involves activity from the three main bone and cartilage cell types; chondrocytes, osteoblasts and osteoclasts. bone formation further occurs via two basic mechanisms; compact bone of the amphicoel and trabeculae is formed directly through intramembranous ossification, whereas the cartilaginous template is replaced by bone in the arch centra through endochondral ossification. bone formation is brought about by a complex set of highly regulated molecular pathways, involving extracellular matrix  constituents , signaling molecules  and transcription factors . some of the key transcription factors in bone metabolism include runx <dig> and osterix  <cit> , involved in the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells  into osteoblasts that express bone matrix  and matrix mineralizing  genes. early chondrocyte differentiation is controlled by sox <dig>  which regulates transcription of col2a  <cit> , the major ecm component of cartilage. further, before endochondral ossification may occur, mef2c assures that chondrocytes mature into col10a producing hypertrophic cells  <cit> . both mineralized bone and cartilage is remodeled through the activity of osteoclasts. these multinucleated cells provide and acidic environment, express cathepsins and matrix metalloproteinases  and are tartrate acid phosphatase resistant . hence mineralized matrix may be broken down  <cit> . the skeletal pathways described in mammals are currently being understood in teleosts. in a recent study, we investigated  <dig> genes for their role in salmon spinal column skeletogenesis  <cit> . however, the genetic interactions of bone and cartilage development are currently becoming more entangled, as chondrocytes and osteoblasts are shown to intersect through the formation of chondroid bone. this process has been described through normal maturation, differentiation plasticity and trans-chondroid ossification  <cit> . though, the molecular pathways involved are still far from understood.

during the last decade problems with spinal disorders in salmon have been increasingly in focus due to the importance of this species in the aquaculture industry. to further elucidate the mechanisms involved in the development of vertebral deformities, we analyzed an intermediate and terminal stage of the fusion process at a morphological level by using radiography and histology and gene transcriptional changes using quantitative pcr  and in situ hybridization . we found that loss of cell integrity and ectopic bone formation characterizes the development of spinal fusions. during the fusion process a metaplastic shift appeared in the arch centra where cells in the intermediate zone between osteoblasts and chondrocytes co-expressed mixed signals of chondrogenic and osteogenic markers. a similar shift also occurred in the notochord where proliferating chordoblasts changed transcription profile from chondrogenic to also include osteogenic marker genes. we suggest that hyperthermic induced development of spinal fusions involve a metaplastic shift in cells from the chondrocytic lineage. with this work, we bring forward salmon to be an interesting organism to study development of spinal fusions.

RESULTS
the elevated temperature regime used in this study induced mainly vertebral deformities of the fusion type. the incidence of complete fusions was  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig> %  at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> g, respectively . the incidence in the two later samplings are underestimated, since these numbers do not take into consideration that fish sampled at  <dig> and  <dig> g could develop into fusions at the following samplings. some fish displayed more than one type of pathology, but pathological changes other than fusions were low in numbers and were not investigated. the fusion process is a dynamic process as visualized by x-ray in figure  <dig> 

histology and immunohistochemistry
histological examination revealed more detailed morphological characteristics of intermediate and fused vertebral bodies . the osteoblasts at the growth zones of the vertebral endplate appeared well-organized in non-deformed vertebrae and little aberrancy was found when staining with toluidine blue . the corresponding growth zones in intermediate vertebrae displayed alterations in vertebral endplates and more disorganized osteoblasts . these findings became more pronounced at fused stage. the osteogenic zone of the vertebral endplate extended abaxial in-between two vertebral body endplates . in addition, arch centra had decreased in fused vertebral bodies and chordocytes appeared denser compared to non-deformed . alizarin red s visualized more calcified tissue in areas with reduced arch centra in intermediate and fused vertebrae . in fusions, normal vertebral hour-glass shape was replaced by a more compact and squared shape morphology, as the arch centra were more or less replaced by bone . alizarin red s stained calcified tissue and showed calcification of the centra and around hypertrophic chondrocytes . no calcification was detected in the intervertebral space of incomplete fusions . in fusions, growth zones of opposing vertebral bodies had fused and intervertebral space mineralized .

a balance between bone resorption and bone formation is required for maintaining bone integrity during remodeling. thus, we examined osteoclast activity using trap staining. weak positive trap staining was detected at the ossifying border of hypertrophic chondrocytes in the arch centra in one sample from the intermediate group . no positive staining was found in samples from the fused group .

to analyze if the morphological changes observed during development of fusions could be linked to an imbalanced cell cycling, we used immunohistochemistry with antibodies specific to pcna for detection of proliferation and caspase  <dig> for detection of apoptosis. a few pcna positive cells were apparent at the osteoblast growth zone at the endplates in non-deformed vertebral bodies . pcna positive cells were almost entirely restricted to these areas and were rarely found in chordoblasts or chordocytes . however, we detected a markedly increase in pcna positive cells at the growth zone of the endplates, and in cells extending axial at intermediate and fused stages . further, high abundance of proliferating chordoblasts were found in the notochord of vertebrae with reduced intervertebral space . a few positive caspase  <dig> signals were detected at the rims of the osteoblast growth zone of the endplates in non-deformed vertebral bodies . increased caspase  <dig> signals were found in these areas of intermediate and fused vertebral bodies. caspase  <dig> positive cells were also prominent at the transition between the intervertebral and vertebral regions . the positive signal was further spreading along the rims of the vertebral bodies in axial direction  and in cells harboring the joints of the trabeculae . caspase  <dig> was not detected in the notochord in any of the groups. the cells that stained positive had characteristic apoptotic morphology with membrane blebbing .

spatial and temporal gene transcription in developing fusions
to examine transcriptional regulations involved in development of fusions, we analyzed non-deformed, intermediate and fused vertebrae with real-time qpcr, while the spatial gene transcription in intermediate and fused vertebrae were characterized by ish. ish of non-deformed vertebral bodies have previously been described in ytteborg et al.  <cit> . no staining was detected for ish with sense probes . quantification of mrna revealed that most genes were transcriptionally down-regulated during the pathogenesis of vertebral fusions and that the suppression was more profound at the intermediate stage than in fused specimens . we divided the  <dig> analyzed genes into two groups; structural genes and regulatory genes .

structural genes
nine out of  <dig> structural genes had a down-regulated transcription in the intermediate group compared to only five in the fused group . four genes were down-regulated in both groups, including genes involved in bone  and hypertrophic cartilage ecm production  and mineralization . col2a <dig> transcription was down-regulated in intermediate while up-regulated in the fused group . osteonectin was up-regulated in both groups. of genes involved in osteoclast activity, mmp <dig> showed opposite transcription, being down-regulated in intermediate while up-regulated in fused. mmp <dig> and cathepsin k showed similar transcription pattern in the two groups, mmp <dig> up-regulated and cathepsin k down-regulated .

ish analyzes of col1a, col2a, col10a, osteonectin and osteocalcin revealed cells exhibiting characteristics of both osteoblasts and chondrocytes. these findings were more pronounced in fused than intermediate specimens. col1a was expressed in osteogenic cells along the rims of the vertebral body endplates and in osteoblasts at the lateral surfaces of trabeculae at the intermediate stage . in incomplete fusions, we could locate osteogenic col1a positive cells in the growth zone of the vertebral endplate extending abaxial in-between vertebral bodies . in addition, col1a was expressed in high abundance in the intervertebral space of incomplete fusions . the chondrocytic marker col2a was observed in chordoblasts in intermediate samples . furthermore, col2a was expressed at the growth zone of the vertebral body endplates in both intermediate and fused samples . positive staining of col2a in the notochord became stronger as intervertebral space narrowed down . transcription of col10a was observed in hypertrophic chondrocytes and in osteogenic cells lining apical surfaces of trabeculae in intermediate and fused vertebrae . col10a seemed to be less expressed in both intermediate and fused vertebrae, as also observed from the down-regulated transcription of this gene from the qpcr results. osteonectin showed a similar transcription pattern as col <dig>  but transcription seemed increased in the trabeculae . transcription of osteonectin was also associated with chondrocytes in regions where arch centra fused . strong osteonectin transcription correlated with an up-regulated mrna transcription observed from qpcr. osteocalcin was transcribed in osteogenic cells lining surfaces of trabeculae of fused vertebrae  and in cells located abaxial in-between two opposing vertebral body endplates . when the vertebral growth zones blended with the arch centra, chondrocytes expressing osteocalcin was observed .

regulatory genes - transcription factors and signaling molecules
all of the regulatory genes  were less expressed in the intermediate compared to the fused group. except of osterix, regulatory genes showed similar transcription patterns in the two groups. twist involved in osteoblast inhibition and mef2c involved in chondrocyte hypertrophy were down-regulated in both groups. however, the chondrogenic marker sox <dig> was up-regulated in both groups. the osteogenic markers runx <dig> and osterix had up-regulated transcription in the fused group, runx <dig> in intermediate group. osterix was down-regulated in intermediate group, however n.s. except of bmp <dig> in fused vertebral bodies, signaling molecules  were down-regulated in both intermediate and fused group.

when analyzing selected genes by ish, runx <dig> was never detected in chordocytes, chordoblasts or chondrocytes in non-deformed vertebral bodies. positive runx <dig> staining was however detected at the osteoblast growth zone of the vertebral endplate . in intermediate and fused samples we detected transcription at the corresponding growth zone and along the lateral surfaces of the trabeculae . we observed an increased transcription of runx <dig> in the chordocytes of incomplete fusions  and in the chordoblasts and chordocytes in more severe fusions . these findings corresponded to the up-regulated transcription found by qpcr. sox <dig> was expressed in chondrocytes in non-deformed vertebral bodies  and in chordoblasts. in intermediate and fused samples, strong signals of sox <dig> were detected in intervertebral space . sox <dig> was also transcribed at the vertebral growth zones of the endplates  and the signal was extending axial in severe fusions . mef2c was expressed in a wide zone of hypertrophic chondrocytes in non-deformed vertebral bodies . hypertrophic chondrocytes also transcribed mef2c in intermediate and fused vertebral bodies . further, mef2c was observed at the boundaries between two fused arch centra . in fusions were arch centra narrowed down, mef2c transcription did not seem restricted to hypertrophic zones . some mef2c expressing cells was also detected at the vertebral endplates  and abaxial between vertebral growth zones of opposing vertebral bodies in incomplete fusions .

discussion
in this study we present a molecular characterization of mechanisms involved in development of vertebral fusions in salmon. we have previously shown that the non-deformed fish used in this study had indications of soft bone phenotype  <cit> . they were further characterized by disrupted chondrocytic maturation, increased zones of hypertrophic chondrocytes and delayed endochondral ossification in the arch centra  <cit> . the number of deformities increased throughout the experiment and an imbalanced bone and cartilage production characterized susceptible fish, predisposed for developing deformities  <cit> . in this study we wanted to analyze an intermediate and a terminal stage of the fusion process to further characterize developing deformities. through this experiment, we found that vertebral deformities were developing through a series of events, of which five hallmarks were identified as particularly interesting. first, disorganized and proliferating osteoblasts were prominent in the growth zones of the vertebral body endplates. second, a metaplastic shift made the borders less distinct between the osteoblastic growth zone and the chondrocytic areas in the arch centra. third, the arch centra ossified and the endplates became straight, hence giving the vertebral bodies a squared shaped morphology. fourth, the intervertebral space narrowed down and the notochord was replaced by bone forming cells. fifth, in a complete fusion all intervertebral tissue was remodeled into bone.

one of the major morphological changes during the fusion process was ossification of the arch centra. our findings suggest that this ectopic bone formation is a key event in development of vertebral fusions, which involve lack of normal cell differentiation and growth. immunohistochemistry with pcna showed that osteoblasts at the growth zone of the vertebral body endplates had a markedly increased cell proliferation during the fusion process. the increased proliferation of osteoblasts was apparently partly counteracted by increased cell death as shown by stronger caspase  <dig> signaling. nevertheless, the osteoblasts at the vertebral endplates appeared less organized in intermediate and fused vertebral bodies by toluidine blue staining. in addition, in fused vertebral bodies we observed moderate changes of abaxial translocation of cells from the osteoblast growth zone. abaxial direction of growth from the borders of vertebral body end-plates and formation of chondroid bone in these areas are also described in previous experiments  <cit> . the findings of increased proliferation and disorganized osteoblast growth were evident in vertebrae with modest alterations, which may suggest that this is an early event in the fusion process.

during the developing pathology, the marked border between the osteoblast growth zones and the chondrocytic areas connected to the arches became less distinct, as proliferating cells and chondrocytes blended through an intermediate zone. pcna positive cells further extended along the rims of fusing vertebral bodies. this cell proliferation appeared to be closely linked to fusion of opposing arch centra. during the fusion process a metaplastic shift appeared in the arch centra where cells in the intermediate zone between osteoblasts and chondrocytes co-transcribed col1a, col2a, runx <dig>  osteocalcin and osteonectin, as visualized by ish. based on histology, witten et al.  <cit>  have previously suggested the involvement of a metaplastic shift in developing fusions. in more progressed fusions, most cells in the arch centra seemed to co-transcribe osteogenic and chondrogenic markers. our suggestion is therefore that trans-differentiated cells produce the ectopic bone.

several in vitro studies have demonstrated that chondrocytes associated with calcifying cartilage can acquire properties of osteoblasts  <cit>  and are able to change their phenotype from a primarily cartilage synthesizing cell type to a bone synthesizing cell type  <cit> . however, hypertrophic chondrocytes able to trans-differentiate into osteoblasts through a process called trans-chondroid ossification has also been described  <cit> . interestingly, this type of growth has been identified during distraction osteogenesis in rats  <cit> , a process where bone is formed rapidly upon stretching. during trans-chondroid ossification, chondrocytes are found to express both col <dig> and col <dig>  <cit> . in a review by amir et al.  <cit>  it was speculated if tension stress during distraction inhibited final differentiation of chondrocytes and rather trans-differentiated these cells into osteoblastic cells. at fused stage, early markers for osteoblasts and chondrocytes  were upregulated whereas the osteoblast inhibitor  and genes involved in chondrocyte hypertrophy  were downregulated, results also supported by ish. deletion of ihh has been shown to disrupt the normal pattern of various zones of chondrocyte differentiation in the growth plate  <cit> , whereas sox <dig> accelerate chondrocyte differentiation in proliferating chondrocytes but inhibit hypertrophy  <cit> . sustained runx <dig> expression, as found in our studies, is further associated with trans-differentiation of chondrocytes into bone cells  <cit> . on the contrary, analyzing the ecm components of both osteoblasts and chondrocytes  revealed that these transcripts had reduced activity in both intermediate and fused vertebrae. these findings might reflect the reduced radiodensity described in fish reared at elevated temperatures  <cit> .

to further characterize the pathological bone formation in the chondrocytic areas in the arch centra, we analyzed osteoclast activity. absence of osteoclasts visualized through trap staining was characteristic during the development of vertebral fusions, indicating that normal endochondral ossification was restrained. in addition, cathepsin k had a down-regulated transcription level. in normal developing salmon vertebrae, these areas are modeled through endochondral bone formation, a process requiring invasion of osteoclasts and activity of trap, mmps and cathepsin k  <cit> . transcription of mmps are up-regulated during idd  <cit>  and compression-induced ivd  <cit>  in mammals. intriguingly, mmp <dig> and mmp <dig> were also up-regulated during fusion of vertebral bodies in salmon. excessive co-activity of mmp <dig> and mmp <dig> is linked to development and healing of chronic wounds in rainbow trout  <cit>  and salmon  <cit> . lack of osteoclast activity and reduced activity of genes involved in chondrocyte hypertrophy during development of vertebral fusions may therefore suggest that mmp's were up-regulated in fused vertebral bodies as a response to chronic injury rather than bone resorption.

our results suggest that the ossification type during development of spinal fusions and fast growth could be trans-chondroid ossification. a mixed type of intramembraneous and endochondral ossification, as suggested by yasui et al.  <cit>  and demonstrated by okafuji et al.  <cit>  may also occur, however the lack of osteoclast activity makes this less likely. our findings indicate that chondrocytes had not only differentiated towards osteoblast-like cells, but also completed the differentiation to cells that were capable of producing mineralized bone matrix. whether the suggested trans-chondroid ossification is trans-differentiation as a sudden switch from the chondrogenic to the osteogenic phenotype or a continuous differentiation was not assessed in this experiment. however, based on our results, a pathway to bone formation through chondrocytes might be possible during development of vertebral fusions.

the completing step in the fusion process is transformation of notochordal tissue into bone  <cit> . as intervertebral space narrowed down, proliferating chordoblasts and denser packet chordocytes were revealed through toluidine blue staining and pcna antibody binding, respectively. the structured chordoblast layer increased and more of these cells stained for col2a. as the pathology progressed, proliferating chordoblasts seemed to occupy most of the intervertebral space and vacuolated chordocytes disappeared. moreover, cells in the notochord had a transcription profile resembling the trans-differentiating cell at the borders between the osteoblast growth zones and the chondrocytic areas connected to the arches. transcription of marker genes changed from chondrogenic to also include osteogenic, as mrna of osteocalcin, runx <dig>  osteonectin and col1a were detected. qpcr further showed up-regulated transcription of both runx <dig> and sox <dig> throughout the developing deformity. comparative to our findings, disc cell proliferation and a switch in the synthesis of ecm components are associated with disc degeneration  <cit> . however, ish revealed that whereas sox <dig> and col2a was present in chordoblasts from the non-deformed stage, runx <dig> and col1a was only detected in fused samples, when intervertebral space was severely narrowed. this co-transcription of chondrocytic and osteogenic markers in the notochord supports the hypothesis of a metaplastic shift during vertebral fusions in salmon  <cit> .

the metaplastic shift in the notochord and arch centra may be induced to produce more robust cells, able to withstand increased mechanical load. however, as bone replaced chondrocytic areas throughout the pathology, notochordal tissue did not calcify until the deformity developed into severe fusion. we therefore suggest that metaplasia leads to cell types more suited to the new environment but that changes are related to a threshold of the stimuli, in this case, grade of fusion. a shift in np cell population coincides with spinal disorders like idd and changes in the synthesis of matrix molecules differ with the degree of degeneration  <cit> . a comparative pathological process to our findings is mammalian "bamboo spine", describing a condition where vertebral bodies have fused and reshaped through ectopic bone formation  <cit> . similar rescue processes have also been found in the mammalian af, where it is strengthened through cartilage formation upon elevated mechanical load  <cit> . overall, the vertebral fusion process seen in salmon might reflect an effort to restore and strengthen a vertebral area of a weakened vertebral column.

CONCLUSIONS
vertebral fusions develop through a series of events. disorganized and proliferating osteoblasts at the growth zones and along the rims of affected vertebral bodies characterized the fusion process. moreover, loss of cell integrity through cell proliferation was prominent at the border between the osteoblastic growth zone and the chondrocytic areas in the arch centra and in intervertebral space. during the fusion process a metaplastic shift appeared in the arch centra where cells in the intermediate zone between osteoblasts and chondrocytes co-expressed mixed signals of chondrogenic and osteogenic markers. a similar shift also occurred in the notochord where proliferating chordoblasts changed transcription profile from chondrogenic to also include osteogenic marker genes. as the pathology progressed, ectopic bone formation was detected in these areas. since transcription turned from chondrogenic to osteogenic, our suggestion is that trans-differentiated cells produce the ectopic bone. in complete fusions, all intervertebral tissue was remodeled into bone. the molecular regulation and cellular changes found in salmon vertebral fusions are similar to those found in mammalian deformities, showing that salmon is suitable for studying general bone development and to be a comparative model for spinal deformities. with this work, we bring forward salmon to be an interesting organism to study general pathology of spinal deformities.

