BACKGROUND
approximately one out of ten insect species is a parasitoid, that is, their larvae develop by feeding on or in other arthropods, which they eventually kill. most parasitoid insects are hymenopterans, and an important fraction of these belong to the family braconidae. study of insect parasitoids is important in order to characterise their biodiversity, understand their evolution, and in some cases make use of their parasitic abilities for practical purposes, such as biological pest control  <cit> . in this paper we focus on the evolution of the braconidae subfamily rogadinae, a cosmopolitan and highly diverse group of lepidoptera-parasitizing wasps with exclusively koinobiont biology, i.e., allowing the recovery and subsequent temporary development of the host after attack  <cit> . the rogadines are currently divided into four tribes, the clinocentrini, stiropiini, yeliconini and rogadini  <cit>  . the latter is by far the most diverse as it contains the highly speciose and widely distributed genus aleiodes wesmael, with more than  <dig> of the approximately  <dig> species currently described for the subfamily  <cit> . rogadines are currently defined only by a single biological synapomorphy, the 'mummification' of the host larvae  <cit> , whereby the wasp deposits her egg  inside a host caterpillar which, after the parasitoid larva has completed feeding, turns into a variously hardened and tanned mummy within which the parasitoid pupates. it has been proposed that this complex strategy has resulted from selective pressures that are intimately related to the biology of a particular host species, and the results are apparent from the observed variability of mummy type within and between the tribes  <cit> .

despite the scant knowledge of host ranges within rogadinae, a variety of lepidopteran host groups have been confirmed. species of the stiropiini, clinocentrini and yeliconini are only known to attack 'microlepidopteran' larvae  <cit> , most of which are concealed feeders  <cit> . on the other hand, members of rogadini, as currently recognised  <cit> , attack both micro- and macrolepidopteran larvae  <cit> , the latter generally having exposed feeding habits  <cit> . in aleiodes, however, parasitism has been observed to occur almost exclusively on macrolepidopteran hosts, although some microlepidopterans with similar exposed feeding habits  are also attacked by a few species, and only in rare cases does aleiodes attack macrolepidopterans living in semi-concealed situations  <cit> .

the few molecular phylogenetic analyses that have examined the evolutionary relationships within the rogadinae have been constrained by limited taxon sampling. chen et al.  <cit>  presented the only molecular phylogenetic study devoted exclusively to the subfamily but included only  <dig> species collectively representing nine genera, and the work was based on a single dna sequence fragment . although most of the relationships investigated could not be resolved with confidence, the rogadini and its subtribes were not recovered as monophyletic.

more recently, zaldívar-riverón et al.  <cit>  carried out a simultaneous molecular and morphological phylogenetic analysis among the cyclostome subfamilies of braconidae . they employed two gene regions  and included representatives of  <dig> rogadine genera and  <dig> species. they recovered a weakly supported monophyletic rogadinae  <cit>  and some relationships that were not concordant with the existing classification of the group, including a non-monophyletic rogadini, with most members recovered as the sister group of stiropiini, and with an aleiodes clade sister to yeliconini.

neither of the above studies dealt with the evolution of mummification nor host ranges, nor did they estimate divergence times. here we reconstruct the first extensive phylogeny for the rogadinae using a combination of cytochrome oxidase i  mtdna and 28s rdna gene sequences. based on the trees obtained, we evaluate the current higher-level classification of the rogadinae. we also estimate times of divergence and assess the evolution of host ranges and mummification within the group. finally, we discuss the driving force for the extraordinary diversification within aleiodes

RESULTS
molecular phylogenies
the bayesian topologies obtained from the separate 28s and coi analyses are shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  the 28s topology has a considerably higher number of clades with bayesian posterior probabilities  ≥  <dig>  compared to the coi one . the two separate analyses recover a number of similar relationships, and there are no significantly supported clades in conflict between them. among the similar relationships recovered by both separate analyses are a clade with the species of aleiodes wesmael, cordylorhogas enderlein, hemigyroneuron baker and pholichora achterberg  , a yeliconini + aleiodes clade , and a clade with the remaining rogadini genera .

the phylogenetic affinities of the two examined members of the non-rogadine tribe cedriini, cedria wilkinson and carinitermus achterberg, vary considerably between the separate and simultaneous analyses. these taxa appear weakly supported in the simultaneous analysis at the base of the aleiodes + yeliconini clade, a highly unlikely relationship considering the extreme difference in morphological and life history features. we therefore carried out an additional simultaneous analysis excluding both cedria and carinitermus. the topology of the latter analysis was similar to the one that included the above two genera, and thus we only show the topology that excluded them.

figures  <dig> and  <dig> show the 50% majority rule consensus tree derived from simultaneous analysis of the two gene fragments. this has considerably more clades with pp ≥  <dig>   than either of the topologies from the separate analyses. among the significantly supported relationships that are congruent with the current classification of rogadinae are the monophylies of clinocentrini, stiropiini, and yeliconini . the rogadinae and lysiterminae were also found to be monophyletic, though with weak support . some other relationships, however, are in disagreement with current taxonomy. members of the rogadini  are grouped in two separate clades. one of these, with significant support , consists largely of the included species of aleiodes , which form the sister group to the yeliconini . the second clade  contains most of the remaining rogadini species  as sister group to the stiropiini  and with the clinocentrini  at the base. the betylobraconinae  was not recovered as monophyletic, with the australian mesocentrus szépligeti and betylobracon tobias instead forming a grade between lysiterminae and rogadinae, and with aulosaphobracon as sister group of all of them .

the aleiodes clade additionally includes members of another three genera, pholichora, hemigyroneuron and cordylorhogas. relatively few of the species groups proposed by fortier and shaw  <cit>  for which we included more than one representative were significantly supported, but rather the relationships were congruent with the currently recognised subgeneric classification of aleiodes . their a. dispar  group , with the exclusion of a. punctipes , forms the sister group to a clade with the subgenus arcaleiodes + the remaining aleiodes species . the two other groups proposed by fortier and shaw  <cit>  that were recovered were the a. gasterator  and the a. circumscriptus   groups. the species known to produce suspended mummies  <cit>  appeared significantly supported as monophyletic . the 28s motif tgcgt located at positions 264– <dig>  in our alignment is highly conserved within the rogadinae and within the braconidae in general, and is retained in the dispar group; however, the homologous positions in the remaining aleiodes species as well as in pholichora, hemigyroneuron and cordylorhogas display a derived agcgt motif.

a clade with the members of the subtribe spinariina with the inclusion of cornutorogas  appears deeply nested within the clade including the remaining members of rogadini . the neotropical species of triraphis constitute a significantly supported clade  that excludes the only old world species of this genus included here.

none of the credible set of trees obtained from the simultaneous analysis recovered aleiodes as currently constituted as monophyletic, nor a monophyletic triraphis, rogadini  and rogadina , and thus these alternative hypotheses are statistically rejected.

ages of diversification in rogadinae
the times of divergence of selected clades  using the penalised likelihood  and bayesian relaxed phylogenetics  approaches are given in table  <dig> and the chronogram for rp is shown in figure  <dig> 

the penalised likelihood  analyses used a sample of  <dig> postburn-in trees derived from the two 28s + coi bayesian searches. the relaxed phylogenetic  analyses were based on eight independent runs of  <dig> million generations each. numbers on the first column correspond to selected clades indicated in the 28s + coi bayesian topology . values on the first and second lines for each of the selected clades correspond to divergence times parameters obtained including and excluding calibration of aleiodes s. l., respectively.

a relationship not recovered.

b relationship present in  <dig> out of the  <dig> sampled trees selected for the pl analyses.

c relationship present in  <dig> out of the  <dig> sampled trees selected for the pl analyses.

d range absent in the rp analyses.

e also including cordylorhogas, hemigyroneuron, and pholichora.

f also including cordylorhogas.

because of the uncertainty associated with the calibration of the aleiodes s. l. clade , we ran pl both including  and excluding  the calibration associated to aleiodes s. l. ten of the fifteen clades that were examined in the two pl analyses have a pp value equal to or higher than  <dig>  in our 28s + coi bayesian phylogeny, and thirteen of them higher than  <dig>  . the taxonomic composition of the clades examined using the pl approach was the same as for the  <dig> sampled trees except in two relationships, which were not present in four and one of the sampled trees, respectively .

the rp analyses including  and excluding  the aleiodes s. l. node calibration both recovered most of the relationships found using mrbayes except for the rogadini + stiropiini clade, which was not recovered in the rpea analysis. the age estimates of clades obtained by the two rp analyses are generally similar; thus, we only show the ultrametric tree derived from the rpia analysis, because it incorporated more node calibrations .

the age estimates derived from the two rp analyses are generally earlier than those from the pl ones . the lineage that led to the extant members of the rogadinae is estimated to have diverged during the late to mid eocene . among the rogadine tribes, the age of the most recent common ancestor  of the stiropiini and yeliconini diversified between the late to mid miocene  and the late eocene to early miocene , respectively. the mrca of the rogadini  on the other hand was estimated to diverge during the late miocene to mid eocene . of the four molecular dating analyses performed, the plea had a considerably younger age estimate for the origin of the mrca of the aleiodes clade  in comparison to the remaining pl and rp analyses .

evolution of host ranges and mummification
the mp and bayesian ancestral states of selected clades for the three biological features examined – host and site of emergence and hardening of mummy – are shown in table  <dig>  the rogadinae ancestral condition for the site of emergence from the mummified host was recovered as equivocal with mp but anterior with the bayesian method, though its ancestral posterior probability  was very low . the stiropiini and the rogadini + stiropini clades had an equivocal and anterior emergence as ancestral conditions with mp and bayesian methods . the ancestral reconstructions of the basal rogadinae clades for the degree of hardness of the mummy were recovered as equivocal  and with low app values. forming a hard mummy, however, appears marginally as nonsignificant in the aleiodes clade. the latter condition also appears to have evolved independently in a few members of the rogadini clade  and in some species of clinocentrus.

maximum parsimony and bayesian  ancestral reconstructions of the three biological features examined in this study. ancestral posterior probabilities were obtained by multiplying the mean ancestral character state probability of the selected node across all trees by the portion of the trees that recovered the node involved. numbers on the first column correspond to selected clades that are indicated in the 28s + coi bayesian topology .

use of microlepidopteran hosts was recovered by both methods as the ancestral condition for the rogadinae, but only with a low app with the bayesian method. in any case, a shift to attack macrolepidopteran hosts appears to have occurred independently in various lineages within the rogadini clade and once more in the aleiodes clade. moreover, our analyses show an expansion to attack various lepidopteran host groups in the aleiodes clade, with the basal groups generally parasitising noctuidae species whereas the derived ones attack other macrolepidopteran groups, including other families of noctuoidea  as well as species of geometridae, thyratiridae, lasiocampidae, satyridae, hesperiidae and sphingidae, and rarely also a few microlepidopterans with exposed larval feeding habits .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
phylogenetic relationships and taxonomic inferences
here we present the most extensive phylogenetic analysis within the rogadinae to date based on dna sequence data. our study covered representatives of the different supraspecific taxa within the subfamily, as well as a number of putatively closely related groups that have previously been considered to belong to this group . our simultaneous analysis recovered a monophyletic rogadinae as currently recognised, though with a non-significant pp. this, and the placement of the betylobraconines mesocentrus and betylobracon at the base of the rogadinae clade leave the actual extent of the subfamily unresolved and probably the betylobraconinae ought to be synonymised with the rogadinae, especially if it were found that they mummify their hosts. further work is also needed to confirm the phylogenetic position of the clinocentrini. unlike previous studies that recovered clinocentrini at the base of the rogadinae  <cit> , in our study this tribe appeared weakly supported as sister group of the stiropiini + rogadini clade.

in the separate 28s and coi analyses as well as in the simultaneous analysis, the aleiodes clade appears as the sister group to the yeliconini, whereas in the latter two analyses a clade comprising the remaining genera of rogadini  together with the stiropiini was also recovered . since these relationships are consistent between the two gene markers, we propose the new tribe aleiodini nov. for the members of the aleiodes clade, within which we recognise two genera, aleiodes and heterogamus stat. rev. .

the relationships recovered within aleiodes s. l. were concordant with its subgeneric classification  <cit>  except for the only examined member of the subgenus neorhogas, which appeared deeply nested within a clade with the members of the subgenus aleiodes. of the species groups proposed for aleiodes by fortier and shaw  <cit>  based on morphological evidence alone, only the a. dispar, a. gasterator and a. circumscriptus groups were partially congruent with our molecular phylogeny. of these groups, the a. dispar group should be treated as a separate genus according to its phylogenetic position and morphological distinctiveness . moreover, the derived 28s agcgt motif present in aleiodes s.s. is absent in heterogamus. members of heterogamus can be morphologically distinguished from aleiodes s. s. by having a considerably elongated hind trochantellus. also, heterogamus species all have forewing vein r relatively long in relation to vein 3-sr, though this state is also displayed by a range of aleiodes s. s. species. an elongate head with a low clypeus , narrow and usually  somewhat banded wings, and long pronotum are also distinctive features in heterogamus, though these are also occasionally present in some species of aleiodes . further, the venom gland apparatus in examined members of heterogamus appears to be less modified than those present in the species of aleiodes s. s.  <cit> , which is congruent with the basal position recovered for this taxon within aleiodini.

the three previously-recognised genera that were recovered as nested within aleiodes s. s., i.e. pholichora, hemigyroneuron and cordylorhogas, are distinguished by the possession of various derived morphological features . however, these genera also possess morphologies characteristic of aleiodes, such as tarsal claws without a basal lobe, setose hind tibial spurs, and otherwise similar wing venation and metasomal carination  <cit> . also pholichora, hemigyroneuron and cordylorhogas have the derived agcgt 28s rdna motiff . based on the latter information and our molecular phylogeny, we therefore synonymise the above three genera  with aleiodes , and all species currently classified within each of these are hereby transferred to aleiodes . we therefore propose that aleiodes s. s. should be represented by the subgenera aleiodes , chelonorhogas , pholichora and arcaleiodes.

two further relationships recovered here are also supported by features of the venom gland apparatus  <cit> . one of them, supported by the presence of a hard secondary venom duct with filaments, consistently shows that spinariina is actually a derived group within the rogadini, and thus the subtribal names employed within rogadini  should be eliminated. the other relationship, supported by the presence of distinct secondary venom duct branching patterns, suggests a polyphyletic triraphis, with the american species being more closely related to other members of the rogadini rather than to the only examined old world species of this genus. members of triraphis from the new world had previously been assigned to rogas ; however, a recent study based on van achterberg's  <cit>  definition of rogadine genera revealed that all the examined species from the new world previously assigned to rogas actually belong to triraphis  and that rogas may be absent from this region  <cit> .

ages of diversification in the rogadinae
the oldest cyclostome fossil that has been found to date  has a considerably more recent age than the times of origin estimated for ditrysia, which is the lepidopteran group that comprises all the taxa attacked by rogadines and that has been calculated to have originated  <dig>  to  <dig>  mya  <cit> . the available fossil evidence thus indicates that the rogadinae originated considerably later than its host group, with our molecular dating estimates showing that its mrca originated during the mid to late eocene. our molecular dating estimates also show that the aleiodini has a more recent origin  than the origins estimated for two of its most frequently attacked lepidopteran families, geometridae  and noctuidae . species of the remaining rogadine tribes often attack members of various basal ditrysian families , and thus their origins also are considerably more recent than those estimated for their hosts.

the short internal branches and low support for several of the relationships within the subgenus aleiodes, which comprises most of the known diversity within the genus suggests a rapid radiation, although other factors, such as lower phylogenetic signal may also explain this pattern  <cit> . the inclusion of additional markers should help to clarify whether there has been a rapid radiation within the group. a rapid radiation has also been proposed within braconidae for the microgastrine group of genera .

evolution of mummification and emergence characteristics
the lack of host records and/or preserved host mummies for several rogadine genera, as well as our failure to recover some key relationships , prevent us from drawing strong conclusions about the evolution of mummification characteristics within the subfamily. however, whether clinocentrini is the sister group to the rogadini + stiropiini clade or the sister group of the remaining rogadine tribes, a weak hardening of the mummy is most likely to be the ancestral condition for the subfamily. producing a hard mummy could have evolved repeatedly in separate lineages, though this condition is mainly found in species of the aleiodini. an anterior site of emergence from the mummified host would be the most plausible ancestral state if the clinocentrini is confirmed as the sister group of the remaining rogadine tribes.

the dorsal emergence from the mummified host observed in all examined species of stiropiini, yeliconini and aleiodini presumably occurs in response to the avoidance of physical obstruction at other orientations. in the stiropiini this may occur because the host is prepupal in a cocoon ventrally attached to a hard substrate, and in yeliconini because the prepupal mummy itself is curved under at both extremities  <cit> . the particular shift to exactly posterodorsal emergence in members of aleiodini might be associated with the anteroventral fixing of the mummy  to a hard substrate, which creates a barrier to emergence through the mummy's more contracted and harder anterior end.

this presumably derived feature is retained in the aleiodini even in species that  have adopted a mummification procedure that avoids this source of obstruction . posterodorsal emergence orientations are also retained in the few gregarious species of aleiodes  <cit> , in marked contrast with the more chaotic emergence seen in gregarious genera of rogadini s. s. such as colastomion and macrostomion  <cit> . on the other hand, in the species of the clinocentrini and most rogadini s. s. the host is killed in its cocoon , with typically no radial impediment, and consequently the emergence position shows no dorso-ventral restriction, but rather appears to occur more or less at random. however, in rogas, in which the configuration of the prepupal mummy positions the host head capsule ventrally, and in triraphis, in which the part grown larval mummy is attached ventrally to a substrate, dorsal emergence is seen.

the degree of hardening of the mummy produced by rogadine species from their host's integument appears to owe much to the need for protection of the parasitoid metamorphosing within it bearing in mind that there will be a cost in providing it. the known hosts of the stiropiini, clinocentrini, yeliconini and most members of the rogadini are killed as prepupae, i.e. in prepared pupation sites, which probably offers substantial protection to the parasitoid larvae and, especially when emergence is rapid, little selection for the mummy to be especially hard. thus, relatively frail and pale-coloured mummies are normal. a revealing exception is seen in the european species triraphis tricolor , whose part grown host mummies are either fixed naked to a tree leaf and emerge rapidly, when they are pale greenish yellow and relatively frail, or fall from the leaf to overwinter on the ground, in which case they are very well-tanned, dark brown and tough .

most known hosts of the aleiodini, on the other hand, are killed during early larval instars, and lack the protection of the host's pupation site, with the result that the mummy itself plays a more important role. thus, the mummies of these species are usually toughened and often strongly darkened, whether or not the parasitoid diapauses in them.

evolution of host ranges
use of microlepidopteran hosts was generally recovered by the mp and bayesian methods as the ancestral condition for both the rogadinae and the rogadini + stiropiini clade. thus, our results suggest that a shift from attacking semi-concealed microlepidopteran to exposed microlepidopteran  or macrolepidopteran host taxa has independently evolved in various lineages within the rogadinae.

our ancestral reconstruction of host ranges and divergence time estimates contradict fortier and shaw's  <cit>  hypothesis of coevolution between aleiodes s. l. and its lepidopteran hosts. based on their morphological estimate of phylogeny, they suggested that putatively basal macrolepidopteran families  are attacked by basal species of aleiodes, whilst the most derived hosts  are attacked by derived parasitoid taxa. in our molecular phylogenetic estimate, however, fortier and shaw's  <cit>  supposedly derived a. dispar and a. gasterator species groups appear instead, with significant support, to be at the base of aleiodini, and most of the species belonging to their proposed basal a. circumscriptus, a. pallidator, a. gastritor, and a. compressor groups are recovered in derived clades.

our results are more congruent with shaw's  <cit>  host ecology hypothesis that explains the apparently rapid radiation in aleiodes s. s. in this hypothesis, the species of aleiodes s. l. that broaden their host range by recruitment of new hosts, sometimes from additional lepidopteran families, promote subsequent radiation within the group. in contrast, other species of aleiodes remain tied to phylogenetically restricted host taxa and so have less tendency to radiate. in our molecular phylogeny, the most basal clades , indeed do not appear to be particularly species rich and seem to be mostly restricted to attacking only noctuidae, though the hosts of heterogamus and the subgenus arcaleiodes remain unknown . in contrast, the intermediate and derived clades  comprise most of the species diversity within the genus and exhibit a wide host range overall  <cit> . within this, specialist use of microlepidoptera taxa such as zygaena , ypsolopha  and some pterophoridae, occurs infrequently, the species using these hosts apparently being very closely related to species that parasitise macrolepidoptera including morphologically similar species in similar feeding niches . thus, the use of microlepidoptera by aleiodes appears to be secondary. moreover, in temperate western european species , the expansions of host range that have been hypothesised  <cit>  to lead to speciation seem often to occur in species having more than one generation a year, which often use different and sometimes not closely related hosts successively. this plurivoltinism with 'discontinuous' host ranges as defined by shaw  <cit>  is seen much more frequently in species of the subgenus aleiodes than in the subgenus chelonorhogas. members of the latter are mostly univoltine and have 'continuous' host ranges.

