BACKGROUND
among the most difficult plant diseases to control are those transmitted by insect vectors. pathogens and their vectors have co-evolutionary histories that are intricately intertwined with their ecologies, environments and genetic interactions. while much progress has been made towards understanding the interactions among vectors and pathogens required for transmission of human and animal diseases  <cit> , much less is known about the factors that govern the transmission of insect mediated plant diseases. a detailed understanding of the genetic and molecular basis of insect-virus-plant interactions will provide more accurate predictions of how vector populations are likely to respond to control measures, and may uncover novel and specific molecular targets for disease control.

modes of plant virus transmission by insects fall into four categories: non-persistent, semi-persistent, persistent-circulative, and persistent-propagative. non-persistently-transmitted and semi-persistently-transmitted viruses do not breach the gut barrier in the insect vector; rather they are retained in the insect stylet or foregut prior to transmission. because of their location outside of insect cells and the few barriers they must cross prior to introduction into a new plant host, these viruses can be transmitted within seconds to hours after acquisition. most viruses transmitted in a non-persistent manner are transmitted by aphids; aphids, leafhoppers and whiteflies transmit semi-persistently-transmitted viruses  <cit> . persistently transmitted viruses circulate within the insect vector before transmission, usually moving through the gut lumen into the hemolymph or other tissues and finally invading the salivary glands prior to dissemination to new host plants during insect feeding  <cit> . persistently transmitted viruses are divided into two categories: circulative viruses that are able to cross the gut barriers and circulate in the insect hemolymph, but do not replicate in the insect vector; and, propagative viruses that circulate in and also replicate in the vector. because these viruses must cross several molecular and physical barriers in the insect and require a latency period between acquisition and transmission, their transmission requires days to weeks. persistently and propagatively transmitted viruses are transmitted by thrips, leafhoppers, planthoppers and aphids, whereas viruses transmitted in a persistent circulative manner are primarily transmitted by whiteflies, aphids and leafhoppers  <cit> . because non- and semi-persistently transmitted viruses interact only briefly with the vector, and do not cross vector membranes, we hypothesized that the genetic and molecular responses of the vector to these viruses are likely to be substantially different and perhaps less diverse than those of the vector to persistently transmitted plant viruses.

the black-faced leafhopper, graminella nigrifrons  is found in the eastern u.s., feeding on a wide range of grasses and cereal crops  <cit> . it is the principal vector of two viruses that infect maize : maize chlorotic dwarf virus  and maize fine streak virus . mcdv is a member of the genus waikavirus that was first detected in maize in ohio and is prevalent in the southeastern u.s.  <cit> . mfsv is an emerging nucleorhabdovirus, first reported in maize in georgia, u.s.  <cit> . while mcdv is semi-persistently transmitted, with acquisition and inoculation to host plants occurring in as little as four hours  <cit> . mfsv is persistently and propagatively transmitted, requiring replication in the insect. acquisition and inoculation periods totaling at least three weeks are required before they are able to transmit virus to new plant hosts  <cit> .

virus-induced biochemical, cellular, molecular, and physiological changes have been well documented in infected host plants  <cit> , but the responses of insect vectors to viruses are far less well characterized. viruses can influence their insect hosts either directly through deleterious effects of virus infection, or indirectly by virus-induced changes in host plant phloem components . even in cases where the vector becomes infected, effects of the virus in the insect tend to be less severe than in the host plant  <cit> . insects use a variety of defense mechanisms to combat pathogen infection  <cit> . these responses include the synthesis and secretion of antimicrobial peptides and degrading enzymes, phagocytosis, cell apoptosis, and cell sloughing. assessing changes in transcript abundance in response to pathogen exposure was critical for identifying contributors to the molecular and cellular defense responses in insect vectors of animal disease, and also provided insight into mechanisms associated with pathogen defense  <cit> . transcript accumulation is intimately tied to transcript function, and can be used to infer an organism’s functional responses under different conditions. in insects, transcriptional induction or repression is a key mechanism in regulating innate immunity  <cit> . however, gene expression studies investigating plant virus – insect vector interactions remain limited, with only a few studies characterizing global transcription profiles of insect vectors fed on virus-infected plants  <cit> . some transcriptional data are also available for insect vectors of animal-infecting rhabdoviruses  <cit>  and plant-infecting rhabdoviruses  <cit> . to date, no study has investigated transcriptional responses to non-persistently transmitted viruses or to differences in vector responses based of the modes of virus transmission.

the recent sequencing and assembly of the g. nigrifrons transcriptome  <cit>  provides a valuable tool for exploring transcriptional changes in an important vector of plant pathogens. in this study, we used next generation sequencing to reassemble the transcriptome and examine changes in transcript accumulation between g. nigrifrons fed on mcdv-infected, mfsv-infected, and healthy maize for 4 h and  <dig> d. mcdv and mfsv were chosen to examine divergent responses based on the mode of transmission, and multiple time points were selected to characterize both the immediate and gradual impacts of feeding on virus-infected plants. transcriptome analysis revealed a substantial, shared induction of core immunity and energy metabolism genes in the response to feeding on virus-infected plants. feeding on mfsv-infected plants elicited additional responses, which included increased transcription of hemocoel and cell-membrane associated immune processes. patterns of transcript expression were validated on a subset of transcripts using quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction at 4 h,  <dig> d, and six additional time points across a four week time period.

RESULTS
sequence assembly
one cdna library consisting of  <dig> pooled samples was sequenced, which generated approximately  <dig> million raw 100 bp paired end reads. after demultiplexing, trimming poor quality reads, adapters and poly sequences, and removing duplicate reads,  <dig>  to  <dig> million non-redundant reads per sample were obtained. de novo assembly of the g. nigrifrons transcriptome was carried out using an automated pipeline, and combined with the previously assembled est database  <cit>  resulting in  <dig>  g. nigrifrons contigs of ≥200 bp . thirteen contigs identified >20 kb were atypical of eukaryotic transcripts and probably represent long non-coding rnas  <cit> . after mapping to the swiss-prot and nr databases ,  <dig> contigs were removed from the dataset because they were of maize, bacterial or virus origin. the remaining  <dig>  contigs form the dataset for subsequent analyses and are hereinafter referred to as ‘transcripts’. the contig sequences have been deposited in the ncbi transcriptome shotgun assembly archive under the accession number gaqx <dig> 

functional annotation and pair-wise comparisons with other invertebrate species
approximately 42%  of the transcripts had a significant hit to the swiss-prot database . of the  <dig>  most highly conserved transcripts , one-third  had greatest amino acid sequence identity to a d. melanogaster ortholog . blast2go was used to examine the hierarchical associations of g. nigrifrons transcripts by assigning gene  and enzyme  ontologies during the mapping and annotation steps. go and/or ec terms in the nr database mapped to  <dig>  transcripts and  <dig>  could be annotated. of the annotated transcripts,  <dig>  were associated with a biological process,  <dig>  with a molecular function, and  <dig>  with a cellular component .

pair-wise sequence comparisons were carried out between the g. nigrifrons transcriptome and those of seven well-characterized invertebrates and one insect dbest collection. pair-wise matches between g. nigrifrons and four insect species indicated that roughly 46%  of transcripts had a significant match to at least one of the insect databases  . g. nigrifons transcripts had the fewest matches to c. elegans transcripts  and the most matches to t. castaneum . the number of matches ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for the other seven insect comparisons .
graminella nigrifrons 
to three invertebrate species with characterized transcriptomes  and one species with a dbest database .

for the subset of g. nigrifrons transcripts with an ortholog match ,  <dig> had a unique match to only one species. taking into account the relative variability in transcriptome/dbest sizes, t. castaneum had the largest proportion of unique matches . the hemipteran, a. pisum, accounted for 11% of the unique matches , whereas c. elegans accounted for only  <dig> % . the proportion of unique matches for the dipterans and hymenopterans ranged between  <dig> % and 15%: an. gambiae: 11% ; d. melanogaster:  <dig> % ; n. vitripennis:  <dig> % ; a. mellifera: 15% . g. nigrifrons had the smallest proportion of unique transcript matches with the planthopper p maidis at  <dig> %  despite its being the most closely related species. this result was surprising and may be because the p maidis library was derived only from gut tissue, and also examined at different time points and developmental stages. fewer assembled g. nigrifrons transcripts were identified in this study than in the initial  <dig> assembly of chen et al. , with <1%  of the transcripts from chen et al. not matching a transcript in the current assembly . the majority of the unmatched transcripts  could not be assigned a function using the non-redundant databases . more of the transcripts in this study had significant hits to the swiss-prot database , mapped to go and/or ec terms  or matched to an insect database . it is likely that the increased read coverage , longer read sizes , additional time points, different treatments, and/or improved preprocessing and assembly techniques contributed to a more complete and accurate construction of the g. nigrifrons transcriptome.

treatment and time dependent differences in transcript expression profiles
transcript expression levels were computed for each treatment/time point sample independently as the unique  reads per kilobase per million reads . treatment was defined as leafhoppers fed on either mcdv-infected, mfsv-infected or healthy maize. time was defined as the duration of feeding, either 4 h or  <dig> d. quality control parameters indicated the rpkm file contained samples that were normally distributed and homogenous. the total number of unique reads per sample used for rpkm analysis ranged from  <dig>  million to  <dig>  million. reproducibility between replicate treatment/time combinations was high, with average r <dig> values of  <dig>  .

a linear mixed model anova was used  to identify transcriptome differences as a function of treatment, time, and their interaction, under the hypothesis the expression profile would differ significantly between time points. both time and the interaction factor had a significant influence on overall transcript expression, while treatment was not significant at p < <dig>  . more than half  of the transcripts accumulated to significantly different levels with respect to one or more factors. because time and its interaction with treatment were significant factors in the model, subsequent analyses separated the data by sampling times to examine the effects of treatment at each time point.
g. nigrifrons 
virgin females1

f
1analysis of variance for abundance of transcripts.

2df, degrees of freedom; ss, sum of squares; ms, mean square; f, f test statistic.

transcriptome variation in g. nigrifrons in response to feeding on virus infected maize
to determine if feeding on virus-infected maize elicited changes in g. nigrifrons that differed from those fed on healthy maize, the samples derived from leafhoppers fed on mcdv- and mfsv-infected plants were taken collectively for each time point, and bayes-moderated t-tests  were carried out to identify common differentially expressed transcripts. at 4 h,  <dig>  differentially expressed transcripts were identified, with the majority  being up-regulated in leafhoppers fed on virus-infected maize. fewer differentially expressed transcripts were identified at  <dig> d , and a greater proportion of these were down-regulated . interestingly, only  <dig> transcripts  were differentially expressed at both time points . the majority of these shared transcripts  were not expressed in the same direction, i.e., they were induced at 4 h and repressed at  <dig> d or vice versa, further indicating change in the response of vectors feeding on infected plants over time. the vast majority of differentially expressed transcripts at both time points  were also identified using the edger package in bioconductor, indicating good correlation between the statistical methods. among the  <dig> top-ranked transcripts with the greatest up-or down-regulation at each time point , the majority  could not be annotated using the nr database .

g. nigrifrons transcriptome annotation is in its earliest stages; therefore, we did not attempt formal quantitative functional analysis of differentially expressed transcripts. instead, we selected an exploratory approach that relied on ortholog prediction using the drosophila transcriptome. the david annotation clustering module  <cit>  set at medium stringency  was used to classify differentially expressed g. nigrifrons transcripts into functional groups. transcripts were first assigned their ortholog drosophila id  then partitioned into four lists: up- or down-regulated in leafhoppers fed virus-infected maize at 4 h or  <dig> d. since only ~40% of g. nigrifrons transcripts had a drosophila ortholog, this analysis only identified some of the processes affected by the treatments. however, the approach removed partial duplicates and variants of candidate transcripts that may not have been detected during the assembly, thus limiting the potential for false overrepresentations. four to nine functional annotation clusters containing ≥ <dig> transcripts that were more than 2-rpkm up- or down-regulation relative to the healthy control were identified in each of the four treatment/time point comparisons .

up-regulation of immunity transcripts within hours of feeding on virus-infected plants
g. nigrifrons fed on virus-infected plants had large and rapid  induction of transcripts that encode components of innate immunity pathways and the active homeostatic processes that regulate them . the response was transient, as levels of most of these transcripts were similar in insects fed on virus-infected and healthy plants for seven days. based on drosophila ortholog prediction, immune response transcripts that were up-regulated included several members of the toll pathway , peroxidases , a superoxide dismutase , a scavenger receptor  and a clip-domian serine protease . notably, transcripts encoding a subset of peptidoglycan recognition proteins , which function as pattern-recognition and effector molecules in innate immunity  <cit> , accumulated to high levels. other groups of up-regulated transcripts included those encoding enzymes that function in proteolysis, especially the ubiquitin proteasome pathway, which was shown to be important for insect defense against pathogens  <cit> . the shared rapid response also included accumulation of transcripts related to protein and energy metabolism, including those associated with translation and the fatty acid and carboxylic acid metabolic pathways. the roles of these pathways in energy production may be important to compensate for the increased metabolic requirements of an elevated immune defense response  <cit> .

concurrent with the elevated immune response at 4 h after feeding on virus-infected plants, transcripts associated with regular cellular activity were suppressed . in particular, transcripts involved in processes related to dna replication and the cell cycle accumulated at lower levels in g nigrifrons fed on virus-infected plants. virus suppression of host cell replication processes may represent a counter-defense strategy employed by viruses to promote their own replication  <cit> . alternatively, the suppression could be the result of the added metabolic burden associated with the heightened immune response. a similar inhibition of basic cellular functions coinciding with increased energy generation has been identified in the transcriptional responses in insects exposed to other stresses, such as heat shock  <cit> .

while the shared immune response was not detected after seven days, the up- and down-regulation transcripts with putative basic cellular functions  and increased energy production persisted . this result suggests that atp-requiring processes related to the virus response continue to occur at  <dig> d. while these data suggest a diminishing innate immune response with time, it is possible that the early stage annotation of the g. nigrifrons transcriptome prevented detection of immune responsive transcripts at the later time point.

common responses to feeding on virus-infected plants likely reflect some combination of plant defense responses and direct virus effects
the substantial, shared and rapid transcriptional responses in g. nigrifrons fed on both mfsv- and mcdv-infected maize were unexpected given the substantial differences in the ways these two viruses are transmitted, and could indicate that the leafhoppers are responding not only to the virus per se, but also to similar changes that occur in maize infected with either virus. virus infection causes biochemical, cellular, molecular, and physiological changes in host plants  <cit> , some of which increase plant attractiveness and preference to vectors  <cit> . however the transcript expression patterns observed were consistent with recent studies of the white-backed planthopper sogatella furcifera and the whitefly bemisia tabaci exposed to persistently transmitted viruses, which showed changes in accumulation of innate immunity transcripts  <cit> . in these studies, the insect was allowed to feed on healthy plants for several days after virus exposure to allow adequate time to diminish potential differential effects of the infected plant , a strategy not possible in our study due to the short retention time of mcdv in g. nigrifrons. future expression studies to compare leafhoppers fed on purified virus in artificial diets independent of the host plant or directly injected with virus may better resolve this for certain transcripts, but the process of feeding insects on artificial media containing virus also introduces a number of new variables that could potentially initiate transcript expression profiles unrelated to the vector – virus interaction .

differential response of g. nigrifrons to feeding on mfsv- and mcdv-infected maize
although feeding on mcdv- and mfsv-infected maize elicited a common differential accumulation of transcripts relative to those fed on healthy maize, virus-specific changes in transcript accumulation were also possible. one-way anova was carried out to identify transcripts with a significant treatment effect at 4 h and  <dig> d. a total of  <dig>  and  <dig> transcripts were differentially expressed with a minimum 2-rpkm-change difference between treatments at 4 h and  <dig> d, respectively. for the 4 h treatment, a heat map of differentially expressed transcripts indicated that the majority of these transcripts were differentially expressed in insects fed on mfsv-infected plants , and that 84% of these were up-regulated . at  <dig> d, the number of differentially expressed transcripts was similar in g. nigrifrons fed on mcdv- and mfsv-infected plants . however, 66% of transcripts were down-regulated in insects fed on mfsv-infected maize, whereas 76% were up-regulated for insects fed on mcdv-infected plants. for  <dig> of  <dig> transcripts, the response was opposite in the two treatments. specifically, 29% and 19% of transcripts up-regulated in g. nigrifrons fed on mcdv- and mfsv-infected maize, respectively, were down-regulated relative to the control in the alternate virus treatment.

to determine whether this differential transcript expression was associated with specific biological responses, the identified transcripts were divided into four lists  and functional annotation was done using david. significant enrichment of annotation clusters was found for three of four lists, with one and seven clusters identified as containing significant up- or down-regulation relative to the alternative treatment and healthy control .

additional immune-linked responses elicited by g. nigrifrons fed on mfsv-infected plants
the rapidly up-regulated transcripts in g. nigrifrons fed on mfsv-infected plants were largely associated with energy metabolism and hemocoel or cell membrane-associated defense responses, such as cytoskeleton organization, hemopoiesis, glycosylation, and phagocytosis/endocytosis. glycosylation plays a key role in the immune response as a sugar-mediated mechanism in cell-cell adhesion for the detection of pathogen carbohydrate moieties  <cit> . other differentially expressed transcripts encode components of the phagocytic process, whereby cells ingest and eventually destroy foreign particles, including pathogens  <cit> . possible immune-response associated transcripts involved in hemopoiesis  <cit>  and cytoskeleton organization  <cit>  were also up-regulated. cytoskeleton-dependent intracellular transport is a common strategy for intracellular virus transport  <cit> . transcripts associated with cytoskeleton organization were also up-regulated at  <dig> d, and this was the only group with significant enrichment at  <dig> d.

because persistently-propagatively transmitted viruses encounter multiple tissue and membrane barriers in the path from the alimentary canal to the salivary glands, feeding on mfsv-infected maize for up to  <dig> d did not afford leafhoppers a long enough latency period to acquire the virus  <cit> . however, the added immune responses may be induced by attempts of mfsv to breach the vector gut barriers and/or entry of the virus into the hemolymph of the vector. in contrast, semi-persistently transmitted viruses like mcdv are largely retained in the foregut and do not cross membranes. our results lead to a working model in which exposure of g. nigrifrons to mfsv elicits greater immune responses than exposure to mcdv. the greater response to mfsv may be required to limit the replication and circulation of the virus in the vector, thereby reducing potential pathological effects on vector development, fertility, and fecundity. however, for g. nigrifrons feeding on mcdv-infected plants, any advantages associated with mounting additional immune responses could be outweighed by their metabolic cost, depleting energy reserves that could leave individual leafhoppers at a competitive disadvantage  <cit> .

rt-qpcr validation and expression profiling of differentially expressed transcripts
differential expression of four transcripts was verified using rt-qpcr. the transcripts were randomly selected from the subset of transcripts that were identified by rnaseq as up-regulated in g. nigrifrons fed on virus-infected maize for 4 h, and for which a drosophila ortholog was predicted. primer pairs for the selected transcripts were developed such that primer pair pcr efficiencies  were between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . all four transcripts were confirmed to be significantly up-regulated in both the mfsv and mcdv treatments relative to the control treatment, with similar magnitudes of expression between the different quantification methods .

accumulation of these four transcripts was also examined for the mfsv and control treatments at six additional time points across a four week window . for all four transcripts, the mfsv treatment exhibited a more heterogeneous pattern of expression across the time series, with highest transcript accumulation at 4 h and no discernible time points of peak expression for the control treatment. the patterns of expression were consistent among samples of the same treatment, with considerable decline in transcript accumulation in mfsv treatment after feeding on virus infected maize for 4 h. taken collectively; all four transcripts appear induced in leafhoppers fed on mfsv-infected maize but not on healthy maize. as suggested by next generation sequencing analysis, the response was fleeting, as transcript accumulation returned to pre-feeding levels within  <dig> to  <dig> d. these results indicate that the transcriptome profiles of g. nigrifrons fed on virus-infected tissue are not consistent in accumulation but rather change in composition throughout the feeding/infection cycle.

CONCLUSIONS
the most economically significant insect vectors of plant viruses are restricted to a few hemipteran families, including leafhoppers   <cit> . comparison of the responses of the leafhopper, g. nigrifrons, to feeding on maize infected with two different viruses uncovered similarities as well as clear differences in the transcriptional responses in the vector that may provide some mechanistic insight. feeding on mcdv- and mfsv-infected maize for 4 h elicited a substantial and shared temporary induction of transcripts involved in innate immune response and energy production. insects fed on mfsv-infected maize also had increased hemocoel and cell-membrane linked immune responses compared with g. nigrifrons after 4 h of feeding on mcdv-infected maize. the response did not persist, as the expression of most transcripts returned to pre-exposure levels within seven days. identifying transcriptional changes in the vector that were independent of virus transmission mode was surprising, and may help facilitate the development of control measures aimed at disrupting vector competence. moreover, emerging high throughout techniques to assay gene function may be undertaken to identify the transcriptional changes influencing g. nigrifrons virus transmission capability. further studies are needed to better characterize the functional roles and interactions among differentially expressed transcripts, to evaluate expression patterns over time, and to determine their impact on fitness in natural populations.

