BACKGROUND
idiopathic scoliosis is a complex deformation of the spine and it is the most common type of spine deformity. its prevalence is about 2% to 3% in children aged between  <dig> to  <dig> years old and girls are at a higher risk than boys for severe progression. although the etiopathogenesis of scoliosis is unknown, various factors have been identified that could be related to the etiology of scoliosis. among these factors, it has been proposed that neurological mechanisms could be related to scoliosis  <cit> . nonetheless, no clear-cut neurological tests either for diagnosing idiopathic scoliosis or for predicting its progression have so far been established.

neurological deficits in idiopathic scoliosis have mostly been evidenced by studies examining the patient's motor behavior. for instance, several studies have demonstrated that compared to age-matched individuals, idiopathic scoliosis patients  show deficits in controlling their postural sway . because many idiopathic scoliosis patients show longer somatosensory cortical potentials  compared to healthy individuals, their balance instabilities could be associated with alteration in sensory signal processing  <cit> . consistent with this hypothesis, impairment in balance control has been observed in isp when sensory information is restored following transient deprivation of visual or somatosensory information   <cit> . the fact that postural sway increased when sensory information returned to normal leads to the suggestion that isp have difficulty in dynamically adjusting the weight of the various sensory inputs to tailor the balance control commands.

cases have been reported suggesting that the motor deficits in isp may also be related to alterations in processing vestibular signals and in transforming these signals into motor commands. for instance, when the vestibular signals remain the only valuable source of information , body sway of isp is aggravated compared to control participants  <cit> . these observations are in agreement with those published by gauchard's et al.  <cit>  revealing that isp failed the balance control tasks that challenge the vestibular system.

while the deficits in sensorimotor transformations have been documented in isp, little attention has been devoted to their capacity to integrate vestibular information for cognitive processing. according to electrophysiological and neuroimaging studies, the output of the vestibular apparatus projects either directly or indirectly to cortical regions of the brain essential for spatial processing . furthermore, behavioral experiments conducted on healthy and neurological subjects have shown that perception of self movement and spatial orientation greatly rely on vestibular signal processing  <cit> .

in addition to their documented deficits in transforming sensory signals into proper motor commands , here we tested whether isp also show impairments in the processing of vestibular signals for cognitive spatial processes.

RESULTS
the analysis of the cognitive vestibular gain  showed that both groups underestimated the whole-body rotation as demonstrated by their average which are below unity. nonetheless, the isp underestimated the magnitude of the whole-body rotation to a greater extent than the control participants . the absence of significant interactions  suggests that, for both groups, the cognitive vestibular gains did not depend on the directions of the chair rotation nor on their amplitudes. on the other hand, the saccades produced by the isp in the absence of whole-body rotation  were accurate and their amplitude was not significantly different to that of control participants .

the analyses revealed that the vor gain  of the isp did not differ from that of control participants regardless of the rotation direction . importantly, the high percentage of the variance explained by the linear regression model for all participants confirms the efficiency of the model in quantifying the gain of the vor for all participants and both rotations .

note: for technical reason, we could not quantify the gain of the vor of one control participant.

discussion
the present study confirms previous results revealing a good capacity of the control subjects to memorize and process vestibular signals to determine whole-body motions  <cit> . compared to controls, however, the isp underestimated the amplitude of the rotations suggesting impairment in their ability to memorize and process vestibular signals. none of the isp showed asymmetry in perceiving leftward and rightward rotations. it is noteworthy that in absence of body rotation, isp performed accurate saccades to memorized targets excluding any saccadic motor deficit. this observation substantiates previous results suggesting that the network assisting the control of vestibular memory-guided saccades is different from the one governing visual memory-guided saccades  <cit> . moreover, the fact that isp had normal vestibulo-ocular reflex gain confirms normal vestibular system in these patients.

using the magnetic resonance imaging technique, liu et al.  <cit>  have recently demonstrated that the volume of several anatomical brain regions of isp differs with respect to controls. for instance, compared to controls, isp have larger parietal, temporal and frontal lobes. despite the fact that no clear link can be established between brain volume and dysfunction, it is worth mentioning that these brain regions receive vestibular inputs and are involved in spatial attention and processing  <cit> . therefore, the impairment of the isp to memorize and process vestibular inputs could be due to an alteration of the cortical network processing vestibular signals. this would be consistent with the findings that, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation applied to the right posterior parietal cortex of healthy participants, impairs encoding of vestibular-derived displacement perception  <cit> .

in addition, as idiopathic scoliosis is associated with melatonin signaling deficit  <cit> , isp impairment in perceiving whole-body rotation may witness alteration of the vestibulocerebellum functions. indeed, although the human cerebellum is not considered as an endocrine system, the external zone of the cerebellar molecular layer has a high density of melatonin receptors  <cit> . integrating vestibular, somatosensory and visual information, the vestibulocerebellum plays a key role in sensing head motion or head orientation in space and relative to gravity  <cit> . remarkably, patients with midline cerebellar lesions underestimated the magnitude of their rotation despite normal vestibular function  <cit> . therefore, it is likely that erroneous vestibular information going to the vestibular cortical network through cerebello-thalamocortical pathways prevents accurate computation of body rotation. however, not all processes mediated by the vestibulocerebellum would be altered as suggested by the isp's accurate saccades to the memorized target in absence of body rotation. this may suggest that the rostral fastigial nuclei could be impaired by the melatonin signaling deficit in isp. these nuclei, which are irresponsive to eye movements, are known as key processing centers for spatial orientation  <cit> .

manzoni and miele  <cit>  and pompeiano et al.  <cit>  have proposed that deficit in melatonin has an inhibitory effect on the vestibulospinal activity which could lead to abnormal activities of the cervical and axial muscles. in addition, impaired vestibular information from the cerebellum to the vestibular cortical network or alteration of this cortical network could also lead to alteration of back muscle activities. therefore, vestibulospinal  <cit>  as well as corticospinal abnormal activities may be part of the mechanisms leading to the onset and progression of scoliosis.

CONCLUSIONS
the present results show that cognitive vestibular processing is impaired in isp. it is possible that severe spine deformity developed partly due to impaired vestibular information travelling from the cerebellum to the vestibular cortical network or alteration in the cortical mechanisms processing of vestibular signals. the present study, however, does not allow one to make claims as to whether deficits in cognitive processing of vestibular signals should be considered as a potential factor leading to curve progression in scoliosis patients. further studies may determine if this deficit and the melatonin signaling dysfunction in isp can predict curve progression in patients with small spine deformity.

