BACKGROUND
skeletal muscle cells are complex multi-nucleated structures that specialize in contractile movement. during the prenatal period of muscle development, embryonic myoblasts initially increase in number  by mitosis, later align and fuse into large post-mitotic multi-nucleated cells, myotubes, which further mature into contractile myofibres. subsequently, post-natal/post-hatch development of muscle cells is characterised by an increase in the size of myofibres , accomplished in part by the addition of myoblasts to the myofibre sarcolemma  <cit> . myoblasts are derived from muscle satellite cells , which reside between the basement membrane and the myofibre sarcolemma  <cit> . when the muscle tissue is subjected to injury, stretch or exercise, muscle satellite cells are activated, divide and differentiate into myoblasts  <cit> . similar to the embryological development of muscle, myoblasts undergo repeated mitosis and fuse into a pre-existing myotube or form new myotubes.

several methods have been described for the isolation and in vitro culture of muscle satellite cells from skeletal muscles to study various aspects of skeletal muscle biology. an early method to isolate muscle satellite cells from rat skeletal muscle was described in  <dig>  <cit> . since then, a wide variety of modifications have been carried out to isolate satellite cells from other species such as human  <cit> , chicken  <cit> , turkey  <cit> , horse  <cit> , cow  <cit> , sheep  <cit>  pig  <cit>  and rabbit  <cit> . in essence, all these methods involve common or similar steps which are mechanical mincing of muscle, followed by enzymatic digestion to release satellite cells, and differential centrifugation to separate the satellite cells from muscle debris. following centrifugation, freed cells are plated onto culture flask coated with muscle extracellular matrix proteins such as collagen type i, gelatine, laminin or fibronectin. if further enrichment of muscle satellite cells is required, cells could be pre-plated on uncoated culture plates to remove faster adhering fibroblasts or centrifuged through percoll gradients  <cit>  which is more time consuming and labour intensive.

primary cultures derived from skeletal muscles are often mixed populations of muscle cells and non-myogenic cells such as adipocytes, immune cells  and particularly fibroblasts. primary cell cultures are an invaluable tool because they are obtained directly from a normal animal, do not contain tumour cells unlike immortal cell lines and more closely represent in vivo muscle cells. primary skeletal muscle cultures have been used in various studies involving development of new medical applications  <cit> , better understanding of muscle physiology and even production of in vitro meat  <cit> .

most of the approaches that have been used to date for the isolation and culture of satellite cells do not usually include characterization of types of cells in culture. studies conducted with an excessively heterogeneous cell population may not accurately provide valid insights into the biology of skeletal muscles in vitro. identification of primary muscle cells can be achieved either by morphological features of the cells or by analysing the expression of muscle-specific genes. while the multi-nucleated myotubes in culture could be readily identified, a significant proportion of mononucleated cells cannot be distinguished from non-myogenic cells. hence, identification of muscle-specific marker proteins by immunocytochemistry is valuable in distinguishing myogenic and non-myogenic cells in culture.

in addition, most of the methods described for the isolation of primary cultures of skeletal muscle are time consuming and complex. there are no standardized methods that could be used to isolate satellite muscle cells across a variety of different species. hence, there is a need for a simple, rapid and reproducible method that will generate a high yield of muscle satellite cells from different species. we report here on the development of a simplified protocol that can be used for the rapid isolation and identification of primary muscle cells from chicken, duck, horse, cow and pig skeletal muscles. we found this method to be cost efficient and yield high number of primary muscle cells that readily fuse to form myotubes in all the species tested.

RESULTS
current methods of isolation of muscle satellite cells from different animal species are highly variable making inter-species comparison problematic. here, we have simplified a previous published method described to isolate muscle satellite cells in mice  <cit>  and applied it to several agriculturally important avian and mammalian species: duck, chicken, horse, cow and pig. following the revised method described in the methods section, a high yield of muscle satellite cells was achieved for the species evaluated  without the need for percoll centrifugation or pre-plating. muscle satellite cells could be identified by their expression of the muscle-specific transcription factor pax <dig>  <cit> . to assess the relative purity of the isolated cells as muscle satellite cells immunocytochemistry for the detection of pax <dig> was performed . a high percentage of isolated cells in all species  expressed pax <dig> . note that pax <dig> was readily detected in all the species examined except for bovine cells where we could not find a suitable antibody that cross-reacted with bovine. each species analysed presented its own distinctively significant percentage of pax <dig> positive cells , with chicken displaying the highest number , followed by horse , duck  and lastly, pig .

in addition, fully multi-nucleated syncytia were achieved in our primary muscle cultures without overgrowth of non-myogenic cells as assessed by immunolabeling for the muscle-specific intermediate filament desmin . high fusion index was achieved for all the species, except the pig , using the same media for proliferation and differentiation. each species exhibited a significantly different fusion index  compared with other species, with the exception of chicken and duck . horse presented a significantly higher fusion index than all the species tested  with ≈ 77% of the cells fused to become myotubes. this is an impressive fusion index considering that these are primary skeletal muscle cells not derived from clonal isolation. fusion index of the avian species  was significantly higher  compared with that of cow  and pig . pig showed the lowest but still substantial fusion index compared with the other species  with ≈ 41% of the cells forming myotubes. porcine primary muscle cells isolated by more technically demanding methods  have achieved a fusion index of ≈ 65%  <cit> .

key known factors which affect the isolation of satellite cells and/or modulate myogenesis in vitro are:  the extracellular matrix protein chosen to coat the culture plates  <cit> ,  the proteolytic enzyme used to digest the muscle tissue  <cit> ,  the manner in which satellite cells are released from the myofibres -enzymatic digestion, mechanical dissociation  or a combination of both  <cit> ,  the cell seeding density  <cit> - and  the choice of growth and differentiation culture media  <cit> . taking into account all these factors, we modified yablonka’s method  <cit>  in the following aspects:  the extracellular matrix protein for coating the cell culture surface was changed from gelatin to type i collagen from rat tail,  the collection, digestion and culture media used were modified as described in methods,  for simplicity, the batch of horse serum  was not pre-selected for maximal fusion,  muscle tissue was enzymatically digested in a water bath without shaking,  the use of only 10-ml pipettes to triturate the muscle tissue, and  instead of using millipore swinney filters, the digested cell suspension was conveniently filtered through a 40-μm cell strainer. we chose to employ pronase as the proteolytic enzyme because of its ability to digest the basal membrane  <cit> . pronase worked well in all species tested and has been extensively used by others to isolate satellite cells from different animal species  <cit> .

after establishing the level of muscle satellite cells in freshly isolated cells, we performed immunocytochemistry to detect several muscle-specific muscle markers in terminally differentiated muscle cultures.

it has been previously reported that only a small proportion of chicken myoblasts express desmin in culture  <cit> . in the present study we also found little expression of desmin in chicken as well as duck myoblasts . by contrast, desmin was extensively expressed in both chicken and duck myotubes . during terminal differentiation, duck myoblasts were able to fuse en masse, forming very large multi-nucleated syncytia which often grew on top of replicating myoblasts. pax <dig>  an early muscle-specific paired-homeobox transcription factor, was readily detected in the nuclei of myoblasts but not in myotubes of chicken primary skeletal muscle cultures  <cit> . likewise, we found pax <dig> nuclear expression in duck myoblasts only and not in myotubes . in our avian cultures, the pattern of desmin and pax <dig> expression in muscle cells did not differ between duck  and chicken muscle cells . however, the two avian species showed distinctive myotube patterns. duck myotubes were sheet-like whereas chicken myotubes were more muscle fibre-like with parallel fibres formation. in addition, after terminal differentiation duck myotubes would more readily contract and detach from the culture surface pointing to differences in the contractile ability of the newly formed chicken and duck myotubes.

horse myogenicity, as indicated by the proportion of desmin positive cells in culture, appeared amongst the highest of all the species investigated. over 95% of equine cultured cells were desmin-positive . equine muscle cells possessed very few contaminating cells, challenging the general notion that mammalian species have higher number of non-myogenic cells when compared with avian species  <cit> . unlike the avian species, both equine myotubes and myoblasts strongly expressed desmin , in agreement with previous observations  <cit> . massive whorls of equine myotubes were evident when immunolabeled for α-sarcomeric actin . such was the extent of syncytia formation that the act of fixation with acetone:methanol was often sufficient to induce their detachment from the culture surface. equine muscle cells were able to grow and differentiate with the same medium: dulbecco’s modified eagle media -glutamax i and 20% fetal calf serum , without the need for serum depletion as previously documented  <cit> .

bovine muscle cells were also readily able to proliferate and differentiate without necessitating a specific differentiation medium which was required in previous reported primary bovine muscle cultures  <cit> . after 3 days of seeding in  <dig> well plates, bovine muscle cells underwent terminal differentiation and fusion into extensive and large multi-nucleated myotubes . desmin expression was predominantly found in myotubes but also in a small number of myoblasts  as previously reported in bovine skeletal muscle cells  <cit> . predictably, α-sarcomeric actin was restricted to myotubes only .

porcine skeletal muscle cells showed the lowest fusion rate in relation to the other avian and mammalian cells examined . to establish culture conditions that promote better differentiation and fusion several types of media were evaluated, including  dmem supplemented with  <dig> % ultroser g ,  dmem:ham’s f <dig> supplemented with 1% insulin-transferrin-selenium   and  dmem supplemented with 2% hs and 2 mm l-glutamine. improved myotube formation was most evident using serum replacement  <dig> % ultroser g which is at a concentration equivalent to 2% fcs . ultroser g has previously been documented to enhance myotube formation when compared with the commonly used serum-containing media in the culture of human skeletal muscle cells  <cit>  and mouse c2c <dig> muscle cells  <cit> . pig myogenicity was assessed by desmin and α-sarcomeric actin staining in cells differentiated with  <dig> % ultroser g for 72 h. a large proportion of porcine myoblasts expressed desmin in culture in accordance with previous studies  <cit> . large multi-nucleated myotubes also expressed desmin  which in conjunction with myoblasts, constituted approximately 80% desmin positive cells. α-sarcomeric actin immunolabeling was limited to myotubes . it should be stressed that only porcine cells required a serum reduction to achieve a high degree of fusion. muscle cells from the other species proliferated and fused efficiently and rapidly in the presence of high serum concentrations .

out of all the species examined, muscle cells from duck , chicken  and horse  fused most extensively covering most of each culture well. duck and chicken muscle cultures exhibited highly myogenic characteristics which are also characteristic of turkey satellite cell cultures  <cit> . bovine and porcine muscle cells occasionally formed large myotubes. the difference seen in the ability of fusion between different animal species was also noted in muscle cultures grown from the fibularis longus  of chicken and duck, and the longissimus doris  in pig , suggesting that the observed degree of fusion is specific to the animal species. primary muscle cells derived from the fibularis longus muscle of chicken formed parallel fibres while duck myotubes were sheet-like as previously observed in the pectoralis major of these species, indicating that both, the patterns and level of fusion, are a species-specific phenomenon.

in our study, equine and bovine muscle satellite cells were harvested from adult animals and appeared to result in reduced yield of satellite cells in relation to the other younger animal species. this apparent reduction in yield could be related to reduced satellite cell density in muscle tissue with age as observed in some species  <cit>  <cit> . nevertheless, once cells reached 70% confluence, both bovine and in particular equine satellite cells, differentiated and fused rapidly to form large multi-nucleated myotubes. equine cells fused within a short period of several hours. whether the proliferation and/or differentiation potential of satellite cells in vitro <cit>  and in vivo <cit>  are adversely affected by age remains to be fully resolved. although we did not quantitatively monitor proliferation, our primary bovine and equine muscle cultures displayed an exceptional degree of myogenic differentiation, indicating that there is no need to exclusively use neonatal muscles to achieve satisfactory yield and myotube morphology in vitro.

CONCLUSIONS
the described modified method represents a versatile and robust way to isolate satellite cells from a variety of animal species. this relatively simple method achieves good yield of high quality satellite cells that are demonstrably able to proliferate, differentiate and fuse into extensive myotubes.

