BACKGROUND
fungi are one of the major eukaryotic lineages that are equivalent in species number to animals but exceed that of plants  <cit> . fungi are among the most important organisms in the world because of their vital roles in decomposition, nutrient cycling, and obligate mutualistic symbioses with plants, algae, and cyanobacteria  <cit> . fungi also have great economic importance for industrial fermentation, pharmaceutical, and biotechnological industries  <cit> . they may also cause food spoilage and diseases in plants and animals  <cit> . the diversity of activities is reflected in the high number of taxa, morphologies, habitats, and life strategies used by this group of organisms. further studies are necessary to better understand their complex interactions with other organisms and environments.

the phylum basidiomycota is the second largest of the fungi kingdom and comprises approximately 30% of all described fungal species  <cit> . this diverse phylum includes primarily macroscopic but also microscopic fungi, such as mushrooms and basidiomycotan yeasts, respectively  <cit> ; saprotrophs, such as wood-decaying fungi  <cit> ; pathogens of plants  <cit>  and animals  <cit> ; and mycorrhizal symbionts  <cit> . basidiomycota species are grouped into the following subphyla: agaricomycotina, pucciniomycotina, and ustilaginomycotina. the first is the largest subphylum with approximately one-third of all described fungal species  <cit> . thus, a substantial amount of the data that is currently available on diversity, distribution, and sequencing has targeted agaricomycotina, particularly in the orders of agaricales, polyporales, and boletales. this subphylum is primarily composed of wood decayers, litter decomposers, and ectomycorrhizal fungi, as well as pathogens and poisonous, hallucinogenic, or edible species  <cit> .

the identification of fungi at the species level is critical to many research areas, such as health sciences and agriculture, where the determination of causal agents of diseases is central to the definition of the suitable treatment, elucidation of outbreaks, and transmission mechanisms  <cit> . furthermore, the understanding of the specific roles of microorganisms in an ecosystem, their abundance, and their community composition in ecological and biodiversity studies can only be attained through their reliable identification  <cit> . however, discovering and describing all extant fungal species appears challenging. according to the dictionary of fungi, only approximately  <dig>  species have been described thus far  <cit> , and the estimated diversity ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig>  million  <cit> .

morphological characteristics are useful for species description; however, they may be limited because many macroscopic structures are produced infrequently and temporarily  <cit> , and many taxa often harbor cryptic species complexes  <cit> . molecular tools complementing morphological ones are very promising in identifying species and can be used to rapidly and reliably evaluate biological diversity. these markers have been applied to the identification of fungal species since the 1990s  <cit> ; however, the strategy based on the sequencing of standardized genomic fragments  was recognized afterwards  <cit> . the primary difference between molecular identification tools and the “dna barcode” approach is that the latter involves the use of a standard dna region that is specific for a taxonomic group. the use of a segment of the mitochondrial gene encoding the cytochrome c oxidase subunit i  has been proposed for animals  <cit> . for plants, various loci combinations have been proposed  <cit> ; however, a study conducted by the consortium for the barcode of life  plant working group agreed that the combination of sequences of two plastid genes, matk and rbcl, is the most promising plant barcode  <cit> . in  <dig>  the study conducted by schoch and colleagues compared six dna regions as promising universal barcodes for fungi. mitochondrial coi and other protein-coding nuclear gene regions were excluded as potential markers for various reasons such as difficulties in amplifying dna and insufficient variability. the nuclear ribosomal rna internal transcribed spacer  region exhibited the highest probability of correct identification  for a wide number of fungal lineages analyzed and the most clearly defined barcode gap  <cit> . since then, the its region has been accepted as the standard barcode marker for fungi. however, a thorough study of its sequences in the international nucleotide sequence database  revealed that this region is not equally variable in all groups of fungi  <cit> . notably, for some genera of ascomycota, including alternaria  <cit> , aspergillus  <cit> , cladosporium  <cit> , penicillium  <cit> , and fusarium  <cit> , identification using the its barcode has been difficult.

one advantage of using the its region as a standard marker is that most fungal species have been identified based on this genomic region. genbank  <cit>  is the most comprehensive and widely used sequence repository in the field. a database specific for fungal sequences, the unite  has been developed  <cit> . unite aims to unify the fungal taxonomic identification and correct the annotations associated with the taxonomic names to the greatest extent possible. the barcode of life data system - bold  <cit>  represents another bioinformatics platform; however, fungi remain underrepresented in it. bold supplies tools for the storage, quality warranty, and analysis of specimens and sequences to validate a barcode library. to obtain a barcode status on bold, sequences must fulfill some requirements, such as voucher data, collection record, and trace files. in the last few years, the scientific community has observed the rapid improvement of dna sequencing technologies and the huge volume of data generated. trimming and identifying this enormous amount of data requires bioinformatics tools, such as automated pipelines and various programs. however, the success of the analysis greatly depends on the correct taxonomic identification of sequences. specifically, in the case of publicly available fungal its sequences, the reliability and technical quality vary significantly  <cit> . schoch and colleagues  <cit>  estimate that only approximately 50% of the its sequences that are deposited in public databases are annotated at the species level. moreover, nilsson and colleagues  <cit>  estimated that more than 10% of these fully identified fungal its sequences are incorrectly annotated at the species level. on the other hand, excellent initiatives, such as unite and that from ncbi that include a tool which allows flagging a genbank sequence with type material  <cit>  have emerged to minimize such a problem.

the its region comprises two sections  that flank the conserved  <dig> s region. the identification of multiple species from environmental samples  requires the use of high-throughput technologies, which may have limitations in sequencing read lengths  <cit> . for such approaches, only a portion of the its region is usually used, the its <dig> or the its <dig>  the efficiency of these sub-regions in the identification of species in many fungal lineages has been evaluated, and some authors claim that its <dig> is more variable than its <dig> . others have found opposite results  <cit>  or that both the sub-regions are suitable as metabarcoding markers  <cit> . in a recent work, guarnica and colleagues  <cit>  demonstrated that the its <dig> region is not more variable than the its <dig> region for cortinarius. furthermore, the complete its region is highly effective in discriminating among species in this highly sampled genus of basidiomycota.

in the present study, an extensive comparative analysis based on the probability of correct identification  and barcode gap analyses was performed using a trimmed dataset composed of all basidiomycota sequences deposited in genbank. we evaluated the most widely used genomic markers for fungi  to determine which is the most suitable for the identification of basidiomycota species. issues related to the need of additional molecular barcode markers as well as the taxonomic complexities within the subphyla are discussed.

methods
data acquisition and filtering
in this study, only sequences with complete nuclear ribosomal its from permanent collections whose taxonomic identifications were curated by specialists  and deposited in genbank  <cit>  were used. taxonomic information regarding the specimens was enriched, when available, from the unite database  <cit> . this step was used after downloading sequences from genbank and before logical and quality filters were applied. for this enrichment, we firstly downloaded the fasta sequence files from unite, and then we generated a tabular file with the unite data, keeping only the access numbers that corresponded to our specimens. then, we retrieved the information related to sampling area and fungal classification from unite. finally, we used the unite information to enrich the genbank information.

quality filters removed sequences with one or more iub/iupac ambiguous characters, and logic filters ensured that the sequences were suitable for dna barcode study in accordance with barcode of life recommendations . the first logic filter guaranteed that only sequences identified at the species level were maintained in the database. therefore, species with inconclusive names  were removed. fungalitsextractor  <cit>  was used to guarantee that only sequences with complete its regions were maintained in the database. more than 99% of fungal complete its sequences deposited in genbank are shorter than  <dig> or longer than  <dig> pb; thus all sequences outside of this interval were excluded from the dataset. the low representativeness together with the potential to distort the multiple sequence alignment justified this filter. only species with specimens collected from at least three different localities were included to guarantee that only distinct and geographically distant specimens were evaluated and to avoid the possibility of working with genetically identical specimens. the list of all species used to perform the analyses of this study is provided . all filters were performed using custom scripts written in the perl programming language and are available upon request. the fungalitsextractor software was used to identify and extract the its, its <dig>  and its <dig> regions.

data analysis
the its, its <dig>  and its <dig> datasets were partitioned in several sub-datasets, each containing sequences belonging to only one genus. sequences from each sub-dataset were aligned using muscle  with default parameters  <cit> . distance matrices were generated using an uncorrected p-distance because it is simple and without any biological assumptions  <cit> . to evaluate the discriminative power of the three genomic markers, the probability of correct identification  was calculated as the ratio of species successfully identified per total number of species. a species was considered successfully identified if the minimum interspecific distance was larger than its maximum intraspecific distance  <cit> . custom perl scripts were written to calculate the distance matrices and the pci values. boxplots were plotted in r language.

two statistical analyses were performed to graphically represent the data, a scatter plot and a dot plot. the scatter plot aimed to evaluate the correlations between the pci values for the genomic regions pairwise combinations , and the spearman correlation coefficient was determined. the dot plot was used to compare the pci with the barcode gap analyses. for this purpose, the pci values for the four groups previously defined from the barcode gap analyses  were represented for each genomic region. all data and graphics were generated using minitab .

RESULTS
our primary dataset was comprised of all complete its  sequences of basidiomycota and consisted of  <dig>  sequences. the exclusion of sequences without the field ‘specimen_voucher’ in genbank file reduced the number to  <dig> . removing sequences with ambiguous nucleotides led to  <dig>  sequences, and removing sequences with inconclusive species names resulted in  <dig>  sequences. after applying fungalitsextractor,  <dig>  sequences remained. its sequences with less than 400 bp and more than 800 bp were also excluded from the dataset, as well as its <dig> and its <dig> sequences less than 100 bp, leaving  <dig>  sequences. the last filter was used to ensure that only species with at least three sequences collected from different geographic locations were retained in the dataset. because most of the sequences did not include information regarding their origin, our final dataset had this number reduced to  <dig>  sequences from  <dig> countries from six continents. this dataset was used to perform all subsequent analyses and represented three subphyla, five classes,  <dig> orders,  <dig> families,  <dig> genera, and  <dig> species . this dataset has  <dig> sequences whose dna were originated from biological specimens considered as type material. many sequences from type materials were not included in our dataset only because they did not pass in quality and logic filters.

although genbank is known to be the most complete available public database, the amount of sequences is biased in our trimmed dataset as follows:  <dig> %  belong to species of agaricomycotina, whereas only  <dig> %  come from pucciniomycotina and  <dig> %.  from ustilaginomycotina. when other taxonomic ranks were analyzed, a similar distribution was observed with the vast majority of species belonging to agaricomycotina . inside the subphyla, the imbalance in the amount of sequences is also enormous. for example, in agaricomycotina, we found very well represented taxa  and others that were poorly represented . most of the genera from the agaricomycotina dataset were underrepresented;  <dig> of  <dig> had  <dig> or fewer sequences, whereas only  <dig> genera were represented by more than  <dig> sequences .fig.  <dig> pie charts represent abundance  of sequences  and species  for the three subphyla represented in the dataset used in this study. the histograms show the number of species and sequences distributed for genera belonging to agaricomycotina , pucciniomycotina  and ustilagomycotina  phylum




the probability of correct identification  for the three genomic regions under study was estimated using our trimmed dataset . the number of genera analyzed decreased compared with the original dataset  because we needed at least two species to estimate intraspecific and interspecific distances. moreover, the sequences identified as type material are distributed in  <dig> distinct genera  , and only  <dig> sequences with refseq accessions interchangeably with genbank numbers were identified . this represented approximately only  <dig> % of the sequences that comprised the dataset used to estimate pci and barcode gap indices.

the mean pci value for the complete its region was 63%, those for the sub-regions were slightly smaller as follows: 59% for its <dig> and 58% for its <dig>  for the its region,  <dig> % of the genera had pci values higher than the mean, whereas for its <dig> and its <dig>  these values were 46% and 48%, respectively . the pairwise correlation between the three markers  was estimated considering the pci values of all genera composing the dataset. the comparisons between complete its and the sub-regions showed most of the data on or near the regression line, meaning that most of the pci values were similar for the genera . when the sub-regions were associated , the distribution of data had a different profile and a lower correlation was observed  . the pairwise correlation between the genomic regions was carried out at the subphylum level; however, there were no observable patterns at this taxonomic level.table  <dig> probable correct identification  values  for all of the basidiomycota genera from our trimmed dataset. the pci values were estimated for the three genomic regions studied, the complete its region  and the sub-regions its <dig> and its2


agaricus

alnicola

amanita

amyloporia

antherospora

antrodia

antrodiella

armillaria

auricularia

boletus

butyriboletus

calvatia

ceriporiopsis

chlorophyllum

chroogomphus

clavaria

clavulina

collybia

coprinopsis

cortinarius

crepidotus

cystoderma

cystodermella

datronia

endoraecium

entoloma

entyloma

exobasidium

favolus

fibroporia

flammulina

fomitopsis

fuscoporia

ganoderma

geastrum

gloeophyllum

gymnopilus

gymnopus

hebeloma

helicobasidium

hohenbuehelia

hydnellum

hydnum

hygrocybe

hygrophorus

hymenopellis

hyphoderma

hyphodermella

hypholoma

inocybe

laccaria

lactarius

lactifluus

lentinellus

lentinus

lepiota

lepista

leucoagaricus

leucopaxillus

lycoperdon

lyomyces

lyophyllum

macrolepiota

megacollybia

melampsora

melanoleuca

microbotryum

mucidula

mycena

neofavolus

octaviania

oligoporus

parasola

paxillus

peniophorella

phaeocollybia

phanerochaete

phellinus

phellodon

piloderma

pisolithus

pleurotus

pluteus

polyporus

porodaedalea

postia

psathyrella

psilocybe

puccinia

pycnoporellus

ramaria

resinicium

rhizopogon

rhodocollybia

rigidoporus

russula

sarcodon

scleroderma

sebacina

stephanospora

strobilurus

suillus

thecaphora

thelephora

tilletia

tomentella

trametes

tricholoma

tricholomopsis

tuberculina

vuilleminia

xerocomus

xeromphalina

fig.  <dig> pairwise correlations  between pci values of all genera from our dataset




based on the analysis of the barcode gaps, we assessed and compared the efficiency of the three genomic markers for the identification of basidiomycota. thus, we classified the marker performance into the following three distinct categories: good, intermediate, or poor. when a clear barcode gap was present , we conventionally stated that the identification was good, even if outliers were overlapping. the genomic markers were considered intermediate if the whiskers from an intraspecific distance overlap those from an interspecific distance , and poor if the boxes overlap or the intraspecific distance values were superior to those of interspecific distance . for most of the genera  evaluated, the three genomic regions performed similarly, i.e., when the identification is good for one region, it is also good for the others. the same occurred when the performance was intermediate or poor. however, for some genera, we found some genomic regions with superior identification performance than others. for instance, the complete its had a clearer barcode gap for the genera auricularia, flammulina, lentinellus, microbotryum, parasola, and tuberculina compared with the its <dig> or its <dig> sub-regions. its <dig> performed better than the other regions in the identification of species from the genera hygrophorus and stephanospora, as well as its <dig> for the species belonging to the genera amanita, amyloporia, fomitopsis, scleroderma, and strobilurus . in some instances, one of the three genetic markers performed worse than the other. the its <dig> sub-region is not sufficient to differentiate the species of the genera collybia and pleurotus, and the its <dig> is not a good marker for sebacina, hydnellum, or vuilleminia. finally, it is important to note that for  <dig> out of the  <dig> genera evaluated , none of the complete its, its <dig> or its <dig> sub-regions could be used to differentiate the species based on the barcode gap analyses . for a detailed classification of genera considering their barcodes, see table  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  where the boxplots for all analyzed genera are shown.fig.  <dig> examples of the barcode gap performance classifications used in this study. a. clear barcode gap  for the genera agaricus, b. intermediate separation between the intra- and interspecific distances for hebeloma and c. a poor barcode gap for lactarius




agaricus, antherospora, antrodia, ceriporiopsis, chroogomphus, clavaria, coprinopsis, cystodermella, datronia, edoraecium, entoloma, entyloma, exobasidium, favolus, fibroporia, fuscoporia, geastrum, gloeophyllum, helicobasidium, hygrocybe, hymenopellis, hyphodermella, lactifluus, lepiota, lepista, leucopaxillus, lycoperdon, lyomyces, lyophyllum, melampsora, neofavolus, octaviania, oligoporus, phanerochaete, phellinus, phellodon, piloderma, polyporus, porodaedalea, psathyrella, psilocybe, puccinia, pycnoporellus, resinicium, rhodocollybia, russula, sarcodon, suillus, telephora, thecaphora, tilletia, tricholomopsis, xerocomus, xeromphalina
alnicola, armillaria, boletus, collybia, cortinarius, cystoderma, hebeloma, hydnellum, hyphoderma, hypholoma, inocybe, lentinus, melanoleuca, mycena, paxillus, pleurotus, pluteus, ramaria, rhizopogon, sebacina, tomentella, tricholoma, trametes, vulleminia
butyriboletus, clavulina, crepidotus, hohenbuehelia, hydnum, laccaria, lactarius, mucidula, peniophorella, phaeocollybia, pisolithus



the results of barcode gap analyses were compared with the pci values for each genus using a dot plot . for the genera for which the three genomic markers were classified as good in barcode gap analyses , most of the genera exhibited pci above the mean value ; however, some disagreements were found. some genera within this group had a pci equal to zero  or between  <dig> and 50%  . when the group for which one or two genomic regions showing a clearer barcode gap  was compared with the pci, most of the genera had a pci below the mean value . when the group for which most of the genomic regions showed an intermediate barcode gap , only lentinus and hyphoderma had higher pci than mean value . when the groups for which all three genomic regions were classified as poor markers considering the barcode gap , most of the genera also had a pci below the mean value  with the exception of butyriboletus .fig.  <dig> pci values for the genera classified in the group  <dig> , group  <dig> , group  <dig>  and group  <dig>  are represented for the its, its <dig> and its <dig> genomic region




discussion
the accepted dna barcode for fungi is the rdna its region  <cit> . its is recognized as a fungal barcode because it is the most sequenced region of fungi and is routinely used for systematics, phylogenetics, and identification  <cit> . in this study, we downloaded all complete its sequences of species belonging to the phylum basidiomycota from genbank. although this is the most complete repository of available its sequences, misidentifications or low-quality sequencing have been encountered in this public database  <cit> . however, some authors think that it is unrealistic that future databases or even a barcode database could be more reliable than genbank because misidentified sequences would be as common as they are currently and because vouchers will not be re-identified by taxonomic experts . to overcome this drawback, logical and quality filters were applied to our original dataset to obtain the most reliable results possible. the restrictiveness in the filtering step aimed to create a high-quality dataset  that would meet the theoretical assumptions of the biological system of identification via dna barcode and the principles recommended in bold systems  <cit> .

more than 90% of our trimmed dataset belonged to the subphylum agaricomycotina. this result is not surprising because it reflects the high diversity of this taxon compared with the other subphyla, which is widely mentioned in the literature  <cit> . kirk and colleagues  <cit>  estimated that one-fifth of all known fungal species described belong to the agaricomycete clade; this diversity is considered to be underestimated because new taxa are continually being described  <cit> . this discrepancy in the amount of species and sequences from the subphyla may reflect a natural event or may occur due to the specific interests of the scientific community in agaricomycotina species.

some criteria have been traditionally used to test the dna barcoding efficacy to classify and/or identify specimens at the species level, such as similarity measures, tree-based techniques, and identification based on direct sequence comparison  <cit> . however, all of these approaches present several issues . similarity measures are generally used to cluster sequences in “molecular operational taxonomic units”; however, the choice of the threshold value for distinguishing intraspecific and interspecific distances is largely arbitrary  <cit> . an important and acceptable measure of the efficacy of a genetic marker should reflect the probability of correctly identifying a species. this concept has emerged as the probability of correct identification   <cit> . however, there is no consensus for the definition and calculation of pci, which currently embraces a broad class of measures. in this work, we assume the concept described by hollingsworth and colleagues  <cit>  in which the authors considered the “discrimination as successful if the minimum uncorrected interspecific p-distance involving a species was larger than its maximum intraspecific distance” to measure the pci for each genus included in our dataset. furthermore, the use of genetic distances enables the observation of the ‘barcoding gap’, which is possible by plotting the intraspecific and interspecific distances. therefore, an ideal barcode marker would reveal intraspecific divergences lower than interspecific divergences  <cit> .

in this study, we aimed to identify the most suitable genomic marker  to identify fungal species belonging to basidiomycota. our findings, based on pci and barcode gap analyses, indicated that for most of the genera, the three genomic regions perform similarly, i.e., when one genomic region was considered a good marker  the other regions were also; the same was observed when the performance of genomic markers was considered insufficient. when the performance of the genomic markers was individually evaluated, barcode gap analyses provided a more optimistic view than pci values. approximately half of the genera exhibited pci values lower than the mean ; however, the three genomic regions were classified as good for most of the genera  when the barcode gap is taken into account. accordingly, the comparison between barcode gap and pci for each genus showed some disagreements. this was primarily observed for some of the genera that showed good identification performance using the barcode gap but had low pci values . the opposite, i.e., high pci values and poor identification performance via barcode gap, was observed for only one genus, botyriboletus .

initially, the low pci values found for some genera  could be explained by dataset features, such as the low number of species  and/or by the high number of outliers, which would have distorted the pci estimates. additionally, the taxonomy appears very complex for many of the genera for which the identification performance using its and sub-regions were insufficient. taxonomy issues for two genera  for which pci values were low and three genera  for which both pci and barcode gap analyses proved that its, its <dig> and its <dig> are not sufficient markers for the identification of species are discussed below based on pertinent literature.


hygrocybe species exhibit extremely high variability in the its region, with sequences diverging by more than 25%. thus, the use of additional dna barcode markers has been proposed to re-evaluate the taxonomy of this genus  <cit> . moreover, significant changes in the classification of hygrocybe, such as its division, are expected  <cit> .

the phylogenetic relationships between and within species of thelephora are also doubtful with its. the existence of cryptic species was described, and the importance of integrating morphological and molecular data, as well as employing a meaningful number of samples for the accurate identification is highlighted  <cit> . hypholoma has been poorly studied. however, a recent study based on the morphological and molecular aspects of h. cinnabarinum samples showed that this species is not a member of the genus hypholoma but belongs instead to agaricus  <cit> . the ecological role of phaeocollybia is uncertain. smith  <cit>  argues that the genus harbors both saprobes and mycorrhiza formers. singer  <cit>  considered that members of the genus were not obligatorily ectomycorrhizal, whereas norvell  <cit>  presented evidence for the consideration of phaeocollybia as a mycorrhizal genus. at the taxonomic level, the complexity remains, as may be exemplified in norvell  <cit> . the author proposed the re-evaluation of the genus phaeocollybia by revealing four new agaric species morphologically similar to phaeocollybia kauffmanii. the wide genetic divergence among pisolithus its sequences  indicates significant evolutionary divergence and suggests that this genus encompasses a species complex. this hypothesis was reinforced by kope and fortin  <cit>  who separated three groups of pisolithus using incompatibility tests and basidiospore spine morphology.

according to bickford and colleagues  <cit> , cryptic species are two or more distinct species that are erroneously classified under one species name. large intraspecific genetic distances associated with morphological and geographical discrete differences have revealed a broad range of cryptic species for many organisms and habitats  <cit> . although our knowledge of fungal species remains limited, the presence of cryptic species inside the group is well recognized  <cit>  and was subsequently described for many of the genera covered in this study.

the use of molecular techniques, primarily dna sequences, generates information to re-evaluate classifications and provides more accurate species delimitations  <cit> . currently, the utility of dna barcoding is evident. however, a universal barcode for the clear identification of all fungal species does not appear feasible, and secondary barcodes for fungi have already been proposed  <cit> . in addition to the known limitations of its barcodes for some genera of ascomycota, our results indicated that for some genera of basidiomycota, such as hygrocybe and pisolithus, additional barcode markers may contribute to a clear elucidation of the complex relationships between and within species. the failure to correctly identify biological species hampers the efforts of the scientific community to conserve, study, or utilize them. future research in this field should include discovering characteristics that natural selection acts upon  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
progress in many research areas fundamentally depends on the rapid and reliable identification of biological species. most fungal diversity is unknown, and issues related to the conservation of these organisms are urgent; thus, studies related to species identification are crucial. knowledge regarding the efficiency and limitations of the barcode markers that are currently used for specific groups of organisms optimize the work of many studies. therefore, the present study contributes to the rational selection of barcode markers of species belonging to the phylum basidiomycota.

additional files

additional file 1: list of species used in this study, their accession and taxon id in genbank and taxonomic affiliations. 


additional file 2: number of species and sequences  recovered to each genus and their taxonomic affiliations. data were compiled from our trimmed dataset. 


additional file 3: list of genera with sequences originated from type specimens and their pci values  and groups according to the barcode gap analysis. 


additional file 4: list of sequences with refseq accessions interchangeably with genbank numbers. 


additional file 5: barcode gap of all the  <dig> genera studied for its, its <dig> and its <dig> genomic regions by plotting intra- and interspecific distances. 




abbreviations
boldthe barcode of life data system

cbolconsortium for the barcode of life

insdinternational nucleotide sequence database

itsnuclear ribosomal rna internal transcribed spacer region

musclemultiple sequence comparison by log-expectation

pciprobability of correct identification

uniteuser-friendly nordic its ectomycorrhiza database

