BACKGROUND

pseudomonas aeruginosa is an important opportunistic pathogen that can cause chronic lung infections in patients with cystic fibrosis   <cit>  or non-cf bronchiectasis  <cit> . once established as a chronic infection, a p. aeruginosa strain can remain in the lungs of a patient for life, despite frequent use of antibiotic therapy. during the infection, the pathogen adopts a biofilm lifestyle, with evidence from explanted lungs suggesting the formation of free aggregates rather than surface-attached biofilms  <cit> . throughout these long time periods, populations of p. aeruginosa adapt to the cf lung in several ways, with isolates often exhibiting phenotypes such as mucoidy, auxotrophy, hypermutability, loss of known virulence factors, loss of motility, slower growth in rich media and resistance to antimicrobials . in addition to flagella-mediated swimming motility, p. aeruginosa exhibits motility on solid or semi-solid surfaces, using iv pili for twitching motility  <cit> , and both flagella and type iv pili for swarming motility  <cit> . in cf, mutations occur in genes encoding both type iv pili and flagella.

recently, it has also become evident that p. aeruginosa populations in the cf lung can diversify both phenotypically  and genetically  <cit> . in particular, we have shown that populations of the most common clone of p. aeruginosa infecting cf patients in the uk, the liverpool epidemic strain   <cit> , are highly diverse  <cit> . however, the factors driving and maintaining this diversity, also observed in other cf pathogens  <cit> , are poorly understood.

it has been shown that sub-inhibitory concentrations of antibiotics can drive diversification of p. aeruginosa populations  <cit> , but other possible contributory factors include host-responses, other members of the complex microbial community associated with the cf lung  <cit>  or the biofilm lifestyle itself  <cit> . temperate phages are abundant in the cf lung  <cit> , and we have demonstrated previously that les temperate phages can both mediate and drive adaptive evolution during experimental evolution in a biofilm model system, by increasing the supply of mutations in genes involved in type iv pilin biogenesis and quorum sensing through insertional inactivation of bacterial genes  <cit> ). the les phages have also been implicated in the competitiveness of the strain in chronic infection models  <cit> .

to test the hypothesis that temperate phages play an important role in driving phenotypic diversity, here we analysed a suite of phenotypic traits in populations of p. aeruginosa that have been experimentally evolved for approximately  <dig> bacterial generations with or without an assemblage of three les temperate phages  in artificial sputum medium . asm is an in vitro environment that recapitulates the physiochemical properties of lung sputum and in which p. aeruginosa forms free-floating biofilms  <cit>  and expresses biofilm-associated genes  <cit> .

RESULTS
phenotypic diversification and loss of wild-type phenotypes occurred in both treatment and control populations
twelve replicate populations of p. aeruginosa pao <dig> were experimentally evolved for ~ <dig> generations in asm in the absence   or presence  of three temperate les phages. at the end of the evolution experiment,  <dig> randomly-selected isolates per population were characterised by assessing a suite of phenotypic traits previously associated with adaptation to the cf lung  <cit> . these were three types of motility , auxotrophy, hypermutability, and resistance to each of the three les phages . these data are available in additional file  <dig>  extensive phenotypic diversity was observed in all endpoint populations. analysis of molecular variance  indicated that the majority of the phenotypic variance was associated with diversity within  and between populations , whereas less than 2% of the variation was explained by treatment  . from the  <dig> isolates,  <dig> different haplotypes were identified, based on eight phenotypic traits. the haplotype of the ancestor was very rare in the evolved populations; only 8/ <dig> isolates shared the ancestral haplotype, all of which were recovered from the control treatment. the most common haplotype constituted 23% of isolates and was observed in all but one population. this haplotype was characterised by loss of all three types of motility and resistance to all three les phages, but displayed the wild-type mutation rate and growth on minimal media phenotypes.table  <dig> analysis of molecular variance of the phenotypic diversity of haplotypes identified in endpoint populations

p
variance was partitioned into within and between populations, and between treatments. significance was tested by monte-carlo permutation tests 




in order to visualise variation between populations, a principal component analysis  was applied to the multivariate phenotypic dataset . the first principal component was strongly associated with twitching motility . there was a large degree of overlap between isolates from the two treatments, suggesting that populations from the different treatments evolved along similar trajectories . while some degree of clustering by population was observed, extensive diversification within individual populations was evident . many isolates exhibited loss of multiple phenotypes, but there was considerable variation in the proportion of mutants in each population . however, there was no difference between the control and phage treatments for any of the phenotypes .fig.  <dig> exploratory principal component analysis of multivariate phenotype data.  variable factor map,  individual factor map, labelled with experimental treatment and  individual factor map, labelled with population number. the eigenvalues for the first and second components were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively


fig.  <dig> boxplots of the proportion of isolates per population displaying the mutant phenotype for twitching motility , swarming motility , swimming motility , hypermutability  and auxotrophy . thick black horizontal lines represent the median, the box represents the upper and lower quantiles, and the circles represent outliers.  <dig> isolates were tested per populations 




endpoint isolates were tested for resistance to each of the les phages. phage resistance was widespread in both treatments . the majority of isolates were resistant to all three phages in all but one of the populations that was not exposed to phages , in which 93% of isolates remained susceptible to all three phages.fig.  <dig> phage resistance of endpoint isolates to lesφ2- <dig>  bars are coloured according to the particular phage combination to which resistance was observed. high titre pure phage stocks were spotted onto a soft-agar lawn of each isolate and scored as resistant if no lysis was observed after overnight incubation at 37 °c




resistance to antibiotics
disk diffusion assays revealed that all of the isolates tested  from every population were as susceptible to a panel of antibiotics as the ancestor. the method was therefore adapted to look for resistant isolates that may be present at a low frequency in the population. entire populations were spread on to agar plates containing antibiotics at clinically relevant resistance breakpoint levels. the frequency of antibiotic resistant isolates varied according to the population and the antibiotic . the highest frequency of tazobactam-piperacillin resistance, observed in the phage-treated population # <dig> , exceeded that seen with the control mutator strain, pao1Δmuts. resistance to ceftazidime and tazobactam-piperacillin arose more frequently than resistance to other antibiotics. no meropenem resistant isolates were identified.fig.  <dig> frequency of bacterial cells in whole populations displaying clinical resistance to a panel of antibiotics . frequencies were calculated after plating endpoint populations onto antibiotic free media, and media containing antibiotics at the clinical resistance breakpoint level. planktonic pao <dig> and pao <dig> grown in asm were included as negative controls. pao1Δmuts was included as a mutator strain control. error bars ±1 s.e.m. piperacillin/tazobactam ; ceftazidime ; ciprofloxacin ; tobramycin ; colistin 




in order to assess the extent to which the mutator phenotype was linked to the high frequencies of antibiotic resistant cells, the frequency of hypermutators in a population was plotted against the frequency of isolates resistant to ceftazidime and tazobactam-piperacillin . higher frequencies of hypermutators were linked to frequencies of resistance against both tazobactam-piperacillin , and ceftazidime . to further characterise the nature of the spontaneously occurring antibiotic resistance, minimum inhibitory concentration  values were determined for two sets of  <dig> colonies from population # <dig> identified as resistant to either ceftazidime or tazobactam-piperacillin. the mic values for ceftazidime ; and tazobactam-pipericillin  were at least two-fold higher than the clinical resistance breakpoints . all isolates found to be resistant to one antibiotic were also resistant to the other. a chromogenic beta-lactamase detection assay was conducted on five randomly selected isolates from each antibiotic medium, using nitrocefin. beta-lactamase production above the level of the control  was observed in all of the isolates tested . antibiotic resistance data and data for beta-lactamase production are available in additional file  <dig> fig.  <dig> the correlation between the frequency of hypermutators in a population and the frequency of resistant isolates . ceftazidime ; piperacillin/tazobactam ; n = 12


fig.  <dig> beta-lactamase production in ceftazidime and tazobactam-piperacillin resistant isolates. activity was measured using nitrocefin, in a chromogenic assay by calculating the change in a486/ <dig> per minute. the dashed line indicates the value of the negative control . ceftazidime ; piperacillin/tazobactam . bars indicate standard error




discussion
consistent with clinical studies reporting extensive phenotypic diversity in p. aeruginosa populations recovered from the sputa of cf patients  <cit> , populations of p. aeruginosa grown in asm exhibited substantial phenotypic heterogeneity. notably we observed the evolution of many phenotypic variants that are also commonly found amongst isolates from cf patients. as with naturally occurring populations in the cf lung  <cit> , the majority of the diversity in our evolved populations was within populations rather than between populations. although our previous genomic analyses suggested that the phages play a key role in accelerating the evolution of key phenotypes  <cit> , our populations treated with or without phages evolved along similar trajectories, and converged upon similar suites of evolved phenotypes  <cit> .

previous studies of cf isolates have reported loss of swimming, swarming and twitching motility  <cit> . although it has been proposed that this loss of motility may be an immune avoidance strategy  <cit> , the lack of any immune system in our model suggests that loss of motility may evolve, at least in part, because of other selective pressures. these could include the viscosity of the lung environment, though this remains a hypothesis yet to be tested. although a role for type iv pili in biofilm formation has been suggested  <cit> , a study examining clinical isolates observed no correlation between biofilm production and motility  <cit> . our observations suggest that type iv pili are not required for the formation of the kind of free-floating biofilms that occur in the asm model.

a high frequency of hypermutators was observed in some evolved populations, but there were large differences between populations, ranging from  <dig> to > 90% hypermutators. an elevated mutation rate can be detrimental due to the increased risk of deleterious mutations, but hypermutability can reach fixation in a population by hitch-hiking with beneficial mutations  <cit> , and can be advantageous in a novel environment, accelerating adaptation  <cit> . the mutator phenotype has been shown to occur during biofilm growth and may confer intrinsic fitness benefits, such as significantly enhanced microcolony growth  <cit> , or overproduction of the h2o2-degrading enzyme catalase, leading to increased resistance to oxidative stress  <cit> . the hypermutability phentotype has also been linked with antibiotic resistance  <cit> , and in our study a clear correlation was observed between the frequency of hypermutators in a population and the frequency of clinically resistant isolates. increased basal production of beta-lactamase has been observed previously in mutator strains  <cit> . the finding that clinically resistant isolates are present at low frequency in hypermutable populations, even in the absence of antibiotic selection, suggests that factors other than antibiotic therapy per se can drive antimicrobial resistance in chronic lung infections. the role of mutator phenotypes in driving evolution in p. aeruginosa surface-attached biofilm systems, including an increase in the frequency of mutations implicated in antibiotic resistance, has been described previously  <cit> . evolution of antibiotic resistance has also been shown during biofilm growth for escherichia coli  <cit> . here, we demonstrate the development of resistance in a free-floating biofilm model systems designed to mimic sputum.

the diversification observed in asm over this relatively short timescale could be driven by growth in a biofilm. it is known that spatially structured environments, like the viscous asm, can select for the evolution of diversity  <cit> . previous studies further suggest that p. aeruginosa diversifies when grown as a surface-attached biofilm, and this diversity helps protect against oxidative stress  <cit> . it has been suggested that this was due to the “insurance effect”, which posits that biodiversity has a buffering effect over time on productivity, as well as raising the overall mean productivity of an ecosystem  <cit> . however, the applicability of the insurance hypothesis to bacterial biofilms has been questioned  <cit> . our observations suggest that diversification of biofilm populations, especially those that have evolved hypermutability, could potentially increase their evolutionary responsiveness in the event of antibiotic treatment by providing standing genetic variation for antibiotic resistance upon which natural selection can act.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated that many of the phenotypic adaptations observed amongst p. aeruginosa isolates from cf chronic infections occur during evolution in a model designed to mimic the cf sputum environment, even in the absence of any selection due to host responses or antibiotics. although we have shown previously that phages can alter the mode and rate of adaptive evolution  <cit> , comparable sets of phenotypes eventually occurred both in the presence and absence of phages. it is, however, worth noting that similar phenotypes can be driven by sub-inhibitory concentrations of antibiotics in non-biofilm systems  <cit> . in cf, it has been proposed that the maintenance of phenotypically diverse p. aeruginosa populations may be a consequence of the spatial heterogeneity of the lung, leading to regional isolation of separately evolving communities  <cit> . here we show that similar population heterogeneity occurs in an artificial sputum biofilm system, emphasizing the potential utility of this model as a tool to facilitate a better understanding of the factors driving p. aeruginosa adaptation and diversification during infections.

