BACKGROUND
rust fungi or pucciniales  represent the largest group of fungal plant pathogens, including more than  <dig> species that possess the most complex life cycles in the kingdom fungi  <cit> . some of these obligate biotrophs have been of long standing concern for agriculture and forestry while others have emerged in recent epidemics. for instance, poplar leaf rusts belonging to the genus melampsora are considered as the world's most important disease of poplars  <cit> . selection for durable resistance to these pathogens is thus an important challenge for poplar breeders  <cit> . although poplar breeding programs have been in place for decades in europe, clones selected for complete resistance against rust have increasingly succumbed in time to new races of melampsora larici-populina  <cit> . sustainability of newly selected resistance clearly requires a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in populus-melampsora interactions.

prokaryotic and eukaryotic plant pathogens have evolved highly advanced strategies to engage their hosts in intimate contacts and deliver suites of effector proteins to modulate plants' innate immunity and enable parasitic colonization  <cit> . understanding the translocation mechanisms of bacterial pathogen effectors inside host cells has been an outstanding breakthrough with the characterization of the type iii secretion system. this export apparatus enables a bacterium to manipulate host cellular processes by injecting effector proteins into the host cytoplasm  <cit> . similarly, plant-parasitic nematodes have developed diverse relationships to obtain nutrients from their host plants. perhaps their most evolutionary sophisticated adaptations are effector proteins encoded by parasitism genes expressed in oesophageal gland cells and secreted through a protrusible feeding spear, called a stylet  <cit> . however, still little is known about such translocation machineries in filamentous pathogens , although another specialized biotrophic infection cell called the haustorium is thought to be involved  <cit> . the haustorium invaginates host cells and makes near-direct contact with the host plasma membrane, where it plays a crucial role in nutrient acquisition. this structure is a regulatory hub involved in the manipulation of host metabolism and the suppression of host defenses, which allows the establishment of a successful biotrophic relationship  <cit> . the concomitance of haustoria formation with the induction of a programmed cell death response termed the hypersensitive response  suggests a significant role for this structure in delivering effector proteins into the infected host cell  <cit> .

key insights have emerged from the recent identification of filamentous pathogen effectors with avirulence activity inducing plant defense responses and hr  <cit> . most of the avirulence genes identified encode small proteins with n-terminal signal peptides that direct them through the endoplasmic reticulum secretory pathway  <cit> . while effector genes reside in pathogen genomes, their products essentially generate phenotypes that extend to host cells and tissues, and are hence likely to be the direct target of the never-ending coevolutionary conflict between host and pathogen  <cit> . in fact, avirulence proteins recognition by plant resistance proteins imposes selection against effector function, and pathogen effector proteins probably overcome resistance through diversification of the genes encoding them  <cit> . for instance, several avirulence genes or their plant counterparts display molecular hallmarks of positive selection  <cit> . recently, the availability of filamentous plant pathogen genome sequences facilitated the cataloguing of whole secretomes using computational analyses, thus allowing the identification of putative effectors  <cit> . indeed, tyler et al.  <cit>  provided evidence that secreted proteins have been subject to accelerated evolution by contrasting the genome sequences of phytophthora ramorum and phytophthora sojae.

here we provide an overview of the expressed secretome of poplar leaf rusts belonging to the genus melampsora. we constructed cdna libraries for four related poplar leaf rust pathogens with different host specificities to test for the signature of selection in these rust secretomes and used computational tools to annotate putative secreted proteins. a comparative genomics approach based on homologous gene groups  was undertaken to evaluate the extent to which secretome members are under different evolutionary constraints. we describe adaptive evolution  in genes encoding secreted proteins of poplar leaf rusts, in agreement with the idea that these genes are expected to display an effector activity and be involved in the escalating and reciprocal coevolutionary arms race with host resistance factors.

RESULTS
defining the poplar leaf rust secretome
we constructed cdna libraries from ex planta material of four different melampsora taxa with different host specificities: the eurasian m. larici-populina, the north american m. occidentalis, and two formae speciales of the north american m. medusae, m. medusae f. sp. deltoidae and m. medusae f. sp. tremuloidae . this allowed the comparison of expressed sequence tags  with their putative orthologues and made it possible to incorporate evolutionary information into our analyses. in order to extend our dataset with candidate effectors expressed in and secreted from haustoria, we generated an additional haustorium-enriched library  of m. larici-populina. in total,  <dig>  clones were sequenced in this study, which represented  <dig>  unique sequences . clone sequences are available under genbank accession numbers gw <dig> to gw <dig>  the identification of transcripts coding for secreted proteins was carried out using an in silico analysis including a series of prediction algorithms , yielding  <dig> sequences encoding putative proteins with predicted secretory signal peptides . a number of sources exist that lead to false prediction, i.e. selecting individual proteins that should not be included in the secretome. for example, mitochondrial localization sequences and n-terminal transmembrane anchors are frequently interpreted as signal peptides  <cit> . even though no computational method seems fully accurate, the prediction algorithms included in our approach should have excluded such false positives. the assignment of a protein to the secretome is also totally dependent on having the full-length open reading frame . an inaccurate ab initio gene prediction or an incomplete orf could lack an additional sequence encoding a transmembrane domain or a signal peptide. for this reason, we conducted reciprocal blast between libraries to reduce the number of false assignments due to partial or mispredicted orfs. most reassignments were false negatives with truncated n termini, thus increasing the number of putative secreted members to  <dig> .

as: initial predicted set of unisequences encoding putative secreted proteins.

bs+: final set of unisequences encoding putative secreted proteins, following reassignments based on reciprocal blast.

functional annotation of the poplar leaf rust secretome: novel proteins and the identification of orthologues
this s+ dataset was used as search query in blastx on the non-redundant uniprotkb database to find sequences with significant matches. furthermore, to develop an understanding of how protein secretion by poplar leaf rusts might be related to specialized functions or processes, we used the pfam  <cit>  and gene ontology   <cit>  databases to determine whether any class of proteins was more likely to be found in the melampsora secreted proteins. in addition, we used the gene ontology methodology within a statistical framework to determine whether any go terms were significantly enriched in s+ proteins when compared to non-secreted proteins . for  <dig> candidates, i.e. 36% of the s+ dataset, significant similarity was found in the uniprotkb database, mostly among putative effectors or proteolytic and carbohydrate-degrading enzymes from other fungal species . less than a quarter of the unisequences had similarity to one or more pfam domain predictions or go term assignments. the most abundantly represented pfam domains in the poplar leaf rusts secretome are presented in additional file  <dig>  and go classifications are depicted in figure  <dig> 

basidiomycotadb included basidiomycota  est sequence 6-frame translations and protein sequences from the non-redundant database of ncbi and gene models from coprinus cinereus okayama  <dig> , cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii serotype a, strain h <dig>  laccaria bicolor s238n-h <dig>  malassezia globosa cbs  <dig>  phanerochaete chrysosporium rp <dig>  postia placenta mad- <dig>  sporobolomyces roseus iam  <dig> and ustilago maydis  <dig>  puccinialesdb included pucciniales est sequence 6-frame translations and protein sequences from the non-redundant database of ncbi and gene models from p. graminis f. sp. tritici crl 75-36-700- <dig>  blastx hits were considered significant when e-value ≤ 1e- <dig> 

ans: final set of unisequences not predicted to encode putative secreted proteins.

bs+: final set of unisequences encoding putative secreted proteins, following reassignments based on reciprocal blast.

host infection by biotrophic fungi is believed to involve the secretion of effectors that suppress plant defenses and alter cellular metabolism to fulfill the requirements of the invading pathogen  <cit> . among the candidates that had significant similarity to known sequences, homologies with potential effectors previously identified in the haustoria of other rust species were observed. interestingly,  <dig> candidates had similarities with eight "haustorially expressed secreted proteins"  from melampsora lini identified using a similar bioinformatics approach. some of these hesps were shown to co-segregate with known avirulence genes and are proven hr elicitors in flax, such as the avirulence protein avrm  <cit> . the percentage of identity between flax rust and poplar leaf rust hesps differed greatly. for instance, hesp- <dig> had close homologues in melampsora spp. , while avrm appeared less conserved . other candidates had similarities with rust transferred protein  from uromyces fabae, a small secreted protein that is specifically expressed in broad bean rust haustoria and translocated into host cells. this protein accumulates within the cytoplasm of the infected host cell and in the host nucleus, suggesting a role in influencing host gene expression  <cit> . homologies with other proteins thought to contribute to pathogenesis were unravelled, with  <dig> unisequences having similarity to cfem domain proteins . this particular domain is an eight cysteine-containing domain for which members are proposed to have important roles in fungal pathogenesis  <cit> , and it was by far the most highly represented pfam domain in the s+ dataset. cfem-containing proteins could function as cell-surface receptors, signal transducers, or adhesion molecules in host-pathogen interactions  <cit> . moreover, five unisequences had significant similarity to gegh16/gegh <dig> h proteins from blumeria graminis, a large family potentially involved in host-pathogen interactions  <cit> . an appressorium-specific expression pattern was described for numerous gegh16/gegh <dig> h homologues, including virulence genes gas <dig>  and gas <dig>  from magnaporthe grisea. gas <dig> or gas <dig> deletion mutants had no defect in vegetative growth, conidiation or appressoria formation, but were reduced in appressorial penetration and lesion development  <cit> .

the diverse ecological niches of fungal species are mirrored in their secretome, which includes gene families encoding various proteolytic and carbohydrate-degrading enzymes known to act on the linkages found in plant cell walls and compatible with the array of nutritional sources they can exploit  <cit> . consistent with the molecular function go analysis ,  <dig> % and  <dig> % of melampsora secreted proteins with a go assignment were involved in binding  and catalytic activity , respectively. note that there was a trend towards concentration of a distinct set of processes and functions in the group of proteins making up the melampsora secretome. significantly higher proportions of secreted proteins, relative to the entire dataset, were assigned to the following functions: carbohydrate and ion binding, and hydrolase and oxidoreductase activity . there also appeared to be enrichment of proteins involved in processes related to cell adhesion , response to stimulus , regulation of molecular function , carbohydrate and lipid transport , and primary metabolic process , including oxygen and reactive oxygen species metabolic process  and carbohydrate metabolic process . apart from putative effectors, members of the secretome had homology to a battery of glycoside hydrolases and subtilisin-like serine proteases that likely contribute to the penetration of the plant cuticle and cell wall  <cit> . in fact, glycosyl hydrolase  <dig>  was the second most represented pfam domain in the secretome, followed by domains typically found in proteolytic enzymes  . a class of secreted proteins exhibiting the ability to neutralize reactive oxygen species , and including mn and cu/zn superoxide dismutases, was also uncovered by this survey. this finding was not surprising as it is known that rust fungi prevent a variety of non-specific defense responses in invaded cells, thus allowing the establishment of the long-term biotrophic relationship between rust fungi and living host cells  <cit> . such host responses frequently involve the production of ros, whose detoxification is essential for the establishment of the pathogen. a mn superoxide dismutase homologue had previously been reported in the haustorial stage of puccinia triticina  <cit>  and was differentially-expressed in uromyces appendiculatus germlings during early appressorium development  <cit> . concordant with these observations, previous studies have demonstrated the upregulation of several host genes encoding enzymes of the redox regulation pathways during populus-melampsora interactions  <cit> . another group of interesting secreted proteins identified here that may be critical for evading host recognition or protecting fungal cell wall from hydrolysis by host enzymes were chitin deacetylases, which have already been described in libraries from phakopsora pachyrhizi  <cit>  and p. triticina  <cit> . the conversion of chitin into chitosan by de-n-acetylation not only protects fungal infection structures from hydrolytic attack by chitinases present in the host tissue, it also prevents the release of chitin oligomers responsible for the triggering of resistance reactions  <cit> .

this functional annotation established the secretome's ability to perform diverse roles in pathogenicity and interactions with host cells. however, for the major part of the secretome, no go or pfam domains could be assigned. for  <dig> candidates, i.e. 64% of the s+ dataset, no significant similarity was found to known proteins in the uniprotkb database  . to ascertain that the large number of unmatched proteins identified in this study was not due to the paucity of pucciniales  sequences in international databases  <cit> , we constructed two specific databases . blastx searches of the complete dataset of melampsora unisequences  were performed against these databases. the percentage of unisequences with homologues was similar between basidiomycotadb and uniprotkb, indicating that the latter is not deficient in basidiomycota sequences . as previously observed with blastx searches, the percentage of s+ unisequences with homologues in both basidiomycotadb and puccinialesdb was generally lower compared to ns. these results are consistent with the view that secreted effector proteins that subvert host-cell structure and functions often show very limited phylogenetic distribution and no obvious conserved motifs, being less evolutionarily conserved. furthermore, the percentage of homologues for the haustorium-enriched library was surprisingly low considering that the whole gene set of another rust, puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici, was included in the database. however, these results were comparable to observations made on the haustorial secretome of other rust fungi  <cit> . most of the proteins secreted from the haustorium could be under rapid evolution and strong diversification due to host selective pressures and, therefore, be species-specific. taken together, these results strongly indicate that a large portion of the secretome  of melampsora may have virulence functions or be involved in host-pathogen interactions.

expression profiles of the poplar leaf rust secretome: stage-specificity
most abundantly represented members of the secretome had no evident homologues in the uniprotkb database , or even in puccinialesdb. however, some highly expressed candidates showed similarities to sequences suspected to be involved in pathogenicity or host-pathogen interactions . to obtain an accurate overview regarding the expression profiles of the secretome, we associated s+ members to 15-bp tags from a serial analysis of gene expression . we analyzed expression patterns at three time points during the infection process of m. larici-populina: twice during the pre-biotrophic stage , and once during the biotrophic stage  . the last two time points were also investigated on both susceptible and resistant hosts, i.e. during compatible and incompatible interactions. a quarter  of the s+ members was confidently associated to a sage tag. an average linkage hierarchical clustering of sage patterns revealed strong stage specificities of the secretome , similar to observations made on u. fabae genes initially identified using the yeast signal sequence trap  <cit> . genes expressed during pre-biotrophic growth were clearly turned off at later biotrophic stages, while others were induced only during the biotrophic stage. global expression patterns were consistent with observations made in our libraries, with 60% of the represented haustorium-enriched library unisequences being upregulated during the biotrophic stage. compatible and incompatible treatments were grouped together at each time point, and the pre-biotrophic stage libraries were clustered together and separated from the biotrophic stage libraries. even though similar stage specificity has been observed for the non-secreted counterpart , the abundance of tags pointed towards higher expression levels for secreted proteins during the pre-biotrophic stage when compared to the rest of the transcriptome. on the other hand, secretome members found during the biotrophic stage had expression levels similar to their non-secreted counterpart . the mean number of tags per unisequences correlated well with the abundance of clones per contig. while the haustorium-enriched library shared a somewhat similar number of genes encoding putative secreted proteins when compared to other libraries, their level of expression, as reflected by the percentage of identified sequences, was quite lower . secreted proteins accounted for 25% of ex planta libraries , while it was only  <dig> % for the haustorium-enriched library. secretory activity among obligate biotrophs thus appears limited and strongly regulated. a strict control of the secretory activity is required to form the interface layers that are observed in biotrophic interactions  <cit>  and this could be a component of the pathogen's strategy to evade recognition by host factors  <cit> .

evolutionary constraints of the poplar leaf rust secretome: adaptive evolution
none of the effectors described from various fungi are known to have close homologues beyond species or genus boundary  <cit> . in order to determine if the evolutionary model of poplar leaf rust s+ proteins was confined to the presence/absence pattern observed above, we generated new blastp searches using  <dig>  predicted orfs against the translated gene models of p. graminis f. sp. tritici, and plotted the percentage of identity of each dataset to their closest homologues . around 40% of each dataset had homologues in the p. graminis f. sp. tritici genome, a proportion that could be explained by the relatively short length of many orfs, the presence of false orfs predicted from non-coding regions such as utrs, and the relative divergence expected between these genera  <cit> . however, approximately half of ns-predicted orfs had high identity values  with their closest homologue from the p. graminis f. sp. tritici gene models compared to only 7% of s+-predicted orfs, thus suggesting that the secretome is under different evolutionary constraints. again, fast evolution of coding regions due to molecular arms races between pathogens and hosts might explain the high divergence between orthologues or the absence of close homologues in related species.

we used reciprocal tblastx searches  among our taxonomic cdna libraries to identify orthologues and/or paralogues in different melampsora species libraries and to classify them into homologous gene groups . in order to increase the number of hggs, we included the gene models from p. graminis f. sp. tritici. we found  <dig> hggs consisting of at least three different sequences with a minimum of two melampsora unisequences retrieved. these hggs included  <dig> melampsora unisequences and  <dig> p. graminis f. sp. tritici gene models. hggs were divided to  <dig> non-secreted hggs  and  <dig> secreted hggs  according to their predicted localization. consistent with the above similarity searches, approximately 45% of secreted hggs had no p. graminis f. sp. tritici homologues , compared with 12% for non-secreted hggs. moreover, the proportion of secreted hggs  was twice the proportion of s+ unisequences , and the mean number of melampsora unisequences per hgg was slightly higher in secreted hggs  compared with non-secreted hggs . these results could suggest that a larger proportion of allelic forms and/or paralogue families exist among the rust secretome, which is consistent with an extensive sequence diversification motivated by the coevolutionary arms race  <cit> .

in order to visualize the evolutionary relationships between melampsora and other fungi we used simitri  <cit> , which plots in two-dimensional space the relative similarities of gene sequences between one group  and three comparators. for each sequence included in an hgg, a blastx was performed against three other basidiomycetes for which genome sequences were available: puccinia , the wheat stem rust, which is phylogenetically close to melampsora and shares a similar biotrophic lifestyle; sporobolomyces , a free-living saprobic yeast that is phylogenetically close to rusts but differs in its saprophytic lifestyle; and ustilago , the corn smut, which is phylogenetically more distant from melampsora but is also a plant pathogen. in a few cases, sequences within hggs matched different paralogous sequences in one of the comparators . consensus sequences were thus created from sequences having identical blastx hits in the three comparators, allowing multiple consensus sequences for a single hgg. simitri was used to plot  <dig> consensus sequences from  <dig> melampsora hggs against related species' gene models . for each hgg, most melampsora sequences grouped slightly towards puccinia, its closest relative . again, the difference between non-secreted and secreted hggs was striking with  <dig> % of non-secreted hggs exhibiting homologous sequences in the three comparators, while only  <dig> % of secreted hggs had such homologues. even tough the percentage of secreted hggs with no hit in the three other species  was almost four times the percentage of unique non-secreted hggs , this was not sufficient to explain this difference. the percentage of hggs unique to pucciniales was twice higher for secreted hggs . similar secreted/non-secreted hggs ratios were observed for the percentage of secreted hggs absent from ustilago  or from sporobolomyces . while hggs absent from ustilago but found in both puccinia and sporobolomyces could have been eliminated following the ustilaginomycotina/pucciniomycotina radiation, hggs absent from the free-living sporobolomyces but found in the more distant ustilago could represent genes involved in host-pathogen interactions and/or biotrophic lifestyles. similarly, recent observations on the whole genome sequences of ustilago maydis and laccaria bicolor suggested that the inventory of certain enzymes underwent massive gene loss as a result of its adaptation to a biotrophic  or symbiotic lifestyle   <cit> .

molecular genetic analysis of plant-pathogen interactions includes many layers of antagonistic coevolution. investigation of molecular evolution at these various levels usually reveals diversifying selection and the selective maintenance of variation, resulting in positive selection at the genomic interfaces of escalating attack and defense systems  <cit> . following this idea, one of the most reliable indicators of positive selection at the molecular level is a higher non-synonymous nucleotide substitution rate  than the synonymous nucleotide substitution rate  between two protein-coding dna sequences   <cit> . based on this criterion, statistical methods, such as the approximate  and the maximum likelihood  methods, have been developed  <cit> . we calculated the dn and ds rates across all possible pairwise sequence comparisons within each of the  <dig> hggs using the ml method. the distribution of omega ratios  was skewed towards extreme low values for non-secreted hggs, with almost 75% of highest pairwise estimates of ω <  <dig>  and only 5% >  <dig>  . this distribution was quite different for secreted hggs, with proportions around 40% and 20% of highest pairwise estimates of ω <  <dig>  and >  <dig> , respectively. for  <dig> hggs, the dn value was significantly greater than ds  in at least one pairwise comparison . ten of these groups under positive selection were secreted hggs . using a different approach based on fixed-effect likelihood  statistics, feau and colleagues detected positive selection in seven gene groups  from a similar dataset  <cit> . two of these seven gene groups corresponded to secreted hggs unravelled using the dn/ds approach described here . interestingly, eight positively selected secreted hggs were found to encode cysteine-rich proteins with an even number of cys residues that may be involved in disulfide bonds. an even number of cys residues is generally indicative of the presence of disulfide bonds, which are formed between the thiol groups of cysteines. disulfide bonds play an important role in the folding and stability of some proteins, usually proteins secreted to the extracellular medium, and are typical features of a subset of fungal and oomycete effectors, especially those acting in the plant apoplast  <cit> .

blastx and pfam hits were considered significant when e-value ≤ 1e- <dig> and 1e- <dig>  respectively.

ans: non-secreted; s: secreted.

bhighest calculated dn/ds ratio among all pairwise comparisons within each hgg.

clength is  <dig> , and  <dig> ; an  <dig> amino acids insertion and a  <dig> amino acids minisatellite are also present in a m. medusae f. sp. deltoidae unisequence  and a m. larici-populina unisequence , respectively.

da  <dig> amino acids deletion  is present in a m. medusae f. sp. deltoidae unisequence.

elength is  <dig>  and  <dig> .

fa  <dig> amino acids minisatellite is present in a m. occidentalis unisequence .

gadditional cys residues are present before the signal peptide cleavage site.

to identify additional hggs under positive selection and detect the amino acid residues that are under positive selection, we contrasted the m2a/m1a, m8/m <dig> and m8/m8a models with likelihood ratio tests   <cit> . significant evidence of positive selection was found in  <dig>  of the  <dig> hggs. selective pressures had previously been identified for one of these secretome members using fel statistics and a population genetics approach  <cit> . this particular secreted hgg has homology with hesp- <dig> from m. lini, a gene known to be expressed in haustoria and encoding a secreted protein with an even number of cys residues  <cit> .

we assessed the position of positively selected hggs on above simitri plots : only one non-secreted hgg  had homologues in the three databases, two secreted hggs  were absent from sporobolomyces, one secreted hgg  was absent from ustilago, one secreted hgg  was present only in puccinia, and the remaining hggs  had no hit. two other groups of sequences identified using fel statistics  <cit>  had corresponding hggs plotted on the line between puccinia and ustilago  .

CONCLUSIONS
database searches with sequences of small secreted proteins from fungi commonly do not yield homologues or known protein domains, the only recognizable features being the presence of a signal peptide for secretion and, in many cases, an even number of cysteine residues. despite these commonalities, effectors appear to be evolutionarily diverse and highly variable in their distribution, showing very limited phylogenetic distributions possibly due to accelerated evolution stimulated by plant-pathogen arms races  <cit> . in a straightforward in silico approach, we generated a first overview of the secretome from poplar leaf rusts belonging to the genus melampsora, unravelling an unknown and diversifying set of genes. the identification of positive selection in putative secreted proteins reported here suggests that these genes are likely to encode candidate effectors implicated in host-pathogen interactions. such information should be used to augment other selection criteria  for prioritizing candidate effector genes for functional studies. two intriguing properties of rust fungi are their host specificity and their need for host alternation. even though host specificity is probably controlled at several levels, examples from the flax rust fungus suggest that the secretion of effectors plays a prominent role  <cit> . their intimate interactions with host factors expose them to very strong selective pressures resulting in their rapid evolutionary turnover. however, poplar leaf rust effectors not only cope with the poplar defense machinery, they also face another phylogenetically diverse host plant, which differs between species, from other dicots to monocots and even gymnosperms. is this particularity responsible for a greater sequence diversification? or is it responsible for a broader arsenal of effectors in poplar leaf rusts? the recent completion of the m. larici-populina genome http://genome.jgi-psf.org/mellp1/mellp <dig> home.html will reveal further information on the whole repertoire of secreted proteins in this pathogen. comparative genomics studies with other biotrophs should elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying common strategies to infect plants. the identification of host targets will provide further insight into the evolutionary forces that shaped the rust secretome, a key step facilitated by the availability of the poplar genome sequence  <cit>  and transcript profiling of poplar-rust interactions  <cit> . this pathosystem clearly represents an unprecedented opportunity to understand the particularities of host-pathogen interactions.

