BACKGROUND
exotic species are a major threat to biodiversity and human welfare, and infestations by invasive species have generally proven difficult and expensive to exterminate  <cit> . the cheapest and most effective control strategy would thus be to prevent invasive species from infesting new localities from the beginning  <cit> . this is only possible, however, if detailed knowledge of the pathways of introduction into new localities is available  <cit> . this type of information is difficult to obtain by direct monitoring, as today most invasive species are introduced unintentionally by human activities: one example is the transport of ballast water, by which ships regularly mix marine species across continents, creating an enormous potential for species invasions  <cit> . furthermore, population sizes of introduced species are typically small and thus unrecognisable on arrival, therefore only becoming obvious after lag phases that can reach up to several decades  <cit> . an increasing number of studies have thus used genetic markers in an attempt to trace back source populations and estimate the number of independent introduction events  <cit> , as in the case of an avocado-infecting thrips species recently introduced to california that is now an agricultural pest  <cit> . genetic marker studies are of great general significance as they can be used to not only unravel phylogeographic relationships between populations, but also to estimate the genetic diversity within populations, which typically reflects the severity of founder effects in each population   <cit> . these genetic effects should be even more pronounced in populations that are a result of sequential introduction events .

invasive species are not limited to specific taxa or habitats and range from terrestrial plants such as the fire tree  to aquatic animals such as the zebra mussel   <cit> . social insects, particularly ants, seem to be especially efficient invaders, with the ants representing  <dig> species of the list of " <dig> of the world's worst invasive alien species"  <cit> . the best known invasive ants are the red imported fire ant solenopsis invicta, the argentine ant linepithema humile and the pharaoh ant monomorium pharaonis  <cit> . however, with the exception of invasive pharaoh ants that inhabit buildings, pest ants have so far remained restricted to climates with warm winters and have not been able to penetrate any cold-temperate regions.

this picture changed in  <dig> when the invasive garden ant lasius neglectus was described in hungary  <cit> . l. neglectus is well adapted to cold winters and is currently spreading quickly throughout europe and asia with  <dig> populations known in  <dig> and  <dig> populations identified to date  <cit> . it has been estimated that the invasive garden ant can survive mean winter temperatures down to -5°c , which indicates that it has not even come close to reaching the limits of its potential distribution: from southern sweden and scotland in the west to china and japan in the east  <cit> . l. neglectus typically occurs in human-disturbed urban habitats such as parks, greenhouses and gardens  <cit>  and has so far not been found in any natural habitat. partly because of this, its native range is not yet known, but the black sea area is the most likely candidate  <cit> .

similar to other invasive ants  <cit> , l. neglectus forms large networks of interconnected and mutually tolerant nests, each of which contains multiple queens  <cit> . this 'supercolonial' population structure differs from the social organisation of native ant species, which typically show high aggression against neighbouring nests  <cit> . supercoloniality is an important factor contributing to the ecological dominance of invasive ants as it allows very high nest densities, which greatly benefits foraging efficiency  <cit> . in addition to this exploitation competition advantage, invasive ants are often highly aggressive towards native ants  <cit> , and this is also true for l. neglectus  <cit> . it is therefore not surprising that the invasive garden ant normally out-competes native ant species and eliminates most other arthropods where it has been introduced  <cit> .

invasive ants have generally lost the typical mating flights that characterise most ants: they mate inside the nest and found new colonies by nest-budding  <cit> . for long distance dispersal, they rely on human mediated transport, which often occurs when soil and plant material is moved from an infested site to another area. newly founded populations that share the same origin are thus expected to be genetically similar and mutually non-aggressive, but genetic markers and aggression are not necessarily tightly correlated with geographic distance because human transport may often result in 'jump dispersal' over long distances  <cit> . supercolonies of invasive ants can therefore span mutually tolerant populations that are geographically separated but all derived from the same introduction. the largest supercolony to date has been described for the argentine ant in southern europe and spans populations as far apart as  <dig> km  <cit> .

the geographic extension of invasive ant supercolonies  is widely used to reconstruct their invasion history  <cit>  and represents an additional source of behavioural information not available in studies of invasive species in general. recognition and aggression behaviour are based on the expression of cuticular hydrocarbon profiles, which represent the recognition cues of social insects  <cit> . in this study, we therefore combine genetic and behavioural analyses with chemical analysis of cuticular hydrocarbon profiles to estimate supercolony expansion of the invasive garden ant. our aim is to evaluate the efficiency of these three different approaches to detect supercolony boundaries and to test whether they give consistent information for reconstructing the invasion history of l. neglectus in europe. we also try to obtain an estimate of how many independent introductions from the native range might have occurred, and how often new populations might have arisen from already existing invasive populations. this type of information is pertinent in the development of efficient biocontrol strategies against the further spread of the invasive garden ant.

RESULTS
size and range of supercolonies
estimates from genetic analysis
as expected for unicolonial ant populations  <cit> , the study populations  were not genetically substructured at the nest level so that the five sampled nests per population represent a random sample of the overall genetic composition of the local supercolony . we therefore used  <dig> individuals per population as independent samples when performing our between-population analyses and did not consider the nest level any further. the overall genetic differentiation among populations  was on average  <dig>  . the six studied microsatellite loci thus carry enough information to differentiate between populations in spite of their moderate polymorphism. this result remains unchanged and significant when omitting any of the six loci. phylogenetic analysis of the microsatellite data revealed two clusters with two and three populations of high genetic similarity . these were, first, two of the three populations within edirne, turkey  and, second, the two populations in hungary  and the population from italy . additional bayesian clustering analysis supported these two clusters and also grouped the populations in france  and belgium . the genetic analysis therefore revealed three genetically different but internally similar clusters of populations, whereas six populations could not be consistently clustered into genetic groups  clusters and populations not assigned to clusters was  <dig> ; pairwise values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> , all significant).

estimates from chemical analysis
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry  analysis of cuticular compounds produced a total of  <dig> different hydrocarbons, of which  <dig> were consistently found in each population, and with the remaining single compound  only present in the population from warsaw, poland . discriminant analysis based on the  <dig> factors extracted from the  <dig> hydrocarbons in a principal component analysis  and using population as a grouping variable, showed that the multiple nests analysed per population always clustered very closely and that populations were distinct . the warsaw population with the additional single hydrocarbon peak 15* was considerably separated from all other populations, so that all nests of this population had a 100% posterior probability to be correctly assigned to this particular population based on their chemical profiles. in the remaining populations, correct assignments were in the range 35–97%, with a total of  <dig> out of  <dig> nests misclassified; see additional file  <dig> for details). to test whether the considerable difference between warsaw and the other populations might have masked differences among the remaining populations, we repeated the analysis without the warsaw population. this lead to very similar posterior probabilities of nests being assigned to their original populations in the range 33–94%, with only a slightly higher proportion of nests  being misclassified.

estimates from analysis of aggression behaviour
aggression never occurred within nests  nor between nests of the same population , confirming our genetic results that populations consisted of single supercolonies. in the between-population tests, aggression was detected in none of the replicates  in 14% of the  <dig> independent pairwise combinations of populations , but always occurred in 19% of the combinations. the remaining 67% showed aggression in some replicates, but not in others. however, the variation between population pairs was significantly higher than the variation between replicates . based on these data, we generated an 'aggression network' , connecting only those populations that were always non-aggressive and thus were inferred to be part of the same supercolony with black solid lines. this revealed one supercolony containing the two genetic clusters belgium-france and hungary-italy, and another smaller one, including the edirne 1+ <dig> cluster. despite this grouping, the boarders of these behavioural supercolonies remained somewhat blurry, as, for example, the populations in budapest and seva and the populations of seva and volterra showed no mutual aggression, yet ants from budapest and volterra did react aggressively when encountering one another. it is therefore not possible to predict the outcome of encounters between two populations based on their behaviour towards a third party. three populations were not part of any behavioural supercolony: one of the spanish populations , the third population collected in edirne, turkey  and the polish population in warsaw. in addition, we created a multidimensional scaling plot  of the populations based on their 'behavioural distances' .

correlations between geographic, genetic, chemical and behavioural distance
partial correlation analysis showed that the geographic and genetic distances between the populations were not significantly associated , as expected under a scenario of jump dispersal. also, the chemical distances between populations were not significantly correlated with geographic  or genetic distances . however, the behavioural distance between populations, that is, the pairwise aggression level, was significantly correlated with geographic , chemical  and genetic distance between populations . as it turned out, aggression was lower when populations were geographically closer, chemically more similar and genetically more related .

age and diversity of populations
the true age was unknown for most populations, so we used 'year of discovery' as the best possible  estimate. as all populations were assumed to have started with a small founder group of a single or very few nests, the present size of a population was also expected to be an indicator of age and both were indeed highly correlated . we determined the chemical variation within populations  and found that the chemical variation was significantly negatively correlated with the discovery date of the populations  and positively correlated with present population size . we found similar results for correlations of the allelic richness for each population based on the microsatellite analysis, with both year of detection  and population size , as well as a high correlation between allelic richness and chemical within-population variation . also, the number of polymorphic loci  was typically low in the youngest populations, discovered after  <dig> . genetic bottlenecks were detected in three populations  when using the software m ratio, but the software bottleneck did not detect any recent decrease in effective population size. investigating the allelic distributions among populations within the same genetic cluster showed that the smaller edirne  <dig> population only contained a fraction of the alleles found in the larger edirne  <dig> population . likewise the alleles present in the smaller populations in debrecen and volterra were subsets of the alleles in the larger budapest population . similarly, the alleles in the small toulouse population were a subset of the larger population in paris . this led us to draw a likely scenario for the history of introductions of the european populations of l. neglectus as shown in figure  <dig> 

discussion
our combinatory approach including genetic, chemical and behavioural data allowed us to evaluate the relative suitability of these different methods, and to  reconstruct the likely introduction history of l. neglectus in europe. first of all, we could not detect any aggression between nests of the same population, or any genetic substructure within populations, confirming that our study populations represented single supercolonies. when performing between-population analyses, the phylogenetic tree of the  <dig> l. neglectus populations revealed two clades supported with high bootstrap values, but otherwise remained relatively unresolved despite high variation in the microsatellite loci. this indicates that most introduced populations of l. neglectus in europe are likely of rather recent date and of fairly similar origin. the bayesian clustering analysis confirmed the two well-supported clades from the microsatellite tree, and detected a third cluster of populations. together, the genetic data therefore indicate that the populations within these three clusters belgium-france, hungary-italy and edirne 1+ <dig> share a recent common introduction history.

the chemical analysis separated the population in warsaw, poland, from all other populations, a split that was not detected by genetic analysis, but that was confirmed by aggression data . all other populations showed high similarities in their chemical profile, consistent with a possible joint origin or with similar environmental conditions. a comparable degree of chemical uniformity was found by errard et al.  <cit>  when analysing introduced populations of the invasive ant wasmannia auropunctata in the new caledonia archipelago.

overall aggression levels between l. neglectus populations were very low in our laboratory experiments, which is consistent with the generally high similarities in the genetic and chemical analyses. remarkably, the observed aggression patterns could be predicted by the genetic and chemical distances between the populations, as well as by their geographic distance. although mantel tests do not directly allow testing of the proportions of variance explained by the different predictor variables, the partial correlation coefficients suggest that genetic distance was the best predictor of aggression, followed by chemical and geographic distances. this is in line with other studies showing that aggression is based on chemical recognition cues encoded in the ants' hydrocarbon profiles  <cit>  and suggests that these hydrocarbon profiles have a significant genetic component  <cit> . however, considerable amounts of variation in aggression remained unexplained by the overall genetic distance at the microsatellite marker loci, suggesting that environmental conditions in the habitat and food also likely affected the cuticular hydrocarbon profiles.

although other invasive ants typically have populations that show a clear affiliation to a specific supercolony  <cit> , no such clear association could be found in l. neglectus. only three populations, bellaterra, edirne  <dig> and warsaw, performed aggression in all replicates towards all other populations . as l. neglectus shows extremely high aggression in inter-specific aggression tests performed under the same laboratory conditions  <cit> , we assume that our data reflect the natural situation and are not a laboratory artefact.

similar to other invasive ants  <cit>  and invasive species in general  <cit> , there was no pattern of 'isolation by distance', that is, a positive correlation between genetic and geographic distances among populations. given the limited dispersal of l. neglectus queens, this suggests that jump dispersal via human mediated transport is very likely. this was also suggested by earlier studies on l. neglectus linking the local appearance of new populations to the introduction of, for example, potted plants  <cit> , and is complementary to our findings on regional and continental expansion patterns in l. neglectus  <cit> . some invasion 'hotspots' could be found in several regions, such as the surroundings of barcelona and within budapest, edirne and warsaw . these likely arise because of frequent human transport of ant-infested potted plants or soil between nearby construction sites within regions. however, no a priori general inferences could be made on the supercolony affiliation of geographically close populations. two of the three populations in edirne, turkey, were extremely similar, whereas the third was different, and the same was true for the two sites studied in the surroundings of barcelona, spain.

it was unexpected that so few populations showed detectable signs of a recent genetic bottleneck, as introduced populations in general show low levels of genetic diversity  <cit> , which is the most powerful method in detecting genetic bottlenecks  <cit> . however, as this method requires data from native populations in equilibrium as a comparison, which are not available for l. neglectus, we chose two software packages that do not require this, but instead rely on polymorphic loci only. the applied methods  were recently evaluated by williamson-natesan  <cit> , who concluded that the m-ratio was most likely to detect bottlenecks when they lasted for several generations, when the population had recovered and when the pre-bottleneck population sizes  were large. the heterozygosity excess method, on the other hand, was better at detecting bottlenecks when they were recent, less severe and when pre-bottleneck population sizes were small. the low number of detected bottlenecks in the present study could be an artefact of our analysis as many of the young populations of the invasive garden ant, however, have few polymorphic loci, which in itself is an independent indication of genetic bottlenecks, but it compromises the detection power of these programs  <cit> . it is therefore likely that the sensitivity of these methods was not sufficient, and that more populations have gone through a recent genetic bottleneck than the three that we could detect. alternatively, we see the same pattern as in the study by clegg et al  <cit>  on silvereye birds colonising islands. they found that a single colonisation event was not followed by severe founder effects, but four to five successive colonisation events were required.

in addition to these well-known and broadly applied methods to detect founder effects based on microsatellite data, we have  tested the suitability of the within-population variation of cuticular hydrocarbons. we found that this chemical variation behaves in a very similar manner to allelic richness and, at least in our study, similarly correlates with both the age and size of populations. our data showed that the younger populations of l. neglectus are characterised by the lowest chemical variation and genetic diversity in terms of allelic richness , the number of polymorphic loci and also the detection of genetic bottlenecks. these data and the considerable similarity between introduced populations make a high number of independent introductions from the native range unlikely. as the founder populations of all extant invasive populations were apparently rather similar, the patterns observed are best explained by assuming that younger populations tend to arise as daughter populations from older introduced populations, consistent with the allelic subset pattern discussed above. this implies that l. neglectus experienced serial genetic bottlenecks, which explains the low genetic diversity of young infestations compared with older invasive populations. the higher genetic diversity in the older populations is unlikely to be a result of accumulation of mutations after population founding, as the differences in age are only a few decades. the total evidence available thus allowed us to tentatively infer the most likely chains of ancestry across the investigated  <dig> populations  as a working hypothesis for further research on the invasion history of l. neglectus in europe. the prevailing pattern is that secondary infestations both have a later discovery date and a smaller population size.

CONCLUSIONS
to the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the first study to simultaneously implement genetic, chemical and behavioural methodology to assess the affiliation of populations of invasive ants to supercolonies, as similar studies mostly rely on aggression behaviour and genetic analyses. we found that the three approaches revealed consistent but also complementary data and that both genetic and chemical variation within populations can be used as a powerful tool for the detection of founder effects. still, microsatellites seem to be a more powerful tool to reconstruct introduction histories, as they moreover reveal the possible direction of spread . the cheapest and easiest of the three methods, behavioural observation of aggression, which can also be performed quickly in the field, was also quite informative, given that we and other studies showed that aggression levels between populations depend on the chemical profiles, which themselves are genetically based  <cit> .

our complementary approach revealed that all extant european populations of the invasive garden ant are probably derived from very few independent introductions out of the hitherto unknown native species range. even if we do not yet know where the native populations of this new pest ant can be found, the development of highly variable microsatellite markers and the genetic 'barcode' of the introduced sites that we have obtained in this study will allow potential candidates for the native population from which introductions into europe have occurred to be tested quickly. our data indicate that most of the younger introductions of l. neglectus have likely arisen from other already established invasive populations. this implies that many more infestations of the invasive garden ant are likely to have taken place already, but have remained undiscovered owing to the usual lag phase for invasive species  <cit> . many of these small and not yet well-established populations will likely have escaped notice because their negative effects on native communities are not currently apparent. however, recent decades have shown that established populations of l. neglectus do expand very fast  <cit>  and are nearly impossible to eliminate  <cit> . we hope that our present study will contribute to the establishment of greater awareness to this pest ant, so that new infestations can be exterminated before they become damaging  <cit> .

