BACKGROUND
infections with staphylococcus epidermidis bacteria pose a serious problem associated with the use of biomaterials in modern medicine  <cit> . these bacteria can form biofilms on the surface of inserted biomaterials and persist in the surrounding tissues, where immune functions are disturbed due to the combined presence of a biomaterial and the bacteria  <cit> . in order to better understand the cause of this phenomenon and to assess the propensity of different bacterial strains and biomaterials to alter and trigger the immune response in the host, a whole animal model with high throughput screening possibilities is desired. this will help identifying which factors determine that innocent bacteria become less susceptible to host defence mechanisms or antibiotic treatments when associated with biomaterials.

mouse and rat models have been used to investigate s. epidermidis infection and biomaterial-associated infection processes. however, histological examination of biopsies is time consuming and does not allow following the infection process over time  <cit> . even with the use of bioluminescence and fluorescence imaging, high challenge doses are required to visualize bacterial colonization and high throughput screening in rodents is not feasible. however, the zebrafish at the embryonal and larval stages is an excellent model for this purpose: it is translucent, fluorescently labelled immune cells and bacteria can be microscopically imaged in real time, and embryos can be obtained in high numbers  <cit> . the responses of many different pathogens such as escherichia coli, mycobacterium marinum, salmonella typhimurium, edwardsiella tarda, burkholderia cenocepacia, and staphylococcus aureus have already been assessed in zebrafish  <cit> . in previous work we successfully performed extensive transcriptome analyses with m. marinum, s. typhimurium, and e. tarda intravenous infection models using custom made agilent micro-arrays and deep sequencing  <cit> . the conventional infection method for zebrafish embryos is injection of pathogens into the caudal vein. however, this method is labour intensive and low throughput. for that reason we have recently developed and validated a high throughput yolk infection model using m. marinum with an automated microinjection system  <cit> . however, in this high throughput model no transcriptome analysis has been performed until now.

in the present study we have developed a high throughput system for quantitating infection with s. epidermidis using the automated microinjection system together with complex object parametric analysis and sorting  technology. this quantitative high throughput technology has been used to study the transcriptome responses during non-lethal infection progression of s. epidermidis over time using micro-arrays and rna deep sequencing. in order to understand which responses can be linked to defence mechanisms of the zebrafish towards fish pathogens, we have compared the host responses to s. epidermidis and to m. marinum at a time point when the initial yolk infection has further spread into the embryo’s tissues. the obtained results allowed us to identify a number of genes as markers common for both infection models but also genes that can be used as markers to discriminate between pathogen specific responses.

RESULTS
pathogenesis of s. epidermidis and s. aureus in zebrafish embryos
we first set out to compare s. epidermidis infected zebrafish embryos with embryos infected with s. aureus. for this purpose we injected s. epidermidis o- <dig> and s. aureus rn <dig> strains containing gfp or mcherry plasmids under the same conditions into the yolk of embryos at 2 hours post fertilization . injections with 5 cfu of s. aureus already showed a high intensity of fluorescent bacteria inside the yolk at the first day after injection. at the second day after injection all embryos had died from infection with bacteria spread inside the entire body of the embryos . injection directly into the caudal vein at  <dig> hpf with approximately 2500 cfu resulted in 100% mortality within several hours . this high early mortality due to s. aureus is in accordance with earlier reports  <cit> . we subsequently tested s. epidermidis o- <dig> in yolk injections at doses of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> or 100 cfu. at 1 day post injection  several small spots of fluorescent bacteria were observed inside the yolk with all cfu doses , which were absent in mock-injected controls. from  <dig> dpi onwards, bacteria, indicated by their fluorescence signal, were visible inside the yolk in a dose-depended fashion. the fluorescence signal became detectable inside the body of the embryos starting at  <dig> dpi . from this day onwards the bacteria were persisting in the vascular system and within various tissues. confocal laser scanning microscopy was used to obtain a detailed image of bacteria spreading into the different tissues at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dpi, the time points at which spreading of bacteria was observed . at  <dig> dpi bacteria were found intracellularly and extracellularly in the hematopoietic region , and free existing bacteria were observed in the blood were taken up by mpeg1:kaede positive cells . free staphylococci in the blood have also been observed after intravascular catheter-related infections  <cit> . at  <dig> dpi much more extracellular bacteria in the intersegmental vessels were seen . no differences were found between the patterns observed at  <dig> and  <dig> dpi . although there was strong increase of the bacterial burden in tissues and blood at  <dig> and  <dig> dpi , in most cases embryos survived the 5 days infection period similar as the mock-injected controls. cfu counts of homogenized pooled embryos revealed that s. epidermidis proliferated exponentially inside the embryos during the 5 days of infection . comparing the yolk injection method with the traditional caudal vein injection method showed that embryos injected with as much as  <dig> and 10000 cfu of s. epidermidis into the caudal vein at  <dig> hpf did not develop any signs of infection. fluorescence microscopy showed that all injected bacteria were cleared within several hours after injection . in view of this, we conclude that the yolk infection system is therefore uniquely suitable to follow the proliferation of s. epidermidis and its effects on the host for at least  <dig> dpi. at the moment we can only speculate why the bacterial that were injected in the yolk had such better survival rates than bacteria injected in the caudal vein at later stages. three possible explanations  are that  there were repeated cycles of invasion from the yolk,  the bacteria in the yolk are primed to an infectious growth strategy for instance by using alternate sigma factors  <cit> , or  the host immune system has been altered due to the prolonged exposure to high numbers of bacteria and possible associated anti-inflammatory compounds inside the embryos.

high throughput infection quantification
the copas xl  is a large cell flow cytometer designed for fluorescence screening of zebrafish embryos, drosophila larvae and beads ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> microns in diameter  <cit> . samples are analysed for size, optical density and three fluorescence signals. groups of up to  <dig> embryos can simultaneously be analysed and sorted into multi well plates or petri dishes within 15 minutes . the profiler software package ii detects and analyses up to  <dig> data points per object for the extinction and fluorescence channels, and can be used to visualize every sample or to set sorting parameters. the profiler shows the outline of a sample together with all fluorescence intensity traces, for each of the embryos in a sample. this is exemplified by a typical experiment of s. epidermidis infection of zebrafish embryos measured at  <dig> dpi .

copas analysis was performed every day from  <dig> dpi until  <dig> dpi. the daily analysis did not cause noticeable damage to the embryos. we observed an increase in the fluorescence signal during the 5 days of infection with s. epidermidis . cfu count results showed good correlation with the increase of fluorescence signal in pools of embryos infected with mcherry-labelled  or gfp-labelled  bacteria. however, in the green channel some background signal produced by the embryonic yolk was detected, leading to less accurate quantification . since the red fluorescence channel did not show any background signal, the results with mcherry-labelled bacteria were quantitatively more reliable, showing a correlation with the cfu counts . we did not find any influence of the orientation of the embryos in the flow chamber since we did not detect differences in embryos passing the laser dorsally or ventrally, or with the anterior or posterior side first. therefore, our results show that combining the copas analysis with the automated microinjection system provides a screening system of which the infection levels are statistically reliable.

specific marker genes for s. epidermidis infection
to characterize the transcriptome response of zebrafish embryos following s. epidermidis yolk injection, we performed a time resolved infection experiment using the high throughput set up . considering that all bacterial injections were carried out with polyvinylpyrrolidone  as carrier, pvp-injected embryos were taken along to control for possible effects of the carrier. furthermore, needle puncture treated and non-injected embryo groups were included as additional control groups. injections were performed with groups of at least  <dig> embryos of the same parents of which sets of  <dig> embryos were sampled during  <dig> time points . in order to check for reproducibility of this experiment an independent experiment was performed with the same parents at  <dig> dpi. rna from these samples was used for micro-array analysis using custom made agilent 4x180k micro-arrays.

principal component analysis showed a clear signature progression in time of all samples . results of statistical analyses are presented in the venn diagrams of figure  <dig>  comparing each time point with multiple control samples clearly shows that there is a false negative effect in the controls that can be corrected for by using the overlap of the ratios of the different controls. this led to a filtered dataset as used for figure  <dig> as discussed below. however, we want to emphasize that the injection of pvp has a reproducible effect by itself . this could be of relevance, especially considering the effect of biomaterials on infection capacity of s. epidermidis in patients that make it worthwhile to further analyse the effect of pvp on infection in future experiments.

we have analysed the effect of s. epidermidis infection over time on gene expression using unigene clusters and ensembl codes as specified in the raw data table of additional file  <dig>  annotation of these probes by gene ontology  shows that the most noticeable result is that s. epidermidis does induce many immune-related genes starting from  <dig> dpi, observing a maximum induction of their expression at  <dig> dpi. filtering the results  we found an effect on the expression levels of many genes in the earliest measured time point  after exposure to injected bacteria. this effect is diminished to only a few genes whose expression is affected at the time point of  <dig> dpi, most of which cannot be assigned to a go category . at  <dig> hpi, go analysis indicated very broad classes of gene functions whose expression are affected by infection but did not reveal an obvious link to the immune response since the broad go category “immune response” was not represented. at this stage the known innate immune responses to bacterial infection are not yet apparent. for instance neutrophils and macrophages have not yet developed and nothing is known about the function of pattern recognition receptors before this stage. we are currently studying the function of the expressed toll-like receptors during early stages of embryogenesis  <cit> . we have manually annotated various functional categories of genes, of which the transcription levels were strongly affected by infection during time as shown in figure  <dig> in a schematic representation and in additional file  <dig> in a quantitative manner. many of the immune genes indicated in figure  <dig> have been previously linked to expression in cells of the myeloid lineage in zebrafish  <cit> . the immune transcriptome response correlates with the infection progression as described above. the first 3 days, the bacteria accumulate inside the embryonic yolk. this apparently does not lead to significantly induction or repression of many immune-related genes. from  <dig> dpi onwards many immune-related genes were significantly induced with a peak at  <dig> dpi . at  <dig> dpi there were slightly less immune-related genes significantly expressed than at  <dig> dpi. expression levels of the  <dig> selected genes shown in figure  <dig> at  <dig> dpi were also lower compared with  <dig> dpi . since the analysed larvae were from the same injected batch it seems that higher microbial burden is not strictly correlated with a stronger immune response.

validation of this micro-array experiment was performed by deep sequencing analysis of rna samples derived of  <dig> batches of approximately  <dig> embryos at the 5 day time point of infection and  <dig> non-infected batches of embryos. the data confirms the micro-array data as exemplified for some of the most reliable probes . furthermore we have compared the normalized reads per kilobase per million mapped reads   <cit>  for the genes shown in figure  <dig>  these comparisons show that only in a few cases there are discrepancies between the results of the two technologies. since the rna deep sequencing results are obtained with a pool of larger number of biological samples, this could indicate that in these cases the micro-arrays result are less trustworthy. however, it was noted that in cases of discrepancy there were extremely low levels of expression resulting in a very limited number of mapped reads, showing that even with a sequencing depth of at least  <dig> million reads per sample there is still a limitation of sensitivity of rna sequencing. this is of note because in most publications currently a sequence depth of  <dig> million reads is standard for rna deep sequencing  <cit> . in several cases, such as il <dig>  there was no ensembl annotation of the gene that could be used for rpkm analysis. we have manually quantified the number of reads mapping to il <dig> to show that there is also induction after infection as in the case of the micro-array analysis . rna deep sequencing provides a much more detailed insight in gene regulation for instance showing also expression levels for every exon of the genes as shown for the representative genes mmp <dig> and il <dig> . with the expected progress in development of high throughput bioinformatic pipelines for data visualisation of rna sequencing data sets, we and others will be able in the near future to further harvest information from our submitted expression datasets as to the effects of infection on differential splicing, transcription start sites or polyadenylation sites in the entire transcriptome.

shown are  <dig> representative immune-related genes that were significantly expressed in the micro-array and rna deep sequencing experiment.

comparison of transcriptome responses to s. epidermidis and m. marinum
in order to compare the transcriptional response observed in zebrafish embryos infected with s. epidermidis with the response triggered by a pathogenic bacterium, we also performed an injection experiment with m. marinum using the same experimental protocol and sampling at  <dig> dpi. this time point was chosen in order to make it comparable to previous studies in which the caudal vein was used as the injection site  <cit> . we performed micro-array analysis, confirming the biological relevance of the yolk injection system since many markers that were previously identified to be differentially expressed in the caudal vein injection system  <cit>  appeared regulated in a similar manner in the high throughput yolk infection system . we observed a stronger transcriptional response of immune related genes than what we observed with caudal vein administration, which can be explained by the fact that bacteria accumulated more strongly after five days compared to the caudal vein injection method and have been present one more day inside the embryos.

a number of the immune markers identified to be differentially expressed after infection with s. epidermidis appeared regulated in the same way after m. marinum yolk infection. these include the matrix metalloproteinases, complement factors, cytokines and heat shock proteins that were previously also identified in m. marinum infection in the caudal vein  <cit> . there are also distinct differences in genes responding to infection by these two different bacteria. most obvious is a stronger transcriptional response of a number of relevant genes to m. marinum than to s. epidermidis infection. interestingly, there is also a category of genes that are highly regulated by s. epidermis but not significantly by m. marinum in the yolk infection model. these genes include various immune related genes such as il <dig>  il12a, tnfb, lect2l, and transcription factor atf <dig>  junba, junbb, irf <dig>  irf1b and cebpb. however, in pilot micro-array studies where higher numbers of mycobacteria were injected, some of the markers were also induced or repressed with the exception of il12a and cebpb . for m. marinum infection we observe some difference of gene regulation after yolk infection as compared to caudal vein injection. for instance, atf <dig> is upregulated in the latter system . one of the examples of genes induced specifically by s. epidermidis in the yolk infection system has high similarity to the mammalian microfibril-associated glycoprotein 4-like isoform  <dig> gene  in ensembl) which has been identified previously by schlosser et al.  <cit>  to bind to human surfactant protein a . interestingly sp-a is a good marker for clearance of s. aureus since it is involved in binding to the staphylococcal adhesion extracellular adherence protein as well to the macrophage receptors sp-a receptor  <dig> and scavenger receptor class a, enhancing phagocytosis  <cit> . there are over  <dig> homologs of this gene clustered in a region on chromosome  <dig> that are extremely similar but not all inducible by s. epidermidis infection. therefore we aim to further investigate specificity of induction of these genes by microbial infection in follow up studies.

we also performed a rna sequencing experiment of the m. marinum infection system at  <dig> dpi for verification of the micro-array data. these data show that all exons of mfap <dig> , atf <dig> and lect2l tested are significantly expressed at  <dig> dpi by s. epidermidis, whereas after m. marinum infection there is no significant expression of these exons. with mmp <dig> as a positive control, the expression of all exons is significantly expressed after m. marinum infection .the expression levels for mfap <dig>  are based on manual annotation of the unique reads in the known gene region since there are several repetitive dna regions in common with the other  <dig> annotated mfap <dig> gene family members . here we clearly benefit from the power of rna sequencing that can overcome the problems of microarray probe annotation for complex gene families. therefore using our unbiased approach we were able to confirm known immune genes as markers for staphylococci infection but also identify novel markers as good candidates for specific response markers of s. epidermidis in our infection model that we will study further in functional analysis in the near future.

CONCLUSIONS
microscopic imaging showed that s. epidermidis when injected into the yolk or caudal vein proved to be far less virulent than s. aureus. under the same conditions of yolk injection s. aureus immediately invades the body of embryo causing 100% mortality within  <dig> dpi. in contrast, during the five day time period analysed, s. epidermidis proliferates efficiently in the entire body of the infected embryos providing an excellent system for analysis of factors that influence bacterial proliferation and virulence. based on this advantage, we have developed a versatile high throughput analysis system for bacterial proliferation that is much less time consuming than cfu count determinations, and which allows repeated measurements of the same embryos over time. copas analysis proved to be accurate to determine the bacterial burden inside embryos at high throughput. with addition of sorting zebrafish embryos into multi well plates, for automated confocal laser scanning microscopy, a medium throughput, high resolution screenings system can be added. we therefore have extended the high-throughput infection methods developed by carvalho et al.  <cit>  to a quantitative level and showed the applicability for the analysis of proliferation of opportunistic pathogens such as s. epidermidis.

our over time transcriptome analysis results correlate very well with the infection pattern of s. epidermidis. the bacteria will grow for the first  <dig> to 3 days inside the yolk of the embryos, while from  <dig> and  <dig> dpi s. epidermidis invade the body of the embryo, at which stage a strong response of many immune related genes occurs. we have compared transcriptome response in the same system using m. marinum. these comparisons show that m. marinum has a far stronger effect on host gene regulation than s. epidermidis. however, some genes were identified that specifically responded to s. epidermidis and not to m. marinum infection including a cell adhesion gene  that can be linked to specific infection by staphylococci in mammals. vuong et al.  <cit>  and otto et al.  <cit>  already reported that s. epidermidis itself does not seem to have particular specific virulence factors. all known putative virulence factors have origins in the commensal lifestyle of this species. however, the large difference between the outcome of injection of bacteria into the yolk or caudal vein could have been caused by an effect of prolonged growth of the bacteria in the host organism resulting in a higher virulence when the bacteria are release in other tissues. in our future research we aim to use our identified host marker genes to identify new bacterial traits involved in proliferation in host tissues and the factors that determine their expression during time with emphasis on the time points when bacteria get in contact with immune cells.. we are particularly interested in the effect of biomaterials on possible virulence factors that make virulence deviate from the commensal life style. this can help to understand which host mechanisms and genes are involved during biomaterial-associated infections.

