BACKGROUND
the transcriptional regulatory network  defines the cellular response to environmental stimuli at the step of transcription initiation. it may be analyzed at four different levels of increasing complexity: individual regulatory interactions, network motifs, functional modules, and the entire network that may be represented as a directed graph  <cit> . several studies in the past years have begun to unravel the structure, dynamical properties, and evolution of the network at these four levels of organization  <cit>  using mainly as a starting point the information of the regulatory networks of e. coli and s. cerevisiae.

studies that focus on the evolution of the regulatory network, even within a group of closely related organisms are limited by the rather scarce knowledge on regulatory interactions outside a few model organisms. among prokaryotes, e. coli k <dig>  <cit>  and b. subtilis  <cit>  have the best known and better annotated networks. several approaches have been developed to overcome the lack of comparative information on regulatory interactions that is necessary in works aimed at studying the evolution of regulatory networks. most of these approaches combine the use of sequence profiles of the sites recognized by a given transcription factor  in a model organism  with orthology information between the genes of closely related organisms  to identify putative orthologous regulatory interactions in organisms other than the model  <cit> .

the problem is more challenging when one intends to extrapolate the information of known trns to phylogenetically distant organisms. two recent studies  <cit>  took the trns of e. coli and b. subtilis and assessed the conservation of their transcription factors  and regulated genes across a broad array of sequenced genomes. both works showed that the set of regulatory genes – even global transcription factors – clearly varies from one group of organisms to another. on the other hand, several studies have shown that, within a group of closely related organisms, the conservation of a tf and a subset of the structural genes it regulates are not sufficient to assume that regulatory links between them are conserved between such two organisms  <cit> .

therefore, the question whether the interchange of regulatory links between tfs and structural genes could be a significant mechanism to "rewire" the regulatory network between closely related organisms remains open. this rewiring has been compared to changing the "software" of the transcriptional regulation machinery  <cit> , as opposed to changing the "hardware". the latter would mean changing the set of tfs or regulated genes – a process observed by babu et al.  <cit>  and lozada-chavez et al.  <cit>  – between phylogenetically distant organisms.

in this paper we use the information stored in tractor_db to compute a normalized site orthology score  that quantifies the conservation of a regulatory interaction across thirty genomes currently included in the database. we then use this sos to assess the evolution of individual regulatory interactions and to find out whether the rearrangement of these connections affects the conservation of network motifs. we found that, within the evolutionary scale of the members of the gamma-proteobacteria subclass, the regulatory links that form feed forward motifs are more correlatedly conserved than triads of random regulatory interactions or pairs of co-regulated genes.

moreover, we used the information stored in tractor_db together with the information on the organization of gamma-proteobacterial genomes in transcription units   <cit>  to assess whether there is a correlation between the conservation of a regulatory site and the structure of the tu whose expression it controls. we found, in agreement with a previous result obtained for seven organisms  <cit> , that regulatory sites with higher sos are more likely to occur upstream tus with more conserved structures, suggesting that a correlation between the conservation of a regulatory site and the conservation of the structure of the tu it regulates does exist at this evolutionary scale. with these results and those obtained by belda et al.  <cit>  regarding genome rearrangements in the gamma-proteobacteria, we state the hypothesis that genome rearrangement events, such as inversion and horizontal gene transfer events, that have occurred during the evolution of this group may have produced tu rearrangements that caused the rewiring that is observed within the network. these changes in the regulation of individual structural genes would be fixed depending on the lifestyle of each organism  <cit> . therefore, while gene duplication and deletion events may be responsible for changing the trn "hardware" over large evolutionary scales, operon rearrangements may play a major role in reprogramming at the "software" level within groups of closely related organisms.

RESULTS
as previously stated, given the scarcity of experimentally verified regulatory sites in gamma-proteobacterial genomes, our study is based entirely on computational predictions obtained from tractor_db. in order to validate the robustness of these predictions we a) calculated the sensitivity and specificity of the computational approaches taken to produce them; b) compared the e. coli experimentally verified trn, and the e. coli and s. typhimurium reconstructed trns with data from gene expression experiments; c) assessed the circularity of the populations of predicted sites, and; d) tested the possibility of a correlation between the sos of e. coli regulatory sites and the scores of their orthologs.  the starting dataset comprises all putative regulatory interactions found within the genomes of the thirty gamma-proteobacteria included in the database. table  <dig> presents a summary of this data, namely the number of putative regulatory interactions annotated in tractor_db, as well as the number of regulons and tus for which regulatory information is available, for each organism. each interaction connects a tf to a structural gene; therefore, a regulatory site  identified upstream a tu defines regulatory links that connect the tf that binds to the site with each gene of the tu . the number of regulatory interactions identified in the networks of each organism ranges from  <dig>  in e. coli k <dig> to  <dig> in x. axonopodis and m. capsulatus. table  <dig> also presents the accession numbers to the genomic sequences of all organisms included in this study, as well as abbreviated names for each organism that are used elsewhere in the paper .

variability of the gene content of orthologous regulons
previous studies done in different groups of gamma-proteobacteria have shown that the gene content of a few individual regulons  changes from one organism to another  <cit> . this phenomenon does not depend on the substitution of the set of tfs and structural genes that takes place between more distant organisms, as observed by babu et al.  <cit>  and lozada-chavez et al.  <cit> . nevertheless, both processes have been explained in terms of the diverse regulatory needs that have arisen in different organisms as they adapt to different lifestyles, which are defined by babu et al.  <cit>  as a combination of four properties: oxygen requirement, optimal growth temperature, environmental conditions, and whether the organism is pathogenic or not.

to determine whether this variation in gene content is a general property of the regulatory network, we classified all orthologous regulatory interactions in our starting dataset  into four groups depending on their conservation with respect to e. coli regulatory interactions . for that, interactions were labeled as conserved, lost gene, other regulon or lost link under the assumption that that the e. coli tf has an ortholog in the organism under analysis and all, except lost gene, are referred to orthologs of the e. coli gene. therefore an e. coli regulatory interaction  for which both an orthologous tf and an orthologous gene exist in another organism may be conserved ; alternatively it may have changed to other regulon , or it may be lost . this classification scheme, although based on e. coli , intends to illustrate a process of disappearance of interactions and appearance of new regulatory links occurred within the evolutionary divergence of the different gamma-proteobacteria from their last common ancestor. see additional file  <dig> for further discussion and illustration.

the fraction of orthologous interactions labeled as other regulon or lost link in other organisms ranges from approximately 18%  to 55% . figure  <dig> presents the distribution of orthologous interactions in the four previously described categories for  <dig> organisms , sorted by increasing fraction of genes with orthologs in e. coli. regulatory interactions classified as other regulon indicate that a process of disappearance of interactions and appearance of new regulatory links – that may be described as a rewiring of the network – takes place at the most basic level of the network: the individual regulatory connections. a number of lost links may in fact be false negatives of the computational strategies that we used to rebuild the regulatory networks of the  <dig> organisms included in tractor_db.  however, given the results of the calculation of the rates of false negatives in the e. coli genome in the starting dataset  we are confident that many interactions classified as lost links indeed correspond to changes of transcriptional regulation between orthologous genes.

the sos  of e. coli regulatory connections is another way to look at their conservation  across the gamma-proteobacteria included in tractor_db. additional file  <dig> presents significant values  of the distribution of sos values obtained for the  <dig> regulons included in tractor_db. considering the network as a whole, the five regulons that present the highest mean sos values  are pdhr , mara , glcc , trer , and xylr . the distribution of sos values in the entire network has a mean of  <dig>  and a standard deviation of  <dig> .

we also analyzed the distribution of the sos values of regulatory links within the network by computing what fraction of regulatory interactions have sos equal to or greater than an increasing cutoff value. this means sampling the regulatory interactions with sos higher than a given increasing value. as figure  <dig> shows  the fraction of regulatory interactions sampled decreases rapidly with the increase of the value of sos used as cutoff for sampling. for instance, for the fnr regulon, the fraction drops to  <dig> at sos  <dig> , which means that no fnr outgoing interactions have associated sos values higher than  <dig> . in the entire e. coli network, only  <dig> regulatory interactions have sos associated values higher than  <dig> .

evolution of small network circuits
one question that arises concerning this rewiring of the network is whether local medium-level structures are affected by the appearance and disappearance of regulatory interactions. regulatory interactions in the trn form recurrent circuits that involve one, three or four nodes, and which are often referred to as network motifs  <cit> . network motifs are known to be involved in local dynamic properties of the network,  <cit>  and therefore, it would be interesting to determine whether e. coli motifs are conserved in other organisms to a higher extent than expected from the observed pattern of shifting of individual interactions.

to address this question, we extracted all the auto-regulatory loops  motifs in the e. coli trn reconstructed in tractor_db. for both types of motifs we used a metrics that is more elaborated than simply counting the number of conserved motifs in other organisms. we relied on the sos of individual interactions to evaluate the conservation of motifs, because the sos takes different values depending on which organisms bear orthologs to an e. coli regulatory site.

in the case of als, we calculated the mean of the associated sos values of the interactions between the tf and its coding gene, and compared it with the average mean that resulted from randomly taking  <dig>  samples composed of the same number of interactions than the set of als. as shown in table  <dig>  the mean sos associated with regulatory interactions involved in als is  <dig> , whereas the mean sos of all regulatory interactions in the network is  <dig> . we found that regulatory interactions that form als are on average better conserved than groups of interactions of the same size sampled randomly from the network . this result implies that natural selection acts at the level of motifs favoring the preservation of regulatory interactions that form auto-regulatory circuits – through which tfs control the transcription of their own genes – in this group of organisms.

with regard to ff motifs, we assessed whether the regulatory interactions that form them are correlatedly conserved . again, since the sos of a given e. coli interaction depends on which organisms have orthologous interactions, it may be seen as a phylogenetic profile measurement that takes similar values for two interactions when they are conserved in similar sets of organisms. therefore, a positive correlation between the sos values of two interactions implies that they appear in a similar set of organisms and are absent in a similar set. table  <dig> shows that these three correlations are positive, and range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . these results mean that the profile of the conservation of two regulatory interactions that make part of an e. coli ff motif – across the genomes of the other  <dig> organisms in the dataset – tend to be more similar than the patterns of conservation of any two interactions sampled randomly from the network, which implies that the structure of e. coli ff motifs tends to be altogether conserved or lost in the same arrays of organisms, as defined by similar sos. in other words, the regulatory links that form feed forward motifs  <cit>  are conserved in a better correlated manner than triads of random regulatory interactions.

in order to compare the correlation of the sos of interactions involved in ffs to other non-random structures within the network, we calculated the correlation coefficient of the sos of  <dig> pairs of e. coli co-regulated genes. table  <dig> shows that, although statistically significant , the pairs of co-regulated genes as a rule, tend to be less correlatedly conserved than pairs of interactions involved in ff motifs.

conservation of the connectivity distribution
the connectivity distribution  in the transcriptional regulatory network may be approximated by a power law function with negative exponent  <cit> . we constructed the connectivity distribution for each organism with more than  <dig> regulatory interactions in the dataset to determine how the rewiring process that takes place at the most basic level of the network affects its global properties.

this result  suggests that despite the rewiring process that takes place at the most basic level of the network, the global properties of the graph, such as the connectivity distribution, remain unaffected within this group of organisms.

the conservation of a regulatory site and the conservation of the regulated tu
changes in gene regulation, that we detect as regulatory links that fall within the categories other regulon and lost link  may have occurred by two main different events: either the gene was "relocated" to a different tu in one of the organisms resulting from a speciation event, or the orthologous regulatory regions diverged to an extent that they no longer bear sites recognized by the orthologous tfs . in an attempt to assess the relative contribution of these two processes to changes in gene regulation, we computed the fraction of tus in each organism whose structure is identical  to their orthologous tus in e. coli and bear genes with regulatory links either unknown  or that have switched to a different regulator . we found that a fraction of the genes in these two categories ranging from 46%  to 77%  appear in tus that are identical to their e. coli orthologs and therefore the change in regulation in their cases could only be explained by divergence of the orthologous regulatory regions.

this result suggests that tu rearrangements have caused the regulatory shift of a number of those genes whose regulation has changed with respect to their e. coli orthologs . to test this hypothesis, we searched for any discernible relationship between the degree to which a regulatory site is conserved across the genomes of the organisms included in tractor_db, and the conservation of the structure of the regulated tus. to assess this relationship, we classified the structure of each tu in one of four categories, according to its similarity to the structure of its e. coli orthologous tu. sorted in order of decreasing conservation, the categories are identical, similar, destroyed, and lost . tus were also classified in four groups according to the sos of the regulatory sites upstream them . the four groups were formed by the tus with regulatory sites with sos between  <dig> and  <dig> , between  <dig>  and  <dig> , between  <dig>  and  <dig> , and between  <dig>  and  <dig>  we chose these extreme values for the intervals instead of evenly dividing the data in quarters, because the last quarter interval  would be highly under-represented due to the relative scarcity of interactions with sos values higher than  <dig>   <cit> .

then,  <dig> groups of tus were formed by merging both classification systems. the tus in each of the four intervals of sos of their regulatory sites were divided into two classes: those with identical or similar structure , and those with destroyed or lost structure . figure 5a shows the distribution of the tus into these  <dig> groups. the bias in the distribution of tus between the i+s and d+l groups is also illustrated in figure 5b, for increasing values of sos of their regulatory sites.

we calculated an i+s/d+l ratio for each sos interval, and assessed the statistical significance of the observed ratios with respect to random associations between tus and regulatory sites. the results  show that there is a statistically significant relationship between the conservation of a site and the conservation of the structure of the tu that it regulates, across the organisms of this group. for instance, regulatory sites with sos between  <dig> and  <dig>  have a probability of only  <dig>  of occurring upstream tus with structures that are either identical or similar to their orthologous tu in e. coli. on the other hand, sites with sos between  <dig>  and  <dig> are located upstream identical or similar tus with a probability of  <dig> . these results are very similar to those obtained by a previous study that used a simpler equation and less data to calculate the sos  <cit> . furthermore, the assessment of the statistical significance – introduced here – reveals that the biases to more or less conserved tus observed for each group of sites are highly significant, as shown by the p-values of the ratios, which range from  <dig> *10- <dig> to  <dig> *10- <dig> 

we also looked at the conservation of regulatory sites in connection to the conservation of gene order between genomes. we counted the number of e. coli sites that are conserved in each of the other genomes and separated them into two groups: conserved sites occurring inside conserved syntenic groups of genes and conserved sites occurring outside conserved syntenic groups. to assess whether a bias exists for conserved sites to preferentially appear in one of these two locations and whether this trend correlates in any way with the degree of conservation of regulatory sites across the  <dig> genomes, we counted sites with sos equal to or higher than an increasing cutoff value  and calculated a ratio of the two aforementioned groups of sites for each sos used as cutoff for sampling. figure  <dig> shows the values taken by this ratio for sites sampled with increasing sos cutoff values for pairs of genomes formed by e. coli and either sty, sfle, sfl <dig> and ypes; stm has been excluded from the graph for clarity, since its behavior is almost identical to the one observed in sty; similar trends to the ones shown are observed in all other organisms, but are less clear due to lower number of conserved sites). the graph shows that the number of conserved sites within conserved syntenic groups between e. coli and each genome tends to decrease slower than the number of conserved sites outside conserved syntenic regions as higher sos values are used for sampling the sites. therefore, regions of conserved synteny between genomes are enriched of sites that are more conserved across genomes. additional file  <dig> exemplifies this behavior through the comparison of orthologous genes between eco and stm, and eco and ypes. each pair of orthologous genes is represented as a filled circle , or as an open circle otherwise. the same trend is observed in other organisms.

discussion
to our knowledge, two studies have extrapolated the information on the e. coli trn to other organisms to investigate the evolution of prokaryotic trns as a whole  <cit> . both studies assessed the conservation of e. coli  tfs and regulated genes across more than  <dig> genomes, showing that tfs are flexibly substituted in the course of evolution. babu et al.  <cit>  found that even network motifs, and the set of global regulators, may change dramatically from one group of organisms to another.  then, they proposed the idea that the free-scale architecture of the trn evolved in a convergent manner within each group of organisms. on the other hand, several studies that focused on isolated regulons had hinted that within a group of closely related organisms the change of regulatory interactions within the trn may be at least as important as the substitution of regulatory proteins. in this process , the links between a tf and some of the genes it regulates in the genome of one species are lost in a second  and replaced by regulatory inputs from other tfs. these new tfs need not to be unique of the second species  <cit> .

in this study, we aimed at characterizing this process of rewiring the regulatory connections within the trn that had been noticed for a few isolated regulons. we used the data on putative regulatory sites in  <dig> gamma-proteobacterial genomes that we had produced using two complementary computational strategies and annotated in tractor_db. we intended to investigate not only the genes that belonged to a given e. coli regulon and which had apparently left that regulon in another organism but if possible, we wanted to identify the tf that appear to regulate the orthologous genes in that second species. furthermore, we intended to assess the influence of this change in regulatory connections on structures of higher complexity within the network, i.e., network motifs and the free scale architecture.

moreover, we wanted to evaluate how this process of rearranging regulatory interactions is reflected on the physical structure of the bacterial chromosome. since the tu is the basic structure responsible for the spatial proximity of all the sequences necessary to accomplish the correct control of the transcription of a group of genes, we decided to search for changes in the structure of orthologous tus that might correlate with changes on regulatory input interactions of the genes that form them.

robustness of the data stored in tractor_db
the scarcity of experimental data on regulatory interactions has been a limitation for comparative analyses that aim at understanding the evolution of trns. manually curated experimental data are available for very few model organisms. among the prokaryotes e. coli k <dig>  <cit>  and b. subtilis  <cit>  have the best known and better annotated networks. to assess the evolution of diverse gamma-proteobacterial regulons, several studies over the past decade have employed computationally predicted regulatory sites. nevertheless, the use of computationally produced data must always be carefully considered when used as the starting point of biological analyses.

in the case of our study, for example, regulatory sites labeled as lost link and other regulon may indeed be artefacts of the computational approaches taken to predict orthologous regulatory sites. the fact that such methodologies fail to recognize an ortholog of an e. coli regulatory site in another organism  may be caused by genetic drift . also, since the recognition of regulatory sites by tfs is aided by protein-protein interactions, the absence of a sequence strong enough to be identified by a weight matrix does not guarantee that the tf will fail to bind to the regulatory region.

to evaluate the robustness of the data stored in tractor_db we compared the results obtained by the methodology of statistical models  used to predict putative regulatory sites in e. coli with experimentally known regulatory sites in this organism, obtained from regulondb  <cit> . relatively high values of sensitivity and specificity – calculated using the definitions by benitez-bellon et al.  <cit>  – were achieved by this methodology.

to assess the validity of our computational predictions in other organisms , we compared the e. coli experimentally verified trn , and the e. coli and s. typhimurium reconstructed trns with data from gene expression experiments. we compared the expression profiles of co-regulated  e. coli and s. typhimurium gene pairs. we found that the strong trend of co-expression observed for experimentally verified co-regulated e. coli gene pairs may also be recognized for e. coli and s. typhimurium computationally predicted co-regulated gene pairs . as more high quality gene expression data is incorporated into microarray databases, this validation might be extended to other organisms.) these results strongly support the validity of computationally reconstructed trns stored in tractor_db.

the identification of putative regulatory sites applying a comparative genomics approach based on regulatory information extracted from e. coli could in principle reproduce these starting data and create the false impression that gamma-proteobacterial trns are very similar. we have used the term circularity to denote this behavior of computationally predicted regulatory binding sites. we have previously tested the data stored in tractor_db for this bias  <cit> , and found that orthologous regulons in tractor_db differ in gene content between organisms, while they share a common set of genes . erill et al.  <cit>  have characterized this behavior for lexa.

different tfs present different binding affinity distributions  <cit> , which might create another possible bias in our data. these differences might reflect on differences in the information content of statistical models built to identify putative regulatory sites. weaker models would identify larger number of false positive sites within orthologous regulatory regions, resulting in falsely high sos values. we tested the hypothesis of a correlation between the sos of e. coli regulatory sites and the scores of their orthologs  that may have arisen as the result of the aforesaid problem. the results in additional file  <dig> show that there is no distinguishable trend that relates high sos values with low sites' scores as would be expected if weak statistical models would have biased sos values by increasing the number of false positive orthologous regulatory sites.

rearrangements of regulatory links are a source of flexibility for the trn
babu et al.  <cit>  and lozada-chavez et al.  <cit> found that the replacement of subsets of e. coli and b subtilis tfs and  structural genes is probably crucial for the adaptation of different evolutionary groups to diverse environmental conditions. this process may be described as the substitution of the trn "hardware"  <cit> . in this study, we found that while the replacement of subsets of tfs may be important for the adaptation of organism in different groups to diverse lifestyles, the role played by rearrangements of regulatory connections between conserved tfs and regulated genes in the adaptation of closely related organisms should not be ruled out.

furthermore, babu et al.  <cit>  showed that tfs and structural genes that are associated in a network motif in e. coli do not tend to appear associated in the networks reconstructed in other organisms with a frequency that is higher than that expected by chance. however, our results suggest that if the three genes that form the ff motif in e. coli co-occur in another genome the probability that the regulatory links between them are conserved  will be greater than the probability of correlated conservation of a triad of randomly chosen regulatory links. and this trend is also stronger than the one observed for pairs of co-regualted genes, although the latter is also statistically significant when compared to randomly sampled nodes. this observed trend may be a consequence of the dynamical properties that motifs confer to the regulation of individual structural genes  <cit> . interestingly, some of the highest sos values correspond to als, i.e., tfs that regulate the expression of their structural gene. this means that if a given tf is autorregulated in e. coli its ortholog in another gamma-proteobacteria it will probably be autorregulated as well.

the fact that small regulatory circuits as als are conserved more often than would be expected from the conservation of individual regulatory interactions – and that regulatory interactions involved in ff motifs are more correlatedly conserved than triads of randomly chosen interactions or pairs of co-regulated genes – suggests that some of these features might be favored by natural selection within a group of closely related organisms once they appear in their common ancestor. in other words, even though the free-scale architecture of trns may show converging evolution in different groups of organisms, some of these elements that are present in the trn of the common ancestor of the group might be preserved by natural selection, while the adaptation of various members of the group to slightly changing lifestyles may be accomplished through changes in regulatory connections, a process that may occur in a short period of time, compared to the substitution of a subset of regulatory proteins.

genome rearrangements may contribute to the interchange of regulatory sites
analysis of the conservation of the structure of tus showed a trend for conserved sites to be located upstream conserved tus. on the other hand, regulatory interactions conserved in few genomes involve genes within tus whose structure is less conserved. this bias suggests that rearrangements of the bacterial chromosome that affect the structure of tus may be related to the rewiring process observed in the regulatory network. itoh et al.  <cit>  pointed out that when a tu is broken, one of the resulting fragments retains the original regulation  while the other fragment by approaching a new regulatory region – through rearrangements – may either retain the same regulation or gain regulatory input from a different tf or set of tfs. moreover, we found that conserved regulatory sites tend to involve genes that occur within conserved syntenic groups, and that this trend increases when analyzing sites with higher sos. that is, interactions that are conserved across a higher number of organisms show a stronger trend to affect genes within conserved syntenic groups. therefore, we raise the hypothesis that rearrangements of genetic material resulting from inversions  <cit>   may have affected the regulation of individual genes. on the other hand, sets of genes whose order in the chromosome is not disrupted  would have maintained their regulatory interactions. thus, these rearrangement events have contributed to the rewiring of the regulatory network. nevertheless, both types of events – when affecting large portions of chromosomes that contain both tfs and their regulated genes – would have preserved the spatial proximity between tfs and their regulated genes, as has been observed by menchaca-mendez et al.  <cit> .

nevertheless, the importance of orthologous regulatory sequence divergence may not be overlooked when analyzing the causes of network rewiring. we observed that as much as 46%  to 77%  of all genes that receive interactions from tfs that differ from those that regulate their orthologs in e. coli occur in tus that are identical or similar to their eco orthologs. therefore, the difference in regulation for these instances may only be explained by the divergence of the orthologous regulatory regions that may affect the recognition by the model that represents the binding site of the orthologous tf.

CONCLUSIONS
while at large evolutionary scales, the main source of variation of the regulation of individual genes may be changes in the repertoire of tfs , at smaller scales, the shift of individual regulatory interactions – or rewiring of the network – between existing tfs and structural genes may be also an important source for this modification. the rewiring observed at the most basic level of the regulatory network occurs mainly by two processes: rearrangements of genetic material and divergence of orthologous regulatory regions. the rearrangements that occur in bacterial chromosomes at this evolutionary scale-mostly inversion or horizontal gene transfer events – alter the structure of some tus but leave the order of genes in certain pieces of the chromosome unchanged. at this evolutionary scale, the connections that are part of motifs tend to be more correlatedly conserved than triads of randomly chosen regulatory links or pairs of co-regulated genes. moreover, the rewiring process does not affect the global properties of the graph, such as the connectivity distribution. this preservation of connectivity distribution takes place without modifying the set of global regulators, suggesting that only fine-tuning of the regulatory network occurs within this group of closely related organisms, in the process of divergence from a common ancestor.

