BACKGROUND
strepsiptera are an unusual group of obligate endoparasitoid insects  <cit> . they occur as a small  monophyletic insect order with uncertain evolutionary origins, inclusive of any clear understanding over the group's nearest extant relative. strepsiptera parasitize  <dig> orders of insects, including silverfish ; cockroaches ; mantids ; crickets and grasshoppers ; bugs ; wasps, ants and bees  and flies . understandably, the very uniqueness of strepsiptera makes their placement within insects using morphological taxonomic methods a contentious task. strepsiptera have been placed as the sister-group to myriad different insect groups, from beetles to true flies, even being placed outside of holometabola: each hypothesis being founded on one or two 'key' characteristics that at one time or another have come under question  <cit> . confident assertions of classification have especially been restricted because intermediate forms have largely gone extinct and are unrecorded in the fossil record . simplification of gross morphology during strepsipteran evolutionary specialization can also be viewed as a significant component of this problem: observable morphological variation is low and unevenly distributed between extremely dimorphic sexes.

females are especially strongly simplified , and in most strepsipteran species, they remain in the living host until the end of the reproductive cycle. conversely, males metamorphose in a typical holometabolan fashion; developing wings and a usual suite of adult insect characters  only to leave the host immediately in search of a mate; usually in the form of a female-containing host  <cit> . males deliver sperm through a brood canal opening in the cephalothorax  of the female, who as a reproductive adult is only partially exposed to the environment, as an extrusion between the tergites or sternites of living hosts. after fertilization, females are capable of producing many hundreds of thousands of active 1st instar larvae who emerge from the cephalothorax.

members of the strepsipteran lineage, mengenillidae, are the sister-group to stylopidia, a clade that includes all other extant strepsiptera . this family represents a transitional phase in the evolutionary specialization of strepsiptera, whereby both sexes leave the host before pupation, and females do not reproduce or release progeny in the unusual fashion outlined above. the level of simplification in free living mengenillid females is much less extreme than in stylopidia ; legs, mouthparts and compound eyes are all still present, although strongly reduced. the invention of a completely endoparasitic female was probably one of the most important novelties leading to the radiation of this unique group  <cit> . evolutionary studies attempting to unravel the developmental and ecological phenomena that make strepsiptera so biologically interesting therefore require that species from before this important transition occupy a central role in research.

insect mitochondrial genomes provide a useful medium to deepen and connect comprehension of microevolutionary forces of populations, like neutral drift and selective sweeps, to macroevolutionary events affecting species and/or deeper levels of divergence. the abundance of mitochondria in most metazoan cell and tissue types makes mtdna an easily obtainable, universally plentiful marker, where a lack of introns or duplicate genes and non-coding variable spacer regions make amplification of mtdna relatively uncomplicated  <cit>  . the near-complete sequence of the mt genome of xenos vesparum is available, and as a member of the more specialized clade stylopidia, it is important to place it into context. the mitochondrial genome of mengenilla australiensis  was therefore chosen for sequencing. genome arrangement, nucleotide content, codon usage and the secondary structure of ribosomal rna genes are each comparatively assessed between two distant strepsiptera, and more widely across holometabola .

RESULTS
genome composition
the near-entire mt genome fragment of m. australiensis is presented as a  <dig> bp sequence, across which  <dig> protein-coding genes , a large  and a small  subunit rrna gene  and  <dig> trna sequences can be identified . pcgs are in expected positions, but two trna translocations disrupt an otherwise ancestral genome arrangement. serine <dig>  moves to a position between alanine  and arginine , whereas valine  is either lost, or transferred to a position in a region that spans the flanking region, potentially anywhere between trna-ile and nad <dig>  all start codons across the pcgs  begin with the typical m- or i- residue  <cit> , and end in taa, tag, ta, or t. the control region itself, including up to  <dig> flanking trna genes could not be amplified. a variety of approaches were explored, none of which were successful in spanning the presumed a+t region. similar difficulties were encountered during the amplification of the mt genome of x. vesparum  <cit> . in our study, genome-specific primers designed to span the a+t region also performed well when reverse compliment versions were implemented. it is hypothesized that the region is unusually long and/or too problematic for even advanced taq polymerases to amplify, as a result of extreme repetitiveness or secondary structural folding issues .

the lengths of pcgs are truncated in both strepsipteran species, and especially so in x. vesparum. across the  <dig> holometabolan dataset, m. australiensis has a reduction in mean content of  <dig>  amino acids per gene. in x. vesparum, this reaches  <dig>  amino acid deletions per gene. x. vesparum has the shortest nad <dig>  cox <dig>  cox <dig>  atp <dig>  atp <dig>  cox <dig>  nad <dig> and nad <dig> gene , representing a  <dig> % loss in amino acids from the average holometabolan complement. its total coding genome is shorter by  <dig> amino acids, the next shortest is m. australiensis  followed by bombus ignitus  and m. bicolor  . given that substantial loss of gene content might be expected to severely compromise gene functionality and efficiency, it would be of considerable interest to investigate whether this kind of genomic streamlining is related in any way to the peculiar lifestyle of small endoparasitoid insects. in particular, does bottlenecking in strepsipteran populations lead to slightly deleterious mutations, like codon deletions, being fixed through random drift? strepsipteran metapopulations could be experiencing the extreme extinction-recolonization population dynamics required for low effective population sizes to become influential, but there are no a priori reasons to suspect these should be so different from other hymenopteran host-parasitoid systems that depend on similar insect host groups . alternatively, bottlenecking could result from the population dynamics of mitochondria themselves, through very low numbers of these organelles being passed via the germ line of strepsipteran eggs, which are known to be extremely small  <cit> .

analyses to date do not reveal general patterns of mitochondrial genome evolution across holometabolan parasitic lineages  <cit> , but these have concentrated largely on the comparative analysis of genome organization  itself. within orders like hymenoptera, although a correlation between the extent of mt genome modification and parasitism appears to be lacking  <cit>  , the truncation of pcgs as presented in this report, probably represents a separate issue. determining the extent to which pcg truncation occurs within strepsiptera must be a target for future investigations. unfortunately, direct measures of insect mitochondrial effective population size have not yet been investigated.

overall nucleotide composition is typically a+t rich in m. australiensis , and like in x. vesparum, c-skew is high . a scatter of the variation in skew and a+t% across the  <dig> holometabolan genomes  is shown in figures 4a and 4b. notably, in figure 4b, of the most c-skewed and g+c% poor genomes ,  <dig>  data points are hymenopteran,  <dig>  are strepsipteran and  <dig>  is lepidopteran. a similar graph that including hemimetabolous insects  <cit>  shows that only  <dig> other genome  is so c-skewed and a+t% rich. conversely, the thysanuran genomes and a subset of coleoptera are very a-skewed and distinctly more a+t% balanced . this pattern is discussed in more detail in the following section.

codon usage
pcgs from strepsiptera and the holometabolan dataset were imported into inca v <dig>   <cit>  to analyze codon usage. m. australiensis and x. vesparum are compared in figure 5: codon bias is significantly relaxed in x. vesparum ; p <  <dig> × 10-5), and an apparent switch in threonine  preference from acu to aca has occurred. in figure 6a, these levels are assessed in context, alongside the holometabolan dataset using the enc and milc measures of codon bias for individual pcgs . in x. vesparum, all  <dig> pcgs occupy a much more relaxed, spread apart region of enc/milc space , with average gene enc and milc values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. in m. australiensis these are  <dig>  and  <dig> , and in holometabola, they average  <dig>   and  <dig>   over all genes. it follows that the values of codon bias among pcgs in m. australiensis should be found in the densest cluster of background holometabolan pcgs. the thysanuran genomes , alongside three coleopteran genomes  have particularly balanced codon usage. although beetles generally follow this rule; pyrophorus divergens, tetraphalerus bruchi and tribolium castaneum in particular, have unusually high milc values. interestingly, unlike the thysanurans, these do not result in correspondingly elevated enc values, possibly because of differences in the way milc and enc estimate bias  <cit> .

these results are consistent with prevailing neutral mutational theories positing that genomic g+c content is the most significant factor in determining codon bias between organisms  <cit> . this may explain why x. vesparum has significantly relaxed enc-milc values, whose global g+c content is 5% higher than m. australiensis. for the thysanuran and beetle genomes, although g+c content in the 3rd codon position of individual pcgs is not necessarily elevated , it is global g+c% content that appears to matter: it has been documented that codon bias can be accurately predicted from intergenic regions  <cit> , and it is unsurprising that these genomes should also have the highest genome wide g+c content across the  <dig> holometabola dataset . it is noticeable that the coleopteran t. bruchi has a very a-skewed genome , which could also partly explain some of the discrepancies appearing between the different methods.

secondary structure of ribosomal and transfer rnas
with the addition of m. australiensis, a comparative revision of strepsipteran mitochondrial rrna secondary structure was possible. figures  <dig> and  <dig> are complete models for the rrnl in m. australiensis and x. vesparum respectively. the addition of new comparative evidence  since carapelli et al.  enables some improvement over the structural model for x. vesparum. these modifications are highlighted in blue. regions in which sequence variability is still too high for good structural covariation are highlighted in red. overall, m. australiensis predictions are largely consistent with current insect consensus models but substantial portions of secondary structure remain problematic in x. vesparum. for example, the helix at the base of domain iv in m. australiensis is supported by comparative evidence from drosophila melanogaster and apis mellifera. in x. vesparum, most of this primary sequence in this helix is highly divergent and covarying base-pairing cannot be identified. where this helix terminates in the single-strand bulge however, the base pairing aug-uau is supported by m. australiensis  which provides additional corroborative support for the bps in d. melanogaster and a. mellifera, which have, aag-uuu and agg-ucu respectively.

rrns secondary structural models for m. australiensis and x. vesparum are presented in figure  <dig>  absence of sequence across domain i precludes a complete analysis, but partial models for domains ii and iii are generally conserved across strepsiptera. regions highlighted in red are more labile, and adequate consensus models for these structures are still lacking. the structural predictions for  <dig> trna genes are given in figure  <dig>  there is less scope for variation within extremely length-constrained trna genes. despite this, the tψp stem is still too variable to be useful in a deep comparative framework: even between m. australiensis and x. vesparum, base-pairings demonstrate little covariation. the three remaining stem-loop structures are more conserved across strepsiptera, and more useful in a comparative structural context. within these regions, x. vesparum demonstrates more substantial modifications to typical insect trna structure than m. australiensis - consisting largely of single base or base-pair substitutions/compensations. for example, the proximal base-pairs of the acceptor stem of trna-pro  in x. vesparum appears as ucag-cuga. in m. australiensis, lepidoptera  and hymenoptera  it is caaa-uuug. similarly, the proximal dhu stem consists of a canonical a-u base-pairing in x. vesparum, where in m. australiensis and other insect groups it appears as a non-canonical g-u. further, the base-pairing c-g, found across disparate insect lineages is substituted by a-u in the proximal stems of the trna-lys  acceptor and the trna-glu  dhu helices of x. vesparum.

CONCLUSIONS
the mitochondrial genome of x. vesparum displays a number of characteristics that are not shared by its distant relative m. australiensis. in the latter, only  <dig> trna translocations disrupt an otherwise ancestral insect genome organization, whereas in x. vesparum,  <dig> trna translocations and at least  <dig> duplications have occurred . codon bias in x. vesparum is also significantly relaxed: m. australiensis occupies a much more typical region of enc/milc space . further, rrna secondary structural model predictions in m. australiensis are much more consistent with current insect consensus structures . in x. vesparum, increased variability at the primary sequence level precludes the assembly of well corroborated models in several parts of the rrna genes. both strepsipteran genomes are unusually c-skewed and a+t% rich. interestingly, pcgs are noticeably truncated in both strepsipteran taxa, but especially so in x. vesparum which has lost nearly twice as many codons  as m. australiensis , equating to  <dig> % and  <dig> % fewer codons than the average holometabolan genome respectively.

these results provide useful insight into the evolution of strepsipteran mitochondria spanning the shift from a largely free-living insect into an extremely unique and simplified endoparasitoid, since the emergence of strepsiptera over  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . the modifications to the mitochondrial genomes of x. vesparum and m. australiensis appear consistent with organisms that have evolved extremely derived lifestyles. m. australiensis represents a transitional phase in the evolutionarily specialization of strepsiptera, and the composition, architecture and structure of its genome reflects this. these observations raise important questions about the changing selective environment in  genomes belonging to small, and almost entirely host-dependent endoparasitoids. future investigations into the evolutionary and developmental origins of this unique biological system must ensure that strepsipteran species from mengenillidae are adequately sampled: wide sampling across this group is crucial if the underlying ancestral signal is to be maximized.

