BACKGROUND
gametogenesis and embryonic development in mammals involve several major cellular events marked by an unusual mode of messenger rna management. in nearly all animal species, mrna molecules are stored in the developing oocyte until use during maturation or after fertilization  <cit> . these stored mrnas direct protein synthesis during the period of transcriptional silence, which begins when the germinal stage oocyte reaches its full size  <cit>  and lasts until embryonic genome activation  <cit> . in cattle, this size is approximately  <dig> μm within a follicular antrum 3- <dig> mm in diameter  <cit> . during the period covering the remaining follicular development , the post-lh-surge oocyte maturation, fertilization and the onset of embryonic genome activation, very little genomic transcription occurs. it is generally believed that transcript storage begins in the early stages of oogenesis and may thus last for several weeks. it is also believed that the transcripts are stored in a particulate form  <cit>  and lack the poly portion, although the latter detail remains the subject of debate. it has been reported that shortening the poly tail to less than  <dig> nucleotides stabilizes the mrna molecule and keeps it from being either degraded or translated  <cit> .

so far, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying the steps that occur during this transcriptional silencing period. early development is characterized by major fluctuations in the abundance of total and messenger rna  <cit> , with specific waves of maternal rna degradation  <cit> . these observations have led to the belief that measurement of messenger abundance provides little useful information about cells that are storing rna, since it does not distinguish between mrna that is 1) stabilized and stored and thus not contributing to any cellular function; 2) recruited and on its way to degradation, not contributing to the translation process and 3) recruited and being translated in de novo protein synthesis. in order to avoid the contribution of the stored or decaying molecules to the mrna abundance measurements, we seek to provide a mean to isolate the mrna population bound to the translation apparatus. messenger rnas engaged in translation are found to be bound by ribosomes throughout the cytosol either freely or attached to the cytoskeleton while dormant or stored transcripts are accumulated in diverse forms of ribonucleoprotein complexes and particles  <cit> . it is also well known that actively translated messengers are bound by multiple ribosomal units  <cit> .

the composition of these different particles makes it possible to fractionate them by density gradient. profiling of polyribosomal mrna through standard sucrose gradient fractionation procedure requires considerable starting material . a recent publication reports the development of a method suitable for input material not fewer than five xenopus laevis oocyte, eggs or early embryos  <cit> . considering the xenopus oocyte contains about  <dig>  times more total rna comparatively to the bovine counterpart , the method still requires too much input for work on mammalian early development. the relative scarcity of mammalian oocytes, egg and embryonic tissues is another impediment to increasing understanding of mammalian gametogenesis and early development, since the choice of methods suitable for handling such minute quantities of material is severely limited. pre-amplifying the entire transcriptome offers the possibility of studying the fluctuations in transcript abundance in these tissues. minute amounts of initial rna can be amplified with success  <cit>  and provide sufficient output for high throughput approaches such as microarrays  <cit>  or systematic deep sequencing   <cit> .

to our knowledge, the isolation of polyribosomes from mammalian oocytes or early embryos has been reported only twice and resulted in limited success  <cit> . the methodology used by de leon and colleagues  <cit>  involves spiking a small sample with a large amount of genetically homologous material to confirm the polyribosomal nature of the rna molecules being studied. however, the inability to distinguish between the spike and the sample prevented identification of oocyte/embryo mrna molecules. in contrast, the approach used by potireddy and colleagues  <cit>  allowed mrna identification but could not confirm the polyribosomal nature of the isolated fraction nor exclude the presence of non-polyribosomal contaminants. we therefore sought to combine the advantages of each method by devising means of confirming the polyribosomal nature of the extracted mrnas while maintaining the possibility of identifying them and determining their relative abundance.

RESULTS
preparation of the inert carrier
in order to develop a polyribosomal isolation method that could be performed with very small quantities of sample material, we used an rna carrier fraction. spiking the bovine sample with polyribosomes from a non-homologous organism  is helpful as long as there is a way to prevent interference with downstream transcript identification.

formaldehyde was used to cross-link rna and proteins from the drosophila sl <dig> cell extracts in order to produce a range of materials that might function as carriers. to determine the optimal concentration of formaldehyde that would provide a useful carrier and minimize downstream interference, a dose-response experiment was done. at lower concentrations , cross-linking was slight, as indicated by the recovery of almost all of the initial rna in sucrose density gradient fractions. at a concentration of 1% formaldehyde, approximately 10% of the rna could be recovered while at the highest concentration tested , less than 1% of the initial rna input could be recovered . the micro-electrophoretic profile confirmed the extremely low level of rna recovered following the  <dig> % formaldehyde treatment . this latter treatment was used and an additional step was included to neutralize excess formaldehyde prior to adding the sl <dig> cell carrier polysome preparation to the experimental samples.

glycine, used routinely to titrate free formaldehyde and used in this study at the commonly used concentration of  <dig>  m  <cit>  was not entirely effective at neutralizing this cross-linking agent . since tris-hydroxymethylaminomethane molecule  has been suggested for this purpose  <cit> , tests were conducted to determine the conditions under which it would efficiently inactivate residual formaldehyde in sl <dig> cell extract. the impact of ph was also tested since polyribosome extraction was done at a lower ph than in the sutherland study. the impact of ph was found not significant . at a concentration of  <dig>  m, tris was found comparable to  <dig>  m glycine and thus could not be considered more efficient. at concentrations of  <dig> m and  <dig>  m, tris did neutralize the residual formaldehyde completely . figure  <dig> shows the effect of the rna carrier preparation protocol on the distribution of polyribosomes in the sucrose density gradient fractions of the drosophila sl <dig> cell extract. the crosslinking treatment did not interfere with polyribosome profiling as both treated and control samples show very similar profiles .

validation of the polyribosomal nature of the isolated rna
since polyribosomes are stabilized by mg2+ ions, addition of edta causes their dissociation into ribosomal subunits and the release of messenger rna. cytoplasmic extracts were therefore fractionated in the presence or absence of edta. in order to observe this in the absence of the drosophila polyribosome preparation, a suitable quantity of granulosa cells was processed. standard rt-pcr of genes actb  and cdk <dig>  was used as means of comparing rna abundance in the collected fractions. for the two cell types, the presence of edta caused a shift in rna abundance towards the fractions containing low sedimentation coefficient materials, thus confirming the polyribosomal nature of the higher sedimenting fractions .

interference of drosophila polyribosome rna with microarray hybridization signals
interference by the exogenous carrier rna with the density-gradient fractionation of the oocyte rna was minimal. we decided to determine if this was true for microarray hybridization signals. samples prepared from purified bovine oocyte rna and from purified drosophila sl <dig> rna were labelled with different fluorophores and hybridized on the same microarray. table  <dig> summarizes the proportion of microarray features that generated positive fluorescent signals above the background threshold. in spite of its phylogenetic distance from cattle, drosophila rna generated one third of positive spots that bovine rna did at 55°c. increasing the hybridization temperature by 5°c resulted in a significant loss in drosophila positive signals and at 65°c, no drosophila signal above background was detected. however, at 65°c, almost half of the bovine signals were also lost. the intermediate temperature seemed to be an acceptable compromise since only 6% of the spots generated positive, but very weak signals from drosophila samples, while the fluorescence values from the bovine samples were still clearly above background. by comparison to the least stringent condition , 77%  of the bovine signals were kept when microarrays were hybridized at 60°c .

reproducibility of the polyribosome rna extraction method
we tested the reproducibility of the entire method by comparing the results obtained from biological replicates. three oocyte pools were thus fractionated and analyzed separately using the density gradient method and microarray hybridization. the mean correlation value was found to be  <dig>  ±  <dig> , which clearly indicates that the procedure is robust .

validation of the method under different physiological conditions
the polyribosome fractionation protocol was tested with oocytes at different stages of maturation using microarray hybridization to measure the abundance of rna sequences representing known key factors in the control of oocyte maturation. quantitative rt-pcr was used since probes for some of the chosen factors were absent on our microarray. the selected sequences correspond to components of maturation promoting factor, namely cyclin b <dig> , cyclin-dependant kinase  <dig>  and moloney sarcoma oncogne , which is part of the cytostatic factor required at the mii stage. total rna , poly  and polyribosomal sub-fractions were measured. the abundance of these rna types varied significantly between the different tissue types , indicating clearly that the stage of maturation of the oocyte sample has an impact on the distribution of the rna.

potential implications for protein levels
since mrna associated with polyribosomes is presumed actively translated, levels of protein corresponding to the selected factors were measured. microarray gene entries corresponding to polypeptide sequences for which commercial antibodies were available were selected. standard housekeeping candidates actb and tuba were used as internal standards. due to the requirement of oocyte maturation for extensive reorganization of the cytoskeleton, these standard housekeeping candidates were found to be unstable and were therefore considered solely as a control of sample loading and not used for data normalization. the fluctuations in polyribosomal mrna levels observed between maturation stages closely matched protein levels for all candidates, as shown in figure  <dig> 

discussion
the need to develop a procedure for isolating and studying polyribosomal mrnas from mammalian gametes and early embryos arose from the peculiarity of these cells. the collection of mammalian oocytes and early stage embryos is challenging and resource-intensive. therefore, samples rarely contain more than  <dig> oocytes/embryos. their scarcity imposes a method suited to handling minute quantities of material. for instance, protein profiling and identification of differentially expressed candidates requires several hundreds to thousands of mammalian oocytes or early embryos  <cit> . similarly, these tissues do not provide a much better source of rna considering for example that a single xenopus oocyte contains about  <dig> μg of total rna  <cit>  comparatively to only  <dig> pg in the bovine  <cit> . nonetheless, the wide array of amplification procedures now available has made it possible to focus on the transcriptome rather than the proteome. study of the transcriptome generally assumes that mrna levels are indicative of cellular status and reflect corresponding protein levels. however, this assumption does not apply to cells containing large amounts of stored mrna, such as mammalian oocytes and early blastomeres. in these cases, mrna bound to polyribosomes and therefore likely being translated is considered a better indicator of gene activity and developmental stage.

the first important step for polyribosomal rna extraction is thorough lysis of the cells. the greatest difficulty encountered when working with oocytes or pre-hatching embryos is the challenge of breaking down the zona pellucida. this porous glycoprotein coat is composed of a dense net of fibril bundles that evolves during oocyte maturation and fertilization  <cit> . the bovine zona pellucida is particularly resistant, with a thickness averaging  <dig>  μm compared to  <dig>  μm for ovine and  <dig>  μm for murine oocytes  <cit> . since the lysis buffer used in the polyribosome isolation procedure is relatively mild to disrupt the cytoplasmic membrane and liberate intact polyribosomes, an additional treatment was required to efficiently disrupt the sturdy zona pellucida to liberate the cellular contents. we found that freeze/thaw cycles, effective for mouse oocytes  <cit> , are ineffective against the bovine zona pellucida and that digestion with pronase produced irreproducible results due to residual protease activity. the previously used acidic  tyrode buffer  <cit>  was also tested, but changes in the granular appearance of the oocyte cytoplasm suggested disruption of the cytoskeleton, to which polyribosomes are believed to be bound  <cit> . moreover, removal of the zona pellucida by acidic treatment has been reported to lead to embryo death and increased frequency of abnormalities in surviving embryos  <cit> , suggesting damage to the embryo development program in which polyribosomes are involved. the only acceptable option appeared to be mechanical breakage of the zona with zirconia-silica beads in the presence of passive lysis buffer . this approach seemed to work since the zona and its contents were completely dissolved within a few minutes.

to our knowledge, extraction of polyribosomes from oocytes and early embryos has been reported only twice  <cit> . in the first case, mouse liver polyribosomes acted as a carrier of polyribosomal mrna extracted from -uridine-labelled mouse oocytes. this attractive method allows confirmation of the presence of oocyte polyribosomes, but does not allow any identification or even relative quantification of the associated mrna, since it cannot be distinguished from that of the liver polyribosomes. the second study involved a method that allowed identification of the transcripts but could not confirm their polyribosomal nature nor exclude the presence of non-polyribosomal contaminants.

we have developed a method in which a heterologous carrier is used and which allows identification of extracted mrna and confirmation of its polysomal nature. this involved determining optimal conditions for cross-linking the exogeneous polyribosomes. uv cross-linking was incomplete and prolonging the exposure led to rna fragmentation . formaldehyde cross-linking, which binds more specifically via free amino groups  <cit>  was found more effective than uv. before adding the carrier preparation to the biological sample, it was necessary to neutralize the excess formaldehyde, which is normally done with glycine. a recent study of the efficiency of glycine suggests using stronger nucleophiles such as tris or lowering the solution ph as quick and efficient means of quenching residual formaldehyde  <cit> . tris was the preferred option, since it was not clear that lowering the ph would neutralize the formaldehyde without damaging the polyribosomes.

using the method described here, the polyribosomal nature of the isolated bovine rna can be inferred from its position in the sucrose gradient. further validation was obtained using edta to disrupt the polyribosomes by sequestering mg2+. the shift observed in the abundance of the amplified cdk <dig> fragment towards lower density fractions following this disruption is indicative of the polyribosomal nature of the bovine mrna in the higher density fractions.

the strength of the approach used here was assessed by quantifying the abundance of selected mrna of genes known to be involved in oocyte maturation. following the luteinizing hormone surge, the oocyte resumes meiosis and undergoes a sequence of events involving germinal vesicle breakdown , first polar body extrusion and a second arrest at the metaphase of the second meiosis  in preparation for fertilization. it is known that maturation promoting factor , a heterodimer composed of cyclin b <dig>  and cyclin-dependant kinase  <dig> , must be activated for meiosis to resume. once meiosis reaches the mii stage, the role of the csf is to halt cell cycle until the ovule is fertilized . we previously observed that in cattle, the gv-stage oocyte lacks the ccnb <dig> component but contains the cdk <dig> protein  <cit> . for activation of mpf, ccnb <dig> must be translated immediately after meiosis resumes but before germinal vesicle breakdown. consistent with these observations, ccnb <dig> mrna was found in the polyribosomal fraction at the gv stage, in addition to cdk <dig> mrna. csf is activated during a later stage of oocyte maturation prior to its involvement in arresting the cell cycle. however, it has been found that mos is expressed readily during early stages of oocyte maturation, since it is involved in ccnb <dig> accumulation and displays an mpf stabilizing activity at the mii stage  <cit> . following fertilization, both the mpf and csf are rapidly degraded. consistent with the activation of mpf, our results showed that levels of cdk <dig> mrna and ccnb <dig> mrna present on polyribosomes increased during the initial step of maturation while mos, known to be involved throughout oocyte maturation, was equally present at all stages. this physiologically relevant profile was not observed when targeting total or poly-bearing rna. this is a strong confirmation that transcript abundance measured as total maternal mrna pool need to be interpreted with care due to the contribution of the large contents of stored thus physiologically inert mrnas.

finally, we also investigated the proportionality between specific polyribosomal mrnas and their corresponding protein products. by definition, polyribosomal rna encodes protein to be newly synthesized. in contrast, the protein content of a candidate results from both its synthesis and turnover rates. nevertheless, of the three mrna sequences studied in parallel by western blot, all showed a shift in total protein that matched the shift in their polyribosomal status, confirming the added value of polyribosome-bound mrna studies in terms of physiological information.

CONCLUSIONS
the study of oocyte maturation and early development faces a major challenge regarding the physiological relevance of the abundance of total rna or even poly rna. the presence of stored and hence inactive maternal rna that marks developmental stages prior to embryonic genome activation can bias the subsequent interpretation of these measurements. we provide evidence that the study of polyribosomal mrna offers a better option for studying the physiology underlying gametes and embryonic development especially when the cells are bearing large amounts of stored rna. the procedure developed in the present study was shown to be robust and efficient for isolating polyribosomal mrna from small amounts of cells. this polyribosomal mrna can then be used for downstream transcriptomic studies.

