BACKGROUND
natural or spontaneous mutations, which accelerate evolution in living organisms, have a number of causes. in flowering plants, flower color mutations occur widely in nature, and floricultural plants in a variety of flower colors have been produced through artificial selection of this natural variability. flavonoids, such as flavones, aurones, flavonols, and anthocyanins, are the most important plant pigments associated with flower coloration. the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway is one of the most extensively studied pathways in plant specialized metabolism
 <cit> . the biosynthetic genes necessary for biosynthesis of colored anthocyanins have been especially well studied in many plant species, including, arabidopsis, snapdragon, petunia, grape, and maize, and have become targets for molecular breeding
 <cit> . in addition to flower coloration, studies of anthocyanin-based coloration and associated mutations in fruits, seeds, and other organs have provided information helpful for elucidation of flavonoid biosynthesis-related genes. in particular, recent molecular biological investigations have revealed the basic mechanisms generating these mutations and their effects on pigmentation at the molecular level in different plant species.

torenia  is a perennial plant widely used as a bedding flower from early spring through summer. cultivars in different flower colors, such as white, blue, and pink, have been generated by conventional breeding and are now commercially available. because of its various merits in regard to molecular analyses , the species is proposed as a potential new model flower to study a wide range of floral traits. torenia fournieri and t. hybrida  are frequently used in transgenic studies of various subjects such as flower color
 <cit> , anthocyanin synthesis
 <cit> , chlorophyll degradation
 <cit> , flower shape
 <cit> , and fertilization
 <cit> . among studied characteristics, flower color is one of the most targeted traits in molecular investigations, as flower color modification is of strong interest from both basic and applied research perspectives. torenia flower pigments are composed of flavonoid anthocyanins. chemical analysis has revealed the anthocyanin components of t. fournieri ‘crown violet’
 <cit>  and t. hybrida ‘summerwave blue’
 <cit> . using these cultivars, flower colors ranging from the original violet to white, pink, and yellow have been successfully produced by genetic engineering of flavonoid biosynthetic genes
 <cit> .

as mentioned above, variously flower-colored torenia cultivars and lines have been produced by both conventional and molecular methods, but the origins of color mutations in the breeding materials are largely unknown. because they are easily recognizable by eye and hence good plant research materials, flower color mutations have been studied extensively in species such as petunia
 <cit> , snapdragon
 <cit> , and morning glory
 <cit> . for example, the variegated-flower morning glory mutation is caused by the insertion of the tpn <dig> transposable element into the dihydroflavonol 4-reductase  gene
 <cit> , and white-flowered morning glory is derived from insertions of tpn1-related dna transposable elements into an intron of the chalcone synthase  gene
 <cit> . red-flowered phenotypes in commercial petunias have been attributed to transposon insertion mutations of the f3′5′h gene
 <cit> . similarly, various mutations related to flower pigmentation have been studied in carnation
 <cit> , with class i, class ii, and other transposable elements implicated in the color changes. we have also identified several dna- and rna-type transposable elements in white- or pink-flowered mutants in japanese gentian flowers
 <cit> . with respect to torenia, little is known regarding the source of flower color mutations, with one exception: nishijima et al.
 <cit>  recently reported that a ‘flecked’ mutant, bearing variegated flowers, originated through the insertion of an enhancer/suppressor-mutator -like transposon  into the intron of the tfmyb <dig> transcription factor gene. the causal agents of flower color mutations in other torenia cultivars have not yet been identified.

in the present study, we uncovered and analyzed mutations in a white-flowered torenia through comparison with a violet-flowered cultivar. we first identified a novel retrotransposable element, designated tore <dig>  in torenia based on a molecular biological approach. using both transient and stable transformation experiments, we then confirmed that the insertion of tore <dig> into the flavanone 3-hydroxylase  promoter region contributes to the white-flowered phenotype. we found two additional mutations in this cultivar and considered their association with white coloration. this is the first known identification of a retrotransposable element in the genus torenia.

RESULTS
analysis of flavonoid components in torenia flowers
as shown in figure 
1a and
1b, t. fournieri cultivars crown violet  and crown white  have violet and white flower petals, respectively. spectral profiles of  <dig> % hcl-methanol extracts of each flower are shown in figure 
1c. in the visible light region, crv had a maximum absorption wavelength at 530 nm corresponding to anthocyanin pigments; in contrast, crw had no detectable peak in the visible spectrum, indicating that no anthocyanins accumulated in this white-flowered cultivar. uv absorption spectra revealed that crw and crv had maximum absorption peaks at  <dig> and 333 nm, respectively. to identify the flavone components accumulating in each cultivar, acid hydrolysis was performed followed by hplc analysis. the flavone aglycones identified in crv, as described previously
 <cit> , were apigenin and luteolin, whereas crw contained only apigenin. total levels of flavone derivatives were  <dig>  times higher in crw than in crv . these results suggest one possibility that the hydroxylation activity of flavonoid b-rings is deficient in crw.

expression analysis of flavonoid biosynthetic genes in torenia flowers
we attempted to screen the mutated genes by means of an expression analysis of torenia flower petals. as shown in additional file
1: table s <dig>  we designed primers based on flavonoid biosynthetic genes of t. hybrida, because full-length sequences, except for chalcone isomerase , are available for this hybrid cultivar. using these primers, which were designed for nearly full-length amplification, rt-pcr analysis was performed on the flavonoid biosynthesis-related genes chs, chi, f3h, dfr, anthocyanidin synthase , f3′h, f3′5′h, anthocyanin 5-o-glucosyltransferase , and flavone synthase ii  . fragments of the expected length were amplified from each gene, and similar expressions were observed between the two cultivars for all genes except for f3h. expressions of tfmyb <dig> and tfbhlh <dig>  recently identified as transcription factor genes regulating anthocyanin biosynthesis in torenia flowers
 <cit> , also did not differ significantly between the two cultivars . furthermore, attempts to amplify partial fragments of f3h using several different primers were unsuccessful , indicating that f3h expression was completely suppressed in crw. to elucidate the expressions of f3h, f3′h, and f3′5′h, we next performed northern blot analyses using the same rnas . no f3h transcripts were detected in the analyses, confirming the rt-pcr results. with respect to the other two hydroxylases, f3′h expression remained unchanged and f3′5′h expression was slightly decreased. no visible band shifts were detected, indicating that no large indels were present in these two genes.

identification of genomic and cdna sequences of three flavonoid biosynthetic genes in torenia plants
based on the results of the pigment and expression analyses, we speculated that three genes, f3h, f3′h, and f3′5′h, were causally related to the crw flower color mutation. we therefore compared genomic sequences of these three genes between the two cultivars. we generated dna fragments that spanned start and stop codons using genomic pcr, and analyzed the sequences. f3h was identical between crv and crw, whereas deletion mutations were present in f3′h and f3′5′h genomic sequences in both crv and crw . in particular, a 12-bp deletion was observed in exon  <dig> of the crw f3′h gene, presumably lacking four amino acid residues . the f3′5′h gene from crw also had a single-base  deletion in exon  <dig>  resulting in a frame shift . these mutated f3′h and f3′5′h sequences were also present in crv, indicating that crv is heterozygous for both gene mutations.

isolation of the 5′-upstream region of the f3h gene from torenia plants
because no mutation was found in the f3h gene, including coding exon and intron sequences, we suspected that crw might have a specific mutation in the 5′-upstream region of f3h. to clone the f3h upstream region, an inverse pcr was therefore performed. a  <dig> -bp sequence upstream of the start codon was identified in crv  and found to contain cis-motifs such as a p-recognition element, an acgt-containing element, and several myb-related elements . interestingly, the f3h upstream region of crw  contained a long  <dig> -bp insertion at the -249th position prior to the transcription start site . this insertion had the features of an ltr-type retrotransposon, and was accordingly designated as torenia retrotransposon  <dig> . our analysis revealed that tore <dig> contains a completely identical pair of ltrs  that start with tg and end with ca—a typical canonical sequence—flanked by 5-bp direct repeats of the tff3h sequence. tore <dig> also contains a single open reading frame  encoding a putative gag-pol polyprotein of  <dig> amino acid residues. a blastp search revealed that the protein has partial homology to hypothetical proteins of vitis vinifera, the copia-like ltr rider of solanum lycopersicum <cit> , and a putative gag-pol polyprotein of citrus sinensis <cit> . the protein contains gag and protease, but seemingly lacks typical pol proteins such as integrase, reverse transcriptase, and rnaseh. as shown in additional file
2: figure s <dig>  a primer binding site  and a polypurine tract  are also present in tore <dig>  in addition to the complete length of tore <dig>  genomic pcr amplification of crw yielded a 5′-upstream fragment of f3h containing only a solo ltr . in crv, the amplified 5′-upstream region of f3h within  <dig>  kb of the start codon did not contain tore <dig> or tore1-related sequences.

southern blot analysis of three flavonoid biosynthetic genes and tore <dig> in torenia
to determine the status of the three mutated genes and the retrotransposable element tore <dig> in each torenia cultivar, southern blot analyses were performed . digestion with ecor i and xba i, which do not cleave the f3h gene containing three exons and two introns, confirmed that the f3h gene is present as a single copy gene in the torenia genome . digestion with hind iii, which cleaves the second f3h intron, generated two and four bands from crv and crw, respectively. the larger bands generated from crw may have been due to partial hind iii digestion within tore <dig>  as depicted in additional file
2: figure s <dig>  southern blot analyses, using as probes the 560-bp ltr  or the gag-pol polyprotein sequence of  <dig> deduced amino acids , uncovered several bands from all restriction enzymes, suggesting that tore <dig> or related elements are ubiquitously present in the torenia genome. f3′h and f3′5′h genes were also found in single copies in the torenia genome . additional banding patterns were observed in crv, reflecting the heterozygosity of crv mentioned above.

transient expression analysis for f3h promoter activity
because the tore <dig> insertion into the 5′-upstream region most likely has a deleterious effect on f3h promoter activity, we measured this activity using a transient expression system in protoplasts of arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells. transcription factors gtmyb <dig> and gtbhlh <dig>  isolated from gentian petals, are known to activate late-stage flavonoid biosynthetic genes
 <cit> ; we therefore used these two transcription factors as effectors in combination with different torenia f3h promoter-firefly luciferase gene  constructs, as shown in figure 
 <dig>  the 35spro- renilla luciferase gene  construct was also co-transformed as an internal standard. the approximately 1-kbp 5′-upstream region of the torenia f3h gene was used for this analysis. this 1-kbp promoter was assigned a luc/rluc relative activity of  <dig>  compared with the 1-kb promoter, the 300-bp tff3h promoter showed only  <dig> % activity; the tore1-inserted tff3h promoter displayed an even greater activity reduction, down to  <dig> %. insertion of the solo-ltr sequence alone also reduced promoter activity . these data indicate that one or more cis-regulatory elements needed for f3h expression are present in the upstream region 300 bp above the translation start site, and that the tore <dig> insertion definitely affects torenia f3h promoter activity in vivo.

flower color complementation in f3h-overexpressed transgenic torenia plants
to confirm whether the deficient f3h expression in crw is actually responsible for the white coloration, crw was transformed with other functional f3h cdna. to produce transgenic torenia plants, we used a gentian f3h gene that encodes a functional f3h enzyme. crw was transformed with the binary vector pskan-35sgtf3h , and  <dig> transgenic torenia plants were regenerated and cultivated until flowering. of these transgenic lines,  <dig> recovered pink-colored pigmentation in flowers, with some variability in the degree of pink color pigmentation;  <dig> lines had intense pink flowers, and five featured faint pink flowers. the upper lips of transgenic flowers were less pigmented than lower and lateral lips. representative lines with intense pink  and faint pink  flowers are shown in figure 
6b. northern blot analysis confirmed the expression of the foreign gentian f3h gene, indicating that the transformation was successful in torenia petals. notably, higher accumulation levels of gtf3h transcripts were observed in lines  <dig> and  <dig> than in line  <dig>  consistent with recovered flower color intensities . the endogenous torenia f3h gene remained suppressed in crw and all three transgenic lines. hplc analysis confirmed that the accumulated anthocyanidin in gtf3h-overexpressed crw was pelargonidin, not delphinidin or cyanidin , indicating that the b-ring hydroxylation ability of anthocyanins was absent in crw because of the lack of f3′h and f3′5′h activities.

discussion
in this study, expression analysis of flavonoid biosynthetic genes revealed that only the expression of f3h was completely reduced in crw. f3h is a 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase that acts in the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway to hydroxylate flavanones to dihydroflavonols, which are common precursors for major classes of flavonoids, flavonols, catechins, anthocyanins, and proanthocyanidin in plants
 <cit> . the gene encoding f3h cdna was first isolated from petunia
 <cit> , with homologous genes subsequently cloned in many plant species. f3h gene mutations affecting color pigmentation have been reported in various plant species, including petunia
 <cit> , soybean
 <cit> , japanese morning glory
 <cit> , and carnation
 <cit> . because anthocyanins are synthesized from dihydroflavonols, reduced f3h expression is the likely cause of the torenia crw colorless flower phenotype.

analysis of genomic structures did not uncover any mutations in either coding or intron regions of torenia f3h, but a long insertion  was found in the 5′-upstream region of f3h in crw. this insertion was identified as a retrotransposable element of the ltr subtype
 <cit> . tore <dig> has typical characteristics of ltr-type retrotransposons, namely 560-bp ltrs with 5 bps of target site duplication , a pbs, and a ppt, and encodes a partial gag-pol protein . tore <dig> may thus be a nonautonomous element derived from an originally autonomous one. southern blot analysis also indicated the presence of tore1-like elements in the torenia genome.

transient expression analysis using various constructs of the f3h promoter revealed that the tore <dig> insertion is indeed involved in reduced promoter activity . for this analysis, we used the heterologous transcription factor genes gtmyb <dig> and gtbhlh <dig>  which regulate flavonoid biosynthesis in gentian flowers. these two genes were chosen because they are well-characterized and constitute a reliable transient assay system established in our previous studies
 <cit> . although torenia endogenous tfmyb <dig> and tfbhlh <dig> genes that are probably responsible for regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis have been recently isolated, the evidence for tfmyb1-tfbhlh <dig> interaction leading to activation of flavonoid biosynthetic genes remains inconclusive. further analysis is therefore required to clarify the effects of tfmyb <dig> and tfbhlh <dig> transcription factor genes on activation of the torenia f3h promoter.

many examples of transposable elements affecting gene expression have been noted in various organisms, with different classes of active transposons observed in genomes of eukaryotes including plants
 <cit> . transposable elements have been confirmed to contribute to plant evolution and diversity
 <cit> . retrotransposon or retrotransposon-like sequences, in particular, are ubiquitous components of plant genomes, and their impacts on plant genome structure and function have also been revealed . transposon insertions have been found in all types of genomic sequences, including coding  and noncoding  regions. in a previous study, an en/spm-like transposon  insertion in the tfmyb <dig> second intron was found to cause a mutant torenia phenotype by reducing expressions of flavonoid biosynthetic genes, including chs, f3h, dfr, ans, and udp-glucose: flavonoid glucosyltransferase  <cit> . in our case, the insertion of tore <dig> completely suppressed f3h expression, as shown by rt-pcr and northern blot analysis. transposable element insertions often induce epigenetic changes, such as dna methylation, that cause strong gene silencing
 <cit> ; this fact suggests that tore <dig> may reduce f3h expression through a similar silencing mechanism. in fact, southern blot analysis of crw genomic dna digested with hind iii revealed some larger bands when probed with f3h. hind iii is sensitive to cytosine methylation within the recognition site, and slowly cleaves hemimethylated aagm5ctt
 <cit> . partial digestion with hind iii due to the effect of de novo methylation has also been reported in transgenic pea plants showing inducible co-suppression of the transgene after virus infection
 <cit> . such an epigenetic change probably contributes, along with disruption of the f3h promoter, to the reduction in f3h promoter activity. further studies using methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes or bisulfite sequencing would confirm this hypothesis.

detailed examination of the 5′-upstream region of the f3h promoter in crw genomic dna revealed the presence of a solo-ltr insertion in addition to the full-length tore <dig> insertion . southern blotting generated a banding pattern inconsistent with the presence of the solo ltr in the f3h promoter, indicating that the tore1-inserted f3h and solo ltr-inserted f3h are not allelic. the solo ltr is probably derived from a recombination between ltrs within tore <dig> in certain cells. as an example, the formation of solo ltrs through unequal homologous recombination of two ltrs has been previously reported in rice
 <cit> . based on the presence of solo ltrs and variously truncated fragments in plant genomes, unequal homologous recombination and illegitimate recombination have been inferred to drive genome size decreases in arabidopsis
 <cit>  and rice
 <cit> . crw sometimes shows faint pink-recovered sections in flower petals . a tore <dig> excision event is probably not involved in this recovery, however, as class i transposons move by a "copy and paste" process. in the transient expression assay, the solo-ltr insertion was less effective in reducing promoter activity than was the full tore <dig> insertion . this result suggests that the advent of the solo ltr is responsible for the partially recovered phenotype. further studies are needed to determine the mechanism and developmental timing of this tore <dig> recombination event in the f3h promoter of crw torenia plants.

the white coloration of crw can clearly be attributed to the f3h mutation, a conclusion confirmed by the complementation study . this finding is further supported by the fact that knockdown of torenia f3h by rnai produces white-flowered torenia plants in the blue-flowered cultivar summerwave blue
 <cit> . nevertheless, mutations were also found in f3′h and f3′5′h gene sequences in crw . deficiency of flavonoid b-ring hydroxylation activities is suggested by two observations: 1) apigenin was the only flavone accumulating in crw petals  and 2) f3h-overexpressing transgenic crw lines accumulated pelargonidin derivatives, not delphinidin derivatives . f3′h and f3′5′h genes in crw have deletion mutations that should affect enzyme activities. in particular, the single-base deletion in exon  <dig> of f3′5′h results in a frameshift and subsequent premature termination of the enzyme . such mutations are frequently observed in other plants. in soybean, for example, single-base deletions in f3′h and flavonol synthase  are associated respectively with gray pubescence color
 <cit>  and magenta flower color
 <cit> . a 4-bp insertion mutation in udp-glucose:anthocyanidin 3–o-glucoside-2''–o-glucosyltransferase  induces a dusky flower color in morning glory
 <cit> . in three morning glory species, a single c to t base transition, a single t insertion, and insertion of the transposable element tip <dig> in f3′h are reportedly involved in reddish flowers
 <cit> . in the case of crw, the 12-bp deletion in exon  <dig> of f3′h did not cause a frameshift, but apparently resulted in the absence of four amino acid residues . this deleted amino acid sequence partially overlapped with a threonine-containing binding pocket  regarded as an oxygen-binding motif of cytochrome p <dig> monooxygenase, required in catalysis
 <cit> . although in vitro enzyme activity was not examined, the lack of this essential motif is very likely responsible for diminished f3′h enzymatic activity. in addition, crw exhibits a shorter uv maximum absorption peak—333 nm compared with 346 nm in crv—and recovered anthocyanin pigmentation in f3h-overexpressing crw petals are pink, a color arising from pelargonidin derivatives that lack b-ring hydroxylation . these results also indicate the absence of f3′h and f3′5′h enzyme activities. it is unlikely, however, that these f3′h and f3′5′h mutations are responsible for white coloration in crw. for example, deficiency of hydroxylation activity in the anthocyanidin b-ring caused a color shift, but not to white as reported previously
 <cit> . how crw came to possess f3′h and f3′5′h mutations is clearly unknown, but they probably arose in this cultivar during breeding selection for flower colors such as pink, lavender, and blue. another possibility is that the breeding parents of crw contained the latent mutations of these two genes. torenia plants of the crown series have various flower colors, and this variation may depend on genotype. in fact, crv is heterozygous with respect to these two genes. it is also likely that the other flavonoid biosynthetic genes, besides f3′h and f3′5′h, have heterozygous mutations, because torenia is primarily an outcrossing species. further analysis of other cultivars of the crown series should also provide clues useful for answering this question.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we investigated the causal factor of white flower color in crown white, a torenia cultivar. using transient and transgenic approaches, we demonstrated that a novel retrotransposable element  inserted into the 5′-upstream region of the f3h gene is directly responsible for the colorless flower phenotype. further investigations will be required to understand the dynamics of tore <dig> in the torenia genome. as torenia cultivars have been produced in various flower colors, we expect that additional mutations will soon be uncovered using molecular approaches. we believe that the crown white cultivar will be useful for genetic engineering of novel flower colors using various plant pigments.

