BACKGROUND
gene expression microarrays enable the measurement of the activity levels of thousands of genes on a single glass slide. the number of genes  is in the order of thousands while the number of arrays is usually limited to several hundreds, due to the high cost associated with the procedure and the sample availability. in classification tasks a reduction of the feature space is usually performed  <cit> . on the one hand it decreases the complexity of the classification task and thus improves the classification performance  <cit> . this is especially true when the classifiers employed are sensitive to noise. on the other hand it identifies relevant genes that can be potential biomarkers for the problem under study, and can be used in the clinic or for further studies, e.g. as targets for new types of therapies.

a widely used search strategy employs a criterion to evaluate the informativeness of each gene individually. we refer to this approach as univariate gene selection. several criteria have been proposed in the literature, e.g. golub et al.  <cit>  introduced the signal-to-noise-ratio , also employed in  <cit> . bendor et al.  <cit>  proposed the threshold number of misclassification  score. cho et al.  <cit>  compared several criteria: pearson and spearman correlation, euclidean and cosine distances, snr, mutual information and information gain. the latter was also employed by  <cit> . chow et al.  <cit>  employed the median vote relevance , naïve bayes global relevance , and the snr, which they referred to as mean aggregate relevance . dudoit et al.  <cit>  employed the t-statistic and the wilcoxon statistic. in all cases, the genes are ranked individually according to the chosen criterion, from the most to the least informative. the ranking of the genes defines the collection of gene subsets that will be evaluated to find the most informative subset. more specifically, the first set to be evaluated consists of the most informative gene, the second set to be evaluated consists of the two most informative genes and the last set consists of the complete set of genes. the set with the highest score  is then judged to be the most informative. for a set of p genes, this univariate search requires the evaluation of at most p gene sets.

several multivariate search strategies have been proposed in the literature, all involving combinatorial searches through the space of possible feature subsets  <cit> . in contrast to the univariate approaches, which define the search path through the space of gene sets based on the univariate evaluation of genes, multivariate approaches define the search path based on the informativeness of a group of genes. due to computational limitations, relatively simple approaches, such as greedy forward search strategies are often employed  <cit> . more complex procedures such as floating searches  <cit>  and genetic algorithms have also been applied  <cit> . guyon et al.  <cit>  employed an iterative, multivariate backward search called recursive feature elimination . rfe employs a classifier ) to attach a weight to every gene in the starting set. based on the assumption that the genes with the smallest weights are the least informative in the set, a predefined number of these genes are removed during each iteration, until no genes are left. the performance of the svm determines the informativeness of the evaluated geneset. bo at al.  <cit>  introduced a multivariate search approach that performs a forward  search by adding genes judged to be informative when evaluated as a pair. recently, geman et al.  <cit>  introduced the top-scoring pair, tsp method, which identifies a single pair of predictive genes. liknon  <cit>  was proposed as an algorithm that simultaneously performs relevant gene identification and classification in a multivariate fashion.

the above mentioned univariate and multivariate search techniques have been presented as successfully performing the gene selection and classification tasks. the goal of this study is to validate this claim because a fair comparison of the published results is problematic due to several limitations. the most important limitation stems from the fact that the training and validation phases are not strictly separated, causing an 'information leak' from the training phase to the validation phase resulting in optimistically biased performances. this bias manifests itself in two forms. first, there is the most severe form identified by ambroise et al.  <cit> . . this bias results from determining the search path through gene subset space on the complete dataset  and then performing a cross validation at each point on the search path to select the best subset. although this bias is a well known phenomenon at this stage, a fairly large number of publications still carry this bias in their results  <cit> . the second form of bias is less severe, and was elaborately described in wessels et al.  <cit> . see  <cit>  for instances of results where this form of bias is present. typically, the training set is employed to generate a search path consisting of candidate gene sets, while the classification performance of a classifier trained on the training set and tested on the validation set is employed to evaluate the informativeness of each gene set. the results are presented as a set of validation performances – one for every geneset. the bias stems from the fact that the validation set is employed to pick the best performing gene subset from the series of evaluated sets. since optimization of the gene subset is part of the training process, selection of the best gene subset should also be performed on the training set only. an unbiased protocol has been recently proposed by statnikov et al.  <cit>  to perform model selection. here, a nested cross-validation has been used to achieve both the optimization of the diagnostic model, such as the choice of the kernel type and the optimization parameter c of the svm for example, and the performance estimate of the model. the protocol has been implemented in a system called gems  <cit> . in addition to the raised concerns, the comparison between the results in available studies is difficult since the conclusions are frequently based on a small number of datasets, often the colon  <cit>  and leukemia  <cit>  datasets. see, for example  <cit> . sometimes even the datasets employed are judged by the authors themselves to be simple and linearly separable  <cit> . therefore, no generally applicable conclusions can be drawn.

we perform a fair comparison of several frequently used search techniques, both multivariate and univariate, using an unbiased protocol described in  <cit> . our conclusions are based on seven datasets, across different cancer types, platforms and diagnostic tasks. surprisingly, the results show that the univariate selection of genes performs very well. it appears that the multivariate effects, which also influence classification performance, can not be easily detected given the limited sizes of the datasets.

RESULTS
the focus of our work is on gene selection techniques. we adopted several univariate and multivariate selection approaches. for each dataset, the average classification error across the folds of the 10-fold outer cross-validation and its standard deviation are reported in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  the best result for each dataset is emphasized in bold characters. for comparison the performance of three classifiers, namely nearest mean classifier , fisher  and the support vector machine , is evaluated without any gene selection being performed, i.e. when the classifiers are trained with all the genes. we judge that method a with mean and standard deviation of the error rate μa and σa is significantly better than method b with mean and standard deviation of the error rate μb and σb when μb ≥ μa + σa. the stars in tables  <dig> and  <dig> indicate results that are similar when employing this rule-of-thumb. as can be observed from tables  <dig> and  <dig>  the univariate approaches are significantly better than both the multivariate approaches and cases where no gene selection was performed in two cases: dlbcl and hnscc. in addition, univariate approaches are the best but not significantly better for the breast cancer and cns datasets, and comparable to the best approach in the remaining two cases . only for the colon dataset, the univariate approaches perform significantly worse than the multivariate tsp.

employing the t-test or snr in the univariate approaches has no effect on the error rate when employed in combination with the nmc. however, it has a significant effect in combination with the fisher classifier. this is mainly due to the sensitivity of the fisher classifier when the number of training objects approaches the number of selected genes during training  <cit> . this stems from the fact that the size of the selected gene-sets changes considerably across the folds of the gene optimization procedure, and may lead to sub-optimal gene set optimization.

concerning the studied multivariate techniques, the base pair  and forward search  approaches of bö et al.  <cit>  are significantly worse in the majority of the datasets, with the exception of the base pair approach in the case of the colon dataset. the liknon classifier reaches error rates comparable to univariate results on the cns and colon datasets. the recursive feature elimination  <cit>  performs slightly better than the other multivariate approaches achieving performances that are not significantly worse than the best approach on four datasets. however, in three of these cases, the performance is similar to the results achieved without any gene selection. as was observed by  <cit> , our results also indicate that there is no significant difference between rfe employing the fisher or svm classifiers. although the tsp method is the best performing approach for the colon and prostate datasets, its performance is not stable across the remaining datasets, in fact, it is worse than the best performing method in all the remaining datasets. summarizing, in six of the seven adopted datasets there is no detectable improvement when employing multivariate approaches, since better or comparable performances are obtained with univariate methods or without any gene selection. the classification performance alone cannot be regarded as an indication of biological relevance, since a good classification could be reached with different gene sets, and gene-set sizes, depending on the methodology employed. this is in agreement with the studies of eindor at al.  <cit>  and michiels et al.  <cit> . these studies pointed out that the selected gene sets are highly variable depending on the sampling of the dataset employed during training. however, different gene-sets perform equally well  <cit> , indicating that there is, in fact, a large collection of genes that report the same underlying biological processes, and that the unique gene set does not exist. the lack of performance improvement when applying multivariate gene selection techniques could also be caused by the small sample size problem. this implies that there are too few samples to detect the complex, multivariate gene correlations, if these were actually present. only one multivariate approach, namely the tsp method, was able to extract a pair of genes that significantly improved the classification performance.

CONCLUSIONS
in gene expression analysis gene selection is imdertaken in order to achieve a good classification performance and to identify a relevant group of genes t hat can be further studied in the quest for biological understanding of the cancer mechanisms. in the literature it is claimed that both multivariate and univariate approaches successfiilly achieve both purposes. however, these results are often biased since the training and validation phases of the classifiers are not strictly separated. moreover, the results are often based on few and relatively simple datasets. therefore no clear conclusions can be drawn. therefore, we have performed a comparison of frequently used multivariate and univariate gene selection algorithms across a wide ränge of cancer gene expression datasets within a framework which minimizes the performance biases mentioned above.

we have found that univariate gene selection leads to good and stable performances across many cancer types. most multivariate selection approaches do not result in a performance improvement over univariate gene selection techniques. the only exception was a significant performance improvement on the colon dataset employing the tsp classifier, the simplest of the investigated algorithms employing multivariate gene selection. however, the performances of the tsp method are not stable across different datasets. therefore, we conclude that correlation structures, if present in the data, cannot be detected reliably due to sample size limitations. further research and larger datasets are necessary in order to validate informative gene interactions.

