BACKGROUND
the major epigenetic alterations in eukaryotes are dna methylation and histone acetylation. promoter methylation has an important role in controlling the binding of transcription factors and other proteins to the dna, which in turn modulate the association of methyl-dna-binding proteins and histone deacetylases to the transcription start sites. this modulation is critical in regulating the switch between transcriptionally active euchromatin  and transcriptionally silent heterochromatin  and in turn gene expression  <cit> . the most common methylation event is the addition of a methyl group to the cytosine present in the cpg  dinucleotide  <cit> . these dinucleotides exist as either cpg islands or as sparsely distributed cpg motifs within the promoter regions of many genes. hypermethylation  of these islands or motifs results in transcriptional silencing  <cit> , whilst hypomethylation , either global or gene specific, induces expression  <cit> .

pcr-based techniques can be used to investigate the methylation status of cpg islands or motifs with the available methods being categorised based on the requirement for bisulfite treatment prior to pcr . bisulfite treatment converts all unmethylated cytosine to uracil/thymine, while methylated cytosines are retained. ms-pcr, psq or bs can then be used to measure cytosine conversion or retention and thus distinguish methylated from unmethylated residues  <cit> . as an alternative to bisulfite-based approaches, methylation-sensitive restriction endonucleases, which contain one or more cpg motifs within their recognition site, can be employed  <cit> . these enzymes will only cut the dna if the cytosine within the cpg motif is unmethylated. for this assay, the dna  is first digested and then subjected to amplification by pcr  using primers flanking the site of interest. if the cpg is methylated, then a pcr product will be generated, however, if there is no methylation, no product will be generated as the site will have been cut.

when designing methylation detection assays using ms-pcr, bs, psq or msre-pcr optimisation of the amplification conditions, including primer design, magnesium chloride concentration and annealing temperature, is essential to ensure correct interpretation of results. to enable this, suitable control dna samples are required that correspond to fully cpg unmethylated and fully cpg methylated dna.

in this paper, we describe an adaptation of the approach described by weisenberger and colleagues  <cit> . the methods presented here use a combination of whole genome amplification  using the multiple displacement amplification  approach  <cit>  with or without subsequent treatment with the cpg methylating enzyme sssi-methylase  to generate matched dna samples differing in only their cpg methylation. the dna samples generated using this method can be used as cpg methylation control samples for optimising pcr-based assays, as well as internal controls for all of the steps involved in a methylation detection experiment.

RESULTS
alterations in dna methylation status can modulate gene expression in the absence of dna base changes. although several pcr-based approaches can be implemented to measure methylation, before these can be reliably used to study patient samples it is first essential to optimise assay conditions. furthermore, as pcr amplification is often the end point measurement in methylation analysis, it is important to have amplification controls as a way of monitoring the whole experimental process, to ensure each step and treatment has worked optimally. while commercially available universally methylated and unmethylated dna can be used as controls, these have not always been reliable in our assays. as a consequence, we have developed a procedure for generating cpg methylated and cpg unmethylated dna from the same source dna using mda and m.sssi treatment.

mda is a rolling circle amplification method, originally developed for the amplification of large circular dna templates  <cit> , which has been adapted for the amplification of the entire genome  <cit> . this amplification method can generate dna strands in excess of  <dig> kb in length, without prior knowledge of the target template  <cit> . in the context of this work, mda generates amplified dna free of any methylation due to the absence of methylase activity for the mda enzyme . as a consequence the dna generated my mda will be unmethylated dna . sssi methylase has been reported to methylate the fifth position of cytosine in all cpg dinucleotides  <cit> , thus the treatment of mda generated dna with m.sssi will generate cpg methylated dna . a flow diagram of the steps involved is displayed in figure  <dig> 

the use of bisulfite treated mdna and udna as template for ms-pcr has allowed for the optimisation of several primer sets. primers for ms-pcr will ideally only generate a product with either mdna or udna, but not both. typical results obtained are displayed in figure 2a. using mmp- <dig> and brca- <dig> as examples, the primers that were designed to amplify methylated dna only amplified mdna and not udna. conversely those primers that were designed to amplify unmethylated dna only amplified udna and not mdna. none of the ms-pcr primers sets amplified untreated genomic dna; in addition wild-type primers did not amplify the bisulfite treated mdna or udna . when the primers were applied to bisulfite treated dna from the hfff <dig>  mda-mb <dig> and mda-mb <dig> cell lines, all three were demonstrated to be unmethylated for brca- <dig> . the analysis of mmp- <dig> methylation status indicated that both mda-mb <dig> and mda-mb <dig> were methylated, whilst hfff <dig> was unmethylated .

the regions interrogated by ms-pcr for brca- <dig> were also studied by pyrosequencing . psq, as first described by ronaghi et al  <cit> , is a dna sequencing approach that utilizes a combination of four enzymes  to perform dna synthesis in real time . as applied to methylation detection, psq can quantify multiple cpg sites per amplicon, whereby the percentage of c bases  versus t bases  can be calculated for each cpg position in each sample. in order to analyze the brca- <dig> amplicon, studied by ms-pcr, two sets of pcr and sequencing primers  were required. the results for udna and mdna demonstrate differential cpg methylation and are in agreement with the ms-pcr results, whereby mdna is methylated and udna is unmethylated. for the eight cpg motifs studied in the udna all had undergone 100% bisulfite conversion from c to t, confirming the fully unmethylated status of this dna as well as indicating that the bisulfite conversion step is working optimally. similarly, for the eight cpg motifs studied in the mdna, all of the eight cpg sites showed methylation , with an average of only 25% conversion, indicated by a 75%  to 25%  ratio  of c to t bases. thus the m.sssi treatment step is 75% efficient at methylating cpg motifs. these findings suggest that although the mda and m.sssi treatment enriches the proportion of methylated dna, up to 25% of the dna, within a single sample, may not be methylated at any one of these cpg motifs. despite this, the results for udna and mdna can be clearly and reproducibly distinguished by psq.

when genomic dna and bisulfite-treated mdna and udna were used as template for sequencing in combination with primers for mmp- <dig>  a pcr product was generated for all samples . bs primers were designed so that they were capable of amplifying the region of interest from all samples, irrespective of methylation status. this was made possible by ensuring that the primers did not contain potential cpg sites that may be prone to methylation. when these pcr products were sequenced, comparison of the results from genomic dna, mdna and udna allowed discrimination between cytosines that had been methylated  or unmethylated  . these bases are indicated in figure 3b–d by asterix . in untreated genomic dna  all cytosines are retained, however, in the mda-generated udna , following bisulfite treatment, all cytosines are converted to thymine. whilst for the m.sssi treated sample, mdna , only those cytosines in cpg dinucleotides remain unchanged indicating that they are methylated.

the results of the msre-pcr using mdna and udna are shown in figure 4a. the promoter regions of both mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> have a low proportion of cpg dinucleotides. associated with some of these motifs are recognition sites for restriction enzymes that are sensitive to cpg methylation , whereby when present methylation blocks the enzymes from cutting. digestion of udna with hpych4iv resulted in cutting of dna at unmethylated cpg motifs, however, mdna that possesses methylated cpg motifs remained intact. subsequent pcr, using primers spanning the restriction site, gave a pcr product with mdna, indicating cpg methylation and protection, but not with udna, showing absence of cpg methylation and sensitivity to digestion. when hfff <dig>  mda-mb <dig> and mda-mb <dig> cell line dnas were subjected to hpych4iv digestion and mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> pcr the results demonstrated that the cpg site in the mmp- <dig> amplicon was methylated in hfff <dig> and mda-mb <dig>  but unmethylated in mda-mb <dig> . the observations for mmp- <dig> indicated that the cpg site is methylated in all three cell lines  as all gave a pcr product. digestion negative samples gave pcr products for all dna samples , proving that the msre-pcr results were specific for detection of methylation status and not a failure in the amplification reaction.

CONCLUSIONS
the results demonstrate that the combination of mda and m.sssi treatment generate dnas that differ only in their cpg methylation status. the examples described herein illustrate udna and mdna can act as methylation-status specific controls for both assay optimisation and as internal controls for methylation experiments. this is important for several reasons;  it enables primer and reaction optimisation,  it allows for an experimental checkpoint, for instance ensuring bisulfite conversion is complete, as pcr products will be generated from mdna and udna with both sets of methylation status detection primers if the conversion is incomplete, or for msre-pcr to ensure complete digestion and  if mdna and udna controls are processed along side test samples when the controls give expected results then the results obtained from the test samples should be more reliable.

