BACKGROUND
evolutionary biology is concerned with explaining the origin and diversification of organismal forms. however, despite great advances in the understanding of maintenance and adaptive evolution of existing organismal forms, we still know very little about their origin  <cit> . especially puzzling is the origin of complex adaptations that involve close and context-dependent integration of multiple organismal systems.

the dual effect of a novel environment on phenotypic plasticity – simultaneous exposure of "hidden" developmental variation and strong selection on this variation – can be a starting point in the evolutionary persistence of some adaptations  <cit> . when individuals vary in their response to the novel stimulus, when this variability is heritable, and the stimulus is recurrent, such environmental induction can lead to eventual genetic determination of a novel adaptation  <cit> . the central thesis of this view is that evolutionary novelty often involves reorganization of preexisting phenotypes  <cit>  and this results in similarity of the novel changes among individuals, facilitates response to novel selection pressures, and can ultimately lead to genetic assimilation of the novel trait  <cit> . yet, empirical documentation of evolutionary persistence of environmentally induced adaptations is rare in natural populations  <cit> .

documentation of environmental induction and phenotypic retention of adaptive plasticity is the first step in investigating this proposed sequence, and rapid colonization of north america in the last  <dig> years by the house finch  – a species native to southwestern united states – provides such an opportunity. in both native  and newly established  populations, sex-bias in ovulation sequence  confers significant fitness benefits – in the recently established population, it increases phenotypic variance in offspring growth which leads to greater juvenile survival under novel ecological conditions, and in the native population, it lessens offspring exposure to ectoparasites and associated mortality  <cit> . in montana, the environmental stimulus to sex-biased ovulation is closely associated with the number of days during oogenesis when the ambient temperature falls below 4°c – minimum egg-tolerance temperature for most passerine birds . in the native population in arizona, the environmental cue is exposure of females during egg-laying to hematophagous ectoparasitic nest mite pellonyssus reedi that infests most nests for  <dig> – <dig> months during the late part of each breeding season  <cit> . the cues are unique for each population – montana population is not exposed to nest mites, whereas arizona population is not exposed to below egg-tolerance temperature during oogenesis and egg-laying.

here we studied the similarity in responses to population-specific environmental stimulus and proximate mechanisms behind such responses in first-breeding  females in each population. because most first-breeding females in the recently-established montana population are long-distance immigrants from southern populations  <cit> , they are not expected to have either an evolved recognition of the local environmental stimulus at the northernmost part of the species' range or an evolved and precise modification of ovulation sequence in response to this stimulus. on the other hand, first-breeding females in the arizona population are mostly locally born or short-distance immigrants from local populations that experience yearly seasonal mite infestation that exerts high nestling mortality  <cit> , and thus are expected to have evolved both a recognition of the local environmental stimulus  and a response to it.

RESULTS
response to environmental stimulus
sex-bias in ovulation sequence of first-breeding females was closely associated with the number of critical temperature days during oogenesis in montana  and with number of mites at the nest site in arizona , but the shape of the relationship differed between the populations. linear regression best described the relationship between the response and stimulus for first-breeding females in mt  +  <dig>  ±  <dig>  critical days, t =  <dig> , n =  <dig>  p <  <dig> ; cubic spline fit versus linear regression fit: t =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ), whereas a threshold-like cubic spline best described the relationship in first-breeding females in az . first-breeding females in mt had less precise sex-bias of ovulation sequence than first-breeding females in az  vs.  <dig> % , females:  <dig>  vs.  <dig> %; both fs >  <dig> , p <  <dig> ).

covariation between sex-bias and environmental stimulus across breeding episodes differed between the populations . in mt, threshold for environmental induction of sex-bias decreased across breeding episodes in females that were followed throughout their lifetime , and by the third breeding episode a single critical temperature day during oogenesis was sufficient to exert a full response . however, the strength of the response did not differ across breeding episodes across females' lifetime . in az, neither the relationship between cue and response , nor the strength of the response differed across breeding episodes .

natural selection on response to environmental stimulus
we documented strong selection on response to environmental stimuli in both populations . in mt, first-breeding females that biased ovulation order when experiencing critical temperature days during oogenesis had the highest fledging success, whereas females that experienced the critical temperature days but did not bias ovulation sequence had the lowest success  =  <dig> , t =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ; bst  = - <dig> , t = - <dig> , ns). in az, first-breeding females that responded strongly to the mites had the highest fledging success, whereas females that had lesser or no response had the lowest success  =  <dig> , t =  <dig> , p <  <dig> , bst  = - <dig> , t = - <dig> , p <  <dig> ). the strength of selection on response to stimulus differed between the populations , however the sharper peak of the estimated az fitness contour was likely confounded by the direct mortality effect of nest mites on nestling survival in nests with more than  <dig> mites at the onset of incubation .

proximate mechanisms of response to environmental cue
to investigate the proximate mechanisms behind adaptive sex-biased ovulation, we studied similarity in yolk uptake among oocytes within and between sexes within a clutch in both populations. specifically we examined whether oocytes that become males and females were recruited into the rapid growth stage at different times during oogenesis , a pattern expected to generate stronger correlations of yolk partitioning among single-sex follicles compared to mixed-sex follicles, or whether male and female oocytes are recruited in random order , a pattern not expected to generate sex-specific groups of oocytes similar in yolk deposition . in first-breeding females in az, our analyses revealed three significantly different, mostly sex-specific, oocyte groups in females that experienced mite infestation and had sex-biased ovulation order , and three weakly differentiated, mixed-sex groups in females that breed under mite-free conditions and did not bias ovulation order . in mt, there were four sex-specific groups in females that experienced critical temperature days during oogenesis , and two weakly differentiated, mixed-sex groups in females that did not experience critical temperature days during oogenesis .

discussion
in order for environmentally-induced plasticity to have long-term evolutionary consequences, it has to be allowed and retained by organismal homeostatic processes, have a heritable component, induce similar changes across individuals, and confer consistent fitness benefits  <cit> ; however, studies of these requirements are rare in natural systems. in several populations of house finches across north america, modification of within-clutch laying sequence of male and female eggs is under current natural selection in both maternal and offspring generations; these modifications are thought to be proximately produced by interplay of induced changes in maternal hormonal profile during breeding in novel or stressful conditions and associated distinct accumulation of hormones by oocytes that become males or females  <cit> . here we showed that, first, the sex-biased ovulation sequence in first-breeding females in the newly established population was induced approximately proportionally to novel environmental stimulus, whereas first-breeding females in the native population responded to the environmental stimulus in a precise threshold-like pattern and without induction . second, the dependence of response on environmental stimulus lessened across a females' lifetime in the newly established population . third, in both populations, sex-biased ovulation order was associated with the same mechanism – sex-specific groups of oocytes most likely induced through temporal similarity in recruitment time between oocytes that become the same sex .

these results raise two main questions. first, what are the mechanisms enabling phenotypic accommodation of environmentally-induced response across a female's lifetime? second, how can environmental induction of ovulation sequence lead to evolution of precise patterns of sex-biased ovulation sequence found in some birds, including in the ancestral population of the study species? we also discuss alternative explanations for the observed findings, including the evolution of reaction norms in maternal traits between populations.

in both populations, the response to distinct environmental cues was produced by rearrangement of the same proximate mechanism – clustering of male and female oocytes. we suggest that such clustering is induced by temporal hormonal fluctuations in female's plasma, such that the effect of ambient temperature on prolactin-regulated female's incubation behaviors or direct experience of nest mites at the onset of mite infestation season, induces female hormonal fluctuations, resulting in exposure of growing oocytes to distinct hormonal profiles, subsequent accumulation of distinct hormonal concentrations which in turn, can affect the sex-determining meiotic division of oocytes  <cit> . indeed, because hormonal mechanisms are involved in both assessment of environmental change and incorporation of novel environmental input, environmental induction of hormonal changes and subsequent phenotypic retention of their effects is a frequently documented route in the evolution of novel adaptations and morphologies  <cit> . because of its complexity, redundancy, and environmental sensitivity, hormonal regulation of avian reproductive system is particularly well-suited for retention of environmentally-induced modifications  <cit> . specifically, hormones regulating oocyte proliferation and ovulation have strong environmental sensitivity, and hormonally-mediated changes in gene expression as a result of prior breeding experience, changes in photoperiod, food, mate familiarity, or ambient temperature are often documented  <cit> . moreover, environmental modifications of the first ovulation sequence, such as sensitivity to ovulation-inducing hormones, might be retained throughout a female's lifetime in vertebrates  <cit> , apparently by the homeostatic effects of complex reproductive systems. thus, hormonal regulation might have a major role in the observed rearranging the same mechanism for novel inputs and novel functions in the two study populations.

female birds can show precise and context-dependent adjustment of sex-bias in laying order in relation to changes in mate quality, food availability, and time of breeding season, both across individuals  <cit>  and between breeding attempts  <cit> . how can precise sex-bias in ovulation sequence evolve, especially when its initial induction is likely to be imprecise ? we propose that evolved precision in sex-bias is caused by the linkage between hormonal mechanisms that influence sex-determination and mechanisms that enable distinct accumulation of hormones in oocytes that become males and females. distinct allocation of hormones into male and female oocytes is under strong selection on offspring growth; for example in the two recently established house finch populations with opposite sex-bias in ovulation sequence, males produced in female-biased positions and females in male-biased positions accumulated hormones incompatible with their normal development  <cit> , likely accounting for strong selection for environmental stimulus recognition documented in this study . because hormones in female plasma change with the progress of oogenesis, laying, and incubation, oocytes develop in and accumulate different hormonal milieus depending on the time of their sequestration, which, in turn, might produce temporal bias in time of sequestering of oocytes that become males and females resulting in sex-specific groups of oocytes described here . thus, natural selection should maintain close integration between the mechanisms by which hormones can bias sex-determination  and mechanisms enabling sex-specific accumulation of hormones by oocytes. such integration not only can explain the observed within-generation increase in precision of sex-bias in ovulation sequence , but also might be the mechanism for precise sex-specific maternal allocation of resources within a clutch in some birds  <cit> .

in the native population, the finding of higher precision, greater expression, and lesser dependency of sex-bias in ovulation sequence on environmental induction  is consistent with observations that sex-bias in ovulation is accompanied by precise maternal adjustment of offspring growth, likely representing an evolved mother-offspring co-adaptation under selection on offspring morphology during periodic mite infestation  <cit> . on the contrary, in the new population, selection on modification of ovulation sequence acted primarily on the maternal generation, such that females that were able to resolve the contrasting hormonal requirements of overlapping incubation and oogenesis under novel breeding conditions had the highest fitness  <cit> . elsewhere, we analyzed the effects of maternal adaptation on offspring across ten consecutive generations in relation to similarity in environmental conditions between maternal and offspring generations and found that the effects of induced maternal adaptation on the offspring induced wider phenotypic plasticity in offspring development and morphology rather than precise adjustment of offspring growth  <cit> .

alternatively, the newly established population might be expressing only a variant of the reaction norm that cannot be expressed in the native population due to more consistent and stronger selection on the reaction norm there  <cit> . in the context of this study system, the reaction norm is the sensitivity to environmental stimuli or a narrower range of adaptive response in the native population. however, strong within-individual changes in phenotypic plasticity , the precise and complex nature of adaptive response where a different sex-bias in ovulation sequence is favored in different populations , and the fact that stimuli are unique for each population make it unlikely that the observed population differences in dependence of the response on the stimulus  constitute differential expression of the same reaction norm or a retained response. at the same time, it is important for future studies to address the within-population contribution of genetic and environmental factors to the evolution of reaction norms.

CONCLUSIONS
across dispersing and native populations of the house finch, we observe differential importance of maternal effects for the evolution of local adaptations – from environmentally-induced maternal effects that increase developmental plasticity in the first few generations of the newly established population to the reliable production of locally adaptive morphologies in the absence of sex-biased maternal effects, but short-term and reversible maternal effects on offspring growth under mite infestation in the native population  <cit> . we showed that developmental plasticity induced by novel environmental conditions confers significant fitness advantages to both maternal and offspring generations and might play an important role not only in the successful establishment of house finches across the widest ecological range of extant bird species, but also can provide an example of the link between environmental induction and genetic inheritance in the evolution of novel adaptations.

