BACKGROUND
the basidiomycete xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous  is an excellent astaxanthin-producing yeast and has been regarded as one of the most promising microorganisms for the commercial production of this carotenoid  <cit> . astaxanthin is a pigment that produces the characteristic coloration of some birds, crustaceans and salmon. it has been used as a feed and food pigment in the aquaculture industry and has been evaluated as a pharmaceutical component because it may possess antioxidant activity  <cit> . due to its biotechnological significance, investigations have been performed to improve astaxanthin production by optimizing fermentation methodologies  <cit>  selecting for over-producing strains  <cit> , using chemical stimulants  <cit> , and employing genetic and metabolic engineering  <cit> .

in x. dendrorhous, astaxanthin is produced via the mevalonate pathway, in which acetyl-coa is a precursor to the formation of isopentenyl pyrophosphate , the general precursor of all isoprenoids. chain elongation by successive head-to-tail condensation is then catalyzed by prenyltransferases with different chain length specificities  <cit>  to generate carotenoid precursors. thus, farnesyl pyrophosphate   and geranyl pyrophosphate   are the immediate precursors of c <dig> and c <dig> carotenoids. ggpp formation is catalyzed by a ggpp synthase. the condensation of two molecules of ggpp is catalyzed by the bifunctional enzyme phytoene synthase to produce phytoene . lycopene is generated by phytoene desaturase, which introduces four double bonds into phytoene. a bifunctional enzyme with a lycopene cyclase activity then transforms lycopene into β-carotene by two cyclization reactions. finally, β-carotene is oxidized by astaxanthin synthetase to yield astaxanthin  <cit> .

because little information on the genomics and regulation of carotenogenesis in x. dendrorhous is available, studies of astaxanthin production from a genetic perspective have been hampered; however, an alternative approach to address these biological questions is proteomics two-dimensional  techniques are the most generally applicable methods for obtaining a global picture of protein expression levels, and mass spectrometry  has become the technology of choice for protein identification  <cit> . in previous studies, it has been demonstrated that 2d electrophoresis coupled with peptide mass fingerprinting  is a viable approach for the identification of homologous proteins across species boundaries  <cit> . therefore, biosynthetic pathways and metabolic events in x. dendrorhous may be deduced from the functions of previously identified proteins.

in the present study, we used 2d protein electrophoresis coupled with matrix-assisted-laser-desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry  to analyze soluble protein extracts from x. dendrorhous cells grown on glucose minimal medium . to the best of our knowledge, this is the first proteomic study on this yeast; thus, prior to protein characterization, we designed an optimized protocol for protein extraction. because some specific or late reactions in carotenogenesis involve membrane-bound enzymes, we designed a protocol for the enrichment of membrane-bound proteins. these extracts were separated in two dimensions to obtain a protein map. in our analysis, the most abundant proteins were involved in primary metabolic pathways, and carbohydrate and lipid metabolic proteins showed the highest intensity spots. interestingly, along with some carotenogenesis proteins, redox- and stress-associated proteins were up-regulated. this proteomic study is an important starting point and may be a useful reference for further studies of metabolic pathways, especially astaxanthin synthesis in x. dendrorhous.

RESULTS
isolation of soluble proteins and 2d electrophoresis
the aim of the present study was to characterize the proteome of soluble protein extracts of the yeast x. dendrorhous grown in mm-glucose media. therefore, sample preparation prior to the ief run was important for optimal electrophoretic separation of proteins.

in the methods, we describe the comprehensive protocol used to obtain the soluble protein extracts. briefly, to improve cell disruption and minimize proteolysis, lyophilized yeast cells were vortexed directly with glass beads. lysis buffer and protease inhibitors were then added to reduce proteolytic enzyme activity. the pellet was disrupted five times in a ribolyzer, followed by phenol extraction and methanol precipitation. finally, the protein spots were stained with coomassie and identified by maldi-tof ms.

to obtain the protein profiles of x. dendrorhous, the yeast was cultured in mm-glucose and harvested at the lag, late exponential and stationary growth phases. four independent cultures showed continuous increases in cell density until  <dig> h, which was immediately prior to the induction of carotenoid biosynthesis . as we have previously reported, pigment accumulation in mm-glucose was evident during the stationary phase  <cit> . carotenoid analysis by hplc showed that astaxanthin was the main carotenoid  produced by the yeast during growth.

for the proteomic analyses, triplicate protein extracts  were subjected to 2d analysis, and their protein profiles were obtained. the different protein profiles were subjected to a stringent comparative analysis using pdquest software . after automated spot detection, spots were checked manually to eliminate possible artifacts such as background noise or streaks. student's t-test  was used to determine whether the relative changes in protein abundance were statistically significant.

a representative 2d image is shown in figure  <dig>  the protein data analyses showed a consistent protein profile during growth . on average, approximately  <dig> spots were detected on each 2d gel in a pi-range of 3- <dig> and a molecular mass range of 10- <dig> kda. this pattern of proteins was highly reproducible, and similar results were obtained in the triplicate cell extracts. overall, the protein profiles did not change dramatically  during growth. of the spots detected in all gels,  <dig> spots with different intensities were selected to be excised, digested with trypsin and analyzed by maldi-tof ms for protein identification. in total,  <dig> non-redundant proteins  were identified in  <dig> spots . the proteins identified were classified according to their biological functions. because it was impossible to determine the spot intensities for overlapping spots, we only quantified  <dig> single-protein spots.

evaluation of multiple spots and differentially migrating proteins
proteins expressed from a single gene can migrate to multiple spots on 2d gels due to either post-translational modifications  or artifactual modifications. it has been reported that several yeast proteins are resolved in multiple spots on 2d gels  <cit> . consistent with these findings, we identified  <dig> proteins that were represented by multiple spots , and approximately  <dig> proteins were present in more than three spots , including the stress-related proteins hsp <dig>  and atp synthase β , which were previously reported to have multiple spots  <cit> , and pp1- <dig> , a protein that regulates the cellular response in glucose starvation and stress  <cit> .

in most cases, multi-spot proteins showed charge variations , which are usually due to protein phosphorylation or other post translational modifications that alter the isoelectric point of a protein  <cit> . interestingly, we found the protein, methionyl-trna formyltransferase , that had a diagonal spot pattern, which is less frequently reported . this migration pattern agrees with the results of previous studies  <cit> , in which several metabolic proteins displayed distinct migration patterns. these multiple electrophoretic species could be generated by proteolytic events or could represent isoenzymes  <cit> ; these possibilities were not further investigated in this work.

approximately 25% of the proteins identified in this study had potential posttranslational modifications or belonged to multigenic protein families. accordingly, we studied the intensity profiles of proteins with multiple spots , of  <dig> multi-spot proteins identified  <dig> subgroups of proteins share similar profiles. for instance, a higher abundance of methionyl-trna formyltransferase and myosin-associated protein were observed at the end of the exponential phase. . in contrast, acetyl-coa carboxylase and golgi transport protein showed dramatic decreases in spot intensity in the late exponential phase. monooxygenase and kynurenine 3-monooxygenase showed increasing intensities during growth. moreover, other sets of spots that corresponded to the same protein were notably different , suggesting that the isoforms are regulated in different ways or are involved in different physiological processes. this form of regulation has been previously reported for some proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism  <cit> . unfortunately, no data could be extracted from our maldi-tof analyses to identify differences between the probable isoforms identified.

regarding the migration of proteins, for which full x. dendrorhous sequences were available, the experimental mr and pi values corresponded closely to the theoretical values, except for acetyl-coa carboxylase . for this protein, the experimental mr was markedly lower than the theoretical mr. this discrepancy in mr could be linked to either in vivo or in vitro protein degradation. in fact, this protein was identified with peptides that spanned the middle and carboxy terminal regions of the reported amino acid sequence. however, for the orthologous proteins identified, we found reasonable correlations between the experimental and theoretical migrations . most discrepancies corresponded to a lower mr value and more acidic pi value for the gel-estimated value compared to the theoretical value. for instance, phosphatidylserine decarboxylase  was detected in the acidic range , but this protein has a basic theoretical pi of  <dig> . this unusual migration has been observed in ribosomal proteins in previous studies  <cit> ; while this behavior still has no explanation, it is probably related to the presence of posttranslational modifications.

protein identification and classification into functional groups
we employed the approach of cross-species protein identification for x. dendrorhous because this yeast is poorly characterized at the gene and protein levels. the conserved nature of many biosynthetic and metabolic pathways in different organisms has been the basis for several studies of species that lack genome sequence data  <cit> . furthermore, based on theoretical and experimental evidence, it has been shown that sequence identities greater than 60% are sufficient to match proteins with high confidence across species boundaries  <cit> . it fact, it has been previously reported that conserved structural motifs could be identified across distant species with total amino acid sequence identities as low as  <dig> %  <cit> . in this work, nitrite reductase was identified with  <dig> mass peptides that covered 16% of the sequence; two of these mass peptides were located in the bacterioferritin-associated ferredoxin-like   binding domain  <cit> . for mevalonate kinase, the four peptides identified spanned the domain designated mevalon_kin  <cit> .

the proteins identified based on these analyses are listed in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig>  along with their corresponding spot numbers from the 2d gel .

the proteins were classified into different groups according to their biological functions, which were determined using annotations from the kegg database. the most abundant proteins found in this study were involved in metabolic pathways  . others were involved in cellular transport ; environmental information processing, such as signal transduction proteins ; genetic information processing including translation and transcription, replication, repair, folding and processing ; and unknown processes  . a similar distribution has been observed in previous yeast proteomic studies .

in the metabolism group, we identified proteins that belonged to different biosynthetic pathways, including amino acid, nucleotide, carbohydrate, energy, isoprenoid, redox and lipid metabolism . the carbohydrate-related protein group, included enzymes from the glycolysis, pentose phosphate  and tricarboxylic acid  pathways . in general, proteins involved in carbohydrate, amino acid, redox and lipid metabolism showed the greatest spot intensities when compared with all other identified proteins.

differential protein abundance during growth in mm-glucose
statistical analyses were performed using student's t-test  to select spots that showed significant changes in intensity relative to the intensity in the lag phase. a total of  <dig> spots  showed more than two-fold changes with confidence levels of 95-99% .

a ssp numbers were assigned by pdquest software analysis.

b identifications were obtained using the swiss-prot and kegg pathways databases and contigs of x. dendrorhous genomic dna.

c data derived from pdquest estimation.

d mean fold changes compared with the  <dig> h cultures. bold values indicate p <  <dig> , italic p <  <dig>  and underlined values indicate p <  <dig> . avg., average; sd, standard deviation.

most of the differentially regulated proteins  fell within three functional groups , while 13% had unknown functions . in addition, we observed similar patterns of intensities between proteins with multiple spots, such as myosin-associated protein and golgi transport protein .

the fold-change data for proteins with differential abundances indicated that more than half of the proteins in the late exponential phase were down-regulated compared to their expression in the lag phase. in contrast most of the proteins were up-regulated in the stationary phase . higher fold-changes were found for amino acid biosynthesis and transport proteins. notably, some proteins involved in signal transduction and carotenoid biosynthesis were up-regulated in the late exponential and stationary phases. however, some redox proteins and the unknown proteins were down-regulated in both phases.

in the following sections, we present an in-depth analysis of the protein abundance patterns based on functional groups.

carbohydrate and lipid metabolism proteins
in the presence of glucose, the major pathways of carbohydrate metabolism are activated to produce energy for the cell. therefore, many proteins that are important for growing cells also play a role in stationary phase growth  <cit> . among these proteins, the enzymes of glycolysis and the tca and pp pathways were identified in the 2d gels. in general, this group of proteins showed high and similar levels of abundance during growth, which is consistent with previous reports  <cit> . as indicated in figure  <dig> and table  <dig> only two proteins  were differentially regulated . it is noteworthy that these proteins not only have pivotal roles in central metabolism but are also linked to carotenogenesis.

during the induction of carotenogenesis, phosphoglucomutase , an enzyme of the pp pathway, showed a three-fold increase in intensity . it has been previously shown that astaxanthin synthesis requires oxygen and nadph, which may be due to the reactions converting β-carotene to astaxanthin  <cit> . in addition, the pp pathway may serve as a key source of nadph for ros removal in response to oxidative stress  <cit> , and phosphoglucomutase shows changes in expression related to nadph generation when cells are treated with h2o <dig>  <cit> . thus, our result suggests that high activity of this pathway might be required to generate sufficient nadph for ros quenching in x. dendrorhous.

acetyl-coa carboxylase  showed a distinct abundance pattern during growth. this protein was present at high levels during the lag phase , followed by a decrease at the end of the exponential phase and then a slight increase in the stationary phase. it should be noted that only one spot showed a significant change in intensity; the other two spots showed a similar trend, although these changes were not significant . the decrease in abundance of this protein coincided with the induction of carotenogenesis at the end of the exponential phase. this enzyme contributes to the overall control of energy metabolism in the cell and, catalyzes the carboxylation of acetyl-coa to form malonyl-coa, an essential substrate for fatty acid synthesis  <cit> . therefore, the observed decrease in abundance might be related to the increased availability of acetyl-coa for carotenoid biosynthesis.

although most of the carbohydrate and lipid metabolism proteins showed similar levels during growth, we observed that several proteins related to acetyl-coa synthesis showed maximal abundance in the lag phase, prior to the induction of carotenogenesis , including acetyl-coa synthetase, alcohol dehydrogenase and atp-citrate lyase   <cit> . this result indicates that carbon flux to the biosynthetic pathways, including carotenogenesis, is tightly regulated to maintain cell activity in x. dendrorhous.

redox and stress response proteins
carotenoid accumulation is thought to be a survival strategy not only for the alga h. pluvialis but also for other microorganisms, including x. dendrorhous  <cit> . it has been observed that carotenoid biosynthesis in carotenoid-producing microorganisms is stimulated by oxidative stress  <cit> . cellular antioxidant mechanisms include both non-enzymatic molecules, such as glutathione and several vitamins, and ros scavenger enzymes, such as superoxide dismutase , catalase and glutathione peroxidase  <cit> . apparently, x. dendrorhous lacks these enzymatic defense systems  <cit> ; in fact, we identified only the mitochondrial mnsod protein . this protein showed a higher abundance at the end of the exponential phase and continued to decrease during growth . a proteomic study of h. pluvialis found that this protein is constitutively highly expressed and is progressively down-regulated after stress induction . in contrast, cytosolic cusod was found to be present in trace amounts and only up-regulated  <dig> h after stress induction  <cit> . thus, an increase in the level of cusod and modulation of the level of mnsod were found in response to stress in this carotenogenic alga. moreover, in a comparative analysis of c. albicans grown on glucose-supplemented media, sod21p  was detected only in the stationary phase, whereas the sod1p isoenzyme  was found only during exponential growth  <cit>  . taken together, these results suggest that the regulation of sod is species-specific and depends on the growth phase. in the specific case of x. dendrorhous, we observed an increased level of mnsod that coincided with the induction of carotenogenesis, which reinforces the antioxidant role of astaxanthin in the absence of other enzymatic antioxidant mechanisms.

for the redox and stress response proteins, we observed distinct abundance patterns occurring before or during the induction of carotenogenesis. at the end of the exponential phase, three redox proteins were more than four-fold down-regulated , indicating that they were highly abundant in the lag phase. interestingly, along with mnsod, the monooxygenase and cytochrome p <dig> proteins were up-regulated approximately  <dig> -fold at the end of the exponential phase . these two proteins are closely related to the biosynthesis of many secondary metabolites, including carotenoids  <cit> . specifically, both catalyze the addition of a single oxygen atom from molecular oxygen to a substrate and the reduction of the second oxygen atom into water, a reaction that consumes two reducing power equivalents. the final donor of electrons for the p <dig> monooxygenases is nadph  <cit> . moreover, crts  belongs to the cytochrome p <dig> protein family  <cit> , and cpr has recently been identified as an auxiliary enzyme for crts during astaxanthin synthesis  <cit> . two of the proteins identified in this work, cytochrome p <dig> and monooxygenase, could perform auxiliary reactions during astaxanthin biosynthesis; the complete identification and further characterization of these proteins is currently underway.

there are clear differences in the induction of astaxanthin synthesis between the carotenogenic microorganisms h. pluvialis and x. dendrorhous. after 24- <dig> h of stress induced by light and high salt, the alga undergoes morphological changes and accumulates astaxanthin for up to  <dig> days  <cit> . in the yeast, under high oxygen concentrations, astaxanthin synthesis is induced on the third day of culture, which coincides with the end of the exponential phase of growth, and allows the accumulation of astaxanthin for up to  <dig> days  <cit> . we found similar protein profiles for these microorganisms; however, as expected, some of the differentially regulated proteins were related to stress response and carotenogenesis. in h. pluvialis, the direct association between stress response and carotenogenesis is clear. for x. dendrorhous, during aerobic growth with a low level or the absence of the antioxidant enzymatic systems, carotenogenesis can be induced. thus, astaxanthin could perform the antioxidant role of quenching ros produced during cellular metabolism.

carotenoid biosynthetic enzymes
using our protocol for protein extraction, we determined that 9% of all the identified proteins were membrane associated. we did not identify all of the membrane-bound enzymes that perform the late reactions of carotenogenesis, probably due to technical limitations. we have identified eight proteins related to general or specific steps of astaxanthin biosynthesis. prenyltransferase, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase/polyprenyl synthetase, phytoene desaturase and astaxanthin synthase were present similar abundances during growth. the other four proteins showed significant fold changes . first, mevalonate kinase , which performs a preliminary step in ipp generation, was present at high levels in the lag phase, was down regulated in the exponential phase and was then, up regulated by approximately three-fold in the stationary phase . this early induction is not surprising, as this enzyme performs a preliminary step in common pathways that include isoprenoid and ergosterol synthesis. in carotenogenesis, it is the second essential enzyme of the mevalonate pathway, after 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coa reductase , which catalyzes the phosphorylation of mevalonic acid to produce phosphomevalonate. mk activity is regulated by intermediates in the pathway, such as geranyl pyrophosphate, fpp and ggpp, via feedback inhibition  <cit> . for phosphomevalonate kinase we observed the highest abundance at lag phase, while diphosphomevalonate decarboxylase reached its highest levels during the exponential and stationary phases. because these two proteins perform sequential steps in the transformation of mevalonate our results indicate that this pathway is tightly regulated to ensure metabolite availability.

another significant carotenoid-synthesis protein is phytoene/squalene synthase, which showed higher abundance at the end of the exponential growth during the induction of carotenoid synthesis . this result agrees with our previously reported mrna expression analysis, in which the maximal levels of carotenoid-specific genes were observed after three days of culture, at the end of the exponential growth phase  <cit> .

in constrast, in h. pluvialis, the mrna transcript levels of carotenoid-related genes reach their maximal levels 24- <dig> h after stress induction, and the synthesis and accumulation of astaxanthin occur 6- <dig> days after stress  <cit> . another enzyme that performs an initial step in carotenogenesis, isopentenyl-diphosphate isomerase , shows maximum expression at  <dig> h after stress induction in h. pluvialis, and is then down-regulated as stress persist; a similar behavior has also been observed for phytoene desaturase  <cit>  . thus, carotenoid-related enzymes in both h. pluvialis and x. dendrorhous may have low turnover rates; this low rate ensures their long-term activities in astaxanthin biosynthesis.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, which is the first proteomic characterization of x. dendrorhous, we describe a protocol for the enrichment of protein extracts for membrane-bound proteins and the efficient extraction of proteins in the presence of excess hydrophobic materials such as lipids or carotenoids. we have also generated a preliminary proteome map, which will be valuable for further studies of the organism under different growth conditions.

we identified two principal types of protein regulation associated with astaxanthin biosynthesis. first, we observed a tight regulation of carbohydrate and lipid proteins, which may ensure the availability of acetyl-coa for the cellular metabolism. second, we observed an up-regulation of redox-specific proteins, such as monooxygenase and cytochrome p <dig>  which likely provides the redox level necessary for the late reactions of astaxanthin synthesis.

based on these results, it is possible to assume that the production of astaxanthin is an alternative mechanism for respondings to cellular or environmental stress conditions in x. dendrorhous.

although we observed a correlation between mrna levels and protein abundances for phytoene/squalene synthase, it will be necessary to perform a membrane proteome analysis to study the late enzymes of the astaxanthin synthesis. moreover, detailed transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic studies are required to generate an integrated understanding of the biochemical, physiological and biological processes of x. dendrorhous, both for basic science research and for metabolic engineering applications to optimize astaxanthin production.

