BACKGROUND
epstein-barr virus  is a herpesvirus that infects epithelial and b cells and has been associated with the development of various tumors, including hodgkin’s and burkitt’s lymphoma 
 <cit> . since ebv is able to transform b cells into continuously proliferating lymphoblastoid cell lines , it is commonly used as a tool in clinical research for creating an unlimited source of patients’ material 
 <cit> . although lcls have been used frequently as a source of dna in genetic studies, controversy still exists about their reliability in faithfully replicating the variation present in the donor germ-line .

in all latently infected lcls, the ebv genome is present in the form of extra-chromosomal copies  from which the viral genome is replicated 
 <cit> . most research on the transforming abilities of ebv has been focused on the expression of viral gene products and the host’s transcriptional response. from this body of research it is now well understood that the viral transcription factor ebv nuclear antigen - <dig> activates the expression of several ebv proteins and non-coding rnas - the growth transcription program - that interfere with the host’s signaling pathways 
 <cit> . specifically, the growth transcription program drives cell transformation by activating cellular proliferation, while suppressing growth inhibitors 
 <cit> . even though the viral gene products exert their transforming functions primarily by interacting with host proteins, recent evidence suggests that ebv also promotes genomic instability in the host 
 <cit> . furthermore, ebv has the potential to cause mutations through integration and disintegration into the host’s genome . these putative early  genetic consequences of ebv infection are less well studied. if ascertained, those structural genomic changes would have important implications for the interpretation of a large number of genetic studies that assume lcls are a bona-fide source of genomic dna.

in recent years, massively parallel dna  sequencing has become increasingly affordable 
 <cit> , enabling the discovery of causative dna variants in rare genetic diseases 
 <cit>  and providing new insights into carcinogenesis and autoimmunity 
 <cit> . a recent study reported the comparison of dna isolated from peripheral lymphocytes and from an lcl from the same individuals by means of exome sequencing 
 <cit> . this study concluded that the exome fractions of genomic and lymphoblastoid cell line dna  are more than 99% identical.

whole genome sequencing can, in addition to identifying variation in coding regions, reveal copy number variation  and chromosomal rearrangements at high resolution. a whole genome sequence data set is therefore multilayered and can be queried for different aspects of genomic organization, making it a valuable tool for our study. here we report the analysis of complete genome sequencing  of a single individual to gain a better understanding of putative genetic alterations introduced by ebv transformation.

RESULTS
here we report the complete sequencing and analysis of the normal genomic and lymphoblastoid cell line dna from the same individual. we organized our analysis so as to proceed from investigation of major chromosomal rearrangements to small sequence variation, to single base changes. as a preliminary step, we performed high resolution karyotyping of the cell line to identify major chromosomal abnormalities. fifteen out of  <dig> analyzed metaphases showed a normal karyotype . only  <dig> cells showed random changes in chromosome number, consistent with what would be expected for an early-passage lcl. once sequencing data was obtained, we evaluated quality metrics of the two sequencing data sets, such as overall coverage, ratio of hetero-to-homozygous single nucleotide polymorphisms  and the ratio of snp transitions to transversions. these parameters are similar to those reported for previously sequenced genomes using the same technology  and other human datasets using next generation sequencing . we also assessed the presence of viral dna. to this end, we extracted raw reads of sequences that did not map to the human genome and aligned these to the ebv genome. we found an average of  <dig> copies of ebv dna reads in the cell line as compared to  <dig> copies in the genomic dna , confirming that viral dna was present only in the cell line sample. since ebv has been described to integrate into host dna , we also checked for viral dna in all longer  insertions and substitutions that passed a pre-determined quality filter , as well as in all “non-reference” dna stretches joining the two arms of a chromosomal rearrangement in the cell line . none of these calls supported the presence of inserted ebv genomic information.

a total of  <dig>  gb of sequence were generated from the cell line and  <dig>  gb from the genomic dna. this difference in coverage did not alter most of the parameters analyzed, as these were highly similar between the two genomes . while the slightly deeper coverage of the genomic dna did result in more variants being called in this sample, the overall depth of coverage was highly similar for the two genomes . also, the regional distribution of reads was highly concordant . once we established that quality measures were not significantly different, we set out to make a detailed comparison between the two genomes.

this table also lists information on the number and kind of indels identified per genome, but does not contain data on structural variances.

gb: gigabase, snp: single nucleotide polymorphism, ins: insertion, del: deletion, sub: substitution, syn: synonymous.

first, we assessed whether the two genomes differed in structural variants, i.e. chromosomal rearrangements and copy number variations . chromosomal rearrangements can be inferred from reads spanning over a stretch of dna that is not contiguous in the reference genome . for example, if one half of a sequence read maps to chromosome  <dig> and the other half to chromosome  <dig>  this might be indicative of a translocation event. by visual inspection of reported dna junctions, we found that both genomes exhibited a largely similar number of chromosomal rearrangements compared to the reference and that they shared most of the inter-chromosomal junctions as well . indeed, a similar but small number of unique chromosomal rearrangements were identified in each genome ; 34% and 45% of these unique junctions, respectively, had been detected in more than 75% of all other genomes sequenced by cgi at that time and hence might represent false positives . to examine whether observed junctions might be linked to the transformation process, we reasoned that if the observed dif-ferences were of biological origin , a set of genes involved in cell cycle regulation would be among the affected loci. go and kegg analyses revealed very similar gene categories affected by chromosomal rearrangements in both genomes , thus suggesting these differences were likely random or false discoveries.

we next inspected ploidy  from genome coverage files in windows of  <dig> kb . both genomes shared almost all cnvs throughout the genome; of note, most dna stretches with ploidy >  <dig> were observed near telomers and centromers, likely reflecting the difficulty to properly align reads in these highly repetitive dna regions. the cell line showed a decreased copy number in only  <dig> regions  as compared to the genomic dna . four genes  and one pseudogene  were affected by the cnvs . none of these is reported to have a negative impact on cell proliferation. hence, it is unclear whether their reduced ploidy plays any role in the transformation process. notably, a 9-fold increase in copy number of mitochondrial dna was observed for the cell line, likely reflecting the increased energy demand of the actively dividing transformed cells . this finding is consistent with a previous study 
 <cit> .

we finally turned to an in-depth analysis of single nucleotide  and insertion/deletion  polymorphisms. using an automated whole-genome comparison algorithm  we found that  <dig> % of the variant calls were identical between the two genomes . only  <dig> %  and  <dig> %  of variants were unique to the genomic and the cell line-derived dna, respectively . of note, this level of discrepancy is within range of the error rate between technical replicates using cgi technology . although the number of expected differences between the  <dig> genomes from the same individual was low a-priori, we continued searching for potentially functional differences, namely non-synonymous variants such as “missense” , “nonsense” , “nonstop”  or “frameshift” . for each class of variant we identified the genes that were affected in each sample and then determined the overlap between the two genomes. while we found that 92% of the affected genes overlapped , these genes were not always affected by exactly the same mutations in both genomes. to test the reliability of these called differences, we inspected the sequence reads of  <dig> selected genes  using the integrative genomics viewer  
 <cit> . we observed that in most instances local coverage in one of the two genomes was very low, thus no variation call could be made with high confidence at that position. in other cases, one of the calls in the two genomes was wrongly reported due to ambiguity in the alignments . another common discrepancy arose from the fact that a variant was determined to be homozygous in one of the genomes and heterozygous in the other, even though both genomes were homozygous . only 11% of the called differences between the two genomes were supported by visual inspection of actual reads , implying that a considerable fraction of the reported differences between genomic and cell line dna represents false positives. 

in order to better control the false positive rate, we used the option -somaticoutput within calldiff, in which a somaticscore is computed for every variant that permits adjusting for sensitivity and specificity . the somaticoutput analysis requires specification of one sample as “normal” and another as “tumor” and generates an output containing all loci that are non-reference in the “tumor” sample. since the transformed cell line can be regarded as a tumor sample derived from the normal genomic sample, definitions were set accordingly ” analysis). the reciprocal definitions were also analyzed as a control ” analysis). since most of the variants only found in the genomic dna sample are expected to be the result of sequencing or calling errors, the gt analysis provides a reasonable estimate of the experimental noise. for both comparisons, the number of variant calls was assessed using different somaticscore cut-off values. as shown in figure 
4a, increasing the somaticscore cut-off increased the proportion of ct to gt variants, thus potentially maximizing true positive findings. even though the total number of variant calls unique to the genomic dna  is larger , a larger number of variants was detected in the ct analysis at all tested cut-off values . to minimize false positives, we chose a stringent cut-off of  <dig>  . assessing the regional distribution of these mutations revealed that variants unique to the cell line were randomly distributed throughout the genome; in contrast, a high proportion of variants unique to the genomic dna seemed within or near telomeric or centromeric regions . interestingly, 52% of variants in the ct analysis represented snps, compared to only 6% identified in the gt analysis . since snps are more reliably called than other classes of variants, they are less likely to constitute noise. this could explain the low fraction of  snps in the gt analysis, which is expected to mainly represent technical noise. we next compared the proportion of snps that were novel  in both analyses. strikingly, whereas all snps that were only present in the genomic dna have been reported before, none of the snps unique to the cell line were annotated in dbsnp, with the exception of one variant . although the low number of identified variants between lcl and genomic dna is within technical noise their novelty suggests that, if real, most of these differences would be random mutational events, driven by the accelerated proliferation of transformed cells. when assessing whether these snps altered coding sequences, we found that while 40% of them overlapped with genes, none had an impact on mrna sequences. specifically, except for one snp, all variants are either located in introns or untranslated regions, thus their consequences are not straightforward . none of the  <dig> snps unique to the genomic dna fell within a gene. in order to estimate the exact error rate of this technology, we randomly selected  <dig> snps unique to the cell line and re-analyzed these by sanger sequencing. we could not confirm any of the identified variants , suggesting that the real number of differences between the two genomes is even smaller than that implied by the somaticoutput analysis. 

taken together, these results suggest that by using this technology at 40x resolution dna from the cell line is mostly undistinguishable from genomic dna from the same individual. the few putatively true differences are randomly distributed across the genome  and do not seem to drive the transformation process.

discussion
here we report on the first genome-wide sequence-based analysis of the immediate genetic consequences of ebv transformation on a low-passage lymphoblastoid cell line from a subject with ms. while genomes from ms and healthy individuals may differ slightly, we deemed that this would not affect the conclusions of our study, which focused on characterizing the genomic consequences of ebv transformation. these effects should be clear-cut and insensitive to the source of the sample . for decades, the cell-transforming abilities of ebv have been used in genetic research to create repositories of subjects’ dna. while the roles of viral gene products in the transformation process have been described in detail, whether genetic alterations are introduced as a consequence of ebv transformation is less well understood.

several studies have systematically compared lcls directly to their parental cells using traditional molecular techniques such as snp typing, gene expression, and whole chromosome analysis 
 <cit> . the overall consensus is that no reproducible differences were identified 
 <cit> . for instance, redon et al. assessed differences between dna from hapmap lcls and their genomic counterparts and found that only  <dig> % of observed cnvs were caused by transformation 
 <cit> . another study confirmed that most cnvs in lcls can also be seen in normal b cells 
 <cit> . two of the cnvs reported in this latter study overlap with those detected in our lcl. this is not surprising since the genomic dna was isolated from pbmcs, whereas the lcl is a b cell line – hence b cell specific cnvs were identified as differences to the genomic dna in our study. the mitochondrial dna cnv reported here was also seen as a “cell line-specific” cnv in a previous study 
 <cit> .

next generation sequencing was recently used to compare genomic and lcl dna, although only the coding sequence  was assessed in that study 
 <cit> . specifically, authors used exome sequencing to compare dna from four lcls with their corresponding genomic dna . focusing their analysis on snps and small indels, authors reported a  <dig> % concordance between the parental dna and the cell lines, with all discordant calls stemming from a single lcl-donor pair 
 <cit> . given the relevance of non-coding regions in the modulation of gene expression and thus cell stability and function, whether the high level of concordance between genomic and lcl dna extended to the whole genome remains an important question. by analyzing the whole genomes  of an lcl and its genomic dna counterpart, we identified  <dig>  and  <dig>  unique variants with respect to the reference genome, respectively. in-silico analysis reduced the number of differences to  <dig>  in the lcl and  <dig>  in the genomic dna. however, none of the  <dig> variants chosen for validation by sanger sequencing were confirmed, thus suggesting that the number of real differences ought to be significantly smaller.

the known error rate of the ligation-based sequencing technique we employed was empirically determined to be approximately  <dig> in 100– <dig> kb . hence, we can expect  <dig>  to  <dig>  errors in each genome. in a previous comparison of two technical replicate samples  using the same technology,  <dig>  differences were detected ; we observed a similar number of differences  between the genomic dna and the cell line genome in our analysis. these numbers highlight how close the difference between the two genomes is to technical noise. we therefore chose to minimize false positives in our analysis by applying stringent filters to the lists of called differences. by these means we identified a number of snps that seemed enriched in the cell line . these variants represented silent mutations and appeared to be random mutational events, possibly resulting from the accelerated division rate of the transformed cells. however, we were not able to confirm a selected subset of those snps and further validation is needed to establish any true discrepancies between the genomic dna and the cell line.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our results indicate that ebv transformed cell lines at low passage number/short time in culture are genetically indistinguishable to the parental cells, suggesting that discoveries in genetic studies conducted using low-passage lcls with a normal karyotype can be extrapolated to the parental patient samples. we determined with high confidence that  <dig> % of the genomes were identical, with no reproducible changes in structural variation  or indels. while we identified  <dig> differences  in single nucleotide variants, none of the  <dig> randomly selected variants validated by sanger sequencing. these findings suggest that the true differences between the two genomes ought to be less than  <dig> % of the candidates identified by bioinformatics filters . we acknowledge that the sample size is a limiting factor of this study, and while similar results were reported by independent groups using different technologies 
 <cit> , larger studies will be needed to precisely determine the genomic effects of ebv transformation.

