BACKGROUND
our understanding of protein interaction mechanisms relies on the analysis of protein-protein complexes aiming to identify and characterize the fundamental physico-chemical and structural factors that are required for the specific recognition and functional interaction of protein partners. considerable efforts have been made to describe protein-protein interfaces in terms of amino acids composition and evolution  <cit> , and in terms of structural  <cit>  and dynamical features  <cit> . the analysis of protein complexes revealed that, although specific protein-protein interfaces present distinct features compared to non-specific interfaces observed in proteins crystals  <cit> , their properties can differ between the different types of complexes   <cit> . the analysis of secondary structures at protein-protein interface emphasized the importance of non-regular secondary structure  compared to more rigid regular ones  preferred in the core  <cit> . the secondary structure percentages at interface are more correlated with those of the exterior residues which suggests that the interface is structurally closer to the protein surface than to the protein core  <cit> . loops, which are more able to adjust themselves upon interaction, generally contribute to 40% of the interface  <cit> . compared to other complexes, transient complexes present a greater involvement of loops at interface since they provide more flexibility for the protein molecules to associate and dissociate appropriately  <cit> . α-helices are also well represented at protein-protein interface, particularly in obligatory homocomplexes of which interfaces are mainly composed by helix-helix pairing  <cit> . in transient heterocomplexes, binding sites have preference for β-sheets and long non-regular structures but not for α-helices  <cit> . the strong preference for β-sheets is probably due to their high ability to form densely packed structures when placed one against the other, thus having a higher potential for intermolecular bond formation. in addition, secondary structures appear to be under constraints to form interface scaffolds favorable to protein-protein interaction  <cit> .

besides the static structural description of protein-protein interfaces, conformational and dynamical changes upon complexation have been analysed since they have important implication for the development of docking algorithms  <cit> . both the 'induced-fit'  <cit>  and the 'pre-existing equilibrium'  <cit>  models for protein binding mechanism underline structural differences between the bound and unbound states of proteins. in the former model the differences are due to conformational changes induced by the binding of the ligand, while in the latter the differences are more related to dynamical changes where the bound state corresponds to conformations that pre-exist in the unbound conformations ensemble. comparisons between bound and unbound structures have been mainly performed through rmsd, torsion angles  <cit> , rmsf and principal components analysis calculations  <cit> . evidence for both models have been found possibly playing a joint role in molecular recognition  <cit> . structural differences between the bound and the unbound states of a protein can be either large  or small . conformational changes are not restricted to the interface and affect around 20% of the residues in allosteric proteins  <cit> . interface residues generally undergo larger motions than the rest of the protein in the case of enzymes  <cit> . in the case of ubiquitin, local structural variations in the region surrounding the binding site have been found to play an important functional role allowing the protein to adapt to its several structurally diverse partners despite a low rmsd in the ensemble of the recognition dynamics  <cit> . the importance of the local structural variation observed in the binding process of ubiquitin highlights the need for efficient local approaches to understand the mechanism of protein-protein interaction. in terms of dynamics, mobility of residues at interface is not homogeneous, core and surface interface residues are respectively less and more mobile than the rest of the surface  <cit> . in terms of secondary structures elements, loops are more likely to experience motions than α-helices and β-strands  <cit> . although the secondary structure composition at protein-protein interface is similar in bound and unbound conformations  <cit> , changes in secondary structures from disorder-to-order and order-to-order occur, possibly playing important functional roles  <cit> .

an innovative way to analyse and characterize induced-fit conformational changes has been proposed which consists of translating the  <dig> d protein structures into  <dig> d structural sequences using a structural alphabet  <cit> . what is the advantage of using a structural alphabet to analyse secondary structures shape and their induced-fit deformation? helical secondary structures can be curved, kinked or straight  <cit> . strand geometry depends on sheet parallelism and pleat which results in variable conformation of the β-strands. loops are weakly constrained structures and therefore difficult to characterize and compare. the hmm-sa structural alphabet  <cit>  describes the local shape of proteins and the logic of their assembly in  <dig> structural letters. it provides a detailed description of the protein backbone and allows the identification of conformational variations within the different secondary structure types. we call conformational variations differences in the backbone conformation  leading to variation in the shape of the secondary structures. four structural letters are associated with variation in the backbone of α-helices, five to variation in the backbone of β-strands. the  <dig> remaining structural letters described local conformations forming loops. thus the structural alphabet provides a way to distinguish among the different conformational states of each type of secondary structure, and also to characterize these states being then comparable. the study presented in  <cit> , in which hmm-sa was used to analyse the differences in structural letter composition at interface of bound and unbound proteins, was the first qualitative description of induced-fit structural changes. it revealed that some specific local conformations in coils are more likely to be deformed at interface upon complexation than other, and that the severity of the structural changes may also vary.

here we investigate the structural differences between the local conformations that can explain this variable behavior in respect of deformation upon complexation. while the previous study mainly focused on the deformation at interface of local conformations associated with loops, here we analyse each of the three types of secondary structure in the whole proteins. we first verify that the structural alphabet is able to fit previously reported description of protein interface, surface and core in terms of the secondary structure for the four different types of complexes. a more detailed analysis reveals a non-uniform distribution of the structural letters within proteins with clear preference of particular structural letters for either surface or core, and to a lesser extent for interface and non-interface regions. we show that structural letters with similar distribution preference shared common structural and solvent exposure features. in other words, it means that different backbone conformations tend to be adopted by the secondary structures depending on their location in proteins at interface, on surface or in core. we revisit the analysis of the structural deformation of local conformations upon interaction proposed in  <cit>  by comparing a dataset of bound and unbound proteins and show how the deformation of local conformations is related to their preferred location in proteins. deformation tendencies for local conformations are defined and different example cases of deformation are presented.

RESULTS
hmm-sa encoding and secondary structures
hmm-sa is a library of  <dig> structural prototypes  of four α-carbons named   <cit> . hmm-sa allows the  <dig> d structure of a protein backbone to be decomposed in four-residue fragments, each of them being described by four descriptors relying on inter-cα distances. more precisely, it corresponds to the distances between the α-carbons of residues  <dig> and  <dig> , of residues  <dig> and  <dig>  of residues  <dig> and  <dig>  and to the oriented projection of the last α-carbon to the plane formed by the three first ones . the resulting descriptors are the input of an hidden markov model able to encode any low energy structure of a protein into its corresponding structural letters sequence . the encoding takes into account both the similarity of the protein fragments with the  <dig> structural letters and the preferred transitions between the structural letters  <cit> . secondary structures of protein are assigned related to their hmm-sa encoding, as in  <cit> . the four structural letters  describe the different local conformations associated with α-helices , the five structural letters  are associated with β-strands , the  <dig> letters  are associated with loops  and the five letters  and  are associated with α-helix and β-strand borders . although classical secondary structure assignment methods attribute residues to either regular or non-regular secondary structures, secondary structures borders are transitional conformations between the two and can be characterized by the structural alphabet. they are classified as loops initially but are analysed separately in the following.

distribution of secondary structures within protein compartments
proteins of large datasets of protein-protein complexes were decomposed into three compartments: core, interface and surface. the residue distribution among the three protein compartments fits with the one reported in  <cit>  . the mean number of interface residues per complex is smaller in heterodimers  and transient complexes  than in homodimers  and obligate complexes  respectively, in agreement with  <cit> . secondary structure distribution is evaluated according to the secondary structure type of the structural letters within the three compartments . the large majority of structural letters on surface and at interface corresponds to non-regular conformations , while in core they are mainly associated with regular ones . the great number of loop- and α-letters at interface compared to β-letters in homodimers and obligates complexes, as well as the greater proportion at interface of β-letters compared to α-letters in heterodimers and transient complexes, is consistent with  <cit> . secondary structure distributions at interface, surface and core compartments are maintained in proteins between bound and unbound states as previously reported in  <cit> . we show here that the local approach is as reliable as the global one since similar observations are made on secondary structure distribution at interface, surface and core for the different types of complexes. in the following, protein-protein complexes are further explored with the local approach by distinguishing among the different structural letters of the same secondary structural type.

percentage of secondary structures in the three protein compartments interface, surface, core and their global proprotion in proteins  are given for the five datasets. regular secondary structures are evaluated by α- and β-letters, non-regular ones by loop- and border-letters.

distribution of local conformations within protein compartments
compartment preference of secondary structures is further deciphered by analysing the distribution of each structural letter among the three compartments. although β-, loop- and border-letters are similarly represented in proteins, α-letters present important representativeness differences . moreover the distribution of letters associated with the same secondary structure type differs in the three protein compartments  and is precisely analysed in a qualitative  and statistical  manner . the mca performed on loop-/border-, α- and β-letters shows that the most informative axis distinguishes between core and surface . differences between interface and non-interface are less discriminative on the mca plots  but z-score values assess significant preference for some letters . a detailed analysis for each set of structural letters corresponding to the different secondary structures is presented below.

distribution of loop-letters and border-letters
the first axis of the mca plot separates loop-letters into two groups of letters :  and  preferentially distributed in core and on surface respectively. in addition, some letters show a preference for interface or non-interface regions . in the first group,  present preference for interface  with significant z-score values for . in the second group,  is under-represented at interface  whereas  shows preference for interface. the kld values associated with border-letters are all significant:  are the most preferred on surface and the least in core while  display the opposite behavior.

distribution of β-letters
non-uniform distribution among the three protein compartments is also observed for β-letters . letter  obtains the most significant kld value among the  <dig> structural letters and displays a clear preference for surface. significant kld values are obtained for β-letters  which are preferentially distributed in core as illustrated by the mca plot. letters  are clearly distinguished by the second axis of the mca plot: letter  is preferred at interface compared to surface while  is under-represented at interface compared to both surface and core indicating its preference for non-interface regions. letter  has no significant preference.

distribution of α-letters
letters  exhibit different distribution in the three compartments  while letter  has no clear preference. letter  is preferred in core while  are preferred on surface. more precisely, z-scores show the preference of  for non-interface region being preferred in both core and surface compared to interface . notice that the kld and z-score values obtained for α-letters are lower than the ones obtained for loop- and β-letters indicating that α-letters display weaker distribution differences than the other structural letters.

compartment preferences in the different types of protein-protein complexes
the distribution analysis of the structural letters in the three protein compartments of the complete dataset unveils compartment preferences among local conformations belonging to the same secondary structure type. the local approach analysis reveals a tendency for secondary structures to adopt different local shapes according to their location in proteins at interface, surface or core. the analysis of homodimers, heterodimers, obligate and transient complexes separately shows a similar distribution preferences for local conformations among the different types of complexes . in particular, the distribution preference of letters for surface, core and non-interface is very strong and stable while the preference of letters for interface is more likely to vary between the different complexes. however, for transient complexes, the preference of local conformations for interface and non-interface is maintained in both bound and unbound states suggesting a structural predisposition of binding sites for interaction .

in order to quantify the extent of the preferential distribution of secondary structures in proteins, the difference between the observed occurrence of a letter in a compartment and its expected occurrence  over the observed occurrence in a compartment of a letter  is computed. the proportion of structural letters affected by the preferential distribution is evaluated for the different types of protein-protein complexes and is shown to be consistent varying between 12-17% for loop-letters, 4-9% for border-letters, 13-23% for β-letters and 3-7% for α-letters .

the percentage of secondary structure affected by the preferential distribution is evaluated in the interface, surface and core compartments using the difference between the observed number of the structural letters in a compartment and its expected number . the total effect  is evaluated according to the sum of the difference in the three compartments. the evaluation is performed on the seven datasets.

the local approach reveals that some local conformations are more affected by the preferential distribution than others. for instance structural letters  and , which have been shown to be preferred on surface and in core respectively, correspond to 57% of the β-letters affected by the preferential distribution in the complete dataset .

in the following, α-letters , β-letter , loop-letters  and border-letters , which are local conformations preferentially distributed on surface, are grouped together as surface-letters. strong preference for core is observed for α-letters , β-letters , loop-letters  and border-letters . they are therefore grouped together as core-letters. although the representation at interface of some letters may vary among the different types of complexes, the tendency for letters  and  to be preferred in interface and non-interface regions respectively is very stable. letters  are then further characterized as non-interface-letters and letter  as interface-letter. the structural characteristics of these groups of local conformations are analysed.

compartment preference and amino acids composition of local conformations
the amino acids composition of local conformations is evaluated at interface, surface and core in the complete dataset. for each structural letter, tryptophan and tyrosin are in greater or similar proportion at interface than in core while all other hydrophobic residues present a greater proportion in core. arginine and histidine present their highest proportion at interface compared to both surface and core. these residues have been previously found to be enriched at protein interface  <cit> . the proportion of proline and glycine, two residues known to be key structural residues, is observed to greatly vary between some structural letters, however these differences do not distinguish between surface- and core-letters structural letters . interface-letter  presents a high proportion of both residues . non-interface-letters  present low proportion of proline  while  appears to be particularity enriched in glycine  in agreement with  <cit> . other structural letters with different compartment preference  are enriched in glycine. then the amino acid composition of the structural letters, analysed in the different compartments, is unlikely to explain the compartment preference of the local conformations and confirms that amino acids and local conformations give complementary and not redundant information.

compartment preference and structural description of local conformations
a principal component analysis  is performed on the four structural descriptors characterizing the  <dig> structural letters of the structural alphabet . the first component  is strongly associated with descriptor d <dig> and inversely to p <dig>  with few importance to d <dig> and d <dig> . it differentiates letters according to their secondary structural types: β-letters are the most extended , α-letters are the least ones with large volume  and loop-letters present variable conformations  with border-letters being the closest to the α- and β-letters. unsurprisingly, the secondary structure type of the letters is the most important structural factor differentiating the conformation of the different structural letters. the second component of the pca  is positively associated with the descriptors d <dig> and p <dig> and positively to descriptor d <dig> in a minor way . it appears from the pca plot, it appears that the structural letters can be discriminatedz according to their preference for surface or core compartments  suggesting that specific structural features, captured by the structural descriptors, are related to solvent exposure. a detailed analysis for non-regular and regular structural letters is presented below.

characteristics of loop-letters
by focusing on the values of descriptors p4/d <dig> and d1/d <dig> for loop-letters , we observe that surface-letters associated with loops correspond to local conformations with short d <dig> and a tendency for low or negative p <dig>  non-interface-letter  and interface-letter  differ from the other surface-letters with the shortest d <dig>  core-letters display short d <dig> with positive p <dig> but can be separated in two groups:  display long d <dig> while  display short d <dig> comparable to surface-letters. these structural differences between the loop local conformations agree with their solvent accessibility . all surface-letters as well as core-letters  are respectively the most and least accessible to solvent while core-letters  present intermediate solvent accessibility. it suggests that local conformations with short d <dig> and long d <dig> are related to unfavored solvent exposure and then preferentially distributed in core, while local conformations with long d <dig> and short d <dig> are more exposed to solvent with variation according to the extent of the curvature  and its orientation. a negative p <dig> appears to indicate an orientation towards the protein exterior and is associated with surface-letters while positive p <dig> indicates an orientation towards the protein interior and is associated with core-letters. notice that border-letters present intermediate descriptor values since they can be associated with either regular or non-regular conformations, and so are not considered here.

characteristics of β- and α-letters
similarly for β-letters , surface-letter  is significant of a curvature in β-strands  and presents the highest solvent exposure on surface among all β-letters, while core-letters  are the least exposed. in particular,  correspond to straight β-strand conformations . distinction between α-letters in terms of structural descriptors is not clear , which is coherent with the fact that they also display the least differences in terms of distribution between the three protein compartments . however, their subtle differences in terms of structural descriptors are in fact reflecting different helix geometries: surface-letters  are associated with distortions leading to kinked and curved helices respectively while  forms straight helices  <cit> . non-interface-letters  also display common structural specificities corresponding to the local conformations with the shortest d <dig> in respect with the other letters of the same secondary structure type. the structural specificities of letters associated with either regular or non-regular secondary structures but sharing the same compartment preference are unveiled: curved conformations appear to be preferred in surface and straight ones in core. such variations in the backbone of secondary structures is associated with solvent exposure differences. local conformations avoided at interface correspond to conformations with the shortest distance cα1-cα <dig>  these results reveal new structural features, regarding the preferential shape of regular and non regular secondary structures in proteins compartments, which have not been appreciated before.

revisiting the deformation of local conformations
the deformation of local conformations upon complexation previously studied in  <cit>  is revisited and results are further interpreted in the light of the compartment preference and structural characteristics of the local conformations. we use a protein-protein interface definition based on solvent accessibility variation  and consider all structural letter transitions  within and between the different secondary structure types.

deformation of local conformations
the deformation of secondary structures is analysed by comparing the structural letter transitions from the proteins unbound to bound state. the local conformations are mainly unchanged in the three compartments, the majority of deformation occurred at interface  compared to surface  and core  in agreement with  <cit> . at interface, 66% of α-letters, 39% of β-letters and 27% of loop-letters are changed, among which 73%, 65% and 60% of α-, β- and loop-letters respectively are changed for letters of the same secondary structural type . but interestingly, on the other hand, the proportion of changed border-letters corresponds to 75% and are changed towards loop-letters , α-letters  and β-letters . it highlights that, although secondary structures are very stable upon complexation , their borders are more likely to be deformed or adjusted upon interaction. similar observations are made for the surface and core compartments, however the proportion of α- and β-letters that are changed for letters of the same structural type is even higher with 87% and 81% respectively . analysing the substitutions of each structural letter at interface gives a more detailed picture of secondary structure deformations upon complexation . for α-helices, curved non-interface-letter   displays a clear preference to be deformed towards straight core-letter  upon interaction  while the inversed substitution is more likely to be due to protein flexibility being as observed at interface as in surface. similarly for β-strands, non-interface-letter   is preferentially deformed towards the straightest core-letters  . curved surface-letter   appears to be deformed towards . for loop-letters, non-interface-letter  is the least changed letter  and core-letter  the most one . the fact that the least changed loop-letter  corresponds to a conformation avoided at interface suggests a non-flexible conformation interfering with efficient recognition or interaction with the other protein. 27% of the interface-letter  are deformed. no clear preferential deformation appears between specific loop-letters but they appear to be deformed towards letters with the same compartment preference: 70% of surface-letters  are changed towards surface-letters and 75% for core-letters  are changed towards core-letters. although the deformation tendencies at interface of local conformations associated with regular secondary structures  agree with their compartment preference , the expected deformation of loops from surface-letters to core-letters is not observed. instead deformation appears to be barely affected by solvent accessibility variation induced by the complexation with transitions between local conformations of the same compartment preference/structural characteristics. the relation between loop deformation and exposure to protein exterior is further analysed.

deformation of loops and exposure to protein partner
relative solvent accessibilies are computed for deformed local loop conformations in the interface compartment in both unbound and disjoint bound conformations, and the difference d between the two accessibilities is calculated. a negative difference indicates a deformation towards a local conformation with higher exposure to the exterior  while a positive one indicate a tendency for lower exposure. the average difference d¯ calculated on surface-letters deformed on surface-letters  and on core-letters deformed on core-letters  are all negative indicating that complexation globally increases residue exposure to the protein exterior. however, deformation of surface-letters towards surface-letters tend to be associated with higher exposure than deformation towards core-letters . coherently, deformation of core-letters towards core-letters tend to be associated with lower exposure than deformation towards surface-letters .

put all together it suggests that, since the deformation of loops upon complexation barely modify their exposure to protein exterior , most of local loop conformations are in an optimized conformation for interaction in the unbound state. more drastic deformations of local conformations occur  which tend to modify the exposure of the residues towards the protein partner. transitions from a core-letter to a surface-letter at interface would favor residue interaction between the two partners  while the reverse transitions tend to unfavor it .

deformation tendencies
local conformations are not subject to the same rate of deformation and follow some specific deformation tendencies: i) transitions from one secondary structure to another are avoided but deformation within each secondary structure type occur with preferences between pairs or groups of letters , ii) deformation preference between local conformations are not commutative, iii) flanking regions are the most frequently deformed local conformations. these observations are in agreement with  <cit> . the analysis of the distribution of local conformations in proteins highlights new features, and their deformations are consistent with their compartment preferences. regarding regular secondary structures, iv) the most deformed local conformations  correspond to curved conformations which tend to be avoided at interface , v) the least deformed ones  correspond to straight conformations preferentially distributed in core and vi) the most deformed local conformations tend to be preferentially deformed towards the least deformed ones. regarding loops, vii) two groups of local conformations emerge where deformation preferentially occur between local conformations of the same group, viii) these two groups present different compartment preference, one being preferred in core and the other on surface, ix) deformation from one group to the other is associated with higher variation of protein exterior exposure than deformation between local conformations of the same group.

notice that the correlated straightening-out of regular secondary structures on each side of the interface of the complexes has been evaluated through the occurrence difference of regular straight letters  between the unbound and bound states of each subunit of each complex. however, the low number of observations per complex does not allow any firm conclusions to be drawn.

illustration of deformation captured by the structural alphabet
example cases of protein-protein interaction are selected from the bound/unbound dataset to illustate the information that can be derived from the deformation tendencies described above. the two first examples illustrate induced-fit modifications that follow the deformation tendencies, the last four illustrate their violation.

from curved to straight regular secondary structures
the fifteen-residue helix of the human melanoma antigen complexes interacting with an enterotoxin  displays a cα rmsd of  <dig> Å between its bound and unbound conformations . it illustrates the deformation of a curved α-helix  towards a straight one  . the five-residue β-strand of the cd8α in complex with the human major histocompatibility complex molecule hla-a <dig>  corresponds to a curved β-strand  in the unbound state that is deformed into a straight one  in the bound state . this deformation is associated with a backbone variation of  <dig> Å rmsd. in these two examples, it is likely that the interaction of the protein chains caused a pressure at the interface flattening the surface of the secondary structures. such a mechanism would explain the deformation tendencies defined above for regular secondary structures.

all the following example cases illustrate the violation of the deformation tendencies. in these examples, it appears that the observed deformations are associated with structural constraints directly related to the function of the proteins.

from straight to curved helices
the first example regards the deformation of the seven-residue αgs <dig> helix of the tgfβ receptor type i  upon interaction with fkbp <dig>  an inhibitor of the tgfβ pathway . the phosphorylation site of the tβr-i is located in the gs loop surrounded by the two helices αgs <dig> and αgs <dig>  when fkbp <dig> interacts with the αgs <dig>  the helix nestles into the tβr-i structure and the gs loop formed an inhibitory wedge that inserts into a space in the protein core  <cit> . αgs <dig> presents a cα rmsd of  <dig> Å between the unbound and bound states that the local approach reveals to correspond to the deformation of a straight conformation encoded by a run of  towards a curved one encoded by a run of  . this deformation violates the deformation tendencies of α-helices and reveals structural constraints imposed on the αgs <dig> helix to allow the gs region to adopt an inhibitory conformation induced by the interaction with fkbp <dig> 

loop deformations
the two following examples illustrate the deformation of loops associated with transitions between surface-and core-letters, which are in violation with the deformation tendencies. residues 18- <dig>  belonging to the α <dig> domain loop of the hemocromatosis protein  is deformed upon interaction with the transferin receptor  from a curved conformation  to a straight conformation  . this extended conformation of the loop allows the exposure of residues l <dig> and l <dig> towards the tfr and in particular the interaction of tfr-helix <dig> with leu  <dig>  <cit> . this loop plays a crucial role in the interaction of the two proteins, its substitution results in a ~ 10-fold reduction in affinity for tfr  <cit> . the second example shows the deformation of residues 100- <dig>  forming a loop at the surface of the transthyretin upon complexation with a molecule of retinol-binding protein . it corresponds to the transition from a straight  to a curved conformation . it appears that this deformation is due to residue s <dig> that is pushed towards the protein interior while interacting with the partner, inducing a rotation of p <dig> .

from regular to irregular local conformations
the last example regards the light chain of the coagulation factor viia  inhibited with a btpi-mutant . although the overall cα rmsd between the bound and unbound states indicates a strong deformation upon interaction , the two efg-like modules  are structurally similar with respectively  <dig> Å and  <dig> Å cα rmsd and 79% and 55% structural sequence identity. the egf <dig> domain rotates ≈ 180° about the linker hexapeptide  compared to its position in the unbound state thanks to a single change in the main-chain torsion angles of d <dig>  <cit>  . the first region  corresponds to the linker region and is associated with a  <dig> Å cα rmsd. it characterizes the conformational modification required for the rotation of the egf <dig> module from an helical conformation modified to a loop one "av"→"be" . the second modified region in the structural sequences  indicates a deformation from a loop to a β-strand conformation "gee"→"mnl" . the proximity of this region to the linker region suggests some broken interactions are responsible for this local deformation . the last modified region  is located in the c-ter of the protein.

the detection of local deformations in the backbone of the proteins by this local approach highlights the importance not only to consider deformation between different secondary structure types but also the conformational variations that occur within the different secondary structure types. while deformation tendencies define general features for secondary structures induced-fit modification coherent with the compartment preference of local conformations, the example cases show more drastic structural modifications that violate the deformation tendencies due to strong structural constraints for functional reasons.

CONCLUSIONS
descriptors of protein interfaces based on amino acid composition and evolution, structural features and complementarity are fundamental to the understanding, prediction and modeling of protein-protein interactions  <cit>  and ultimately to protein functions. recent work on ubiquitin has shown the need for efficent structural descriptors able to characterize local conformations  <cit> . here we use the structural alphabet hmm-sa that allows the identification of local variations in secondary structure conformations. loops can be characterized despite their high plasticity that inhibits their description by global approaches  <cit> . the straight or curved shape of regular secondary structures can be detected. our analysis reveals new structural features, regarding the shape and induced-fit deformation of secondary structures, which have not been appreciated before. in particular, variations in the shape of secondary structures have been analysed thanks to the local approach for the different types of complexes and results are shown to be stable between homodimers, heterodimers, obligate and transient complexes. the large-scale analysis of secondary structure changes in proteins from disordered to ordered secondary structure and between different secondary structure types using a global approach has shown the importance of secondary structure modification for protein function  <cit> . here we show that conformational modification within secondary structures can be further analyzed and detailed using to the local approach. we show that the local conformations associated with the different types of secondary structures are not uniformly distributed within proteins at interface, in the core and on the surface, but show compartment preferences that can be related to structural characteristics. in the light of this new structural description of protein compartments, we revisited the induced-fit modifications of local conformation analysis proposed in  <cit> .

the local conformations modeled by the  <dig> structural letters of hmm-sa are associated with variation in secondary structure conformation. we observed that they present preferential distributions at protein interface, surface and core which affect around 14% of the loop-letters, 23% of the β-letters and 3% of the α-letters. the greatest difference occurs between protein surface and core, where straight local conformations are preferred in core while curved ones are preferred on surface with the particularity for some of them to be avoided at interface. the proportion of a local conformation at interface is generally intermediate between its proportion on surface and in the core suggesting that interface scaffolds are formed by secondary structures mixing local conformations preferred on surface with ones preferred in the core. previous analysis on amino acid composition have led to the description of protein-protein interfaces as regions displaying intermediate properties between those of the hydrophilic protein surface and the hydrophobic protein core  <cit> , hydrophobic and polar residues are organized in a core/rim interface  <cit> . local conformations preferentially distributed on the surface tend to be more accessible to solvent at interface than local conformations prefered in the core. this suggests a specific organisation of the local conformations in the binding site . however the amino acid composition of the local conformations appears to be not correlated with their compartment preference, exposure to solvent of residues is more likely to play a role. moreover the fact that some local conformations are found to be avoided at interface in both protein bound and unbound states and that local loop conformations are mainly unchanged upon complexation suggests that such organisation is prior to the interaction. binding sites would be structurally optimized to interact with protein partners. this latter remark is supported by a large-scale analysis of protein-protein interface performed by a global approach showing that favorable interface structural scaffolds have been re-used and adapted by evolution for diverse functions  <cit> . to the authors' knowledge, the analysis and results presented here have not been reported before and have been elucidated thanks to the use of a local approach able to described the conformation of secondary structures elements in more details than global approaches. these findings should be considered for accurate protein structure reconstruction either based on structural alphabet  <cit>  or on efficient secondary structure conformation prediction  <cit> .

the analysis proposed in  <cit>  has opened the path to an innovative way to analyse structural modifications upon complexation and has highlighted differences between local conformations regarding deformation. by revisiting the induced-fit modifications of local conformations in the light of their compartment preference and structural characteristics, we gain further insight into the deformation properties of local conformations, and of secondary structures to a larger extent, upon protein-protein complex formation. for regular secondary structures, curved conformations  tend to be mostly deformed at interface towards straight conformations , these deformations could be a mechanistic effect of the interaction with the partner leading to a structural adaptive flattening of the interface's surface and a decrease of solvent exposure. for loops, deformation of local conformations appears to be mainly associated with the conservation of the exterior exposure suggesting that loops adopt optimized conformations prior to the interaction. deformations associated with a modification of the exposure to protein exterior are suggested to favor/unfavor residue interaction with the partner. the low number of this latter type of deformation fits with the fact that only few residues at interface are under strong structural/functional constraints. interestingly, flanking regions present a different behavior compared to secondary structures being highly deformed. it highlights their important structural adaptive role in the reorganisation of secondary structures between them upon interaction. induced-fit modification tendencies defined from this analysis should be valuable information to consider for docking tools that aim to consider proteins flexibility  <cit>  since protein deformation can be of critical importance for protein interaction. finaly, we present example cases where the violations of the induced-fit modification tendencies derived from this analysis are associated with strong structural constraints directly related to the function of the proteins. an example illustrates transitions between local conformations associated with different secondary structure types which characterize the deformation of a linker and of a neighboring region involved in the open/closed conformation of the protein. more globally, transitions between different secondary structure types have been shown to play an important role in protein function  <cit>  and are observed in a variety of proteins  <cit> . therefore the possibility to finely detect and characterize such transitions is an important point of this study. another example of the violation of the induced-fit modification tendencies is the deformation from straight to curved α-helices involved in the inhibitory conformation of a protein. the detection of such subtle deformations by the local approach highlights the importance not only of considering deformations between different secondary structure types but also the conformational variations that occur within them. such considerations should allow a better understanding of the role of secondary structures in the functional mechanism of proteins.

