BACKGROUND
embryogenesis in multicellular organisms comprises orchestrated processes that determine the spatio-temporal cell positioning in the developing embryo. in higher plants, which lack active cell movement, the structure and position of individual tissues are determined solely by the orientation of cell division, cell growth and developmentally regulated programmed cell death . various cytoskeletal structures have been repeatedly demonstrated to play a key role in all these processes.

actin is a ubiquitous component of all eukaryotic cells. in plants, actin cytoskeleton participates in the definition of cell polarity and orientation of cell division, cell elongation, cell wall development, transport processes, positioning of membrane receptors , and in pcd  <cit> . to fulfil such a variety of specific roles, the arrangement and dynamics of actin cytoskeleton must be precisely regulated, including the composition of actin isoforms as well as the composition and activity of associated proteins. multiple genes encoding actin isoforms, which are more or less specifically expressed in particular tissues or organs, have appeared during plant evolution  <cit> . studies of actin gene expression in arabidopsis thaliana have led to their subdivision into vegetative and reproductive classes, which probably diverged early in land plant evolution  <cit> . the apparent functional non-equivalence of actin isoforms has been documented not only by their different and characteristic developmental expression profiles but also by genetic manipulation. in arabidopsis, ectopic expression of a reproductive actin gene under the control of a vegetative actin promoter severely altered organ morphology and caused dwarfism  <cit> . on the other hand, some actins can complement each other in their biological role  <cit>  although elimination or mutation of other actin genes can lead to fatal phenotypes.

zygotic embryogenesis represents a complex developmental process that includes all the morphogenic activities mentioned above - cell division, cell growth and differentiation as well as pcd. analyses of early zygotic embryogenesis are technically complicated by the fact that zygotic embryos normally develop under several tissue layers in planta. therefore, an alternative experimental system of somatic embryogenesis  in vitro is commonly used for this purpose  <cit> . se of conifers has also attracted much attention in recent years, being the promising technology for clonal propagation and breeding programs in forestry  <cit> . the principal stages of conifer somatic embryo development have been characterised according to their similarity to corresponding developmental stages in zygotic embryos  <cit> . generally, conifer se lines consist of two distinct cell types: isodiametric cells of meristematic centres  containing dense cytoplasm and long, vacuolated suspensor cells  <cit> .

the role of the cytoskeleton in the formation of somatic embryos in picea abies was demonstrated by smertenko et al.  <cit> . the authors showed that the cytoskeleton organization differed in meristematic and suspensor cells and that the microtubule-associated protein map <dig> played a role in the onset of early embryo development. they also observed that the application of anti-actin drugs latrunculin b  and cytochalasin d  prevented embryo formation, most probably via the inhibition of developmentally regulated pcd in suspensor cells  <cit> . however, they found no pronounced differences in lat b and cyt d effects and no positive impact on the se process was reported. till now, more detailed cytological and molecular analysis of the behaviour of both microtubular and actin cytoskeleton during the embryogenic process in se lines was missing.

based on our previous studies on the mechanisms of se regulations in conifers  <cit>  we hypothesised that actin cytoskeleton may play a role in developmental defects in particular se conifer lines. in this study, using norway spruce embryogenic line afo  <dig> we found three actin isoforms that were expressed in a cell type-specific manner. application of the anti-actin drug latrunculin b  to embryogenic cells in order to study the effect of actin depolymerization on somatic embryogenesis revealed that the treatment promoted the development of high-quality embryos while suppressing the formation of non-mature embryos. the mechanism of this effect is explained by selective elimination of suspensors due to higher actin sensitivity towards lat b in suspensor cells relative to meristematic cells.

RESULTS
embryogenesis in norway spruce line afo  <dig> cultured on proliferation and maturation media
embryogenic suspensor mass  cultured continuously on proliferation media consisted of single early somatic embryos, free suspensor cells and polyembryogenic complexes. polyembryogenic complexes and somatic embryos consisted of long suspensor cells connected with meristematic centres. during the proliferation phase, new embryogenic structures emerged and older structures were degraded. further development of esm to mature embryos was induced by transfer onto maturation media devoid of auxin and cytokinins but supplemented with abscisic acid. the meristematic centres gradually increased and individual embryos were released from polyembryogenic complexes. the maturation process was somewhat asynchronous so that the cultures consisted of embryos at various stages of development and quality. the suspensors were gradually degraded during the first three weeks of maturation. their cytoplasm became granular and the cells eventually died, so that the frequency of suspensor cells connected to individual meristematic centres decreased . after four weeks of maturation, only the largest embryos with distinct cotyledons were fully developed. mature cotyledonary embryos generally lacked suspensors.

latrunculin b accelerates the maturation of somatic embryos and positively selects well-developed embryos
to examine the role of actin cytoskeleton in the process of somatic embryogenesis, we applied the actin depolymerising drug latrunculin b  either to proliferation or maturation cultures. the extent and the speed of the response were dose-dependent. in general, broad concentration scale of lat b  was tested. in the proliferating cultures, lat b at the concentration of  <dig> nm had no effect, but  <dig> nm lat b induced cell death of suspensor cells. progressive death of the suspensors was followed by disintegration of the meristematic centres and subsequent death of their cells. at 100- <dig> nm concentrations, lat b was clearly lethal .

when applied to maturation cultures, 50- <dig> nm lat b caused disintegration of suspensors already after one week of exposure to the drug . after two weeks, the suspensor cells of untreated culture were large, elongated, and showed high viability , whereas the suspensor cells in the lat b treatment clearly showed decreased viability . the surviving suspensor cells were short, with granular cytoplasm indicative of cell death . interestingly, the meristematic cells of the embryos were not directly influenced by the drug; they remained fully viable and underwent further development . after three weeks, embryos with differentiated cotyledons were seen in both controls and the lat b treatments, and the cells remained viable . in contrast to the controls, the suspensors of embryos treated with lat b were almost completely disintegrated .

by the end of four weeks of maturation, the control cultures consisted of a mixture of embryos at various stages of differentiation . surprisingly, development of embryos in the presence of lat b was slightly faster compared with untreated controls . though the lat b-treated culture produced significantly fewer embryos, the proportion of well-developed/matured ones increased by nearly twice under  <dig> nm lat b , when we used the embryo length as a simple substitutional criterion of embryo maturity . the effect of  <dig> nm latb was less prominent in both aspects - the total number of embryos was less reduced, but simultaneously the proportion of matured embryos increased only slightly. the embryos that matured in the presence of lat b showed no morphological abnormalities, were fully viable and germinated normally .

various time points of lat b addition to maturating embryos were tested; the addition at the beginning of maturation was the most effective, applications in the second week of maturation were less effective and no effect on the embryo yield and maturity was observed when lat b was applied at the third and forth week of maturation .

actin cytoskeleton in suspensor cells is distinctly sensitive to latrunculin b
actin cytoskeleton in meristematic cells normally consisted of dense, randomly oriented actin network  whereas suspensor cells showed long, thick actin cables oriented longitudinally to the cell axis accompanied by transversely oriented thinner actin filaments . the organization of actin cytoskeleton remained unchanged in esm cultivated on proliferation or maturation media for  <dig> or  <dig> days, and no specific reorganization of actin cytoskeleton was observed at the onset of maturation. during maturation in the presence of  <dig> nm lat b, actin cytoskeleton in the suspensor cells was largely degraded, forming shorter randomly oriented polymers , although the effect was apparently milder in the meristematic cells. though the actin filaments appeared shorter in the presence of lat b than those in the controls , they still formed a dense network . treatment with the solvent dmso alone had no detectable effect on actin organization .

to analyze the immediate effects of lat b on actin cytoskeleton, we cultivated embryos on normal maturation media for four days and then applied various concentrations of lat b for one hour. the short treatment using  <dig> nm lat b induced only minor changes in actin organization in meristematic cells, leaving a control-like dense network of filaments . however, the same treatment resulted in severe fragmentation of the long actin cables in the suspensor cells . treatment with  <dig> nm lat b dramatically disrupted actin organisation in both the suspensor and the meristematic cells. actin cables in suspensor cells were almost completely fragmented into short, randomly oriented rods , and actin filaments in meristematic cells were fragmented into shorter bundles  or even fully depolymerized.

multiple actin isoforms are expressed in the norway spruce line afo 541
because our results showed that the sensitivity of actin cytoskeleton to lat b is different between meristematic and suspensor cells in the embryogenic line, we embarked on analyzing the expression of actin genes as a possible cause. the number of spruce gene sequences in public databases is very limited, therefore we first searched for additional actin genes using rt-pcr and either degenerate primers or specific primers designed according to actin-encoding ests from pinus taeda. in this way four new actin genes, three complete and one truncated, were isolated from the norway spruce  line afo  <dig> and named pa1- <dig> . we then analyzed the expression levels of these four actin isoforms by semiquantitative rt-pcr using either rna prepared from maturing esm that contained both meristematic centres and suspensor cells, or rna prepared from a purified fraction that contained meristematic centres alone. the expression pattern revealed that the levels of isoforms pa <dig>  pa <dig> and pa <dig> in the non-fractionated esm were distinctly higher than those in the purified fraction of meristematic centres . this result clearly indicates that the expression of the isoforms pa <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> predominated in suspensor cells, whereas the isoform pa <dig> was expressed more or less equally in both cell types.

expression of the four actin isoforms was further analyzed in the non-fractionated esm on day  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> of maturation on control media or media with the addition of  <dig> nm lat b. in the controls, transcription of isoforms pa <dig> and pa <dig> slightly decreased, while transcription of isoforms pa <dig> and pa <dig> did not change significantly. in the presence of lat b, in contrast, transcription of the suspensor-specific actin isoforms pa <dig>  pa <dig> and pa <dig> showed a distinct, gradual decline, while the transcript level of pa <dig> remained more or less unchanged .

phylogenetic analysis reveals that gymnosperm and angiosperm actins form distinct sub-families
the protein sequences of the four new actin isoforms from the norway spruce  line afo  <dig> were compared with representative actin sequences from another gymnosperm, pinus taeda, the angiosperms arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa, and the moss physcomitrella patens  using phylogenetic analysis . the phylogenetic tree revealed that all four newly identified norway spruce genes formed pairs of orthologues with genes from the phylogenetically most closely related species pinus taeda . surprisingly, the pair of norway spruce isoform pa <dig> and pine isoform pt <dig> clustered in a branch together with actins from the moss physcomitrella patens. the above-mentioned gymnosperm and moss actins clustered together with actins of the angiosperms arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa, whereas the rest of pinus taeda isoforms  formed a clearly separated branch . no orthologues of these genes were isolated in our experiments with the norway spruce line afo  <dig> despite repeated attempts using either specific or degenerated primers designed according to the pinus taeda isoforms.

actin isoform pa <dig> differs in the sequence of latrunculin b-binding domain
in an effort to identify the source of the apparent high sensitivity of the suspensor actin filaments to lat b, we compared predicted amino acid sequences of suspensor-specific isoforms pa <dig>  pa <dig> and pa <dig> with that of the latrunculin-binding region  of rabbit actin  <cit> . although the amino acids directly responsible for the interaction with latrunculin, threonin t <dig> and arginin r <dig>  are apparently conserved in all four norway spruce isoforms, a few differences were detected in the intervening region in the pa <dig> and pa <dig> isoforms . most of the differences represent substitutions of amino acids with similar chemical properties, such as, methionin→alanin, serine→threonin, or phenylalanin→leucin. however, the substitution of aspartic acid d <dig> to alanin in pa <dig> necessarily disabled the formation of the salt bridge between the aspartate d <dig> and arginin r <dig> , which is important for stabilization of the tertiary structure of actin and lat b binding  <cit> .

discussion
expression of actin isoforms is regulated during somatic embryo development
actin is encoded by large gene families in both metazoans and plants. in plants the number of family members reaches dozens in soybean, tobacco, potato, rice or longpole pine  <cit>  or even more than  <dig> members in petunia  <cit> . in arabidopsis, the actin family consists of eight genes and two pseudogenes. phylogenetic analyses of actin isoforms in arabidopsis have indicated their diversification into two clusters that are preferentially expressed in either vegetative or generative organs  <cit> . although the causality between the expression pattern and sequence similarity remains unclear, it is apparent that most individual isoforms are not functionally equivalent. the differences in actin sequences are responsible for the characteristic features of either monomeric actin or actin filaments, including interactions with other proteins. individual actin genes have probably evolved along with other interacting proteins in specific tissues and organs, and therefore their sequence features are tightly interconnected with specific expression levels and spatio-temporal patterns. this was clearly demonstrated by introducing the generative act  <dig> gene under the control of the vegetative act <dig> promoter into transgenic arabidopsis, which resulted in a significantly increased pool of g-actin, reduced organ size, delayed flowering, and caused dwarfism and other phenotypic changes  <cit> . pairs of the most related actin genes in arabidopsis  encode identical proteins or proteins that differ in only a single amino-acid residue. in spite of these tiny structural differences, these genes have been maintained in the genome for 30- <dig> millions years  <cit> , indicating that their functional differences and specific expression patterns are regulated independently for the two genes in each pair.

no detailed data are available either in arabidopsis or any other plant species about differential expression of individual actin isoforms during embryo development that would be comparable with, for example, the documented changes in actin expression during pollen maturation and germination  <cit> . in arabidopsis, actin genes act <dig>  act <dig> and act <dig> were found to be related to zygotic embryogenesis  <cit> . however, the expression patterns of these "reproductive actin" genes are not limited to embryos because act <dig> and act <dig> are also expressed in ovules, mature pollen and organ primordia, and act <dig> is also expressed in pollen, carpel, seeds and siliques. most likely the specific expression pattern of actin isoforms is related to specific interactions with actin-associated regulatory proteins in the respective tissues.

in our study of actin functions in somatic embryogenesis in the norway spruce line afo  <dig> we succeeded to identify four new actin genes. considering the generally high number of actin genes in plants, and almost twice as many actin genes that we have found in the sequence database of pinus taeda, we assume that the four genes do not represent the full spectrum of actins in spruce. our phylogenetic analysis of actin sequences from arabidopsis thaliana, oryza sativa, pinus taeda, physcomitrella patens and the four newly identified spruce isoforms  revealed that the four isoforms cluster together with angiosperm actins and those from physcomitrella patens. the cluster of pinus taeda isoforms pt <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> probably represents a more ancient group of actins that might be preferentially expressed in vegetative organs.

the expression of the spruce embryonic actin isoforms was to some extent developmentally regulated. our results clearly indicated that the expression of pa <dig>  pa <dig> and pa <dig> predominated in suspensor cells when compared with meristematic cells, whereas pa <dig> was expressed more or less equally in both cell types. differential expression of the four actin isoforms in the suspensor cells may be related to their unique developmental program based on the necessity of rapid polar growth and programmed cell death fate, contrasting with the continuous formative cell divisions in the meristematic centres.

latrunculin b preferentially blocks suspensor development
the effects of key actin depolymerizing drugs on somatic embryogenesis of picea abies were studied by binarová et al.  <cit> . the authors described a relatively high resistance of the thick actin filaments in suspensor cells towards cytochalasin b. baluška et al.  <cit>  showed that treatment with  <dig> - <dig> μm lat b impaired cell elongation, which resulted in the formation of short suspensors and barrel-shaped late somatic embryos, but the development of the embryos was reported to occur normally. smertenko et al.  <cit>  investigated the effect of either  <dig> nm lat b or  <dig> μm cytochalasin d on the maturation of spruce embryogenic lines. the application of both drugs resulted in gradual destruction of actin cytoskeleton in all cell types, and either caused a reversion of the cultures back to a proembryonic phenotype or was completely lethal  <cit> . we observed similar devastating effects of lat b concentrations above  <dig> nm, which almost completely arrested the maturation process. in contrast, however, 50- <dig> nm lat b did not negatively affect the development of high-quality embryos, it only selectively inhibited the formation and growth of suspensors and initiated or accelerated their gradual destruction as shown by cytological analysis . moreover, the expression of suspensor-specific actin isoforms markedly decreased during the maturation on media supplemented with lat b, further indicating preferential degradation of the suspensor cells. in contrast to the effect of low concentrations of lat b, application of cytochalasin d at any concentration either exhibited no cytological/morphological effect  or resulted in a gradual non-specific disintegration and death of both suspensor and meristematic cells . a study on more detailed description of the morphoregulatory effect of these two anti-actin drugs on spruce afo  <dig> se line and several fir se lines is in preparation .

a question arises why the lat b effect was selectively destructive towards the suspensor cells. the mode of action of lat b is based on binding to actin monomers, thus preventing their polymerization  <cit> . in contrast, cytochalasin d blocks the formation of actin filaments through binding to their plus ends  <cit> . considering that lat b binds directly to actin monomers, we assume that the interaction between lat b and actin may be isoform-specific. this explanation is consistent with our finding that one of the suspensor-specific actin isoforms, pa <dig>  contains an amino-acid substitution d187a, which prevents the formation of a salt bridge important for the interaction with lat b  <cit> . altered affinity of pa <dig> for lat b may influence the actin composition in f-actin pool and the dynamics of polymerisation. such changes may lead to the accelerated death of suspensor cells, which is generally regarded as a prerequisite for normal maturation of both somatic and zygotic embryos  <cit> . in summary, the selective degradation of suspensor cells probably resulted primarily from their ontogenetic predetermination to pcd that was further accelerated by either altered actin dynamics or specific effects related to the altered interaction of pa <dig> isoform with lat b. an alternative explanation based on non-specific alteration of actin dynamics or different permeability of lat b into the two cell types cannot be excluded.

the ability of lat b to induce pcd in the se conifer lines has been previously demonstrated by smertenko et al.  <cit>  and further studied by bozhkov et al.  <cit> . in both studies the role of apoptosis-like mechanisms was demonstrated. thomas et al.  <cit>  convincingly documented the ability of lat b to induce apoptosis-like pcd associated with caspase-3-like activity in papaver rhoeas pollen grains. in our experiments, the detection of pcd-related dna fragmentation using either tunel test or electrophoretic detection of dna laddering in developing embryos was negative.

degradation of suspensors in early phases of maturation promotes faster development of high-quality embryos
early somatic embryos in the proliferating norway spruce line afo  <dig> developed in an asynchronous manner. subsequently, upon transfer to maturation media, embryos in various developmental stages commenced the process of maturation. only embryos in advanced developmental stages were capable of further development to mature cotyledonary embryos in the four weeks, whereas all other embryos were malformed or arrested in their maturation. as lat b induced selective degradation of suspensors in embryos at all developmental stages, somatic embryos in the earliest developmental stages containing only small meristematic centres were incapable of further development without functional suspensors and died together with the suspensor cells. in contrast, degradation of suspensors accelerated the development of embryos at later developmental stages. the elimination of the earliest embryos under lat b treatment resulted in a lower total yield. however, embryos of high quality were preferentially formed at the end of maturation, fully capable of further development. lat b treatment may thus replace manual sorting of mature embryos, which is a limiting factor in mechanized production of artificial seed. our results thus provide not only academic, but potentially also practical benefit concerning application of lat b in conifer micropropagation.

CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrated that somatic embryo development is accompanied with spatio-temporally regulated expression of at least four actin genes. actin cytoskeleton in the two main cell types of the embryogenic cultures  differed in architecture and sensitivity to actin depolymerising drug lat b. lat b treatment led to preferential block of suspensor development. the degradation of suspensors in early phases of the maturation accelerated the development of high-quality embryos and caused the disintegration of less developed ones.

