BACKGROUND
isolation of the antarctic continental shelf by the polar front has arguably produced the coldest, most oceanographically stable environment on the planet. however, this long-term oceanographic stability may have resulted in the evolution of an ecosystem filled with endemic fauna that are poorly poised to deal with rapid climate variation  <cit> . in the face of global climate change, marine organisms are perceived to have but three options: they can migrate to more favorable environments, alter their biology through physiological plasticity, or evolve in response to the altered environment . given the unique environment afforded by the southern ocean, it is highly unlikely that population migration is a viable option for its endemic biota. while evolutionary responses may benefit the species in some longer time frame, they may be outpaced by environmental change. thus, for extant communities in the antarctic, use of physiologically plastic responses may be the only available method of persisting under near-term future environmental variations.

the southern ocean is dominated by an endemic suborder of perciform fishes, the notothenioidei  <cit> . the effects of increased temperature on the physiology of antarctic fish have been well documented providing some important insight into the plasticity of a number of antarctic fish species to a single stress . however, we have very little information regarding what impact interacting and synergistic stressors will have on the physiological tolerances of these unique fish. this is problematic for identifying physiological tipping-points for polar species, as previous measurements of their capacity to respond may be overly conservative since they do not account for non-additive effects of the joint action of multiple stressors. this point has been highlighted by recent studies that assessed the physiological response of temperate and eurythermal organisms to the combined stress of ocean acidification and elevated temperature. results reported from these studies suggest significant trade-offs in performance and stress tolerance may exist when two or more environmental conditions are varied . an important outcome of these studies is an increased understanding among physiological ecologists that relevant assessment of species vulnerabilities will require consideration of multiple environmental variables  <cit> . equally important is the realization that it is no longer sufficient to focus on a single cellular or molecular response, but rather the consideration of multiple co-regulated processes is critical  <cit> .

genomics-based approaches hold the promise of greatly facilitating our understanding of physiological plasticity in these endemic fishes, especially when considering the impact dynamic environments have on multiple physiological pathways . with modern genomic techniques, we can now ask: to what extent are conserved patterns of gene expression absent in the antarctic fishes and how does this affect their ability to adjust to major changes in their environment? to this end, we have used rna-seq analyses to profile the genomic response of an endemic antarctic fish to predicted levels of ocean acidification and global increases in mean sea surface temperature . in this investigation of multiple stressors related to climate change, our goal was to assess the molecular response of trematomus bernacchii to conditions consistent with scenarios laid out by the ipcc with respect to anthropogenic increases in atmospheric co <dig>  <cit>  while providing direct comparison to previous studies looking at thermal stress in this organism.

RESULTS
reference transcriptome
following assembly, the transcriptomic library initially consisted of  <dig>  unigenes  and  <dig>  transcripts with a median transcript length of 444 bp, mean transcript length of 1011 bp and n <dig> of 2160 bp. after removing transcripts with expression levels below  <dig>  fpkm  and clustering at 100 % identity;  <dig>  transcripts and  <dig>  unigenes remained. transcript level annotation yielded  <dig>  blast hits  and  <dig>  go  annotations.

sequencing read quality control and mapping
sequencing yielded an average of  <dig> , <dig> reads  per sample. trimmomatic  <cit>  quality processing retained an average of  <dig>  %  of the input reads; resulting in samples containing an average of  <dig> , <dig> reads . bowtie <dig>  <cit>  mapping achieved an average of  <dig>  %  of the trimmed sequencing reads mapped to the reference transcriptome, which corresponded to an average number of mapped reads per sample of  <dig> , <dig> .

transcriptome-wide differential gene expression analysis
differential gene expression analysis using edger  <cit>  yielded a total of  <dig> differentially expressed genes across all three time points . a sample similarity comparison demonstrated that the 7d multi-stressor treatment resulted in considerable differential gene expression when compared to the 7d control treatment . furthermore, the 7d multi-stressor individuals clustered as an outgroup in the cluster dendrogram of all treatments and time-points, demonstrating the consistent and distinct effect of this treatment-time combination on overall gene expression as compared to all others . the 28d and 56d multi-stressor treatments also segregated from their respective control treatments indicating differential expression compared to the control, although to a lesser extent than the 7d multi-stressor treatment .fig.  <dig> transcriptome wide sample similarity matrix and cluster dendrogram: the sample similarity matrix represents the cumulative similarity of each individual at each time-point as a reflection of transcriptome wide gene expression. transcriptome wide expression is represented by all gene products that demonstrated an fdr ≤  <dig>  during the differential gene expression analysis. portions of the matrix shown in yellow demonstrate a high degree of similarity in the transcriptomic expression profiles between the two samples, with a value of  <dig> indicating the samples are identical; whereas those shown in grey demonstrate a lower degree of similarity, with a value of  <dig>  demonstrating the most dissimilar expression profiles between two samples. as the samples are extracted from the same tissue and species, the degree of similarity in this case is a minimum of  <dig> . the cluster dendrogram also groups samples based upon similar expression profiles, with those samples grouped most closely demonstrating more analogous transcriptomic expression responses



direct comparisons of the control and multi-stressor treatment at each time-point demonstrates  <dig> differentially expressed genes within the 7d multi-stressor treatment;  <dig> differentially expressed genes within the 28d multi-stressor treatment; and  <dig> differentially expressed genes within the 56d multi-stressor treatment. of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes of the 7d multi-stressor treatment,  <dig> were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated . of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes in the 28d multi-stressor treatment  <dig> were up-regulated with  <dig> down-regulated . lastly, the 56d multi-stressor treatment demonstrated  <dig> up-regulated genes and  <dig> down-regulated genes out of the  <dig> total differentially expressed . these metrics indicate a robust initial response to the 7d multi-stressor treatment, which tapers off considerably in fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment for 28d and 56d . a slight increase in the number of differentially expressed genes was observed between the 28d and 56d time-points which may provide insight into the long-term acclimation tactics in these fish .fig.  <dig> number of differentially expressed genes: the bar graph depicts the total number of differentially expressed genes observed between the multi-stressor treatment and control fish at each time point. yellow bars  represent the total number of de genes up-regulated after  <dig>   <dig>  & 56 days of acclimation while blue bars  represent the total number of de genes down-regulated. in all, differential gene expression analysis using edger  <cit>  yielded a total of  <dig> differentially expressed genes across all three time points . fish from the 7d multi-stressor treatment displayed  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated. fish from the 28d multi-stressor treatment displayed  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated. fish from the 56d multi-stressor treatment displayed  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated



gene ontology over-representation analysis
fisher’s exact tests for gene ontology term over-representation further supported a robust initial transcriptome-wide response in gill tissues that diminishes over time, with the 7d stressor treatment exhibiting the most differentially expressed and over-represented gene ontology terms.

for fish within the 7d multi-stress acclimation group, go terms within the molecular function subclasses associated with differentially up-regulated genes indicate these fish experienced large-scale cellular remodeling . among the up-regulated genes in the 7d multi-stressor treatment we found that go terms associated with nucleic acid binding, transcription factor activity, helicase activity, and double-stranded rna binding activity were over-represented; indicating a significant change in transcription activation and rna processing. furthermore, the increased expression of gtpase activity, gtp binding, and trna ligase activity suggests a significant up-regulation of a diverse number of cellular functions such as trafficking across the nuclear membrane and protein biosynthesis in the 7d multi-stressor-acclimated group. lastly, there also appears to be a considerable amount of protein recycling occurring in fish acclimated to the multi-stress treatment for 7 days as evidence by the significant increase in the expression of  <dig> genes associated with peptidase activity. this spike in protein degradation coincides with a marked increase in oxidative damaged in the same fish tissue  <cit> . it has been previously demonstrated that transcriptional regulation, rna processing, protein biosynthesis and proteolysis are highly active gene ontology groups when exposing t. bernacchii to short term heat stress   <cit> ; our findings indicate that this initial cellular stress response continues well into the first 7 days. it was further observed that peptidase activity remained up-regulated in fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment for 28d, before being down-regulated in the 56d stressor treatment specimens.fig.  <dig> over-representation analysis of gene ontology level  <dig> category molecular function: shown are gene ontology terms within the broad molecular function category  that were significantly over-represented in the stressor treatments compared to the reference transcriptome as determined by a fisher’s exact test . subgroups of up- and down-regulated gene cohorts were created for each stressor time-point  and compared to the go term distribution of the reference transcriptome. the number in each category represents the total number of genes within that over-expressed go term category 



over-representation analysis of go terms in the biological processes category identified a significant number of genes associated with a sustained response to cellular damage in the gill cells of fish acclimated to the 7d multi-stressor treatment . the top  <dig> over-represented categories included immune system response , response to stress , cell death , and protein ubiquitination . whereas the biological processes highly over-represented in the down-regulated genes in the gill tissues of the same fish include signal transduction , embryo or morphological development , and cell proliferation . the over-representation of any biological processes is largely absent in fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment for 28d, while we observed a slight increase in the positive regulation of the cell cycle  and dna metabolic processes  in the 56d multi-stressor treatment. taken together, the analysis of molecular and biological functions suggest t. bernacchii maintains a sustained response to cellular stress in its gills for at least 7 days and returns to a homeostatic state by 28 days of acclimation. specimens acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment may experience a second adjustment in transcriptional activity that may indicate a potentially prolonged acclimation response at the 56d time-point.fig.  <dig> over-representation analysis of the gene ontology level  <dig> category biological process: gene ontology terms within the broad biological process category  that were significantly over-represented in the stressor treatments compared to the reference transcriptome as determined by a fisher’s exact test . subgroups of up- and down-regulated gene cohorts were created for each stressor time-point  and compared to the go term distribution of the reference transcriptome. the number in each category represents the total number of genes within that over-expressed go term category 



organisms experiencing environmental stress can often display two conserved responses, a rapid, transient response known as the cellular stress response  and a more permanent response termed the cellular homeostasis response   <cit> . it is likely expression profiles observed in the 7d and then the 28d or 56d acclimated fish highlights the transition from the csr to the chr, and are representative of both the immediate and long-term adjustments necessary to cope with these environmental conditions. therefore, a more detailed analysis of the biological processes found to be over-represented was conducted for cell death and immune system process; in addition to a number of more specific go terms for biological processes potentially involved in the acclimation to multiple stressors including: carbohydrate metabolic processes, lipid metabolic processes, cell proliferation, cell death, response to stress, and homeostatic processes. these sub-categories are further investigated below in an attempt to identify specific gene products involved in the initial 7d time-point response, and those that may indicate a capacity for long term acclimation at the 28d and 56d time-points .table  <dig> a summary of major gene ontology groups demonstrating differential gene expression at the 7d, 28d, and 56d time-points of the multi-stressor condition

the first column includes the total number of genes found within the transcriptome associated with each go term, followed by the differential expression data for each time-point of the multi-stressor treatments as compared to the control treatment  for each of the go term categories carbohydrate metabolic process, cell death, cell proliferation, homeostatic process, immune system process, lipid metabolic process, and response to stress. the confidence threshold to determine differential expression was a fdr ≤  <dig> 



to highlight the molecular response of these fish to acute and chronic stress, we have separated our discussion into two primary sections consisting of the short-term responses  and the longer-term responses .

pathway specific responses 
carbohydrate and lipid metabolism
analysis of significant changes in mrna expression levels for genes associated with the go category for carbohydrate metabolism  demonstrated a nearly equal number of genes that were up- and down-regulated at 7d in fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment relative to the control treatment . of the up-regulated genes in this category, nearly half  were associated with hydrolysis of carbohydrates while  <dig> genes displaying significant down-regulation were associated with carbohydrate synthesis. the same general trend was observed in lipid metabolism, with  <dig> genes up-regulated and  <dig> genes down-regulated in fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment for 7d. of the genes found to be up-regulated at the 7d time-point, a large number of genes were associated with small molecule metabolic processes , most notably genes involved in phospholipid biosynthesis and membrane maintenance such as serinc <dig>  plcxd <dig>  plcxd <dig>  and ept <dig>  among the down-regulated genes,  <dig> were associated with lipid biosynthesis or catabolism .fig.  <dig> heatmap–metabolic processes: this heatmap demonstrates the change in expression patterns of metabolic genes that displayed differential expression in at least one acclimation time point  when fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment  were compared to fish in the control treatments . genes associated with the gene ontology term carbohydrate metabolic process  are represented by  and lipid metabolic process  are represented by  . fold change is log <dig> adjusted with genes showing significant up-regulation depicted in yellow and genes showing a significant down-regulation in blue . genes whose level of expression did not differ significantly between control and multi-stressor treatments are shown in white. the number of gene variants identified in the annotated transcriptome that were associated with the same gene name are indicated in parentheses next the gene symbol



previous heat stress studies in notothenioids have demonstrated an up-regulation of genes associated with both carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, albeit it on a much shorter time scale of 4 h  <cit> . an increased glycolytic capacity is paralleled by a significant increase in resting metabolic rates when specimens are acclimated to stressful conditions for 7 days  <cit> . the rapid increase in capacity and oxygen consumption likely fuels the massive cellular reorganization captured in the expression profiles of fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment for 7 days. we have more recent metabolic rate data that provides further support for this hypothesis. the metabolic rates of these fish were measured over the 56d acclimation period, and similar to the  <dig> study  <cit> , these fish showed a dramatic increase in resting metabolic rate  within the first 7d of acclimation to the multi-stressor treatment, however, rmr rates in these fish returned to basal levels by 56d  <cit> .

additionally, notothenioids are thought to rely primarily on lipids to fuel glycolytic metabolism under non-stressed conditions  <cit> ; however, the significant down-regulation of lipid mobilization and catabolism pathways observed after 7 days of acclimation to stressful conditions suggests t. bernacchii has shifted away from its reliance on lipids as a primary energy source for atp generation. this is further reinforced by the simultaneous up-regulation of carbohydrate hydrolysis and down-regulation of carbohydrate synthesis pathways in addition to a nearly 2-fold increase in lactate dehydrogenase . similar shifts in apparent glycolytic substrate preference have been noted for a number of other antarctic species via changes in enzyme activity for ldh, citrate synthase , cytochrome-c oxidase  and hydroxyacyl-coa dehydrogenase . in specimens of a closely related notothenioid, pagothenia borchgrevinki, acclimated to elevated temperature, both ldh and cyt-c activity were found to be elevated  <cit> . a distantly related species, the eelpout pachycara brachycephalum, exhibited increased cyt-c activity coupled with decreased cs activity at elevated temperatures  <cit> . lastly, jayasundara et al. reported a similar increase in ldh activity coupled with decreased cs activities in t. bernacchii specimens acclimated to + <dig>  °c  <cit> .

cellular death and proliferation
in addition to the metabolic changes that were seen in the gill tissue of 7d multi-stressor acclimated fish, we also observed a significant change in the regulation of cell survival with the activation of several genes associated with apoptosis . gill tissue isolated from these fish demonstrated a significant up-regulation of a number of caspases ; and multiple suppressors of cytokine signaling . interestingly, a down regulation of angiopoietin-related proteins  and endothelial pas domain-containing proteins , which can activate the cell’s hypoxia response, are also observed at 7d.fig.  <dig> heatmap apoptosis and cell proliferation: this heatmap demonstrates the change in expression patterns of genes involved in cell proliferation or programmed cell death that displayed differential expression in at least one acclimation time point  when fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment  were compared to fish in the control treatments . genes associated with the gene ontology term cell death  are represented by  and cell proliferation  are represented by . fold change is log <dig> adjusted with genes showing significant up-regulation depicted in yellow and genes showing a significant down-regulation in blue . genes whose level of expression did not differ significantly between control and multi-stressor treatments are shown in white. the number of gene variants identified in the annotated transcriptome that were associated with the same gene name are indicated in parentheses next the gene symbol



as to cell proliferation, fish in the 7d multi-stressor treatment demonstrated a strong trend of down-regulation overall   that suggests cell cycle arrest in response to stress extends beyond the initial time-frame proposed by sleadd and colleagues  <cit>  . specifically, we observed a strong down-regulation in a number of growth factors including insulin growth factors ; fibroblast growth factors ; myostatin ; bone morphogenic protein , and platelet-derived growth factor , among others.

response to stress
our results support previous studies, which found a lack of inducible heat shock response in t. bernacchii  <cit> . despite the considerable transcriptome-wide changes in expression demonstrated above; of the  <dig> heat shock and heat shock-related genes expressed in the reference transcriptome, only  <dig> were found to be differentially regulated  in fish exposed to the 7d multi-stressor treatment . overall, of the three hsp families typically induced in a teleost heat shock response  <cit> , there is almost no response for the hsp <dig>  hsp <dig> and small hsp families. among those heat shock proteins that did show significant changes in regulation, hsp <dig> demonstrated the clearest up-regulation with both hsp <dig> genes found to be up-regulated  in the 7d multi-stressor treatment group. a similar trend was observed in p. borchgrevinki acclimated to +4 °c for 4 days. in this study, bilyk and cheng report hsp <dig> as the only hsp transcript displaying significant up-regulation in this closely related species  <cit> .fig.  <dig> heatmap–cellular stress response: this heatmap demonstrates the change in expression patterns of genes involved in cellular stress response and homeostasis that displayed differential expression in at least one acclimation time point  when fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment  were compared to fish in the control treatments . genes associated with the gene ontology term response to stress  are represented by , immune system process  are represented by , and homeostatic process  are represented by  that displayed differential expression  in at least one time point are included. fold change is log <dig> adjusted with genes showing significant up-regulation depicted in yellow and genes showing a significant down-regulation in blue. genes whose level of expression did not differ significantly between control and multi-stressor treatments are shown in white. the number of gene variants identified in the annotated transcriptome that were associated with the same gene name are indicated in parentheses next the gene symbol



while none of the inducible hsp isoforms were differentially regulated, there did appear to be a number of endoplasmic reticulum  specialized molecular chaperones that did show moderate increases in the 7d multi-stressor treatment. for instance, of the over  <dig> hsp70-related genes annotated in our reference library, only  <dig> transcripts  demonstrated significant up-regulation . similarly, grp <dig>  a member of the hsp <dig> family that plays a role in assembly of secreted proteins and is localized in the er, was up-regulated ~  <dig> -fold in the 7d fish.

in opposition to the lack of a robust hsr, t. bernacchii does display a strong response to dna damage. the gill tissue from fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment for 7d displayed up-regulation of a number of genes associated with activation of dna damage response pathways . among the genes up-regulated are several members of the gadd <dig> family of proteins which mediate the activation of the p38/jnk pathway, resulting in cell cycle arrest, dna repair, cell senescence, and apoptosis  <cit> . furthermore, two key genes directly involved in dna repair also displayed significant increases. proliferating cell nuclear antigen , which has a stimulatory effect on the 3′-5′ exonuclease activity of dna polymerase and rad <dig>  which is a structure-specific 5′-flap endonuclease, were both up-regulated over 2-fold in the 7d multi-stressor acclimated fish.

in one of the few studies that has looked at cell proliferation and dna damage in antarctic fish under conditions of cellular stress, sleadd et al. found a significant increase in pcna protein concentrations in t. bernacchii after being held at +4 °c for 72 h  <cit> . unlike our findings at the transcript level, sleadd et al. found that pcna protein levels had returned to control values by 168 h . in our multi-stressor study, we found pcna transcript levels were still significantly elevated in the gill tissue of t. bernacchii after a 7d acclimation that included a +4 °c thermal stress. the elevation in this dna repair machinery tracks the molecular signatures of cell-cycle arrest described above. it is possible the additional stressor  extended the response of pcna and cell cycle arrest in our study; however, given the differences in tissues observed between the two studies  and the molecule considered  it is difficult to draw more concrete conclusions.

immune system processes
an aggressive immune response is a common characteristic of teleosts when stressed from any number of cellular perturbations  <cit>  and this appeared to hold true for t. bernacchii. genes associated with immune system processes demonstrated a general trend of up-regulation in the 7d multi-stressor treatment  .

this response is highlighted by the up-regulation of a number of chemokines  that recruit elements of the immune system including macrophages, t-cells and neutrophils  <cit> . the notable exception is the down-regulation of cxcl- <dig> , which is thought to inhibit the signaling action of cxcl- <dig> and immune cell migration  <cit> . in addition to members of the cxc-type chemokine family, the strong up-regulation of socs <dig>  which is thought to serve a vital role in both innate and adaptive immune responses  <cit> , further supports the occurrence of a robust immune response to the multi-stressor treatment at the 7d time-point.

homeostatic processes
in teleost fish, the maintenance of ionic and acid–base homeostasis are invariably linked; however, unlike terrestrial organisms, which can alter plasma ph by increasing or decreasing ventilation rates, acid–base balance in fish requires direct exchange of ions with the external environment via specialized chloride cells within the gill epithelium  <cit> . as such, when experiencing hypercapnic conditions, fish cannot “off-gas” co <dig> by increasing ventilation rates. the compensation for imbalance requires the direct transfer of an acid  and base  for na+ and cl− respectively, across the gills, kidneys and/or intestine .

we found fish acclimated to the 7d multi-stressor treatment demonstrated a robust gene response associated with maintaining acid–base homeostasis. in all,  <dig> genes in this go category were significantly up-regulated while only  <dig> were significantly down-regulated .

sodium-hydrogen exchangers are known to be a primary mechanism for acid–base regulation in the gill tissue of fish, with fish excreting protons in order to achieve acid–base homeostasis when subjected to increased co <dig> concentrations  <cit> . the acidification resulting from the increased pco <dig> is likely responsible for the observed up-regulation of slc9a <dig> , which is a member of the sodium-hydrogen exchanger family  <cit> . we do observe a concurrent down-regulation of slc9a <dig> , however this variant is thought to localize to the mitochondria  <cit>  and not the cellular plasma membrane where slc9a <dig> is found, and thus is likely not involved in maintaining cellular ph counter to the external environment.

in addition to perturbations to acid–base balance, increases in temperature and decreases in ph can also impact redox potential within the cell, leading to increased oxidative stress  <cit> . a common biomarker of oxidative stress, protein carbonyl concentrations, have previously been shown to significantly elevate in t. bernacchii exposed to the same multi-stressor conditions  <cit> . similarly, in the expression profiles of fish in the 7d multi-stressor treatment, we find the up-regulation of redox related proteins including txn  and sh3bgrl <dig> .

interestingly, a number of genes encoding for disulfide-isomerases are also up-regulated  in the 7d multi-stressor treatment. protein disulfide-isomerases  are known to assist in proper protein folding or corrective protein folding in the er and play key roles in the unfolded protein response  in the lumen of the er  <cit> . pdis are essential in disulfide bond formation and are likely involved in the biogenesis of a large number of membrane bound proteins necessary during cellular remodeling  <cit> . their up-regulation is a further indication of the large-scale changes involving membrane bound processes such as ion regulation, acid–base balance and potentially even the redox potential of mitochondria.

pathway specific responses 
carbohydrate and lipid metabolism
mrna expression levels for genes associated with the go category for carbohydrate metabolism in fish acclimated for longer time-frames displayed distinct changes from the patterns observed in the 7d acclimated fish . analysis of significant changes in gene expression for fish in the 28d treatment groups displayed little difference between control and multi-stressor treatments while fish acclimated to the 56d multi-stressor treatment indicated a particular up-regulation of pathways involved in the catabolism of simple sugars  and the glycolytic enzyme 2-phospho-d-glycerate hydro-lyase . similarly, the number of de genes involved in lipid metabolism fell to  <dig> up-regulated/  <dig> down-regulated in the 28d fish and  <dig> up-regulated/  <dig> down-regulated in fish acclimated for 56d .

following the initial cellular stress response at the 7d time-point, expression of genes associated with metabolic pathways largely appeared to return to basal levels as there were very few differentially expressed genes in fish acclimated to the 28d and 56d multi-stressor treatments. however, the few genes that remain differentially expressed in the longer time periods of 28d and 56d may be evidence of the more persistent metabolic changes that are required for acclimation to elevated seawater temperatures and pco <dig> levels. for example, the 56d multi-stressor treatment experiences a strong up-regulation of multiple diacylglycerol kinase isoforms , a potential indicator of a persistently elevated challenge in maintaining the integrity of cellular membranes. furthermore, the heavier reliance on carbohydrate utilization and anaerobic glycolysis for atp generation may also persist beyond the initial cellular stress response observed in the first 7 days. indeed, this apparent change in energy usage has been shown to persist for at least 14 days in t. bernacchii when thermally stressed  <cit> . furthermore, we have recently collected ldh activity data in these same fish that when combined with the changes in carbohydrate catabolism pathways noted above, suggests these fish may not be capable of fully compensating for the increased energetic demands of acclimating to this multi-stressor treatment  <cit> .

cellular death and proliferation
as seen with lipid and carbohydrate metabolism, the changes in genes associated with cellular death are also heavily diminished in the 28d and 56d acclimated fish . at 28d few genes are differentially regulated with the notable exceptions of the down-regulation of caspase- <dig> related genes  which continued through the 56d treatment . the down regulation of caspase- <dig> seen in the gill tissue is likely a strong indicator of a reversal of the apoptotic signal induced in the 7d treatment and likely signals a return to normal cell proliferation by 28 days. caspases are grouped into two functional families, effectors and initiators, of which caspase- <dig> belongs to the latter  <cit> . caspase- <dig> is known to play a central role in both the cell surface-initiated apoptosis pathway as well as the mitochondrial-initiated apoptosis pathway and its activation is likely a key regulatory step in the initiation of the apoptosis signaling pathway  <cit> . fish in both the 28d and 56d multi-stressor groups appeared to exhibit dramatic changes in expression of caspase- <dig> precursor . however, a closer analysis at the individual level of the expression of this particular gene indicates that these dramatic changes in expression are driven by a single individual within each treatment group, and thus are likely an aberration. the strong negative regulation of the cell proliferation also appears to be limited to the initial cellular stress response as no genes in this go category were differentially regulated in the fish acclimated for 28d and only one was observed in fish acclimated for 56d in the multi-stressor treatment .

our data indicate the positive regulation of cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis observed under acute thermal challenges continue for at least 7 days into a cellular stress event. taken together with the remodeling of metabolic pathways discussed above and the physiological and biochemical analyses previously performed on these same specimens  <cit> , it appears t. bernacchii requires somewhere between  <dig> and 28 days to transition from a bio-energetically costly cellular stress response to a state of relative cellular homeostasis. however, even after 56 days of continual exposure to a multi-stressor scenario, t. bernacchii may not be capable of fully compensating for elevated temperatures and pco <dig> levels.

response to stress
as seen in the 7d acclimated fish, we found little evidence of the t. bernacchii is capable of mounting an effective heat shock response in gill tissue after chronic exposure to a stressful environment. in the fish acclimated to the 28d multi-stressor treatment we observed zero de genes in this go category and only  <dig> in fish acclimated to the multi-stressor treatment for 56d . we did however note a conspicuous − <dig> -fold decrease in transcript levels for the constitutively expressed chaperone, hsc <dig> after 56d of acclimation to +4 °c and  <dig> μatm pco <dig> . these data are consistent with results obtained from a previous description of the de novo transcriptome assembly of t. bernacchii in which we noted a down-regulation of constitutively expressed chaperones in a number of tissues after a 28d acclimation to +4 °c alone  <cit> . bilyk and cheng confirmed a similar trend in liver tissues of p. borchgrevinki after a short-term acclimation  to elevated temperatures  <cit> .

these changes in constitutive chaperones also coincide with reduced levels of oxidative damage in the gill tissue of both t. bernacchii and p. borchgrevinki  <cit> . taken together, these unexpected shifts in chaperoning capacity and protein damage suggest acclimation to elevated temperature may have interesting and perhaps unexpected consequences for protein dynamics in these fish.

immune system processes
unlike many of the other go sub-categories assessed in this study, a more sustained differential gene expression response was observed within immune system processes  . while it may be possible that the immune system is responding to a latent infection that is able to manifest due to the effects of the multi-stressor treatment on t. bernacchii, the more likely scenario is that the observed response is to wide spread cellular damage and remodeling directly resulting from the multi-stress treatment.

this argument is supported by indicators of cellular damage, such as psmb <dig>  which is also up-regulated at the 7d  and 28d  time-points. psmb <dig>  also known as 20s proteasome subunit β-1i, is an essential subunit of the proteasome and may be associated with a more specialized form of the proteasome known as the immune proteasome  <cit> . psmb <dig> is required for the production of mhc class- <dig> restricted t-cell epitopes, and thus plays an important role in antigen processing. furthermore, a previous study measuring stress at the cellular level found that several notothenioids exhibit considerable increases in oxidative damage after 7 days of heat and pco <dig> stress, which diminishes at  <dig> and 56 days  <cit> ; indicating a sufficient level of protein damage likely exists to result in the activation of the immune proteasome seen here.

homeostatic processes
the concurrent up-regulation of ph regulators, redox regulators and disulfide isomerases observed at the 7 day time-point in the multi-stressor condition is indicative of the challenges t. bernacchii faces in maintaining homeostasis under these conditions. after the short-term acclimation response, t. bernacchii no longer experiences dramatic changes in expression of proteins related to the maintenance of cellular homeostasis. as seen with previous categories, this response tapered off rapidly at 28d with only  <dig> up-regulated genes, suggesting these fish are capable of at least partially compensating for the changes in extracellular ph and osmolarity likely caused by the multi-stressor condition . a notable exception is the continued up-regulation of sh3bgrl <dig> throughout the 56d time point , which may indicate the continued need for assisted folding of membrane associated proteins under the multi-stressor condition and may be representative of a protracted cost to cellular maintenance. despite the return of most gene expression patterns to a basal state observed in control fish, the continued up-regulation of some key cellular functions provides further support that t. bernacchii may not be fully capable of compensating for these experimental conditions within the 56d acclimation period studied here.

CONCLUSIONS
our efforts have uncovered several key findings concerning the molecular response of t. bernacchii under the multi-stressor condition brought on by increased sea surface temperature and ocean acidification. first, although previous studies using acute thermal stress suggest a portion of the conserved cellular stress response is retained in these fish, we have now shown that t. bernacchii is capable of mounting a robust and coordinated response to stress and that this response persists for at least 7 days and perhaps as long as 2 weeks. among the conserved responses observed were dna repair pathways accompanied by cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis; maintenance of acid–base balance and redox-potential; and cytokine signaling and cellular inflammation. as found in previous studies under heat stress alone, t. bernacchii does not possess an inducible heat shock response when exposed to synergistic heat and pco <dig> stress. however, the up-regulation of chaperones and pdis localized in the er may indicate the unfolded-protein response of the er remains intact in these fish.

second, the multi-stressor treatment results in significant cellular damage that continues for at least 7 days after the initial exposure. in addition to the increase in oxidatively damaged proteins previously noted in these fish, there also appears to be a significant amount of dna damage accrued as indicated by the up-regulation of pathways associated with cellular death, dna damage responses, and immune system responses. furthermore, the multi-stressor treatment induces a strong initial response that likely comes at a significant energetic cost to the organism. in addition to the activation of stress responsive pathways, we also observed changes in gene expression patterns that suggest a shift in substrate preference for glycolysis and the possible reliance on anaerobic pathways to supplement atp generation.

our findings demonstrate that the multi-stressor condition induces a strong short-term response that returns to near basal levels of expression within most of the studied pathways, indicating some degree of compensation to the environmental changes has set in. this would seem to indicate that t. bernacchii possesses the physiological plasticity to cope with an environment similar to the multi-stressor condition and thus also with the changing climate of the southern ocean.

although our study demonstrates that after 56 days of exposure to the multi-stressor condition, expression levels across the transcriptome largely returned to near basal levels, it is noteworthy that not all gene expression patterns returned to control levels and this may be an indication that t. bernacchii has not fully compensated within the 56d acclimation period. we identifed subtle changes in expression that persist through the 56d time-point  that may significantly affect t. bernacchii’s fitness over a longer period of time. furthermore, in a related study, we tracked growth parameters and calculated fulton’s index for these fish over the course of the experiment and found temperature had a negative impact on fish condition. in particular, t. bernacchii displayed significant declines in condition when acclimated to 4 °c for 28d or longer  <cit> . as such, we must approach conclusions about their capacity to adapt to future ocean conditions with caution, as this physiological plasticity does not appear to rise to the level of warm hardiness previously observed in other notothenioid species  <cit> . figure  <dig> provides a summary schematic of the molecular responses observed over the 56 day acclimation period and how they may scale up to impact the physiology of these fish in a high co <dig> ocean.fig.  <dig> schematic of molecular response integrated with physiological changes at the organismal level: gene expression patterns identified in this study suggest a number of cellular pathways that were up-regulated  or down-regulated  in fish acclimated to combined elevated temperature and pco <dig> stressors over the course of 56 days. these changes likely underlie the physiological changes previously observed in t. bernacchii under these multi-stressor conditions . although the expression of most genes returned to basal levels, a number of key genes remained up-regulated at the 56 day time-point suggesting t. bernacchii has not fully compensated. ultimately, these stressors may impact the fish condition overall  and may have long-term population level impacts such as reduced growth and reproduction



lastly, as this study focused upon the gills of adult fish only, and did not investigate juveniles, other tissues, or the overall reproductive cycle; it is difficult to surmise the overall effect that these synergistic stressors may have on the fitness of t. bernacchii at the population level and over the course of many generations. further inquiry is necessary to address these concerns, and to further elucidate t. bernacchii’s potential to adapt to changing environmental conditions.

