BACKGROUND
tsetse flies  are the biological vectors for trypanosomes, the causative agents of human african trypanosomiasis . hat is a debilitating disease that continues to present a major public health problem and a key factor limiting rural development in vast regions of tropical africa. to augment the current vector control efforts, the tsetse fly ) genome was recently sequenced  <cit> . to elucidate the organization of the basal transcription initiation machinery and thereby improve genome annotation, g. m. morsitans core promoters and their corresponding transcription factor binding sites were analyzed in this study.

the core promoter constitutes the minimal portion of the promoter required to properly initiate transcription. it encompasses transcription start site  extending either upstream or downstream for ~ <dig> bases . the tss can be defined as the first nucleotide copied at 5′ end of corresponding mrna. for eukaryotic protein coding genes, transcription initiation is facilitated by rna polymerase ii in co-operation with other transcription factors  that bind transcription factor binding sites . the core promoter architecture has been elucidated for human and mouse  <cit>  and the fruit fly  among which canonical core promoter motifs are conserved  <cit> . canonical core promoter motifs include tata, the initiator , tfiib recognition element  and downstream promoter element  motifs.

recent developments in high-throughput next generation sequencing  technologies have been employed to facilitate the elucidation of transcriptional control mechanisms through promoter identification and expression profiling. for example, tss seq  <cit> , a recently developed ngs technique, employs oligo-capping technology  <cit>  to capture 5′ end of mrnas, providing information on location of tss and permitting analysis of high-throughput transcript expression profiles. since outputs of tss seq experiment are tags exclusively enriched with 5′ end of transcripts, mapping tss seq tags on a genome appears as a peak signal.

high-throughput methods for tss detection on a genome-wide scale have revealed that metazoan transcription initiates across genomic windows of varying lengths  <cit> . this variation in initiation patterns led to two major promoter classification schemes namely;  narrow promoters, whose transcription initiation proceeds from a single nucleotide or within a region of several nucleotides, and  broad promoters where transcription initiates in a region of 100– <dig> bases reviewed by lenhard et al.  <cit> . in drosophila melanogaster, narrow promoters mainly harbor the tata and inr motifs while broad promoters tend to harbor variably located core promoter motifs  <cit> .

computational prediction coupled with experimental validation has helped identify an ever-increasing number of core promoter elements such as motif ten element   <cit> . this association of discrete core promoter motifs with either of the promoter classes has highlighted the importance of core element diversity for transcription regulation  <cit> . vertebrate promoters have normally been associated with presence of cpg island with, half of protein coding genes harbored in cpg islands in human genome  <cit> . the case is different for insects where promoters are more a and t rich as observed in drosophila  <cit> , suggesting fundamental difference in global promoter architecture between mammals and insects.

genome wide analysis of core promoter architecture is poorly understood, despite advances in deciphered motif profiling of specific genes in genomes of blood feeding insects such as mosquito . g. m. morsitans promoters present a valuable tool both for studying vector parasite interactions and development of novel trypanosomiasis control strategies such as trypanosome-refractory tsetse flies through expression of anti-trypanosome genes. with the completion of the g. m. morsitans genome  <cit> , this study endeavors to gain insight into core promoter architecture of a blood feeding insect. approximately six million tss seq reads sampled from the larval and pupal developmental stages of g. m. morsitans were used to identify the tss of corresponding genes. regions flanking the tsss were used to assess the core promoter architecture in g. m. morsitans.

RESULTS
genome mapping and tss seq clustering
the current assembly of g. m. morsitans genome consists of  <dig>  scaffolds of which  <dig> contain at least one gene  <cit> . tss seq reads mapped onto  <dig> of the  <dig> gene-containing scaffolds and  <dig> out of  <dig>  scaffolds without genes. tss seq reads with at least one overlapping read were grouped into clusters known as tag clusters. tag clusters containing at least  <dig> tss seq reads were deemed to have a strong transcriptional signal and were selected for downstream analysis. most tag clusters mapped onto gene-containing scaffolds . the scaffolds without genes may be intergenic regions, suggesting unassembled regions of the current g. m. morsitans genome. overall,  <dig> tag clusters were obtained with a cluster defined by at least  <dig> reads per cluster . about 65 %  tag clusters mapped onto annotated genes with the rest mapping onto intergenic regions, probably corresponding to previously unannotated transcripts or non-coding rna tss. most  of the tag clusters mapping onto annotated genes were located on the first coding exons or their proximal 5′utr regions. an additional  <dig> tag clusters mapped onto the gene-less scaffolds that probably represent intergenic regions. the connotation ‘intergenic’ for gene-less scaffolds is used with caution because of the fragmented nature of the genome coupled with irregular gene distributions. about two-thirds of gene-containing scaffolds harbor only one gene, with median gene length of about  <dig> base pairs. tag clusters located within  <dig> base pairs from either end of the scaffold, were classified as “periphery tag clusters” and could not be associated with any gene.table  <dig> summary of tss seq genome mapping statistics


aabsolute numbers of reads mapping 


acds1 = first coding exon



core promoter extraction
core promoters were defined as  <dig> nucleotides  tss surrounding the tss. by setting the threshold at  <dig> tags per cluster,  <dig> tag clusters were located on the first coding exons and their proximal 5′utr regions.  <dig> genes had more than one candidate tag cluster. in such a case, the cluster with more tags was selected for further analysis. their corresponding core promoters were extracted. approximately  <dig> core promoters were entangled with transposons and were therefore excluded from further analysis, effectively reducing core promoter set used for motif assignment to  <dig> 

delineation of promoter classes and distribution of their core nucleotides
the peakedness  of a tag cluster decreased with increasing tag cluster size. clusters with single tss had sg value of  <dig> while those with the highest number of tss  had an sg value of  <dig> . essentially higher sg values represent peaked distributions and vice versa. at least 70 % of tag clusters had no peak, as defined by a cut off of at least 50 % of the total reads in the mode position for a tag cluster . alignment of −200/+ <dig> regions surrounding the tss revealed clear distinction in nucleotide composition between mammalian and insect promoters . insect promoters exhibit propensity for the at dinucleotide whilst mammalian promoters exhibit propensity for the cg dinucleotides.table  <dig> summary of tag cluster types

fig.  <dig> combined nucleotide composition graphs for d.melanogaster, glossina morsitans, h. sapiens and m. musculus. for each chart, the x-axis represents  <dig>  bases around the tss while the y-axis represents % base composition at each nucleotide position. base colors are represented as follows; red = c, blue = a, green = g, yellow = t



the inr motif, encompassing tss, varies substantially between studies ranging from a tca  tc to a single dinucleotide –purine )  <cit> . notably, majority of promoters only have one or a few of these patterns, and some patterns are typically found in certain species. the −5/+ <dig> region surrounding the tss was extracted for a closer scrutiny of the inr in g. m. morsitans and d melanogaster core promoters . the nucleotide frequency distribution show that in g. m. morsitans core promoters, the −1/+ <dig> positions shows propensity for aa dinucleotide while the d melanogaster core promoters positions −1/+ <dig> show propensity for the ca dinucleotide. the base composition around g. m. morsitans inr sequence suggests that this analysis assigned the tss properly for most of g. m. morsitans core promoters.fig.  <dig> nucleotide frequency distribution surrounding the tss. the y-axis represents % base composition at each nucleotide position. the x-axis represents  <dig> nucleotides surrounding the tss. red = c, blue = a, green = g, yellow = t. glossina morsitans core promoter: the −1/+ <dig> positions shows propensity for aa dinucleotide while drosophila melanogaster core promoters: the −1/+ <dig> positions shows propensity for ca dinucleotide



annotation of core promoter motifs
real vs. random motifs
every motif finding algorithm is ordinarily exposed to spurious matches that may appear as significant as the ones in question  <cit>  and the number of core promoter motifs in the random dataset in table  <dig> confirms this. by knowing the biologically functional genomic windows of these motifs a priori, motifs that did not occur in biologically functional genomic windows were omitted, partly correcting for false matches. the number of motifs identified within the narrow , broad with dominant peak  and broad without dominant peak  promoter datasets exceeded those identified in a randomized dataset . there is a clear enrichment for all but the breu motif between the real and random datasets across all promoter classes.table  <dig> comparison of core promoter motifs instances between true and random datasets



promoter motif profiles in narrow and broad classes
canonical core promoter motifs were found in 74 % of g. m. morsitans core promoters. overall, the inr, mte and tata motifs were present in 34 %, 33 % and 30 % of these core promoters respectively. the bred motif was present in 29 % while the breu motif was present in 21 % of the core promoters . there was a clear separation in core motif frequency between the three core promoter categories . the breu motif is underrepresented in both broad core promoter categories . approximately 50 % of the narrow core promoters harbored the tata and inr motifs. this suggests that the inr may be of equal importance to transcription for narrow promoters as the tata motif in g. m. morsitans. narrow core promoters with focused initiation are associated with tata and inr motifs  <cit> .table  <dig> percent core promoter motifs occurrence

fig.  <dig> distribution of core promoter instances in the various promoter classes. the figure depicts a clear separation in core motif frequency between narrow and broad promoters. the breu motif is underrepresented in both broad core promoter categories



about 23 % of g. m. morsitans core promoters had tata motif. there was no significant difference in the frequency of the breu motif, however, the remaining core promoter motifs had a higher frequency in tata-less promoters, notably the mte and inr motifs . the dpe was previously reported to occur frequently in tata-less promoters  <cit> , but these results show that the inr and mte are more frequent in g. m. morsitans tata-less promoters. indeed lim and colleagues  <cit>  showed that the mte in the absence of a dpe can compensate for the loss of a tata motif.fig.  <dig> distribution of core promoter motifs in the tata containing and tata-less core promoters. there was no significant difference in the frequency of the breu motif, however, the mte and inr motifs exhibit higher frequency in tata-less promoters



motif co-occurrences in narrow vs. broad core promoters
for two-way motif combinations, the 95 % confidence interval calculations indicated that the mte-dpe pair  is significantly over-represented within the broad without peak core promoter category. the breu–mte and bred-dpe pairs are under-represented within the narrow promoter category, and breu-dpe and bred-dpe are under-represented within the broad with peak core promoter category indicating possible non-cooperativity in binding. all other motif pairs fell outside the 95 % confidence interval. nevertheless the higher frequency of co-occurrence for the inr-mte and mte-dpe , and tata-inr and tata-dpe pairs  points to possible cooperativity during transcription activation. the tata-inr and mte-dpe cooperation has been observed in mammalian and drosophila promoters  <cit>  .table  <dig> two-way motif co-occurrences

breu-mteb
breu-dpec
bred-dpeb,c

astatistically over represented in the broad without peak promoter category


bstatistically under represented in the narrow promoter category


cstatistically under represented in the broad without peak promoter category



for three-way core promoter motif combinations, there was no statistically over-represented trio within each promoter category. however, the top two trios occurring in each promoter category indicate a possible synergistic role. for example, lim and colleagues  <cit>  demonstrated that the mte motif could function independently of, or synergistically with, both tata and dpe motifs. the breu-bred -mte pair was under-represented across all core promoter categories indicating that the trio may not act in synergy for all promoter classes . other trios were either under represented in broad without peak category, broad with peak category or combination of the two .table  <dig> three-way motif co-occurrences

breu-tata-breda
breu-tata-inrc
breu-tata-mtea
breu-tata-dpea
breu-bred-inra
breu-bred-mted
breu-bred-dpea
breu-inr-dpeb

astatistically under represented only in with broad with peak core promoters


bstatistically under represented only in broad without peak promoters


cstatistically under represented in both broad promoter categories


dstatistically under represented in all promoter categories



gene ontology associations with various promoter classes
ontology terms were assigned to  <dig> out of  <dig> genes that represented different promoter classes. selection of ontology terms in the 75th percentile of each promoter category showed that ontologies associated with developmental processes such as “structural constituents of cuticle” are over represented in narrow and broad with peak promoter classes . cuticular constituents are involved in chitin metabolism and molting and are crucial to insect growth and morphogenesis.

certain ontologies were represented in specific promoter classes. atp binding and dna binding were over-represented in the narrow promoters . signaling pathways such as a small gtpase mediated signal transduction was over-represented in broad without peak promoters .

discussion
the species-specific differences associated with nucleotide sequence composition informs the parameters used to develop ab initio gene prediction algorithms. for example, lenhard and colleagues  <cit>  demonstrated differences in promoter landscape among metazoan species. these comparisons tend to utilize the drosophila genomic data when compared to mammalian species due to the high quality genomic and transcriptomic resources for drosophila. the recent annotation of the second blood feeding disease vector, the tsetse fly, relied on gene prediction algorithms well suited to the drosophila genome annotation project. access to tss seq data, albeit from two developmental stages only, provided the opportunity to investigate tsetse fly promoter composition in an attempt to improve genome annotation within this species and in preparation for the pending sequencing data of four related tsetse species. to this end, tss seq data was generated for larvae and pupae developmental stages and mapped to the tsetse genome  to characterize the promoters and delineate the primary tss location.

core promoter organization in g. m. morsitans
in this study, approximately  <dig> core promoters were extracted from the recently assembled tsetse genome. most of tag clusters  were identified in the 5′utr and the first coding exon. carninci and colleagues  <cit>  used the variations in tag cluster location and composition to define promoter types. we applied this classification scheme to tsetse and found that 95 % of the core promoters in this dataset are of the broad type. within the broad category 76 % do not have preference for one initiation site. these are known as “broad without peak promoters”. the remainder  of promoters in the broad category have a preference for one initiation site. narrow core promoters, which initiate over a narrow range of nucleotides, constitute a very small proportion of the total promoter count . this distribution is concordant with the picture that is emerging for metazoan transcriptional programs whereby few of the core promoters fit the “traditional” model of transcriptional regulation, that is, the narrow category. majority of metazoan genes’ core promoters are of the broad type. broader tss initiation patterns may in theory be a consequence of non-specificity in the basal transcription machinery, and biological effects of such alterations on transcription are yet to be elucidated  <cit> . it was presumed that the combinatorial interaction of multiple tfs with the gene promoter is sufficient to explain the process of transcription. however, recent studies provided results to show that most eukaryotic genes possess multiple tsss and by extension multiple promoters. these multiple promoters drive gene expression in a context-specific manner  <cit> . possession of multiple promoters by extension generates diversity and complexity in the eukaryotic transcriptome.

tsetse fly core promoter’s propensity for at nucleotides
the nucleotide frequency and distribution in tsetse fly core promoters are similar to that of d. melanogaster  <cit>  where the core promoters are characterized by propensity for the at nucleotides. in d. melanogaster, at enrichment peaks at approximately −200 bp from the tss and microarray analysis showed these regions as nucleosome free mostly for active genes in d. melanogaster  <cit>  and saccharomyces cerevisae  <cit> . the positioning of nucleosomes along chromatin has been implicated in eukaryotic gene expression regulation because packaging of dna into nucleosomes affects sequence accessibility. on the other hand, mammalian promoters depict propensity for the cg nucleotides. vertebrate promoters have generally been associated with presence of cpg island, for instance, in the human genome, half of protein coding genes harbor cpg islands  <cit> . the difference in nucleotide preference suggests a fundamental difference in global promoter architecture between mammals and insects. perhaps, other mechanisms may perform the role of cpg islands in g. m. morsitans and d. melanogaster. these mechanisms have yet to be elucidated. while profiling ascidian promoters, okamura and colleagues  <cit>  postulated that cpg islands are not sufficiently ancient to be found in invertebrates and that these islands may have appeared early in vertebrate evolution through some active mechanism. the islands may have since been retained as part of vertebrate promoters. indeed, introducing an artificial cpg island into mouse cells led to establishment of epigenetic patterns typical of promoter suggesting that mammalian cpg islands might be primed to be promoters by default  <cit> .

variation of known core promoter motifs
to further validate reliability of our tsss identification method, the presence of canonical core promoter motifs was examined. variations in motif frequencies in narrow and broad promoters were investigated. narrow promoters are characterized by only one or a few consecutive tsss and are associated with genes that are expressed in tissue-specific manner. these promoters are enriched for the tata motif. broad promoters contain several tsss over a large genomic window . in mammals, they are cpg rich and are usually found in constitutively expressed genes . in this study, high frequency of the tata and inr  motifs was observed in narrow promoters. a similar pattern is observed for the broad with peak category  . since both the narrow and broad with peak classifications harbor a single dominant peak, these core promoter patterns may indicate the specificity of the transcription initiation machinery for peaked promoters. despite its conservation in all eukaryotes, comprehensive analyses of drosophila core promoters as well as mammals have suggested that the tata occurs in approximately 10–30 % of all genes within a genome  <cit> . in this study, 23 % of g. m. morsitans core promoters harbored a tata. apart from the breu motif, tata-less promoters record a higher frequency of all other core promoter motifs. a similar observation was made by gershenzon and colleagues  <cit>  where they postulate that other core promoter motifs may provide a binding site for the basal transcription machinery in the absence of a tata to mediate transcription. indeed, the dpe was discovered through the analysis of the binding of purified tfiid to tata-less genes  <cit> . nucleotide conservation and core promoter motif’s distribution among g. m. morsitans and d. melanogaster genes indicate conservation of core promoter machinery among these insects.

variation of core promoter motifs co-occurrence
most core promoters have at least one core-promoter motif at a functional position working as anchors for the basal transcription initiation machinery. however, the presence of a synergetic combination of two core promoter elements is often considerably stronger than a single element as it dictates the position of tss. it is extremely rare for all motifs to be present in any given core promoter. analysis of g. m. morsitans core promoter’s two-way motif co-occurrence revealed that the tata-inr pair has the highest frequency among narrow core promoters whilst the mte-dpe pair has the highest frequency for broad core promoters. since high frequency of co-occurrence may indicate that the motifs exert their functions cooperatively, we postulate that the corresponding tfs for the tata and inr as well as mte and dpe exhibit synergistic interactions during transcription initiation for narrow and broad core promoters respectively. indeed, the tata-inr and mte-dpe co-operation has been reported by other studies such as  <cit> . in the broad without peak category, the highest frequency of three-way motif co-occurrence was found to be the inr-mte-dpe triplet. most studies on core promoter motifs have shown that neither the dpe nor the mte exhibits core promoter activity in the absence of an inr  <cit> . furthermore, our analysis of tata-less core promoters shows propensity for the inr and mte motifs and they have also been shown to compensate for the lack of a tata motif  <cit> . intriguingly, this triplet has anchor points downstream of the tss, and within the tss itself. thus, from a structural point of view this combination may mediate basal transcription initiation without necessarily positioning the rna polymerase ii complex very efficiently. the broad with peak category had the tata-inr-dpe and tata-inr-mte combinations as the most frequent trios. the tata-inr-mte combination was also observed by lim and colleagues  <cit> . structurally, these triplets have anchor points on both sides of the tss and within the tss itself and may therefore position the rna polymerase ii complex efficiently. tata-mte-dpe combination was most frequent in the narrow core promoter’s category. the mte exhibits synergy with the tata and dpe motifs according to gershon and colleagues  <cit> . notably, 26 % of the core promoters lack known core promoter motifs, an observation that has been made in other studies . it is hypothesized that undiscovered core promoter motifs might exist. however, the current ones are deemed sufficient to explain the rna pol ii mediated basal transcription initiation program for majority of genes.

repeat-recruited core promoters
approximately one third of the g. m. morsitans genome is riddled with repeat motifs and  <dig> out of  <dig> core promoters in this dataset were located on transposons. it has been recently discovered that retrotransposons and repeat elements are recruited as promoters and there is growing interest in the role of repeat elements in gene regulation. indeed laboratory investigations have confirmed many specific examples of mammalian genes regulated by promoters donated by endogenous transposable motifs. for example, while using reporter constructs for ewing cell lines, guillon and colleagues  <cit>  showed that transcription activation is highly dependent upon the number of repeats that are included in the construct. they postulated that microsatellites in promoters contribute to long-distance transcription regulation. in their review of metazoan promoters, lenhard and colleagues  <cit>  attribute approximately  <dig>  human promoters to be retrotransposons-driven. in addition they state that these repeat driven promoters do not so far fit clearly into one of the main promoter classes namely, narrow and broad. according to cohen and colleagues  <cit> , repeat-recruited promoters have preference for tissue specific activity. a recent study by lee and maheshri  <cit>  has shown the indirect impact on gene expression if the repetitive regions contain tfbss which include transcription factor sequestration, aberrant activation of genes outside given promoter contexts and negative cooperativity in transcription factors. these events culminate in qualitative changes in the behavior of gene regulatory networks in which target genes are embedded. vinces and colleagues  <cit> , showed that in s. cerevisae, as many as 25 % of all gene promoters contain tandem repeat sequences and these genes driven by repeat-containing promoters show significantly higher rates of transcriptional divergence where variations in repeat length result in fluctuations in expression and local nucleosome positioning. this observation could be used in follow-up studies towards understanding of the effect of these tandem repeats on transcription control in upcoming glossina genomes.

putative non-coding rna transcription start sites
non-coding rna genes include highly abundant and functionally important rnas encompassing several groups involved in diverse cellular processes. out of  <dig> clusters fitting our inclusion criteria,  <dig> were located on gene-less scaffolds, whilst  <dig> were located outside the candidate genic regions. these tag clusters constitute approximately one third of the total count. we postulate that these intergenic tag clusters may represent tsss for several classes of non-coding rna genes in g. m. morsitans. we refer to them as intergenic tag clusters. however, we are aware that the term ‘intergenic’ is loosely defined as the genome is yet to be fully assembled. in addition, manual refinement of the predicted gene models is on-going. in insects, non-coding rnas appear to occur primarily in intergenic and intronic sequences and at intron-exon junctions. in addition they are significantly associated with genes encoding developmental regulators  <cit> . exploration of intergenic regions with tss tag clusters may cast new insights into the role of non-coding genomic regions glossina spp evolution.

functional roles under the control of narrow and broad promoters
in general, broad promoters have been associated with developmentally regulated genes whereas narrow promoters are associated with tissue specific expression  <cit> . however, in this study exceptions to this rule were observed. genes involved in chitin metabolism were over-represented in all core promoter classes. this underscores their importance during development. chitin metabolism is crucial to insect morphogenesis which primarily relies on the ability to remodel chitin-containing structures  <cit> . the presence of chitin metabolism genes in all promoter classes suggests members of this gene family in tsetse are transcribed using both narrow and broad promoters.

the small gtpase binding activity constituted the bulk of go annotations in the broad without peak category. gtpases are required for several developmental events such as organization of the actin cytoskeleton and signaling by c-jun n-terminal kinase and p <dig> kinase cascades  <cit> . they have also been shown to participate in dorsal closure of the drosophila embryo  <cit> . loss of the drosophila larval gtpase miro has been implicated in dysfunction of the axonal mitochondrial transport, leading to abnormal subcellular distribution of mitochondria in neurons and muscles  <cit> . the gtpase cdc <dig> has recently been shown as a vital component during drosophila embryonic development  <cit> .

stress response controlled by broad promoters
the go term heat shock binding activity is over-represented in the broad without peak promoters. in aedes aegypti larvae and pupae, this protein family has been shown as an important indicator of stress and may function as crucial proteins to protect and improve survival  <cit> . during embryogenesis in d.melanogaster, expression of hsp60a is post-transcriptionally regulated in a highly dynamic order, even under heat-shock conditions suggesting novel roles for hsp <dig> family proteins throughout drosophila development  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
by locating g. m. morsitans tss using experimental data, the study has provided insight into the promoter architecture of g. m. morsitans. to our knowledge, this is the first study to locate tsss and core promoters in the newly sequenced g. m. morsitans genome and by extension the first blood feeding vector. results presented herein have generated testable hypothesis, such as the impact of transposons on transcription regulation. this study provided useful insights using g. m. morsitans genome data that would be employed as a platform to assess the conservation of transcriptional control mechanisms in upcoming glossina genomes.

