BACKGROUND
despite their sedentary lifestyles, plants actively perceive and respond to a wide range of environmental cues, including those associated with attack by insect herbivores. induction of plant defenses following insect herbivory is well characterized  <cit> . and recent work has shown that, prior to the onset of feeding, many plant species also express or prime anti-herbivore defenses in response to herbivore-associated environmental cues, including both physical and biochemical cues related to the physical presence of herbivores or their eggs  <cit> . defense priming has furthermore been shown to occur in response to airborne chemical cues, specifically damage-induced volatile organic compounds emitted by neighboring plants  that are already experiencing herbivory  <cit> .

recently, we documented an apparent example of similar defense priming in goldenrod plants  exposed to an olfactory cue derived directly from an insect herbivore—the putative sex pheromone of the specialist gall-inducing fly eurosta solidaginis <cit> . specifically, we observed dramatically reduced herbivory—in both laboratory and field studies—on plants exposed to the volatile emission of male flies, as well as enhanced induction of the key defense phytohormone jasmonic acid in emission-exposed plants subjected to insect feeding damage. building upon this work, the current study elucidates additional effects of exposure to the fly emission on s. altissima defense responses, as well as the direct effects of the emission itself on insect feeding.

it is well established that plants can respond to airborne chemicals. for example, the diverse and critical functions of the gaseous phytohormone ethylene have been documented and elucidated over many decades  <cit> . and numerous recent studies have elucidated the responsiveness of plants to environmentally derived olfactory cues. parasitic plants in the genus cuscuta, for example, have been shown to grow toward host-plant-derived volatiles  <cit> , and, as noted above, plants can respond to plant odors elicited by insect feeding  <cit> .

our demonstration of s. altissima responses to the putative sex attractant of e. solidaginis <cit>  documented a novel class of plant-insect interactions mediated by plant perception of olfactory cues deriving directly from insect antagonists. in that study, we also proposed two alternative hypotheses that might influence the interpretation of our findings:  that the effects observed might reflect a biochemical manipulation of the host plant by the fly , and  that some residue of the fly emission present on plant tissues might itself deter subsequent herbivory. the first of these hypotheses is difficult to reconcile with our previous finding that female e. solidaginis discriminate against emission-exposed plants in the field, which strongly suggests that the quality of these plants as hosts for fly offspring was compromised rather than enhanced  <cit> . the second alternative hypothesis is also countered by our previous findings, specifically the observation of significantly enhanced ja responses of exposed plants to subsequent herbivory, indicating that the observed effects are indeed mediated by physiological responses of the plant to exposure. however, the existence of such enhancement does not exclude the possibility that the fly emission might also have directly deterrent effects on insect feeding that contribute to the subsequent reduction in herbivory. the current study therefore sought to provide additional evidence that exposure to the e. solidaginis emission induces changes in s. altissima defense chemistry and to directly test the influence of the emission on feeding by insects.

to further explore s. altissima defense responses, we analyzed the volatile production of s. altissima plants exposed to the e. solidaginis emission and unexposed controls, both before and after herbivore damage. in addition to providing olfactory cues for neighboring plants, as discussed above, herbivore-induced changes in plant volatile emissions are thought to confer defensive benefits by providing cues that recruit natural enemies of feeding herbivores  <cit>  or deter feeding or oviposition by additional herbivores  <cit> . furthermore, volatile induction is known to be mediated by ja  <cit>  and thus is likely to reflect downstream influences of the ja induction we documented previously. in addition to examining the effects of the e. solidaginis emission on s. altissima volatile responses, we conducted parallel experiments in maize . because maize has no apparent co-evolutionary or ecological relationship with e. solidaginis and we did not previously observe reduced insect feeding on exposed maize  <cit> , we predicted that exposure to the e. solidaginis emission would not induce changes in volatile induction in this plant species.

to explore potential direct effects of the e. solidaginis emission on insect feeding we performed feeding assays using striped cucumber beetles  feeding on e. solidaginis emission-exposed squash plants  or on unexposed controls and performed similar assays using goldenrod leaf beetles  feeding on emission-exposed calico aster  or controls. again because of the absence of any apparent association between e. solidaginis flies and squash or calico aster plants we did not expect squash or calico aster to exhibit any physiological response to the e. solidaginis emission, so that any reduction in feeding damage observed could likely be attributed to the direct deterrent effect of the emission.

RESULTS
volatile collections
to determine whether exposure to the e. solidaginis emission primed herbivore-induced volatile production in s. altissima plants, we analyzed the volatiles produced by s. altissima plants exposed to the emission and unexposed plants both before and after feeding damage by heliothis virescens caterpillars. this generalist caterpillar species was used in place of e. solidaginis for the volatile-induction assays because it triggers a strong volatile response from s. altissima and because the galling habit of the flies makes them difficult to use for such assays  <cit> . furthermore, by substituting a generalist leaf-chewing herbivore, we were able to compare volatile-induction by the same herbivore in both maize and goldenrod. prior to herbivory, we found no difference in volatile production between s. altissima plants previously exposed to the emission and unexposed control plants . after feeding by h. virescens caterpillars, however, we found that the emission-exposed plants produced a greater total amount of herbivore-induced plant volatiles  both during the day  and at night , indicating a more vigorous response to insect damage . we collected volatiles during both the photophase and scotophase because previous studies documented substantial variation in volatile blends emitted during these phases and day- or night-active insects can be more responsive to the volatiles emitted during their times of peak activity  <cit> .

we also conducted principal component analyses for both the daytime and nighttime hipv and plotted the first two components from each to visualize which compounds in the blends might be driving the differences between treatments . for daytime hipv, the first two principal components account for  <dig> % of the variance. for nighttime hipv, the first two principal components account for  <dig> % of the variance. in total, we measured and identified twenty-three compounds in the s. altissima volatile blend. we found no novel compounds in the hipv blend of emission-exposed plants compared to the control or when comparing the blends of damaged and undamaged plants; however, we identified a few specific compounds in the daytime and nighttime blends that were emitted in significantly greater amounts by the induced emission-exposed plants . the compounds emitted in significantly greater amounts  in the daytime blend were the monoterpenes α-pinene, β-pinene, and limonene. three compounds were also marginally significant, including bornyl acetate  and the monoterpenes camphene  and myrcene . in the nighttime blend, emission-exposed s. altissima emitted the following compounds in significantly higher amounts  after herbivore damage: the monoterpenes α-pinene, β-pinene, myrcene, and limonene, the sesquiterpenes caryophyllene, α-humulene, β-farnescene, and germacrene d, and the compound bornyl acetate. four compounds were marginally significant, including the green-leaf volatiles  -3-hexen-1-ol  and -3-hexenyl isobutyrate , the terpene alcohol linalool  and -jasmone . no compounds were emitted in significantly higher amounts by the unexposed control plants.
solidago altissima 
individual herbivore-induced volatile organic compounds 

eurosta
eurosta
compounds in 
s. altissima 
t
t
1- <dig> -dimethyl- <dig> ,7-nonatriene.

within daytime and nighttime collections, asterisks  indicate statistical comparisons  of volatile constituents that were significantly different  between plants that were exposed to the e. solidaginis emission and untreated control plants. dashes  indicate overlapping standard errors so no t-tests were conducted. all compounds detected and identified in the s. altissima volatile blend are included here.

to test whether this observed increase in hipv production following exposure to the e. solidaginis emission represented a specific response from the co-evolved host plant species or a general plant response to the compounds in the fly emission, we also examined the influence of exposure to the e. solidaginis emission on volatile production in maize plants . as for s. altissima, we found no difference between the total volatile production from undamaged maize plants exposed to the emission or undamaged controls; however, here we also found no difference between the volatile blends induced by h. virescens feeding damage on exposed or control plants, indicating that the maize plants did not respond to the e. solidaginis emission by enhancing hipv production . herbivore-damaged maize plants exposed to the eurosta emission produced  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ng cm− <dig> during the day and unexposed controls produced  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ng cm− <dig>  nighttime hipv production from eurosta-exposed plants was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ng cm− <dig> and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ng cm− <dig> from unexposed control plants. .

feeding assays
to test the hypothesis that the presence of the e. solidaginis emission might directly deter insect feeding on exposed plants, we conducted feeding assays with the specialist beetle herbivore a. vittatum feeding on exposed and unexposed c. pepo plants. cucurbita pepo is only distantly related to s. altissima and has no apparent association with e. solidaginis. we also performed a similar feeding assay with t. virgata feeding on exposed and unexposed symphyotrichum lateriflorum. trirhabda virgata was employed in our previous study of plant responses to the e. solidaginis emission and was found to consume less leaf tissue on emission-exposed s. altissima <cit> . this species naturally feeds upon solidago and a few closely related genera, including symphyotrichum <cit> . symphyotrichum lateriflorum is a suitable host plant species for t. virgata but not for e. solidaginis; therefore, we predicted that exposure to the e. solidaginis emission would not enhance symphyotrichum lateriflorum defenses or deter t. virgata feeding. we found no significant difference in the total amount of leaf tissue consumed by a. vittatum beetles on exposed or control c. pepo  or t. virgata feeding on exposed or control symphyotrichum lateriflorum , suggesting that these plant species, which again do not appear to have co-evolutionary history with e. solidaginis, did not alter their defenses in response to its emission and the emission did not directly deter herbivore feeding.

discussion
we previously reported that s. altissima plants perceive the volatile emission produced by male e. solidaginis flies and respond by enhancing their anti-herbivore defenses  <cit> . the findings presented here provide additional physiological evidence of this phenomenon and reveal that a specific downstream anti-herbivore defense—herbivore-induced volatile production—is primed by exposure to the emission. although the ecological significance of hipv in this system has not been explored, it is likely that s. altissima volatile emissions play a role in plant defense against insect herbivores  <cit> , as has been found for numerous plant species  <cit> .

exposure to the emission of male e. solidaginis enhanced daytime herbivore-induced volatile production by roughly 44% and nighttime production by roughly 68%. these substantial differences in hipv production would appear to provide a strong signal for members of the associated arthropod community, possibly including foraging predators and parasitoids. eurytoma parasitoids of e. solidaginis are active during the day , but we are unaware of any efforts to characterize their activity levels at night. given the considerably stronger induction of nighttime volatiles, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that night-active natural enemies may be able to exploit these cues.

a previous study found that primed maize plants, which released more concentrated hipv emissions preferentially attracted natural enemies compared to unprimed control plants  <cit> . some of the compounds emitted in higher concentrations by damaged, e. solidaginis-emission-exposed s. altissima have previously been linked to defensive roles against insect herbivores in other systems. green-leaf volatiles  and terpenes, for example, provide important signals for parasitoid and predator attraction, herbivore repellence, and reduced herbivore performance  <cit> . additionally, some of the sesquiterpenes primed in this study, including β-farnescene, β-caryophyllene and germacrene d, were also emitted in higher quantities by primed poplar trees and/or maize plants exposed to hipv  <cit> .

in contrast to the s. altissima hipv response following h. virescens attack, we observed no similar increase in hipv production when the same generalist caterpillar species attacked emission-exposed maize plants. these contrasting results support our hypothesis that s. altissima plants exhibit an evolved ability to perceive and respond to the emission of its closely associated herbivore e. solidaginis. it seems likely that other plant species may also have evolved the ability to detect the pheromones of their herbivores, but we hypothesize that this adaption is most likely to have developed in closely co-evolved plant-insect interactions, likely with monophagous or narrowly oligophagous herbivore species that have a strong influence on host-plant fitness  <cit> .

in our previous work, we observed that both larvae and adults of t. virgata consumed less leaf tissue from s. altissima plants exposed to the e. solidaginis emission compared to control plants  <cit> . in the same study, we also observed a general reduction of herbivory on the emission-exposed plants in our field experiment, these results are consistent with our hypothesis that the reduced feeding on emission-exposed s. altissima plants was the result of an evolved response by s. altissima to its specialist herbivore e. solidaginis. in the current study, we observed no difference in the feeding of a. vittatum on their preferred host plant species c. pepo,  with and without exposure to the volatile emission of the fly. we also found no difference in feeding damage by t. virgata on emission-exposed or control s. lateriflorum. this latter result is of particular interest because symphyotrichum lateriflorum is a close relative of s. altissima that is a suitable host plant for t. virgata but not e. solidaginis <cit> . these results thus strongly indicate that insect herbivores, in this case two herbivorous chrysomelid species, are not directly deterred by the e. solidaginis emission.

CONCLUSIONS
the findings presented here provide further support for our hypothesis that s. altissima plants can perceive and respond to the putative sex attractant of e. solidaginis. in contrast, we found no evidence that the e. solidaginis emission directly deters insect feeding. furthermore, the enhancement of hipv induction in emission-exposed s. altissima plants observed here complements our previous finding that ja induction by herbivory is enhanced in s. altissima plants given prior exposure to the fly emission  <cit> , providing additional evidence that reduced herbivory on s. altissima plants following exposure to the volatile emission of e. solidaginis indeed reflects an evolved adaptive response of this plant species to an olfactory cue from its closely associated herbivore. we can therefore conclude with greater certainty that this system provides the first example of a novel class of plant-insect interactions mediated by plant perception of insect-derived olfactory cues.

