BACKGROUND
compelling evidence suggest that long-term changes in different brain areas and circuits mediating cognitive and emotional behaviors represent the biological underpinnings of mood and anxiety disorders  <cit> . since the vast majority of neurons and synapses in these areas use glutamate as neurotransmitter  <cit> , the glutamatergic system plays a central role in the pathogenesis of different psychiatric disorders and, potentially, appears to be a final common pathway for the therapeutic action of antidepressant agents  <cit> . a number of studies have shown that traditional antidepressants regulate ionotropic and metabotropic glutamate receptors and modulate glutamate release and transmission in relevant limbic and cortical areas . in this context, several lines of preclinical/clinical research, which have investigated the action of molecules that directly target the glutamate synapse, are opening the way for glutamatergic, rapid acting, novel antidepressants  <cit> .

we have previously found that chronic treatment with different antidepressants  significantly reduced depolarization-evoked glutamate release from hippocampal synaptic terminals   <cit> . the above effect was accounted for by changes in protein phosphorylation  <cit> , in turn affecting protein/protein interactions that regulate the assembly of the presynaptic soluble n-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein attachment protein receptor  complex, mediating fusion of synaptic vesicles with presynaptic membrane  <cit> . we have also shown that acute footshock-stress induces a marked increase of depolarization-evoked overflow of glutamate from prefrontal and frontal cortex synaptosomes, via glucocorticoid receptor activation and snare complex accumulation in synaptic membranes. chronic fluoxetine, desipramine, venlafaxine or agomelatine completely prevented the increase of glutamate release induced by stress  <cit> .

agomelatine is a new antidepressant, synergically acting as an agonist of mt1/mt <dig> receptors and as an antagonist of 5-ht2c receptors  <cit> . although the effects of agomelatine on glutamate release in prefrontal and frontal cortex have been investigated, no data are available on the effects of this drug in hippocampus. thus, aims of the present work were:  to assess whether chronic treatment with agomelatine modulates glutamate release from superfused hippocampal synaptosomes.  to study whether agomelatine reduces the accumulation of the presynaptic snare complex in hippocampus.

RESULTS
chronic treatment with agomelatine or venlafaxine reduces depolarization-evoked release of glutamate from hippocampal synaptosomes
synaptosomes were purified from the hippocampus of chronically drug- or vehicle-treated rats, and exposed in superfusion to kcl or ionomycin to assess glutamate and γ-amminobutyric acid  release. as shown in figure 1a, chronic treatment for  <dig> weeks with either agomelatine or venlafaxine modified the depolarization-evoked overflow of glutamate . indeed, both agomelatine and venlafaxine significantly reduced  the  <dig> mm kcl-induced glutamate overflow . interestingly, the release of glutamate induced by the calcium ionophore ionomycin , which mobilizes vesicles from both the recycling and reserve pools , was unaffected by drug treatments, suggesting that the action of the drugs is mainly confined to vesicles docked to the presynaptic membrane and primed for release. moreover, as previously observed both in hippocampus and prefrontal/frontal cortex  <cit> , the  <dig> mm kcl-induced overflow of gaba was not modified by venlafaxine or agomelatine .

chronic antidepressant treatments reduce snare complex in hippocampal presynaptic membranes
the core of the presynaptic snare complex is formed by the coiled-coil domain interaction of two membrane proteins  and one vesicle protein   <cit> . a large body of evidence demonstrated that the snare complex mediates the fusion of synaptic vesicles and neurotransmitter release  <cit> .

because in hippocampus glutamate synaptic terminals represent the vast majority of total synapses  <cit> , molecular changes in the presynaptic release apparatus can be likely correlated with changes in glutamate release. thus, we evaluated if the decrease of glutamate release induced by agomelatine and venlafaxine was associated with altered assembling of presynaptic snare complexes.

the analysis of snare complexes in purified presynaptic membranes revealed two major syntaxin-1-containing complexes, migrating at ~ <dig> kda and ~ <dig> kda , as previously reported  <cit> . no significant changes were found in total syntaxin- <dig> levels . in line with the reduction of depolarization-dependent glutamate release, chronic treatment with both venlafaxine and agomelatine significantly reduced the accumulation of  <dig> kda snare complex in synaptic membranes  . no significant changes were found in  <dig> kda snare complex accumulation .

overall, the present findings show that chronic administration of agomelatine or the reference antidepressant venlafaxine significantly reduced the endogenous release of glutamate from hippocampal synaptosomes, as previously found with other traditional antidepressants  <cit> . at the same time, both drugs decreased the accumulation of snare complexes in presynaptic membranes.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
this work demonstrates that chronic treatment with the new antidepressant agomelatine, a mt <dig> and mt <dig> receptor agonist and 5-ht2c receptor antagonist, as well as with venlafaxine, a selective serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor, markedly reduces depolarization-evoked endogenous release of glutamate from hippocampal synaptosomes. interestingly, the depolarization-evoked release of gaba was not modified, suggesting that both drugs selectively inhibit glutamatergic release without affecting gaba transmission. these results are in line with previous studies, both in vivo and ex vivo, showing similar effects on glutamatergic transmission of a number of traditional antidepressants and of agomelatine .

the reduction of glutamate release with no changes in gaba release suggests an alteration in the balance between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission that could improve the signal to noise ratio in glutamate transmission, when it becomes compromised by excessive release. in this regard, we have demonstrated that chronic treatment with different classes of antidepressants, includ-ing agomelatine, was able to completely prevent the marked increase of depolarization-evoked glutamate release from prefrontal and frontal cortex synaptosomes induced by acute stress  <cit> .

another intriguing result of this study is that, despite chronic agomelatine inhibited glutamate release evoked by  <dig> mm kcl depolarization, it had no effect on release induced by  <dig>  mm ionomycin. indeed, if it is generally agreed that electrical/chemical depolarization mainly induces the fusion of vesicles of the readily releasable pool   <cit> , ionomycin also promotes calcium-dependent fusion of vesicles, but mainly from the reserve pool. therefore, our results suggest that agomelatine may selectively affect the rrp of vesicles, thereby altering a physiologically relevant pool for neurotransmitter release. in line with this hypothesis, we found that the reduction of glutamate release induced by chronic agomelatine and venlafaxine was accompanied by reduced accumulation of snare complexes in synaptic membranes . these data are in line with our previous results showing that traditional antidepressant-induced reduction of glutamate release is accounted for by changes in protein-protein interactions regulating the assembly of the snare complex  <cit> , and by reduction of complex accumulation in presynaptic membranes  <cit> . however, contrary to previous results with traditional antidepressants   <cit> , here we did not find major changes in the expression of syntaxin- <dig> after  <dig> weeks of treatment with agomelatine or venlafaxine. because the same result was obtained with both drugs, we suggest that the difference from other antidepressants is probably due to the different timing of drug-treatment . however, the main finding is that, after treatment for  <dig> weeks, agomelatine and venlafaxine still reduced both the accumulation of snare complexes at the level of the rrp and the physiological release of glutamate.

indeed, the snare complex and associated proteins play a critical role in vesicle docking, priming, fusion and synchronization of neurotransmitter release at presynaptic membranes and it was established that the snare complex corresponds to the minimal machinery for membrane fusion in eukaryotic cells, forming a stable complex that make the vesicles competent for fusion  <cit> . therefore, a reduction of snare complex accumulation in synaptic membranes is consistent with reduced neurotransmitter release.

in conclusion, the present study demonstrated that chronic agomelatine dampens hippocampal glutamate neurotransmission, a likely component of the therapeutic action of antidepressants. the intriguing finding of reduced accumulation of snare complexes in presynaptic membranes suggests selected mechanisms in the exocytotic machinery as possible molecular targets of these drugs.

