BACKGROUND
the ability to produce unidirectional action potentials  in peripheral nerves by external stimulation would have numerous potential clinical applications. for instance, spasticity is an abnormally increased amount of muscle tone associated with an exaggerated stretch reflex. spasticity can cause severe debilitations such as a reduced range of motion in a joint and the development of soft or hard tissue contractures. many methods have been developed to eliminate or reduce spasticity. one of these methods involves electrically stimulating the nerve such that the resulting action potential travels in only one direction, and using them to create collision blocks in peripheral motor nerves  <cit> . however, this method is unattractive in that the electrodes must be placed close to or on the nerve, an invasive and potentially painful procedure. if uaps could be generated via large time-varying magnetic fields, it might be possible to reduce or eliminate spasticity in a non-invasive and pain-free manner.

magnetic stimulation is a clinically accepted means of eliciting action potentials in the human body. the basic designs of magnetic stimulators and the mechanisms of activation are well documented  <cit> . however, nobody has fully addressed the issue of magnetically induced uap's. indeed, it is generally thought that it cannot be done with today's commercially available magnetic stimulators because the stimulus produced is too weak and too short in duration to create and sustain an anodal block  <cit> . though a mechanism has been suggested for uap genesis in the motor cortex using magnetic stimulation  <cit>  there have been no data presented to specifically address the idea of magnetically induced uaps in the peripheral nervous system outside of our own findings  <cit> . however, there are published results that are consistent with the method of uap genesis that we hypothesize  <cit> .

one hypothetical method of uap generation is by an anodal block of a bi-directional action potential on one side of the cathode. the anodal block works by causing the interior of the cell to become more negative relative to the extracellular space; displacing the membrane potential further from the threshold. if the membrane potential is lowered far enough away from threshold, the propagating action potential will be unable to raise the membrane potential above threshold and fail to conduct across the hyperpolarized region. the anodal region and the site of stimulation interchange positions by changing the direction of current in the coil  <cit> .

previous research has demonstrated that the amplitude of a propagating action potential in a bullfrog sciatic nerve on either side of the stimulation site is dependent on current direction in the stimulation coil, is reversed upon current reversal, and that the recording site with the smaller amplitude action potential is on the side of the virtual anode  <cit> . this supports the idea of uap generation via anodal block.

recently, it has been shown that the amplitude of the compound muscle action potential is dependent on the direction of current in the stimulating coil  <cit> , and that the amplitude of the m-wave generated by magnetic stimulation at the elbow with a circular coil is dependent on current direction and that the site of the virtual cathode changes with current direction  <cit> . however, neither study measured the amount of afferent neural activity generated by magnetic stimulation and how it depended on current direction.

previous unpublished results in our lab suggested that uaps may be produced in the upper arm as a result of magnetic stimulation. upon stimulation with a particular current direction in the coil, subjects exhibited forearm muscle contraction and reported little or no sensation in the hand. when the current direction was reversed in the coil , the forearm muscle contraction lessened or ceased and the subjects reported a stronger sensation. these qualitative observations indicate that magnetic stimulation might induce uaps in the periphery, with the direction of propagation dependent on the current direction in the stimulating coil. the primary goal of the present study was to obtain quantitative measures of efferent  and afferent  activity during magnetic stimulation as a function of current direction in the coil.

RESULTS
all  <dig> of the subjects had more emg activity and less sep activity when stimulating with a cw current direction compared to the ccw current direction . this held true for each of the three coils. put another way, m/s was always greater than  <dig> for cw current flow and less than  <dig> for ccw current flow . the magnitude of this difference was significant for  <dig> of the  <dig> subjects .

as for the effectiveness of the coils on the subjects, coil  <dig>  was the most effective. in  <dig> of the subjects, it produced the largest contrast between the ratios. coil  <dig> was responsible for producing the largest contrast between ratios in  <dig> of the subjects while coil  <dig> was best in only one subject.

the mean of the m/s ratios for all subjects was  <dig>  times larger for cw stimulation than for ccw stimulation . this value is an underestimate of the actual magnitude of the difference, since the ratio of the two values is bounded on the low end by  <dig>  but unbounded on the upper end. if there was no effect due to current direction, or current direction affected emg and sep equally , the mean m/s ratio would be the same  for both current directions. to provide a symmetrical distribution around this mean value of  <dig>  and to allow statistical analysis of the data, the ratios were log transformed. note that, since the data were log transformed, one needs to look at the ratio of the cw to ccw m/s ratios, not the difference between the two.

the log transformed data showed that the mean m/s ratio for cw stimulation was  <dig>  that of the ratio for ccw stimulation, with a 99% confidence interval of  <dig>  to  <dig>  . a multi-way anova test on the log transformed data from all  <dig> subjects gave a p <  <dig> e- <dig> 

discussion
the 99% confidence interval of the cw to ccw m/s ratios does not contain the value  <dig>  therefore we conclude that there is a difference in relative evocation of emg and sep activities between the two current directions.

since the distribution of motor and sensory activity for a given subject matched the innervation pattern of a single  nerve, we conclude that this effect is not likely to be due to evoking activity in a predominantly motor nerve with cw current, and a predominantly sensory nerve with ccw current. this scenario is rendered even less likely when one considers the fact that changing the current in the coil from ccw to cw always increased emg activity and decreased sep activity. given the variability between subjects in the precise anatomical locations of the peripheral nerves in the arm and our procedure by which coil placement was determined without reference to which current direction had which dominant effect, it is difficult to imagine that all  <dig> subjects would show the same dependency on current direction.

furthermore, we believe the possibility that current in one direction was more effective in activating nerve fibers than current in the other direction, and that differences in fiber sizes for motor and sensory axons resulted in relatively more recruitment of one population than the other in the more effective direction, is low based on the observations made when changing the current direction in the coil. if this were the case, both emg and sep signals would have increased with the more effective direction, rather than one going up and the other going down.

similarly, we believe that observed distribution of m/s ratios makes unattractive the suggestion that cw versus ccw currents preferentially activate different fascicles  within a given nerve. while it is possible to selectively activate different fascicles within a peripheral nerve using extraneural stimulation through a multi-contact cuff electrode  <cit> , the variability of fascicular distribution within peripheral nerves  <cit>  means that this process has to be fine tuned on an individual subject basis. again our placement of the coil was based simply on seeing an effect, not on the basis of which current direction was more effective for sensory or motor stimulation. thus, if there was differential activation of motor versus sensory fascicles with different current directions, we would expect to see a random distribution of m/s ratios as a function of current direction across the subject pool  however, stimulating with cw coil current resulted in greater motor activation and lesser sensory activation as compared to the ccw current direction in all subjects and the m/s ratios were comparatively high for cw and low for ccw for all subjects.

we note also that work by others has demonstrated variations in emg amplitude with changes in coil current direction consistent with our findings  <cit> , and observations of preferential motor cortex activation have been explained by an anodal block model  <cit> .

though we find the results consistent with a model of uap generation via anodal block, we have no direct evidence that an area of hyperpolarization was generated so as to produce an anodal block in the nerves stimulated, and our results should be considered with that in mind.

CONCLUSIONS
it is apparent that there was a differential activation of motor and sensory nerves upon stimulation with a magnetic coil. based on the results obtained in these experiments, and the results from in vitro experiments in our lab  <cit> , we find that it is possible that the data presented reflects the creation of uaps via an anodal block mechanism. however, since we provide no direct evidence to support this, it is possible that the observed effect may be due to one of the other possible explanations discussed earlier.

still, all of the observations made during these experiments are consistent with our model of uap generation. for one, since the change in emg and sep amplitudes varied consistently with the direction of the current in the coil relative to the arm, the blocking mechanism must be dependent on current direction, as is the position of the anodal region relative to the cathodal region in the stimulated nerve  <cit> . additionally, we have developed a detailed computer model to analyze field distributions with circular coils applied to the upper arm in humans. this model shows that under the proper conditions, unidirectional action potentials can be produced by such coils, a finding that has been confirmed with excised nerves placed in a geometrically well-defined environment  <cit> . however, there are variations in conductor inhomogeneities on an individual basis that are not accounted for in our computer model, which can greatly influence current flow and the site of excitation  <cit> .

