BACKGROUND
in recent years the field of cancer research has seen an increasing number of large gene expression studies of primary human tumours. analysis of these datasets has tended to focus on the identification of markers able to divide disease samples into prognostically relevant classifications  <cit> . in the seminal paper by alizadeh et al. <cit>  they were able to subdivide lymphomas on the basis of their gene expression profiles and thereby associate specific genes with the tumour’s clinical characteristics. subsequently, numerous studies have attempted to classify other tumour types based on their gene expression profiles and others to stratify patients into the most appropriate treatment group. the latter whilst not yet driving therapeutic options, clearly has potential implications for individualised patient therapy  <cit> . these studies have generally focused on the identification of groups of differentially expressed genes that can be used to divide tumours into subgroups using statistical approaches. such predictive gene signatures are frequently composed of genes with no obvious shared biological function. indeed, there may be a number of signatures derived for essentially the same purpose that share few if any genes in common  <cit> .

an alternative approach is to generate signatures that reflect a specific biological process or outcome  <cit>  or sets of coexpressed genes based upon correlation matrices  <cit> . one issue complicating analysis of any cancer gene expression data is the heterogeneity of samples. the tumour cells themselves differ not only in the nature of the mutation that have driven them, but also the genotype of the patient and the treatment that they have received. a significant proportion of a tumour mass is comprised of stromal cells  <cit> ; these non-transformed cells forming the microenvironment in which tumour cell growth is contained and supported. indeed, the tumour stroma is increasingly seen as an alternative target for therapeutics with potential treatments targeting angiogenesis  <cit> , the extracellular matrix  <cit>  or immune cells  <cit> .

one approach to analysis of the cancer versus the stromal components in a tumour is to employ laser capture microdissection e.g.  <cit> . here we present an in silico approach to dissecting the expression profiles of individual cell types in the tumour stroma, as well as the cancer cell component. we have developed a computational framework and associated tool that now supports visualization and clustering of very large correlation networks derived from microarray expression data  <cit> . the approach takes advantage of the heterogeneity of tumour samples. the underlying premise of this approach is that the expression of genes specifically associated with a given cell type or pathway will increase or decrease with the relative abundance or activity of those cells/pathways within a given sample, either because of genuine biological variation or random sampling of different regions of the tumours . the relative significance of correlation increases with the size of the dataset, as the probability of coexpression occurring by chance decreases. modelling these associations as a graph brings together groups of functionally associated genes which share similar expression profiles such that they form cliques of high connectivity in a graph. we have recently confirmed this hypothesis through the meta-analysis of large collections of expression data derived from many different populations of mouse cells  <cit> , pig tissues  <cit>  and clinically derived samples  <cit> . here we demonstrate using individual cancer datasets that global expression patterns can be divided into biologically meaningful clusters defining tumour cell and stromal elements, and also that many of these gene signatures are conserved across multiple unrelated human cancer datasets.

RESULTS
network topology
following download of all cancer data it was subjected to rigorous qc as poor quality data can have a significant and detrimental effect on correlation network topology. only data that passed qc was used to construct the large networks described here. network topology was visibly complex  and unsupervised cluster analysis using the markov clustering  algorithm <cit>  defined cliques of highly connected nodes in all graphs. each clique  represented transcripts whose expression patterns were highly correlated across the dataset. these were surrounded and linked by sparser network structures. go and pathway enrichment analysis was able to demonstrate functional enrichment in many of the clusters, but was generally poor in identifying clusters associated with the specific cell types from which some of these signatures were clearly derived. we therefore supplemented this analysis by comparison with gene sets  derived from datasets of isolated tissues and purified cell populations  <cit>  and mining of the literature. all graphs described in this work are available from the website http://www.oncograph.org which supports the direct visualization of graphs in biolayout express3d using java web start technology.

technical replicates and functionally related genes are closely associated in the graph network
data derived from different probesets designed to the same gene, genes in the same loci and functionally related genes were frequently found to be connected within the graphs. for example in the testicular dataset the six probesets designed to haemoglobin alpha  and three designed to haemoglobin beta  clustered together reflecting the known co-regulation of these loci . likewise the multiple probesets for the growth hormone genes, gh <dig> and gh <dig>  were closely associated within the testicular network graph alongside the chorionic somatomammotropin hormones  which are all sited at the same loci on chromosome  <dig> . furthermore, two clusters of hox genes were found to be co-expressed in certain testicular cancers . finally, markers of monocyte/macrophage populations cd <dig>  csf1r and cd <dig> were all expressed at highly variable levels across individual tumours but exhibited very similar profiles across the dataset. indeed, these markers were always closely associated within all graphs and were usually all present in a single mcl cluster. furthermore, these clusters were also enriched with many other genes also known to be expressed in macrophages . in a cluster such as this in which many of the genes can be associated with a given cell type, the cluster provides a unique insight into the functional profile of the cell within the tumour. although many of the genes in such clusters are not recognised markers of these cells and are therefore only characterised as such by the principle of ‘guilt by association’, they may be of significant interest in terms of defining the functional activity of cells or as potential targets for manipulating cell function.

individual tumour datasets form unique network structures related to the specific mix of cell populations
in previous studies of mouse primary cells and tissues  <cit>  we were able to identify clusters associated with specific cell populations and others that reflected particular cell functions. this was possible because cells vary in their relative activity of different aspects of cell biology e.g. growth and proliferation, metabolism, protein synthesis and secretion, endocytosis, motility etc. similarly, in this analysis many clusters showed clear functional enrichment of genes encoding proteins associated with a cell-specific pathway or cellular process . some clusters were common to all datasets and some, such as neuronal signatures in the glioma dataset or tissue signatures in teratomas, were specific to individual tumours. across all tumour types there were closely related clusters of genes associated with cell cycle progression, similar to cell cycle signatures observed previously in other datasets  <cit> . the profile of these genes reflected the known relative proliferative rate of the tumour with, for example, expression at a higher level in aggressive types of ovarian tumours compared to those of a low malignant potential. a prominent cluster found in all graphs was formed of genes associated with the extracellular matrix ; an expression signature also evident in mouse data and analysed with respect to human connective tissue-related diseases  <cit> . expression of genes in this cluster was higher in tumours characterised by a fibrotic stroma, for example expression of these genes being elevated in primary mediastinal lymphoma  as compared to other subtypes of dlbcl. other small clusters contained known functional markers of endothelial cells , smooth muscle cells  and adipocytes . however, the predominant stromal expression signatures are clearly associated with specific cells or activities of the immune system. clusters enriched for markers of the monocyte/macrophage , t cell , and interferon response  were present in all tumour types studied here, and their composition was essentially tumour-type independent. there was no evidence of skewing of the macrophage profile towards any particular phenotype. b cell-specific markers and related genes were present in the immune-related networks of some cancers but not others. in all tumours there was a prominent signature representing a post-germinal centre b cell/plasma cell which was rich in immunoglobulin genes as well as markers of post-germinal centre b cells such as irf <dig>  a neutrophil signature was identified only in the colorectal cancer dataset, reflecting the presence histologically of neutrophils in this tumour type.

in all of the graphs there were also many clusters of genes showing relatively uniform expression across samples. many of the genes that formed these clusters were poorly annotated limiting the possibility of assigning any functional linkage between them but are likely to play a role in uncharacterised cellular housekeeping functions. in mouse data also, cell lineage-specific or inducible expression of genes are associated with more informative annotation, reflecting the priorities of studies on gene function  <cit> .

disease networks
recognised markers associated with specific cancer subtypes often did not fall within large clusters, presumably because they are not highly correlated with global biological features of cancer cells or the associated stroma. for example in the breast cancer dataset, there was a small component of the graph representing genes whose expression is lower in basal-like and erbb2-positive tumours . this component included esr <dig> , gata <dig>  foxa <dig> and xbp <dig>  and therefore appears to capture a significant proportion of the oestrogen signalling transcriptional network, including modulators and downstream targets. gata <dig> is involved in luminal differentiation in normal breast tissue  <cit>  and esr <dig> and gata <dig> have been demonstrated to reciprocally regulate each other  <cit> . gata <dig> is an inducer of foxa <dig>  which in turn can induce xbp <dig>  while esr <dig> acts both upstream and alongside foxa <dig> . similarly, in the dlbcl dataset, irf <dig>  one of the markers of the abc-subtype  <cit>  lies in a sparse network on the edge of the graph, whose nearest neighbours include foxp <dig>  pim <dig> and card <dig>  all described to be up-regulated in abc-subtype of dlbcl, with amplifications or mutation affecting foxp <dig> <cit>  and card <dig> <cit>  identified in 38% and 10% respectively of tumours studied . in both cases it would appear that the graphs have accurately identified key disease modules associated with esr <dig> or irf <dig> and other genes lying in the immediate neighbourhood merit further investigation. an additional disease module  <cit> , was associated with silv in the skin cancer data  <cit> . the immediate neighbours of silv, a gene whose product pmel <dig> is used clinically in the diagnosis of melanoma  <cit> , includes tyr  the key enzyme in melanin biosynthesis, mlph , which plays a role in melanosome transport, gpr <dig> expressed on the melanosome membrane and mlana . also present was mitf, a melanocytic transcription factor and transcriptional regulator of many of these genes  and snca .

networks constructed based on the mean pearson correlation values across multiple datasets identify conserved transcriptional signatures
having examined gene expression signatures within individual datasets, we questioned whether these signatures were preserved across different tumour types. using six datasets  a full correlation matrix was calculated for each and the mean pearson correlation coefficient across the datasets calculated between all combinations of probes. layout of a graph derived from the mean pearson values  across the six different tumour types resulted in a smaller graph than those derived from individual tumours at this threshold .

the topology of this graph broke down into three main components which draw together clusters enriched in genes associated with broad functional groupings. the dominant topological feature contained four of the five largest gene clusters. many of the genes in these clusters are poorly characterised but relatively uniformly expressed across all samples in all datasets and were therefore designated the ‘house-keeping’  clusters. in general these clusters were poorly conserved in individual datasets although areas of the graphs enriched in housekeeping clusters were clearly identifiable.

a second portion of the graph was highly enriched with genes encoding cell-cycle or cell-cycle related proteins. cluster  <dig> contains multiple cyclins, kinesins, members of the minichromosome-maintenance-complex, e2f transcription factor family members, dna polymerases and topoisomerase. the aurora kinases , bub <dig> and both checkpoint proteins  are also present along with many other genes that have previously been associated with the cell cycle . associated with the cell cycle cluster are further smaller clusters e.g. clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> enriched in mitochondrial, ribosomal and glycolysis-related genes.

the third main area of the graph is clearly associated with different elements of the tumour stroma with a number of immune-related gene clusters in close proximity to each other and those representing other stromal components being somewhat more distant. the macrophage cluster  from the combined cancer graph contains many genes considered to be specific to the myeloid lineage including cd <dig>  cd <dig> and csf1r. there is also enrichment for lysosomal genes, multiple genes involved in chemotaxis, and multiple toll-like receptors as well as scavenger receptors cd <dig>  marco, msr <dig> which have previously been described by many groups as expressed in tumour-associated macrophages . also, within the macrophage cluster are multiple components of the mhc class ii antigen processing machinery. interestingly, among the genes also expressed is cd <dig>  the co-stimulatory molecule, suggesting that these cells may be able to efficiently present antigen to t cells. the t cell cluster  contains pan-t cell markers  and elements of the t cell receptor signalling cascade . there are many chemokines, cytokines and their receptors in the cluster  including also interferon gamma , the prototypical ‘classical’ macrophage activator. the t cell signature is suggestive of an active state with expression of cytotoxic molecules granzymes and perforin as well as markers of activation . lying adjacent to the t cell and macrophage clusters is a cluster of genes many of which have been associated with an interferon response containing elements of the proteasome and multiple interferon regulatory factors and interferon inducible proteins.

the largest non-immune-related element of the stromal signature is a cluster of genes associated with extracellular matrix which are almost certainly expressed specifically in fibroblasts/myofibroblasts. it contains structural proteins including many collagens as well as cadherins, laminins, fibrillin and integrins. the signature also contains modifiers of the extracellular matrix such as mmp <dig>  loxl <dig>  adamts <dig>  adamts <dig> and receptors for growth factors  and shares a high degree of overlap with the ecm signature derived from mouse  <cit> . the vascular signature fragments into four small but closely aligned clusters, three of which appear to represent endothelium and the fourth associated with the basement membrane/extracellular matrix component. these clusters contain classical and well characterised markers of vascular differentiation such as pecam <dig> , cd <dig>  vwf, kdr and cdh <dig>  in addition, they contain many genes that have been identified as endothelial specific genes by alternative bioinformatic analysis approaches   <cit> , components of the notch signalling pathway and other endothelial genes which have been demonstrated in normal and tumour associated endothelium such as plvap <cit> . finally there is a small cluster that contains many adipocyte specific genes including adh1b, adipoq, fabp <dig> and lpl. other small clusters or groupings of small clusters of note contain the affymetrix control probes, histone complexes, ap <dig> transcription factors/early response genes  and as mentioned previously somatotrophins .

core signatures are conserved in an unrelated dataset
in order to confirm that the ‘core’ transcriptional signatures generated from the meta-analysis of six datasets are conserved in other cancer datasets, we mapped the signatures onto a number of completely independent tumour datasets derived from skin/melanoma  <cit> , gastric cancer  <cit>  and hodgkin lymphoma  <cit> . in each case clusters derived from the meta-analysis of the six tumours identified corresponding clusters in these independent datasets. shown here are the results of their comparison to a dataset consisting of primary skin cancers including basal cell carcinomas , squamous carcinomas  and melanomas, plus a number of metastatic melanomas  <cit> . like the other independent datasets, this contained unique transcriptional signatures corresponding to the different tumour types represented in this dataset . however the core signatures were clearly also present. for example, cluster  <dig>  in the skin cancer dataset was highly significantly enriched for genes found in the macrophage cluster in the ‘merged’ dataset   implying that these genes represent a true ‘functional unit’, in this case a cell signature. similarly cell cycle, stromal and house-keeping clusters were also conserved in the skin cancer data  and all other cancer datasets so far examined have all generated networks where the conserved signatures identified here have been found to be present.

each cluster or group of related clusters has been placed into a functional grouping based on the biology from which it is derived. details of the cluster are provided together with selected pathway/gene ontology enrichment scores for the genes that make up the clusters. .

this study demonstrates the feasibility of an in silico alternative to laser capture microscopy to identify the gene expression profiles of the cells that make up a tumour. understanding the microenvironment of the tumour allows exploration of potential new targets for therapy, directed not at the malignant cells, but at the environment in which they exist. study of these cells is complicated by the heterogeneous background in which they exist and isolation of the cells from their background, unless by approaches such as microdissection, will inevitably change them. any clinically relevant approach to the microenvironment must of necessity, address the microenvironment of the established tumour, rather than the factors that contribute to tumour development. we have used biolayout express3d a visualization tool that allows exploration of complex networks of a size not previously possible  <cit> . furthermore, we have used the mcl algorithm  <cit>  to group nodes  into clusters in a completely unsupervised manner. in this respect mcl has been shown to perform as well or better than other network clustering algorithms  <cit> . previous efforts to identify gene signatures/modules in cancer data have used different analytical approaches, less data, grouped far fewer genes and often failed to explain the biological significance of their findings  <cit> . where correlation networks have been used previously to analyse modularity in gene expression data  <cit> , available computing frameworks have not permitted the visualization or exploration of the resultant graphs as effectively in the current study. the robustness across different datasets, and the obvious association of genes of known function or cell lineage-restriction, provides a strong internal validation for our approach.

the preservation of specific clusters associated with stromal cells across such a large number of genetically diverse individuals and multiple tumour types argues there is a common tumour microenvironment that controls, and is controlled by, interactions amongst elements of the stroma. there is already a wealth of data on the role of the tumour associated macrophage , with the majority of studies suggesting that large numbers of tams are associated with poor prognosis . macrophages have been attributed functions in assisting invasion, promoting angiogenesis and subverting an immune response to the advantage of the tumour. to date there are only global gene expression profiles from tams derived from inbred mouse tumour models in which the cells have been separated from their microenvironment and therefore potentially had their gene expression altered by the process of isolation. our core macrophage signature contains genes involved in phagocytosis, mhc class ii antigen presentation and t cell co-stimulation and is therefore suggestive of a macrophage acting as an antigen-presenting cell. the tam profile also contains scavenger receptors and genes involved in lipid metabolism suggesting a role in apoptotic cell clearance by tams. analysis of the t cell profile demonstrates the presence of an almost completely intact antigen recognition and signalling pathway containing elements of the tcr, co-receptors and downstream signalling molecules. also in the signature are cytotoxic molecules and markers of activation suggesting these are, at least in part, activated cytotoxic t cells. the preservation across all tumour types of a cluster of genes associated with an interferon response and the presence of ifng in the t cell signature argues that activation of this pathway forms a consistent part of the response to a tumour. this is also in keeping with data derived from murine models in which it was shown that tams express many interferon inducible genes  <cit> . taken together, these data do not support the view that tams have a so-called m <dig>   <cit>  phenotype characterised by dominant actions of interleukin  <dig>  nor does the analysis support the view that recognition of tumour-associated antigens is compromised by a lack of antigen-presenting cells.

one of the larger signatures observed is associated with the extracellular matrix. this was enriched in structural proteins, proteoglycans, modifiers of the extracellular matrix and signalling molecules. histologically, the presence of a desmoplastic tumour stroma is a well recognised phenomenon occurring in many tumour types. however, like many other elements of the microenvironment the precise role played by this reactive stroma has been difficult to assess: is the role of the stroma to contain the tumour or is it yet another factor recruited to promote the survival of the malignant cells? recent data from studies of dlbcl suggest that in this tumour at least the answer may be that different elements of the stroma contribute to both a good and a poor prognosis  <cit> , whereas work in small cell carcinoma has established the role of interactions between the ecm and tumour cells in resisting chemotherapy-induced death  <cit> . more recently work in a lung carcinoma model  <cit>  highlighted the role that ecm components, in this case versican, can play in activating other elements of the microenvironment suggesting that as for other elements of the tumour microenvironment, cross-talk between elements is likely to be of great importance.

the vasculature signature observed here contains many well characterised markers of endothelial cells as well as less well characterised endothelial genes. it contains receptors and co-receptors  for vegf, the major angiogenic factor but also contains elements associated with notch signalling, another important system in angiogenesis . notch <dig>  usually expressed in vascular smooth muscle, lies in the endothelial-related cluster enriched in ecm and basement membrane proteins. a recent study investigated the crosstalk between endothelial and mural cells via notch <dig> signalling and showed a reduction in angiogenesis in an in vitro co-culture system when notch <dig> is knocked out in mural cells  <cit> .

the fact that macrophage, t cell, ecm and endothelial-specific genes form independent clusters, indicates that there is not a tight causal relationship between them. the t cell signature and macrophage signatures are to some extent correlated in all of the networks, but this does not necessarily imply an interaction beyond the fact that the most fibrotic regions of a tumour tend to exclude leukocytes so the two cell types could be co-enriched by chance. despite the reported association of macrophage number with microvessel density in some solid tumours  <cit> , the signatures of macrophages and endothelial cells are clearly separate, so there is not likely to a strict macrophage requirement for angiogenesis, and in fact the drive to angiogenesis is likely to be multifactorial. this viewpoint is supported by the fact that the macrophage cluster does not contain any of the known regulators of endothelial proliferation, such as the vascular endothelial growth factors . neither macrophage nor endothelial cluster contains tie <dig>  which has been implicated, based largely upon in vitro studies, in tumour-associated angiogenesis and regulatory t cell production  <cit> . indeed, the t cell cluster does not contain foxp <dig> or cd <dig>  indicating that regulatory t cell activation is not a ubiquitous feature of the immune environment of tumours.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have demonstrated a unique approach to phenotyping cell types and identifying pathways within cancer without the need for technologies such as microdissection. the approach is related to the views of pathways, interaction and functional relationship that can be derived from analysis of introduced genetic variation in yeast  <cit> . the core signatures we report provide a tool to aid the analysis of further datasets, and using the tool biolayout express3d they can readily be overlaid on to other data as an aid to the interpretation of other large-scale expression data. in considering therapeutic approaches to cancer, our approach identifies sets of genes that are common to a range of tumour types, and to the stromal components, and which might therefore be potential targets. it also identifies candidate markers for assessing the mechanism and efficacy of therapeutic intervention.

