BACKGROUND
the amount of data used in phylogenetic reconstructions has been steadily increasing during the past decade , and phylogenies based on multiple datasets  are now common. however, analyses based on different partitions do not always result in congruent phylogenetic reconstructions. molecular evolutionary events such as gene duplication, horizontal gene transfer, heterotachy, gene extinction, long-branch attraction, saturation and model misspecifications can cause inferred gene trees to differ from species trees. for example, incongruence regarding phylogenetic placement of taxa can occur between mitochondrial and nuclear data . in the case of mammals, mitochondrial data strongly support the marsupionta hypothesis placing marsupialia as sister to monotremata   <cit> , whereas the theria hypothesis, which places marsupialia with placentalia, has been strongly supported by both morphological and nuclear data . phillips and penny  <cit>  showed that strong compositional biases in pyrimidine and purine frequencies in mitochondrial genomes of marsupialia and monotremata provided support for the marsupionta hypothesis. however, both partitioning the dataset and to a lesser degree ry coding were able to effectively minimize artificial signal. in general, taxa affected by biases such as increased substitutions rates, heterotachy, etc., are the ones misplaced in phylogenetic analyses. however, biases may also influence the placement of unbiased taxa. in the case of the symplesiomorphy trap  <cit> , a paraphyletic assemblage of taxa is grouped together as monophyletic based on the possession of symplesiomorphic characters, which are mistakenly assumed to be apomorphic. the symplesiomorphy trap has been characterized as a special class of long-branch attraction by wägele & mayer  <cit> .

this problem is common for morphological data and several instances are known. one well-known annelid example is the position of clitellata as sister to polychaeta due to the lack of typical polychaete characters such as parapodia and nuchal organs  <cit> . however, molecular data clearly place clitellata within polychaetes . in theory, the symplesiomorphy trap is not restricted to morphological data, but can also apply to sequence data  <cit> . however, studies addressing this problem in molecular data are scarce because detection of the trap is not straightforward. first, the misplaced taxa are not themselves affected by compositional biases or increased substitution rates. second, support for monophyly of misplaced taxa is based on apomorphies for a higher taxonomic unit and hence not artificial. third, knowledge of the 'true' phylogeny is needed to directly detect the symplesiomorphy trap. typically, detection of the trap occurs indirectly by excluding other possibilities of incongruence and revealing characteristic signatures in the data. for example, wägele and mayer's  <cit>  study showed that misplacement of acrothoracica barnacles in a 18s parsimony analysis was due to symplesiomorphic characters shared exclusively by ascothoracida  and acrothoracica . these characters overwhelmed the phylogenetic signal for the monophyly of cirripedia. this phenomenon is known as the symplesiomorphy trap.

here we report another instance of the symplesiomorphy trap in molecular data discovered while examining terebelliformia  phylogeny. terebelliform worms  are typically tube-dwelling annelids, found in diverse marine habitats, including intertidal, deep-sea and even hydrothermal vent areas. terebelliformia include about  <dig> species within five 'families': alvinellidae, ampharetidae, terebellidae, trichobranchidae and pectinariidae  <cit> . based on thorough investigations using data partitioning, topology tests, removal and addition of taxa, spectral analyses, detection of compositional biases, models of non-stationary sequence evolution, and recoding of characters, we were able to pinpoint the source of the incongruence between mitochondrial and nuclear data and relate it to the symplesiomorphy trap. ampharetidae and alvinellidae exhibit strong compositional biases in their mitochondrial genomes. however, these biases affect placement of trichobranchidae and terebellidae rather than ampharetidae and alvinellidae.

methods
sample and data collection
accession numbers of determined sequences are in bold.

1mtdna = mitochondrial genome

2ef1α = elongation factor 1α

3for locality information on available data see original source

genomic assembly and gene identification
sequences were edited and aligned using dnastar™ lasergene programs seqman and megalign  <cit> . protein-coding genes and ribosomal rna genes were identified by blast  <cit> . all trna genes were identified using trnascan-se web server  under default settings and source = "mito/chloroplast", or by hand based on their potential secondary structures and anticodon sequences.

datasets
datasets consisted of mitochondrial and nuclear data. all alignments are available at treebase http://www.treebase.org. seventeen available annelid mitochondrial genomes with about 50% coverage or greater were used for the phylogenetic analyses . the alignment of zhong et al.  <cit>  was employed with the addition of nephtys sp., pectinaria gouldi, paralvinella sulfincola and auchenoplax crinita. because we were interested in relationships within terebelliformia, we deleted the mitochondrial data of katharina  and terebratalia  and used all other annelids as outgroup taxa.

both nucleotide and amino acid datasets were created for mitochondrial phylogenetic analyses. in the nucleotide dataset, all protein-coding genes  and the two rrna genes  were included. clustal x  <cit>  under default settings was used to align rrna genes. gblocks  <dig> b  <cit>  was used to identify ambiguous aligned regions in the rrna genes. these regions and the 3rd positions of protein-coding genes, which are saturated with substitutions for family-level analyses, were excluded from the analyses with the aid of macclade <dig>   <cit>  and se-al v <dig> a <dig>  <cit> . the amino acid dataset was created from the aligned nucleotide dataset by translation of protein-coding genes with the drosophila mitochondrial genetic code and exclusion of rrna genes. the mitochondrial nucleotide and amino acid datasets comprised  <dig>  and  <dig>  positions, respectively.

additionally, a combined data matrix was constructed with the addition of 18s, 28s and ef-1α sequences to the mitochondrial data for the above  <dig> taxa . because we employed data from genbank and collected data in two different laboratories , in some cases we concatenated data from as closely related species as possible to generate operational taxonomic units  with a more complete coverage . sequences were aligned as above. due to the addition of nuclear data, the combined datasets comprised  <dig>  nucleotide and  <dig>  amino acid positions. the amino acid dataset comprised only the protein-coding genes.

moreover, we also constructed a nuclear dataset comprising only 18s, 28s and ef-1α sequences at the nucleotide level for these  <dig> taxa . the nuclear dataset comprised  <dig>  nucleotide positions. analyses of nuclear ribosomal gene datasets were also based on  <dig> and  <dig> taxa to reveal if taxon sampling had a substantial impact on the phylogenetic reconstruction of the nuclear data. by comparison, taxon sampling was far more limited for mitochondrial genome sequences. additional file  <dig> provides a summary of the construction of these datasets with more than  <dig> taxa.

phylogenetic analyses
maximum likelihood  and bayesian inference  approaches were employed for all mitochondrial, nuclear and combined datasets. for all nucleotide datasets with  <dig> taxa, ml analyses were performed in paup <dig> b <dig>  <cit>  with a gtr+Γ+i model as determined by modeltest v <dig>  based on the akaike information criterion   <cit> . heuristic searches were run with random-taxon addition  using tree-bisection-reconnection  swapping. all model parameters used fixed values as determined by modeltest v <dig> . bootstrap analyses employed  <dig>  iterations using heuristic searches with  <dig> random taxa addition replicates. partitioned ml analyses were conducted with raxml  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  using a gtr+Γ+i model for each individual gene and  <dig> bootstrap replicates followed by a best tree search. partitioned bi invoked independent substitution models for each gene in mrbayes version  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  and ran for 5* <dig>  or 2* <dig>  generations, respectively, with  <dig> runs of  <dig> chains . trees were sampled every  <dig> generations. the implemented diagnosis feature comparing the  <dig> runs by average standard deviation of split frequencies was determined every  <dig>  generations. gtr+Γ+i models were selected under the aic in mrmodeltest  <cit>  for 18s and 28s rdna, ef-1α, cox <dig>  cox <dig>  cob, nad <dig>  nad <dig>  and nad <dig>  gtr+i models for both 12s and 16s rdna, gtr+Γ model for cox <dig>  and hky+Γ model for nad <dig>  nad4l and nad <dig>  convergence of -ln likelihood scores and tree length was determined using tracer v <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  to identify the burnin point at which all estimated parameters reached equilibrium . the majority-rule consensus tree containing posterior probabilities  was determined from the remaining trees. additional file  <dig> provides a more detailed description of the analyses and results for the datasets with more than  <dig> taxa.

for both amino acid datasets , non-partitioned and partitioned ml, and partitioned bi analyses were run. for ml analyses, model selection was performed in raxml  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  and the mtzoa+Γ+i+f model was chosen as the best-fitting one for both non-partitioned datasets. for individual genes, mtzoa+Γ+i models were selected for cox <dig>  cox <dig> , cox <dig> and cob, and dayhoff+Γ+i for nad <dig>  nad <dig>  nad <dig>  nad <dig>  nad4l, nad <dig> and ef-1α. maximum likelihood searches were implemented with  <dig> bootstrap replicates using raxml  <cit>  followed by a ml tree search for both non-partitioned and partitioned ml analyses. for partitioned bi of amino acid datasets, the mixed amino acid substitution model option plus a Γ distribution and a proportion of invariant sites was assigned to each partition individually and unlinked in mrbayes v <dig> . <dig>  bi ran for 2* <dig> generations and trees sampled every  <dig> generations . in the mixed model option, a specific model is not specified a priori, but each model is chosen during the run based on its posterior probability.

non-stationary sequence evolution
to analyze data in a non-stationary bayesian framework, we used phase  <dig>   <cit>  to allow usage of different compositional vectors along branches of the tree. as in stationary bayesian inferences using mrbayes, we conducted partitioned analyses for nucleotide datasets with  <dig> taxa of both mitochondrial and nuclear data invoking previously mentioned substitution models for each gene . we performed analyses based on  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> different compositional vectors. for each number of compositional vectors, we ran  <dig> independent runs, with one cold chain each and different random seeds , in parallel. each run ran for 12* <dig> generations and trees were sampled every  <dig>  generations. the first 2* <dig> generations were discarded as burnin as convergence of -ln likelihood scores and tree length was indicated by tracer v <dig> . <dig> <cit> .

topology testing
to further understand congruence and incongruence in our datasets, the approximately unbiased  topology test of consel  <cit>  was employed to assess support for alternative hypotheses. more specifically under the ml criterion, au tests compared the three possible terebelliform hypotheses with respect to incongruence for each possible combination of partitions in the 17-taxa case . based on initial results, the following hypotheses were tested: 1) trichobranchidae as sister to alvinellidae/ampharetidae , 2) trichobranchidae as sister to terebellidae , and 3) terebellidae as sister to alvinellidae/ampharetidae . paup analyses were constrained to obtain only the best trees congruent with the particular hypothesis. settings for the analyses were as described above.

spectral analyses
we conducted spectral analyses to gain further insights into the support for specific bipartitions   <cit>  because they have been useful in the detection of the symplesiomorphy trap  <cit> . a bipartition splits a set of otus into two groups. in the context of spectral analyses, we use the term ingroup  to define the group of the bipartition we are interested in, and outgroup for the other group of that bipartition. for example, trichobranchidae, alvinellidae and ampharetidae in one group of the bipartition, the ingroup, and all others including terebellidae in the other, the outgroup, would be congruent with the triaa hypothesis. to calculate and visualize the bipartition support, we used splits analyses methods  and microsoft excel for mitochondrial, nuclear and combined datasets with  <dig> taxa. sams is a split-decomposition tool that does not require hadamard conjugations. hence, there is no need to consider the complete split space. sams differentiates support for a bipartition into three categories: 1) binary, both groups exhibit only one character state each, but different from each other; 2) noisy outgroup ; 3) noisy ingroup and outgroup  <cit> . because we were only interested in bipartitions regarding relationships within terebelliformia, we only retrieved bipartitions from the results that were relevant regarding these relationships. the perl script to retrieve these bipartitions is available from ths upon request.

determination of compositional biases
we also analyzed our nuclear and mitochondrial datasets for compositional biases, which can mislead phylogenetic analyses . first, we employed relative composition variability , which is the average variability in composition between taxa for a dataset  <cit> . phillips and penny  <cit>  used absolute numbers of nucleotide occurrence for calculation of rcv. however, this means that the rcv value does not only reflect composition variability, but also sequence length variability in the dataset. therefore, we created a measure of relative composition frequency variability  by modifying the rcv calculation to use base frequencies instead of absolute numbers:

 rcfv= ∑i=1n|μai-μ˜a|+|μci-μ˜c|+|μgi-μ˜g|+|μti-μ˜t|n 

where μai is the base frequency of a for the ith taxon and μ˜a is the mean base frequency across n taxa. besides the rcfv for complete datasets, we also report herein taxon-specific rcfv values ∕n), taxon-specific absolute deviations of each nucleotide , and combinations of nucleotides . second, we determined different skew values to determine if strong biases between two nucleotide frequencies exist. perna and kocher  <cit>  introduced the a-t and g-c skews for an individual strand of nucleic acids. herein, we additionally propose a-g and c-t skews, because for mitochondrial genomes, major mutational biases are within purine and pyrimidine frequencies, respectively  <cit> . a-g and c-t skews for a taxon are calculated the same way as a-t and g-c skews are:

 a-gskew=μa-μgμa+μg;c-tskew=μc-μtμc+μt 

RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses
mitochondrial datasets
ml and partitioned bi analyses of 17-taxa mitochondrial datasets based on either nucleotides or amino acids inferred identical topologies, with one exception, regarding terebelliform relationships with strong nodal support . monophyly of terebelliformia is well supported  and partitioned nucleotide  analyses,  <dig> for non-partitioned amino acid , and  <dig> for the partitioned amino acid  analyses; pp:  <dig>  for both bi analyses). mitochondrial datasets infer a sister relationship between trichobranchidae and terebellidae, the triter hypothesis . furthermore, topology testing significantly rejected a sistergroup relationship of trichobranchidae to alvinellidae/ampharetidae, the triaa hypothesis , as well as terebellidae as sister to alvinellidae/ampharetidae, the teraa hypothesis . two ampharetidae taxa were close to alvinellidae in the analyses of both mitochondrial datasets . pectinariidae was shown to be the basal lineage in terebelliformia except in the partitioned ml analysis of the nucleotide dataset, which placed pectinaridae as sister to trichobranchidae/terebellidae .

nuclear datasets
ml and partitioned bi of the 17-taxa, three-nuclear-gene  dataset inferred an identical topology with respect to terebelliform relationships . interestingly, monophyly of terebelliformia was not recovered as pectinaria gouldi was placed as sister to the sipunculid phascolopsis gouldi, albeit with weak support . the other four terebelliform taxa formed a clade with stronger nodal support  than in mitochondrial analyses . as for the mitochondrial analyses, a sistergroup relationship of alvinellidae and ampharetidae is well corroborated . moreover, the triaa hypothesis was supported  and topology testing significantly rejects the alternative triter  and teraa hypotheses .

combined datasets
phylogenetic trees from combined analyses  were similar to the ones from mitochondrial data  with differences occurring in outgroup relationships. monophyly of terebelliformia is significantly supported in these analyses . pectinariidae branched off first within terebelliforms . alvinellidae was recovered as sister to ampharetidae . trichobranchidae was placed as sister to terebellidae, the triter hypothesis, in all analyses. however, bootstrap support for the triter hypothesis in the combined analyses was generally lower than in mtdna alone analyses . furthermore in contrast to the mitochondrial nuc dataset, topology testing did not significantly reject the alternative triaa hypothesis favored by the nuclear dataset , though the teraa hypothesis is still significantly rejected .

congruence and incongruence between partitions regarding terebelliformia
due to these results, we further explored conflict regarding the triter and triaa hypotheses indicated by mtdna  or nuclear partitions , respectively. therefore, we conducted phylogenetic analyses and topology testing for all possible combinations of the four partitions  when using  <dig> taxa. these analyses showed that when the mitochondrial data partition was added, the triter hypothesis was supported, whereas all possible combinations of the three nuclear genes, excluding mtdna data, recovered the triaa hypothesis. with an increasing amount of nuclear data  bootstrap support for the triaa hypothesis steadily increased , while bootstrap support for the triter hypothesis remained low . furthermore, the p value of the au test for the triter hypothesis decreased with an increasing amount of nuclear data from a non-significant value of  <dig>  to a significant one of  <dig>  . on the other hand, in all datasets including mitochondrial data bootstrap support for the triter hypothesis was high, though it slightly decreased with an increasing amount of nuclear data , and, vice versa, the bootstrap support for the triaa hypothesis was low, but slightly increased with increasing nuclear data . however, as the proportion of nuclear data combined with mtdna data increased, the p value of the au test for the triaa hypothesis became less significant . comparatively and independent of the inclusion of mitochondrial data, the p value for the teraa hypothesis decreased with an increasing amount of nuclear data . hence, topology tests clearly revealed that nuclear data favor the triaa hypothesis, whereas mitochondrial data favor the triter hypothesis.

spectral analyses
spectral analyses revealed that  <dig> positions of the 17-taxon nuclear dataset support the triaa hypothesis  recovered in the best tree . one hundred and five positions are consistent with the triter hypothesis favored by the mtdna data and  <dig> with the teraa hypothesis. this is congruent with the results of the topology tests based on the 17-taxon nuclear dataset, where the triter hypothesis had a higher p value than the teraa hypothesis . however for the mitochondrial dataset with  <dig> taxa, similar numbers of positions,  <dig> and  <dig>  support the teraa and triaa hypothesis, respectively. on the other hand, only  <dig> positions are consistent with the triter hypothesis, which was recovered by the best tree of the mitochondrial dataset .

besides the number of positions, the quality of supporting positions is different for these three alternative hypotheses in both 17-taxon datasets. for the nuclear dataset, two binary positions support the triaa hypothesis  and no binary positions support the triter and teraa hypotheses. in contrast, no binary positions are found to support any of the three hypotheses in the mitochondrial dataset. all other positions consistent with the triaa or teraa hypothesis are either noisy only in the outgroup  or in both ingroup and outgroup , with more positions belonging to the latter class. conversely, positions consistent with the triter hypothesis are exclusively based on a single class of positions, noisy in the outgroup only .

source of incongruence
based on analyses herein, placement of trichobranchidae is incongruent between mitochondrial and nuclear data. to further investigate possible sources of incongruence with regards to trichobranchidae placement, we examined two properties known to mislead placement of taxa, placement of the root and base composition heterogeneity.

placement of the root
with respect to the relationships of trichobranchidae, terebellidae, alvinellidae and ampharetidae to each other, mitochondrial and nuclear partitions yield identical subtrees that were rooted differently . effects of long-branched outgroups and basal taxa misleading placement of the root have been long known . pectinaria gouldi, as well as phascolopsis gouldi, exhibit long branches in nuclear rrna data . however, pectinariidae is placed as sister to the other terebelliform taxa and may influence placement of trichobranchidae within the nuclear dataset . nuclear data of scoloplos cf. armiger also exhibited a long branch on the reconstructed topology . therefore, we excluded these taxa  to examine the possibility of long-branch attraction, but found that they did not influence placement of the root or trichobranchidae. all combinations of nuclear genes still favored the triaa hypothesis, whereas the addition of the mitochondrial data always rendered trichobranchidae being sister to terebellidae in ml reconstructions. correspondingly, results of topology tests are not altered substantially by excluding these three long branched taxa .

poor taxon sampling can also influence taxon placement and rooting  <cit> . as we could not easily increase the available number of mitochondrial genomes for terebelliformia, we focused on adding more nuclear data and included  <dig> new 18s and  <dig> 28s sequences for terebelliformia and one cirratulid to the available data . phylogenetic analyses of this dataset comprising  <dig> taxa also recovered a sistergroup relationship of trichobranchidae to alvinellidae/ampharetidae  within a monophyletic terebelliformia. additionally, the 61-taxon dataset based only on 18s rrna data failed to provide resolution within terebelliformia ; thus, neither exclusion of long-branched taxa nor an increased taxon sampling had an influence on the placement of the root for the nuclear data.

base composition
evaluations of base composition heterogeneity showed a strong difference between nuclear and mitochondrial data. the rcfv value for mitochondrial data  was much greater than for nuclear data . thus, mitochondrial data exhibit a stronger compositional heterogeneity. for mitochondrial data, taxon-specific rcfv values  showed that alvinellidae, and especially ampharetidae, had much higher values than the other terebelliforms or the average outgroup value indicating strong compositional biases in alvinellidae and ampharetidae. no obvious biases were observed in nuclear data. similar results were obtained for absolute deviations from mean frequency for individual nucleotides as well as combinations of nucleotides . for pyrimidines , ampharetidae and alvinellidae deviated more from the mean than other terebelliform taxa. in addition, ampharetidae also showed a much stronger deviation from the mean in guanine. binning nucleotides as at and gc did not alleviate these differences in deviation , but recoding pyrimidines  and purines  reduced the biases between terebelliform taxa .

ampharetidae exhibited a strong g-c skew value towards guanine relative to cytosine . moreover for mitochondrial data, c-t skews indicated that ampharetidae was biased towards thymine, and alvinellidae away from it, relative to other taxa. the same pattern could be observed in a-t skews driven by the differences in thymine frequencies. thus, ampharetidae and alvinellidae showed strong-but opposite-biases in frequencies of pyrimidines, and ampharetidae also a strong skew towards guanine. these evaluations were based on the mitochondrial dataset, we used for phylogenetic analyses , but examining either 3rd positions alone or with 3rd positions included resulted in similar patterns . codon usage reflected biases in base frequencies with deviations in ampharetidae and alvinellidae compared to the other taxa .

amelioration of incongruence
non-stationary sequence evolution
using models of non-stationary sequence evolution has successfully ameliorated misleading effects of compositional biases in mitochondrial genomes of beetles  <cit> . therefore, we also employed such models for both our mitochondrial and nuclear datasets using phase  <dig>   <cit> . for both datasets and each number of different compositional vectors,  <dig> independent chains starting from different random seeds failed to converge upon the same score indicating a structured tree-space with several local optima. nonetheless for mitochondrial data, the majority-rule consensus topology derived from the best run  for each number of different compositional vectors  were identical except for the position of the outgroup taxon clymenella torquata . as before with mitochondrial data, terebellidae and trichobranchidae were sister to each other . for nuclear data, the three topologies derived from the best runs invoking  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> different vectors placed trichobranchidae as sister to alvinellidae/ampharetidae . thus, using different compositional vectors along the branches did not reduce incongruence between datasets.

ry coding
for mitochondrial genomes, ry coding strategies can ameliorate biases within pyrimidines and purines, because they do not distinguish between transition or transversion classes  <cit> . the best ml tree based on ry coding of the nuclear partition  is similar to the ml tree using standard nucleotide coding . however, bootstrap support for trichobranchidae as sister to alvinellidae/ampharetidae dropped.

in contrast, ry coding of the mitochondrial partition and combined dataset  yielded different ingroup relationships  with terebellidae as sister to ampharetidae/alvinellidae rather than trichobranchidae. notably, bootstrap support for this clade was below  <dig> in the analyses of both mitochondrial and combined data and all previous topology tests clearly rejected this relationship . besides this difference in ingroup relationships, ry coding of mitochondrial and combined data also differed in several outgroup relationships.

discussion
biases in nucleotide frequencies influenced placement of trichobranchidae and terebellidae in both mitochondrial and combined analyses. misplacement of these taxa is interesting because the taxa themselves did not exhibit compositional biases, but alvinellidae and ampharetidae biases influenced their placement. this misplacement was apparently due to biases in ampharetidae and alvinellidae and can be related to the "symplesiomorphy trap" for which few molecular examples have been elucidated  <cit> . in the cirripedia example by wägele and mayer  <cit>  , acrothoracica and ascothoracida grouped together due to symplesiomorphic characters because of the long branch uniting the remaining cirripedia. though no long branches could be observed in our analyses based on mitochondrial data regarding terebelliform taxa, biases in base composition and codon usage detected in ampharetidae and alvinellidae pointing in opposite directions appear to have had a similar effect. these directional biases affected nucleotides in all three coding positions of mitochondrial genes in ampharetidae and alvinellidae presumably due to differences in substitution rate or pattern.

in our case the symplesiomorphy trap appears to have misrooted a terebelliform subtree rendering a paraphyletic assemblage as a monophyletic group. the misinterpretation appears due to basal homologies, or symplesiomorphies, rather than an artificial signal due to homoplasy . first of all, though alvinellidae and ampharetidae are affected by opposite biases in mitochondrial nucleotide frequencies their sistergroup relationship, which is independently confirmed by the nuclear data, is still strongly supported by mitochondrial data as judged by bootstrap and spectral analyses. hence, these two taxa appear unaffected by the opposite biases. second, we could exclude that the nuclear partition is affected by an artificial signal; the nuclear data exhibited no biases with respect to terebelliform taxa. the root of the subtree comprising terebellidae, trichobranchidae and ampharetidae/alvinellidae, which was supported by all our analyses as well as several previous ones , was not placed differently by the inclusion or exclusion of taxa  <cit> . moreover, the spectral analysis of the nuclear partition is in agreement with the reconstructed nodes regarding the relations of these three taxa to each other. the number of supporting positions in the spectral analysis is in agreement with support by bootstrap and topology test p values for nuclear data. third and contrasting with the nuclear data, the spectral analyses of the mitochondrial data are not congruent with tree reconstructions. whereas the triter hypothesis was recovered in all best trees that included mtdna data and was strongly supported by bootstrap and topology test results, spectral analyses revealed that this hypothesis was consistent with the fewest numbers of positions in the mitochondrial data. using mitochondrial data, these characters overwhelmed the larger numbers of positions supporting the alternative placement of trichobranchidae.

in the case of the symplesiomorphy trap, the phylogenetic signal for a certain relationship can be eroded along internal branches leading to subgroups without affecting the subgroups themselves. in the cirripedia example  <cit> , this erosion occurred along the branch leading to all cirripedia but acrothoracica . in our case, there are more possibilities; the branch leading to ampharetidae/alvinellidae as well as the branches within this clade could be relevant. for the terebellidae/trichobranchidae/ampharetidae/alvinellidae clade, differences in substitution processes of alvinellidae and ampharetidae obscured signal for this clade by exhibiting a state different from the apomorphic state of this clade in one or both of these two taxa . hence, a large proportion of the data would still exhibit the original character-state only in terebellidae and trichobranchidae, but not in ampharetidae/alvinellidae. as only four character states are exhibited in nucleotide data and because of skews in mitochondrial nucleotide frequencies, the likelihood is high that, in this case, states exhibited in ampharetidae, alvinellidae, or both, are also present in either terebellidae or pectinaridae. accordingly, results of spectral analyses showed that 1) most of the positions in mitochondrial data supporting the split of trichobranchidae/ampharetidae/alvinellidae are noisy within ingroup and outgroup, and 2) equal in numbers to the splits of terebellidae/ampharetidae/alvinellidae and pectinaridae/ampharetidae/alvinellidae . therefore, as with the cirripedia example, strong support for the sistergroup relationship of terebellidae and trichobranchidae by mitochondrial data is due to symplesiomorphic characters rather than apomorphic ones.

the process of deamination of the non-coding strand may be responsible for biases observed herein for pyrimidines and purines  <cit> . compositional biases in our mitochondrial data were greater within pyrimidines than in purines; guanine had the lowest average frequency  of all nucleotides. this is similar to the situation found in mammals though their guanine frequency can be considerably lower  <cit> . in mammals, this is due to spontaneous deamination of cytosine to uracil and adenine to hypoxanthine on the complementary strand during replication of mitochondrial genomes  <cit> . the former deamination occurs more often than the latter  <cit>  explaining the low level of guanines in mammals on the coding strand and the stronger bias observed in pyrimidines than in purines, because the low guanine frequency allows for little variation  <cit> .

the best strategy to ameliorate the effect of the symplesiomorphy trap is to increase ingroup taxon sampling  <cit> . however, increasing the taxon sampling might not always be easily achieved or possible. for example, sampling of nearly complete mitochondrial genomes in annelids is time consuming and expensive, but new sequencing technologies are changing this. in other cases, taxon sampling will be limited by number of extant taxa from which genetic material can be obtained. therefore, we tested different strategies with respect to their capabilities to ameliorate the effect of the symplesiomorphy trap given a limited taxon sampling. in the cirripedia example, using appropriate methods such as ml and increased outgroup sampling ameliorated the symplesiomorphy problem because this misplacement was due to long branches  <cit> . in the mammalia example, the problem could be solved by the ry coding strategy and partitioned analyses, which resulted in weak support for the theria hypothesis even using mitochondrial data  <cit> . moreover, usage of non-stationary models of sequence evolution were able to adjust for compositional biases in mitochondrial genomes in the reconstruction of the beetle phylogeny  <cit> .

in our case, the most effective strategy was ry coding, which reduced the effects of compositional biases within pyrimidines and purines. however, we still did not recover strong support for trichobranchidae as sister to ampharetidae/alvinellidae with either mitochondrial or combined data. moreover, phylogenetic signal in all datasets was substantially decreased by ry coding. addition of nuclear data was only able to slightly minimize the effects of the symplesiomorphy trap as indicated, for example, by the slight decrease in bootstrap support for the presumed 'incorrect' hypothesis. therefore, substantially more unbiased nuclear data would have been necessary to turn the tides. on the other hand, herein partitioned analyses always obtained the same topology as non-partitioned ml analyses, and phase analyses did not resolve incongruence either. the poor performance of non-stationary models of sequence evolution in our analyses, in comparison to sheffield et al.  <cit> , might be due to the limited sampling of ingroup taxa. increased sampling may allow better adjustment to biases along the branches  <cit> . finally, we also tested if exclusion of biased taxa in turn would alter the results  <cit> , but there was no noticeable effect. thus, though several approaches were tried, none completely ameliorated the influence of the symplesiomorphy trap.

interestingly, results based on combined data seem to be congruent with morphological and mitochondrial gene order data and, therefore, the underlying incongruence in the data was not apparent at first. trichobranchidae strongly resemble terebellidae and, thus, were placed as sister to or within terebellidae  <cit> . however, only one non-homoplastic character supports their common origin: prostomium on peristomium with fused frontal edges. in contrast, others did not support a sister relationship of terebellidae and trichobranchidae  <cit> . the position of two adjacent trnm genes also seemed to support such a relationship of terebellidae and trichobranchidae  <cit> . however, two adjacent trnm genes are also found in the pectinarid p. gouldi  and in some but not all sipunculids  <cit> . thus, no unequivocal character supports a sistergroup relationship of terebellidae and trichobranchidae. analyses herein revealed that support by mitochondrial and combined data was only due to symplesiomorphic characters. on the other hand, although a close relationship between alvinellids and ampharetids has been long suspected based on morphology , until now strong support by molecular data  has been lacking.

CONCLUSIONS
herein we report the detection of the symplesiomorphy trap in molecular data, one of a few known examples to date. mitochondrial data placed trichobranchidae as sister to terebellidae in contrast to the nuclear data, which placed trichobranchidae as sister to ampharetidae and alvinellidae. these latter two taxa exhibited strong compositional biases in the mitochondrial data as shown by spectral analyses as well as skew and rcfv values. however, ampharetidae and alvinellidae themselves were not misplaced but caused trichobranchidae to be erroneously placed. this taxon exhibits no obvious compositional bias. unfortunately, several state-of-the-art approaches  were not able to ameliorate the influence of the symplesiomorphy trap in the mitochondrial data. therefore, more sophisticated substitution models have to be developed to appropriately address this peculiar tree reconstruction artifact. in the mean time, partitioned and careful analyses can be used to detect the trap and to be aware of incongruencies in the molecular data even if nodal support is high as in our case. given the advent of next generation sequencing technologies, we hope that analyses, such as those done here, will be better able to detect artifacts due to systematic errors because much more data will be brought to bear on such issues. hence, these approaches may add strength and confidence to results of phylogenomic studies by allowing more in depth understanding of the sources of signal and noise.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors' contributions
ths and khm conceived this study. bh, ag and mn collected the nuclear data and mz the mitochondrial data. ths and mz performed the analyses. ths, mz and khm mainly contributed to writing the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
mitochondrial genomes and their properties. this file provides a more detailed description of methods for the determination of the mitochondrial genomes as well as of their general properties such as codon usage.

click here for file

 additional file 2
analyses with increased taxon sets. this file provides a summary of datasets, analyses and results with more than  <dig> taxa.

click here for file

 additional file 3
best ml trees of the amino acid datasets with  <dig> taxa. this file provides a supplementary figure showing the best tree of ml and bi analyses based on mitochondrial and combined amino acid datasets.

click here for file

 additional file 4
compositional heterogeneity of the 3rd positions. this file provides a supplementary figure showing the analyses of compositional heterogeneity of 3rd positions included in the mitochondrial dataset as well as of only the 3rd positions of the mitochondrial protein-coding genes.

click here for file

 additional file 5
analyses using time-heterogeneous models. this file provides a supplementary figure showing the results of the phase analyses using  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> compositional vectors, respectively, for both the mitochondrial and nuclear dataset.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this study was funded by the nsf-wormnet grant  and the german science foundation dfg str683/5- <dig> from the priority program  <dig> "deep metazoan phylogeny" and dfg str683/6- <dig>  contribution # <dig> to the au marine biology program and # <dig> to the molette biology laboratory for environmental and climate change studies.
