BACKGROUND
introduction
next generation sequencing technology has caused an explosion in the genomic data that is available to the research community. as a consequence, the annotation of such large numbers of diverse genomes has now become a major challenge. more specifically, in order to elucidate novel biological processes in certain organisms, assigning functions to the genes involved and understanding their interplay have become key problems. to address these challenges, several methods of function assignment have been proposed over the past decade. these range from simple homology-based strategies  to comparative genomics-based methods such as the gene cluster method  <cit> , the phylogenetic profiles method  <cit> , and the gene fusion  <cit>  method.

in the case of prokaryotes, the gene cluster method has been very effective as functionally related genes tend to be physically clustered together on the genome and these arrangements tend to be conserved due to selection pressures  <cit> . however, conservation of genes is highly sensitive to the set of reference genomes and their phylogenetic relationship. in general, gene clusters are correct, in terms of functional relationship of component genes, but gene clusters are small and fragmented when clusters conserved in many genomes are sought. in addition, proximity-based clusters are often fragmented since not all genes in a functionally related gene set are physically co-located.

another technique called the phylogenetic profiles method has been effective for co-evolving gene sets. however, this method is prone to false positives. moreover, both these methods do not help understand the underlying mechanisms of biological processes. in order to establish such higher-level functions for both genes and gene clusters, we adopt a novel approach that involves the identification of functionally related gene clusters. to the best of our knowledge, this identification problem has not been addressed before. in this paper, we propose a novel method called the gene cluster profile vector  method that combines strength of both techniques. gcpv takes, as an input, a set of gene clusters that are stringently defined and then group clusters based on the similarity of two clusters defined as the occurrence profiles of individual genes of the clusters in a set of genomes. we evaluate the gcpv method’s effectiveness in grouping together related operons in escherichia coli and also assess the performance of the gcpv method in comparison to the single-gene phylogenetic profiles method. we then test its performance on predicted gene clusters from caulobacter crescentus.

motivation
genes whose products that contribute to the same biological process tend to form small clusters in prokaryotes. however, these clusters themselves, tend to be spread out through the entire genome. simple proximity-based methods would be unable to identify functional relatedness in such cases. moreover, although certain biological processes are observed in certain organisms, the corresponding clusters related to them may be fragmented into smaller clusters. on the other hand, although the phylogenetic profiles method has been successfully used for gene function assignment, it is based on the assumption that genes with related functions would have similar evolutionary profiles. this assumption tends to lead to false positives due to spurious matches. we propose a method that combines the advantages of the proximity and evolutionary constraints inherent in these two methods. previous attempts at combining these methods, used individual scores for a gene, based on proximity and on co-evolution and combined these scores to assign it a function  <cit> . since the goal of this study is not only to assign specific functions to genes but to also identify functional relationships between whole gene clusters, such score-based methods cannot be used. we, therefore, propose a more intuitive combination of the phylogenetic profiles and gene cluster methods.

problem description
the problem being addressed in this paper can be described as follows. given a target genome, a set of gene clusters in the target genome  and a reference genome set, the goal is to identify functionally related gene clusters in the target genome and thus, generate clusters of gene clusters that contain gene clusters with similar biological functions, i.e.

input:  gt , a target genome;  c, a set of gene clusters predicted by a proximity-based method in gt ;  g, a set of reference genomes that are at varying evolutionary distances from gt.

output: l, a set of clusters of gene clusters where each cluster contains functionally related gene clusters. the main reason behind the use of proximity-based gene clusters as input is that, gene clusters, when predicted with stringent parameters, are generally accurate but are fragmented as small sets. thus, we have designed the gcpv method to group together such tight, fragmented clusters.

challenges
in order to address the above problem, several challenges have to be overcome. first, no prior information on gene or cluster functions is known. second, in order to identify functionally related gene clusters, both proximity and conservation information in these clusters need to be considered. third, when considering phylogenetic profiles of gene clusters, the method needs to be independent of the size of gene clusters. finally, comparative genomics methods like the phylogenetic profiles methods are typically dependent on the size and nature of the reference genome set used and such dependence needs to be minimized. thus, the design and implementation of a novel method to identify functionally related gene clusters is not trivial.

RESULTS
evaluating the gcpv method - operons from e. coli
the best approximation for a gene cluster is an operon as operons are also sets of genes that are constrained by proximity to each other. however, it must be noted that an operon corresponds to a set of co-transcribed and co-regulated genes. we have used a set of known operons in escherichia coli k- <dig> substr. mg <dig>  that have been verified by experiments. this dataset was obtained by filtering out computationally predicted operons from regulondb   <cit> . subsequently, there were  <dig> genes represented in  <dig> operons from e. coli. this data, along with single gene phylogenetic profile information was input into the gcpv workflow. note that for this and all the following experiments, only prokaryotic species were used as reference genomes and these were downloaded from ncbi. the resulting clusters of operons were evaluated using seed broad categories.

we found that, on average for each starting reference set , about  <dig> clusters of operons were produced. about 60% of the clusters of operons had scores of at least  <dig>  at the broad category level  and about 40% at the seed subsystem level . note that we have used a less stringent cutoff simply because our evaluation method itself is harsh on smaller clusters . fig.  <dig> also shows that there is very little correlation between performance of the method and the number of genomes used in the original reference set. as can be seen in additional file  <dig>  clusters of operons are fairly consistent across reference sets of different sizes. although some of these clusters show slight differences in their members, there tend to be a core set of operons common to all genome sets. there are also a number of clusters that are unique to each set. these tend to be smaller clusters broken down from larger clusters of operons. we believe both these issues can be explained by the fixed tree-cut height we use during hierarchical clustering.

in order to get some sense of the effect of the phylogenetic relationships among genomes in different reference sets, we broke the reference sets in fig.  <dig> down to the phylogenetic classes of each genome. fig.  <dig> shows that although in some reference sets, all classes are not represented, the results are still similar. note that these original sets were randomly devised and certain classes like gammaproteobacteria and firmicutes are well-represented in all sets due to inherent biases in public databases.

comparing performance with single-gene phylogenetic profiles method
we further sought to test the usefulness of the gcpv method in the characterization of novel genes. for this, a comparison was made with respect to an in-house implementation of the single-gene phylogenetic profiles  method. the same dataset and the same validation approach was used as in the benchmarking tests. however, in order to make a fair comparison, the dataset of operons was mixed with ‘artificial’ gene clusters  generated with intra-cluster distance cutoff of  <dig> bp  <cit> . this increased the number of genes in the dataset to  <dig>  which is closer to the total number of genes in the genome. additionally, the evaluation method was slightly changed to enable validation at the gene level as opposed to the cluster level. this was achieved by skipping the step where the union of categories of genes within a cluster were assigned to the whole cluster . as shown in fig.  <dig>  on average, the gcpv method performs  <dig> times better than the sgpp method for identical reference genome sets even with a strict cutoff of  <dig> . the sgpp implementation is as described in step  <dig> in the methods section and is a baseline implementation. although subsequent work has improved upon the sgpp method through different variants of the method, we believe if similar variations were to be applied to the gcpv method, its performance would improve similarly.

testing the gcpv method - gene clusters from c. crescentus
for this experiment, we used gene clusters from caulobacter crescentus na <dig> , predicted to be conserved in four other members of the alphaproteobacteria class by the phyloeggs algorithm . this dataset contained  <dig> genes represented in  <dig> gene clusters. a reference genome set of size  <dig> was used and evaluation was done using kegg pathway information  <cit> . this was done because the target genome was relatively new and no seed information was available for it at the time of the study. since this dataset was much smaller, a lower number of clusters of gene clusters was obtained . of these  <dig> predicted clusters, about 79% of them showed scores greater than  <dig>  . this indicates that the gcpv method does group together functionally related gene clusters effectively and can be used on larger datasets with gene clusters that are not well-characterized.

case studies
an interesting example is the ccna_ <dig> gene in c. crescentus which is annotated as a hypothetical protein. phyloeggs predicted it to be a part of a two-gene cluster also containing a translation initiation inhibitor . the gcpv method included this gene cluster in a cluster of cluster of size three with the remaining two clusters being assigned similar kegg pathways . the latter is a general metabolic pathway while the former deals with oxidative phosphorylation. based on this, one can conclude that ccna_ <dig> may play a role in oxidative phosphorylation or a similar pathway. this would not have been evident through a simple blast search or by just using the cluster context. this highlights the use of the gcpv method as an effective annotation tool.

another case study involves genes responsible for the various steps in the flagellar assembly process. table  <dig> shows the different clusters of operons that contain flagellum-related operons from e. coli. cluster  <dig> seems to be the most specific to flagellar assembly while the other clusters do not entirely contain operons involved in flagellar assembly. interestingly, the justification for the fact that flgamn, flhdc and flidst are not grouped into cluster  <dig> along with the other operons is that these operons consist of genes that produce early or late gene products in the flagellar assembly process. thus, the gcpv method also enables the possible distinction between genes that contribute to a process at different time stages. the fliazy operon is isolated probably because it has been established that the fliz and fliy genes from this operon are not required for motility  <cit> . thus, the gcpv method also enables the identification of genes that are involved but are perhaps not instrumental to a particular process.

                              flgbcdefghij
                           ,
                              flgkl
                           ,
                              flhbae
                           ,
                              flilmnopqr
                           ,
                              motab-cheaw
operons involved in flagellar assembly are marked in bold and identifiers are those in additional file 1

CONCLUSIONS
we have established an effective and robust method for the detection of functionally related gene clusters and thus, genes, with no prior information on function provided. the gcpv method shows minimum dependence on the reference genome set used and has been shown to outperform the basic phylogenetic profiles method which is in agreement with previous work in this area  <cit> . however, our work serves as an improvement over the work in  <cit>  as our method can accommodate gene clusters of any size. a limitation of the gcpv method is that genomic coverage may not span the entire genome as not all genes are present in as parts of clusters.

this was aimed to be a pilot study and future work includes the use of more sophisticated clustering techniques to further improve performance. this is particularly important in the context of improving consistency at the individual cluster level. interestingly, in its current form, the gcpv method still groups together functionally similar clusters/operons as indicated by the evaluation scores. this implies that although individual clusters may not be reference-set independent, the gcpv method generates clusters containing functionally related gene clusters and can be used for function assignment. additionally, the gcpv method can be adapted to any gene set other than proximity-based gene clusters, as long as the intra-set coupling is tight. in general, the gcpv method holds the potential to play a role not only in genome annotation but also in testing hypotheses for roles of previously uncharacterized genes in metabolic pathways, protein-protein interactions and general biological processes.

