BACKGROUND
flexible life cycle duration is widespread in insects  <cit> , also among aquatic species  <cit> . variation may concern an important portion of normal life cycle length. it arises mainly from differences in the duration of the larval stage in which most of the life cycle is spent  <cit> . the main causes for such differences are different temperatures, day length or food in the various habitats of the population .

differences in life cycle length between individuals of a population at the same site have also repeatedly been reported for aquatic insects  <cit> , but the causes are less easily explained. in the case of extended hatching from eggs, early hatching individuals are often assumed to have an advantage in development resulting from the combined effects of temperature and longer growth period  <cit> . such explanations focus mainly on time as factor. however, what causes a population to split into several cohorts growing and developing at different speed? there are no satisfactory explanations so far. often, cohort splitting occurs when larval density at the respective site is high . intraspecific competition may be important in this context as shown, for example, in tadpoles  <cit> , water striders  <cit>  and also stoneflies  <cit> . in the mentioned cases, some individuals grew better than the rest, at the expense of the remaining members of the cohort. possible causes might be competition for space and access to resources , or some direct competition for food .

to investigate possible causes of these frequently observed phenomena we used the stonefly, nemurella pictetii klapálek,  <dig>  as a model species to check for intraspecific competition as a possible cause of cohort splitting in experiments. our experiments extended previous studies by testing competition under standardised laboratory conditions, for long periods of time. n. pictetii is particularly suitable for such study, for several reasons. in appropriate habitats like springs, seeps, and slow flowing spring runs n. pictetii may attain very high larval densities . the species is remarkable for a very flexible semi- to multivoltine life cycle . it also exhibits cohort splitting, even between siblings from a single egg mass  <cit> . some larvae hatching from eggs in spring attain the last instar within three months, emerging as adults and ovipositing in late summer of the same year. other siblings from the same egg mass require a full year to complete development and emerge the next spring, together with offspring of their fast developing siblings  <cit> . multimodal adult emergence described in other studies  probably also reflects similar cohort splitting. at northern latitudes, n. pictetii may exhibit semivoltine life cycles  <cit> .

abbreviations: density = maximal larval density , n = number of parallel samples.

the present study attempts to cast light on these problems and is based on the following hypotheses:  intraspecific competition does influence growth and development of n. pictetii;  the type of competition involved is interference competition. to test these hypotheses, we first compared the immediate effect of different larval densities on speed of larval growth and development . in a second experiment we supplied excess food and indirectly estimated the amount of ingested food by determining the amount of faeces produced per unit time, under different larval densities . in doing so we assumed that speed of development is positively related to the amount of food ingested per unit time.

RESULTS
speed of growth and maturation experiment
larval density distinctly influenced both growth and development of the larvae. larvae kept at low density grew faster and already after two weeks attained significantly larger hcws than larvae kept at high density. the size differences between the two treatments increased further as the experiment continued .

differences in development of larvae kept at the two different levels of density are evident from the degree of wpd  while all larvae kept at low density possessed wing pads at the end of the experiment, the same was true of only 64% of the larvae kept at high density.

in contrast, hcwr revealed no significant influence of larval density . the range between the smallest and largest larva in each experimental unit was similar at the two larval densities .

sr was also not influenced by larval density . at the end of the experiment,  <dig> and 93%, respectively, of the larvae survived at low and high density, respectively.

food ingestion experiment
analysis of af in the food ingestion experiment yielded significant differences among the four treatments. larval density as well as sex distinctly influenced the amount of faeces produced by a larva . animals kept at high density produced fewer faeces than larvae kept at low density and females more than males. for example, male larvae kept at low density produced three times the amount of faeces produced at high density .

during the short term experiment, there was no food shortage. during the experiment, dry weight of the available biofilm decreased on average by only 8%, even at high larval density: from a mean dw of  <dig> mg  at the start to a mean of  <dig> mg dw  at the end of the experiment.

discussion
the results of the speed of growth and maturation experiment confirm our first hypothesis that intraspecific competition influences growth and development of n. pictetii. both parameters were distinctly affected by larval density. high densities induced significantly slower growth and retarded development than observed at low densities. there were distinct  differences in hcw as well as in wpd. however, intraspecific competition was not strong enough to distinctly influence survival rate , which was over 90% at both factor levels.

during preliminary tests we had noticed a striking aggressiveness of larvae during encounters, at least at high densities. larvae stood head to head, threatening with open mandibles. actually, antennae but also cerci were often bitten off. larvae behaved in ways similar to baetisr hodani  at high larval densities  <cit> . this author described larvae frequently pushed against others laterally, and conducted abrupt beats with the cerci against the competitor. each larva may have a critical distance at which no others are tolerated, as described for other aquatic insect larvae with territorial behaviour . for example, large nymphs of coenagrion resolutum  excluded smaller nymphs from areas with high food resources  <cit> . the favourable food supply might accelerate development of such larvae over others, and eventually lead to cohort splitting. however, analysis of hcwr suggests no similar mechanisms act in the present case. hcwr was only little wider at high than at low larval densities . at the end of the experiment, there were no individuals in a unit that were strikingly larger than the rest; drastic suppression of some of the larvae by a few others appears improbable. the fact that hcwr of larvae was similar at both factor levels while hcw and wpd differed distinctly suggests two other causes.

first, n. pictetii larvae are very active and move around frequently  <cit> . at high larval density, disturbance during frequent encounters of larvae may retard development which would be interference competition. stress during frequent encounters is supposed to reduce food ingestion and further increase locomotion. hence, metabolic cost would increase at the expense of resources for growth. our second consideration concerns exploitative competition. shortage of high quality food  may have caused retarded development at high larval density, affecting all individuals in a similar way.

the food ingestion experiment elucidated the kind of intraspecific competition more precisely. the distinctly negative correlation  between larval density and amount of faeces produced by a larva does not suggest exploitative competition, for several reasons. on the one hand, biofilm is a high quality resource  <cit>  that n. pictetii prefers  <cit> . on the other hand, enough biofilm remained during our short term experiments to exclude food shortage. larvae used in the experiment were of comparable size and similarly far developed. also, the biofilm used offered uniform food quality across the entire feeding plot. therefore, interference  seems to have been decisive, which supports our second hypothesis. frequent encounters seem to have hindered ingestion of food. a recent study  <cit>  found comparable evidence. among other, the authors studied mass loss of conditioned alder leaves in relation to larval density of n. pictetii and also found a negative correlation. like ourselves, they attributed their results to the high activity of the species and also regarded interference as cause of the correlation. in contrast, studies of intraspecific competition among slowly moving grazers like trichoptera  <cit>  or gastropoda  <cit>  regarded exploitative competition as more important factor than interference.

although intraspecific competition importantly influences the life cycle length of n. pictetii it can hardly by itself cause the cohort splitting observed both in the field and in the laboratory. egg development of n. pictetii is direct and synchronous, egg rests that are important in other stoneflies  <cit>  do not occur in the present species . instead, several factors may act in combination. possibly, intraspecific competition resulting from high larval densities drives part of the population into suboptimal microhabitats with reduced availability of high quality food, i.e., benthic algae  <cit>  where detritus or the like must instead be consumed. macan's  <cit>  reasoning to explain why the development of pyrrhosoma nymphula  takes  <dig> years in some microhabitats but  <dig> years in others is similar .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, intraspecific competition may importantly influence length of larval life and consequently the entire life cycle of the present species. given the high larval densities of over  <dig> specimens per square meter  observed in some habitats, interference competition must decisively influence the life cycle.

in our experiments, we observed interference competition, but no animal was able to profit at the expense of others. therefore, cohort splitting observed in the field  <cit>  cannot be explained by direct competition, provided the animals inhabit restricted areas with similar food quality. however, in more heterogeneous habitats displacement of some specimens to less favourable sites with lower food quality  can be conceived, especially in view of the aggressive behaviour observed in the present species. size differences caused by different food qualities  <cit>  may thus be enhanced through intraspecific competition by increasing territorial behaviour, as shown in water striders  <cit> . further study is needed for a precise analysis of the situation.

