BACKGROUND
the ciliate tetrahymena thermophila has been successfully used as a model system in molecular and cell biology for decades. fundamental discoveries such as ribozymes, telomeric repeats, telomerases or the function of scan rnas were first studied in this eukaryotic microorganism  <cit> . in addition, cells grow fast to high cell densities in inexpensive media and simple bioreactor infrastructure and several foreign proteins have been expressed, suggesting that t. thermophilahas the potential to become an excellent expression host  <cit> .

ciliates characteristically possess two nuclei, a somatic macronucleus  and a germline micronucleus  <cit> . recently, the entire genome of the mac of t. thermophila has been characterized <cit> . a shotgun sequencing analysis of the mac revealed that t. thermophila is  <dig> mb in length and has approximately  <dig> mac chromosomes that contain more than  <dig>  protein coding genes. about  <dig>  genes match genes of other organisms. in addition to that the genome analysis also elucidated that a huge number of genes are based on gene duplication mechanisms. this is especially true for genes that play a role in structural complexity, sensing and response to environmental conditions and using of different resources. the sequenced genome analysis of t. thermophila once more illustrates the complexity of this single cell eukaryotic microorganism  <cit> .

in order to get more insights into functional aspects of the t. thermophila genome molecular biology tools are necessary that allow the easy handling of the t. thermophila genes to form the basis of the postgenomic age of this model organism. the nuclear dimorphism  of the ciliates offers different possibilities of manipulating the organism's properties <cit> . however, altering the phenotype ultimately needs direct or indirect genetic engineering of the vegetative mac. the first approaches were based on the use of plasmids that take advantage of the vast amplification of the rdna gene during anlagen/mac development  <cit> . however, the episomal presence of these plasmids depends on the presence of antibiotics in the culture medium and the plasmids often recombinate homologously and non-directionally into the endogenous rdna.

the stable integration of expression or knock out cassettes into the diploid mic provides a second method to manipulate the ciliate's genome, because after conjugation of two different mating types the old macs disintegrate and new ones form that carry the new information derived from the recombinant mic. the advantage is that one obtains stable clones that can be crossed via classical mendelian genetics to combine various properties of different t. thermophila strains. but this approach is elaborative and time consuming. furthermore, it has recently been shown that scan rnas  derived from the old mac epigenetically control the genome rearrangement of the new developing mac  <cit> . thus this rnai-like mechanism may cause problems due to partial deletion of foreign expression cassettes in the developing new mac.

so far ciliate expression vectors rely on large double rdna origin stretches to ensure a stable propagation in t. thermophila cells or on large flanking integration sites of non-coding regions that are necessary for a proper and efficient homologous recombination into the gene loci of the mic or mac. in both cases the at-richness of these functional dna sequences cause problems in handling and cloning.

recombinases like cre, flp or the λ system catalyze rearrangements of dna at specific sequences  <cit> . this enables the insertion of mobile dna elements into the host genome. consequently these recombinase mechanisms were used to develop different systems that simplify the molecular genetic applications. from the technical point of view these techniques allow the flexible and fast transfer of dna sequences from donor plasmids into multiple adequate acceptor backbones thereby circumventing restriction and ligation reactions. thus, once inserted into a donor plasmid the selected dna does not need to be subcloned. it is obvious that this is of high relevance in cloning very large or at-rich sequences. in this study we present for the first time a cre-recombinase dependent vector system for ciliates. it allows the independent construction of expression cassettes on the one and the preparation of acceptor vectors with integration sites on the other hand. in a second step expression cassettes can be easily shifted from the donor plasmid into various acceptor backbone constructs.

here we describe the proof of concept of such a system for the t. thermophila expression host by two independent examples. we used the c-terminus of a merozoite surface antigen  from p. falciparum and a novel blasticidin resistance gene . they were cloned into the donor vector and the gene cassettes were transferred via the cre-recombinase into different expression vectors. finally we showed the production of the foreign proteins in the ciliate t. thermophila.

RESULTS
the goal of this work was to establish a system that facilitates the cloning and then allows a flexible shuttling of the corresponding sequences and/or expression cassettes into the appropriate vector systems. to reach this aim we constructed a set of vectors that take advantage of a cre-dependent recombinase system  <cit> .

first we constructed the donor plasmid. we selected a pcr-topo vector as backbone and removed the ampicillin resistance  gene by bsphi digestion and subsequent religation of the plasmid. in a second step a  <dig>  kb dna cassette was inserted by using ecori sites. this artificial cassette  has a modular structure and contains a histone promoter , a signal peptide  fused to the eyfp reporter protein and a histidine stretch  as well as the beta tubulin terminator  of t. thermophila. all of these dna modules can be easily changed by using unique restriction sites. the whole cassette is flanked by loxp sites on the 5' and 3' ends .

a chloramphenicol resistance  was inserted between the loxp site and the btu <dig> terminator to reduce background clones, because this cmr is only translated in e. coli if a correct site-specific recombination between acceptor and donor plasmid has been occurred. however, due to the modular architecture of the pdl-plasmids also other resistance markers can be used for this purpose . in a next step, the sacb marker gene was inserted into the intermediate vector. the sacb gene product metabolises sucrose into levansucrose, a toxic substance for e. coli cells. the parallel usage of the cm resistance  and the sacb  gene strongly inhibits the presence of non-recombinant clones. finally, we replaced the enhanced yellow fluorescence protein  cdna by the msp <dig> cdna from p. falciparum or the blasticidin resistance gene  to demonstrate that the whole system facilitates cloning and expressing foreign genes like previously shown for other host systems e.g. arabidopsis.

recently, we described the bifunctional dihydrofolate reductase and thymidylate synthase  of t. thermophila. both enzyme activities play a crucial role in dna synthesis. the loss of these essential activities can be used as an auxotrophic marker in t. thermophila. we developed a vector system that combines the knock out of the endogenous dhfr-ts gene with the knock in of an expression cassette that encodes a foreign gene   <cit> . appropriate acceptor vectors for the t. thermophila system were created by cloning the loxp-promoter site  into this pkoi vector backbone as well as into a previously described rdna based episomal plasmid . the new vectors were named into pkoix  and pax . a scheme of the acceptor vector structure is given in figure  <dig> 

the final expression vectors pax-msp119/pax-bsdr and pkoix-msp119/pkoix-bsdr were generated via the novel recombinase mechanism. in general, a mixture of  <dig> ng of donor and  <dig> ng of acceptor plasmid yielded  <dig> to  <dig> initial positive clones that were able to grow on lb-agar plates supplemented with both chloramphenicol and ampicillin.

we picked six clones of the msp <dig> recombinase reactions and analyzed them by diagnostic pcr and restriction analysis to test the efficiency of the novel recombinase approach. all of the analyzed clones were positive . this finding was independent of the used acceptor plasmid. the recombinant pax- as well as pkoix-plasmids carry complete expression cassettes and an all complete plasmid backbone. the results are shown in figure  <dig>  the left column illustrates the results using the pax and right column the pkoix backbone. positive clones were analyzed by restriction analysis  and diagnostic pcr , verifying a correct recombinase event. in general nearly all clones  obtained were positives and have a complete backbone. we obtained such quotes in all performed cre-recombinase reactions .

we compared the recombinase efficiency of generating recombinant expression plasmids standard cloning techniques. the pdl-msp <dig>  was digested with noti and saci and the corresponding insert  was ligated into the pre-cut ph4t <dig> vector to obtain an rdna-based msp <dig> expression plasmid. an analogous approach was done with the pkoi plasmid. eight clones were randomly picked and analyzed by restriction analysis. all of them  were negative and most of the ph4t <dig> backbones were degraded or fragmented during the ligation, transformation selection and propagation procedure. the supplementary figure  <dig> illustrates a typical result of such an approach. in most cases only 2–3%  carries the complete expression cassettes in a complete plasmid.

extracts of cells that were transformed with the pkoix-msp <dig> plasmid were analyzed for expression of a  <dig> kda protein fragment of the msp <dig> protein. we used cell extracts of four independent stably transformed strains and compared them to the non-transformed 1868/ <dig> wildtype strain. in all tested cell extracts the recombinant  <dig> kda fragment of msp <dig>  could be detected by the specific monoclonal antibodies   <cit> . in the wildtype negative control no signal could be found. the results are summarized in figure  <dig>  in previous expression experiments we could also demonstrate that the rdna plasmid is capable of expressing the msp <dig> c-terminus .

we attempted to confirm the cre-recombinase dependent cloning by using a second independent expression module. therefore pax and pkoix constructs that carry the bsdr expression cassette  were transformed into conjugating and vegetative t. thermophila wildtype strains according to protocols previously described. the transformants  were cultivated in spp-medium supplemented with thymidine and increasing concentrations of paromomycin  to ensure a stable propagation of the clones. the same clones were cultivated in spp-medium without antibiotics . in a second step we performed a blasticidin growing assay and switched the antibiotic from paromomycin to blasticidin  or applied both antibiotics in parallel. in all experiments the wildtype  that did not contain a resistance gene died within 2– <dig> days. as expected the mock transformant  that only carried the neo <dig> cassette  died when blasticidin was added to the spp-medium .

interestingly, we observed that the pkoix-bsdr transformants were more stable when compared to the pax clones . eight out of the ten analyzed independent pkoix-bsdr clones are resistant against both antibiotics. in contrast to that only ~30% of the pax clones  displayed both resistances. this is probably due to recombination events between the rdna plasmids backbones and/or due to the very similar architecture of the neo <dig> and bsdr resistance cassettes . in summary these results illustrate that the cre-dependent modular donor plasmids in combination with the recently described knock out/knock in concept  provides an easy and sustainable system to establish a resistance testing tool.

discussion
protozoan and functional genomics are an exciting research area. more and more genomes of eukaryotic microorganisms have already been completely sequenced  or will be available soon   <cit> . this allows new insights into evolutionary mechanisms as well as the discovery of new biochemical pathways or the identification of promising vaccine candidates against pathogenic protozoans.

the recently characterized genome of the ciliate paramecium tetaurelia for example elucidated that three successive whole genome duplications lead to nearly  <dig>  genes, illustrating that these mechanism allows a an excellent adaptation to environmental conditions  <cit> .

however, functional genomics and subsequent proteomic studies require tools that allow the analysis and manipulation of certain genes of interest. for the most common model organisms and expression systems like mammalian cell lines, drosophila, yeast or e. coli these tools have been developed and optimized for decades. in contrast to this some tools are lacking to deal with unusual properties and pitfalls of unusual organisms. at-rich genomes for example cause difficulties in handling the dna sequences. also the at-richness of the t. thermophila genome causes the main challenge in altering the ciliates phenotype. previously described episomal expression plasmid consist of a puc backbone that enables propagation in e. coli, two  <dig>  kb parts forming the rdna ori and the neo <dig> cassette that allows the selection of the transformed ciliates. the empty vector is sized about  <dig>  kb. especially the two rdna origins are  at-rich sequences  <cit> . these sequences are probably one reason why this vector tends to recombinate into the highly amplified endogenous rdna chromosomes of the host cells.

recently, we developed a knock out/knock in system  that is based on the stable integration into the endogenous gene locus of the dhfr-ts. the main advantage of this concept is that a stable knock out can be monitored by the complete loss of the dhfr-ts activity, resulting in an auxotrophy for thymidine. thus this marker system allows the propagation of recombinant t. thermophila cells without rdna ori sequences  <cit> . however, large at-rich stretches are necessary to ensure good integration efficiency by homologous recombination. in the case of the pkoi constructs a  <dig>  kb regions of the 5'- and a  <dig>  kb 3'-region of dhfr-ts gene have been added to the vector backbone. the uptake of ligation reactions and the subsequent amplification in e. coli often resulted in reduced and fragmented backbones and the loss of the expression cassettes. this indicates that the at-rich dna of the double rdna or of the integration sites is responsible for the described problems. there is a demand for simplification of the genetic manipulation of at-rich protozoans. therefore both available vector systems were optimized.

creating and tuning of expression cassettes in a small and flexible donor vector and the subseqeuent construction of final expression vectors by an easy and robust shuttling of the expression module provided a solution to this problem. the constructed donor vector possesses a modular structure and is small sized. it lacks at-rich sequences like rdna or integrative sites. thus the gene of interest as well as signal peptides, promoter and terminator sequences can easily be substituted via unique restriction sites. this offers the possibility to establish simple test systems like the here shown resistance gene test system. furthermore, different constitutive, cell cycle dependent or inducible promoter sequences can be combined to various genes of interest.

the whole dna cassette of the donor vector is flanked by loxp sites to enable the cre-dependent site-specific transfer into appropriate acceptor plasmids.

as acceptor plasmids we used both, the backbone of the episomal rdna plasmid ph4t <dig> and the recently described pkoi backbone. up to now, these concepts and the paclitaxel system developed by gaertig et al. are the only known expression vector concepts that are available for the t. thermophila system  <cit> . we did not only observe a complete transfer but also an expression of the encoded genes of the shuttled expression module , illustrating the high efficiency of the new system.

the ciliates are one of three evolutionary lineages that make up the alveolates. the two further groups are dinoflagellates and apicomplexans. especially the endoparasitic apicomplexans contain a number of human and animal pathogens . the most important protozoans from this apicomplexans group are plasmodium species that causes malaria.

intriguingly, the genome of plasmodium falciparum is the most at-rich genome known so far . this illustrates that the handling of  at-rich dna sequences is not a problem limited to t. thermophila applications. however, we and others demonstrated that the t. thermophila expression system is able to express proteins from the malaria parasite plasmodium faciparum, suggesting that this "distant cousin" can serve as an expression system for proteomic applications of other protozoans  <cit> . furthermore, the here shown vectors can be modified to enable an adaptation to optional requirements. for example, the dhfr-ts integration sites of pkoi can be substituted by dna sequences of other species to allow an integration into other host systems . thus the here presented powerful molecular biological tool allows a more flexible and easy handling of dna sequences and might reveal a concept that can easily be transferred to other protozoan host systems.

CONCLUSIONS
the here presented cre-dependent recombinase system is the first one that has been established for a protozoan system. it allows a facilitated shuttling of dna into expression vectors and thereby an easier handling of these at-rich dna sequences.

as the concept can easily be adapted to further unicellular eukaryotes the whole system provides a powerful molecular biology tool in protozoan research.

