BACKGROUND
enterococci are important causes of hospital-acquired infections, and treatment of infections due to these opportunistic pathogens is becoming increasingly difficult because of their resistance to multiple antibiotics  <cit> . the clinical importance of biofilm formation has been proposed for several enterococcal infections, but the information regarding the basic molecular mechanisms is fragmentary  <cit> . we have recently identified a four-gene locus involved in biofilm formation in enterococcus faecalis, provisionally named bop . recently, bourgogne and coworkers confirmed that genes of this locus are regulated by the fsr system, a quorum-sensing mechanism involved in the expression of virulence genes in e. faecalis  <cit> . a putative sugar-binding transcriptional regulator, bopd, was found to be necessary for biofilm formation. the transposon insertion occurred into the second gene of the operon, but the reduction of biofilm formation is related to a polar effect on the  <dig>  gene . complementation of the transposon mutant was done using all the separate genes  with only the bopd gene being able to partially restore biofilm formation  <cit> . we thus concluded that this gene may be important to integrate nutritional cues, such as the availability of certain carbohydrates, into the signal transduction pathway regulating biofilm expression and probably other virulence mechanisms  <cit> . since bopd exhibits significant sequence homology with a number of bacterial proteins involved in the regulation of maltose metabolism  <cit> , we evaluated the biofilm formation in medium containing glucose or maltose of the wild-type  and two mutants, a biofilm-negative transposon mutant  and a biofilm-enhanced deletion mutant . the possibile effect of oligosaccharide in the diet on the colonization and biofilm production of resident enterococci in mice was also evaluated.

RESULTS
biofilm formation of the e. faecalis strains grown in glucose or maltose medium
the optical density measured in the microtiter plates after  <dig> h of incubation was not statistically different for the various strains  grown in medium without additional sugars and in medium supplemented with 1% glucose  . in biofilm medium supplemented with 1% maltose , the wild-type strain  and the transposon mutant  grew equally well, while the triple deletion mutant  grew significantly less than the other two strains . none of the strains produced biofilm in medium without sugar or in medium that contained  <dig> % glucose or  <dig> % maltose .

biofilm formation by the wild-type e. faecalis t <dig> did not differ in glucose- and maltose-containing medium . as shown before  <cit> , the biofilm-negative transposon mutant e. faecalis 10d <dig>  when grown in bfm-g, produced significantly less biofilm than the wild-type . however, when the bacteria were grown in bfm-m , the wild-type e. faecalis t <dig> and the transposon mutant e. faecalis 10d <dig> produced equal amounts of biofilm. when grown in bfm-g, the deletion mutant e. faecalis tdm produced significantly more biofilm  than did the wild-type strain e. faecalis t <dig> . however, when this mutant was grown in medium containing maltose as the single carbon source, it produced significantly less biofilm  than did the wild-type e. faecalis t <dig> or the transposon mutant e. faecalis 10d <dig>  as expected, all strains produced biofilm in medium containing both 1% glucose and 1% maltose . we also tested biofilm formation of the wild-type strain and the two mutant strains in medium containing various sugars  and observed that mannose and glucose produced similar activity . all strains were able to form strong biofilm when fructose was added to the medium, while biofilm formation was reduced in 1% sucrose . no biofilm was observed for any strains in cultures containing trehalose or lactose.

scanning electron microscopy
to obtain a comparable view of the biofilm composition, micrographs were taken from randomly chosen fields at the same magnification for each sample.

t <dig> appeared to form a well-organized, multilayered biofilm in all growth conditions , while the transposon mutant 10d <dig> formed biofilm only when maltose was present . the triple deletion mutant exhibited a well-formed biofilm in glucose , while maltose appeared to induce the formation of large aggregates of amorphous material apparently covering the cells ; in this case, however, no multilayered accumulation of cells was observed.

biofilm formed in glucose and maltose appears to differ slightly: t <dig> cells grown in glucose presented small globular aggregates on the cell surface  that became larger and less regular when bacteria were grown in maltose . larger aggregates where also visible on the surface of 10d <dig> grown in maltose  and on the deletion mutant grown in glucose .

extracellular material visible on scanning electron micrographs represents polysaccharides partially collapsed due to dehydration caused by processing for sem. however, we always examined samples processed in a single run, to avoid biased observation caused by artifacts; the differential "collapse" of the extracellular material when bacteria were grown in glucose or maltose, suggests that the material does in fact differ.

mouse colonization model
mice were treated with oral antibiotics to eliminate their physiological gastrointestinal flora. after bacterial challenge with different strains in the drinking water the animals showed increasing gastrointestinal colonization over a period of  <dig> days and stable colony counts in the stool thereafter . the transposon mutant resulted in a delayed colonization with about 5– <dig> times reduced colony counts during the first  <dig> days of the experiment. after that the colony counts were comparable to the wild-type strain .

discussion
enterococci are important inhabitants of the gastrointestinal tract of humans and many animals  <cit> . while a number of colonization and adhesion factors have been studied, the ability of enterococci to effectively colonize the gut is not well understood. several studies have investigated biofilm formation of enterococci, which is thought to be a multifactorial event  <cit> .

le breton and colleagues identified the locus described by us previously  <cit>  as being responsible for the uptake and metabolism of maltose  <cit> . from these data and from our results it seems clear that bopd is likely to be a maltose-sensitive negative regulatory protein that may repress both bopabc, and the divergently transcribed malt operon. two insertional mutants were studied by le breton et al., one in the malt and one in bopa . these results confirm the role of this locus in the utilization of maltose and corroborate our observations with regard to the growth curves in our mutants. e. faecalis tdm shows significantly decreased growth in medium containing maltose as the single sugar source compared with the other strains . however, the ability to form biofilm seems to be independently reduced under these conditions because all the optical densities measured for the biofilm formation were normalized to take into account the different growth rates.

trehalose and maltose are abundant disaccharides in nature and serve as important carbon and energy sources to lactic acid bacteria. maltose is generated by enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis of starch by amylases present in the gastrointestinal tract. in l. lactis the genes encoding maltose phosphorylase , trehalose-6-phosphate phosphorylase , and β-phosphoglucomutase are induced by maltose and trehalose, indicating that the trehalose and maltose catabolic pathways are closely connected  <cit> . however, when our wild-type and mutants were grown in medium containing 1% trehalose, the effect on growth was different with respect to growth in maltose and no biofilm was formed .

it has been observed that, in the hyperthermophilic bacterium t. maritima, at high growth rates, maltose consumption increased significantly, although it appeared that carbon was used in the formation of extracellular polysaccharide  rather than accumulation of biomass  <cit> . the authors speculated that eps formation could reflect the processing of excess carbon or, alternatively, could be coupled to a specific ecological strategy, such as biofilm formation.

it has been hypothesized that whenever bacteria are in non-optimal growth conditions , the accumulation of reducing equivalents can be disposed of through the production of biofilm to transport these molecules out of the cell. in fact, it has been proposed that bacteria form exopolysaccharide matrices as a by-product to release reducing equivalents that could otherwise function as a bottleneck in the metabolism of an excess of the carbon source  <cit> .

the observed effects of reduced biofilm formation in the transposon mutant grown in glucose could be attributable to the lower expression of the bopd protein and its subsequent minor efficiency in carbon catabolite regulation.

on the other hand, lower expression of bopd results in derepression of the bopa gene , and to a minor extent also of the upstream sugar transport gene malt, as confirmed by real-time pcr , which in turn may lead to a higher efficiency in transport and maltose utilization and enhanced biofilm formation ability when bacteria are grown in maltose.

in the deletion mutant tdm, the transcription of the bopd gene seems to be somewhat enhanced with respect to the wild-type. this probably results in increased repression of the transcription of bopa compared to the wild-type and the transposon mutant 10d <dig>  as confirmed by real-time pcr . however, e. faecalis tdm lacks functional bopa, bopb , and bopc . consequently, when this strain is grown in bfm-m, it may not be able to use maltose to produce the extracellular macromolecules necessary for biofilm formation, while its ability to metabolize glucose may not be affected.

moreover, when e. faecalis tdm is grown in glucose, the overexpression of bopd could increase alternative pathways for glucose metabolism and in turn lead to enhanced biofilm formation.

in the gastrointestinal colonization model, we could demonstrate that the biofilm-negative mutant was delayed in colonizing the mouse intestinal tract, although the levels achieved after  <dig> days were eventually as high as for the wild-type strain. however, since the transposon mutation also leads to different expression of other genes putatively involved in biofilm formation  <cit> , these experiments cannot completely rule out pleiotropic effects that may be responsible for the observed differences. using stringent decolonizing methods in this experiment that provide a very artificial "mono-organism" colonization, interactions of these strains with other organisms cannot be ruled out.

a mechanism that integrates the availability of certain carbohydrates into the signal transduction pathway regulating biofilm expression could be important for the ability of enterococci to colonize the gastro-intestinal system of many animals and humans. biofilm formation could help the bacteria adhere to the gut wall and may represent an advantage for certain strains. the formation of a biofilm seems to be related to a multicellular architecture and copious amounts of extracellular macromolecules, as shown in the scanning electron micrographs. this organization depends on the presence of specific genes and specific carbohydrate pathways as well as specific oligosaccharides in the environment.

CONCLUSIONS
although the functional role of the above-mentioned mechanism needs to be further elucidated, we speculate that the availability of starch and maltose in food and gastrointestinal contents may influence the expression of biofilm by enterococci and that this biofilm formation may enable these bacteria to colonize and persist in the gut.

