BACKGROUND
in plants, three major classes of flavonoids  are synthesized via the branched flavonoid biosynthetic pathway  <cit> . these secondary metabolites contribute to the 'colorful' pigmentation of flowers, fruits, seeds and leaves and are involved in several physiological and biochemical processes in plants such as uv protection, insect attraction, herbivore defense and symbiosis  <cit> . plants also utilize various colors conferred by anthocyanins to recruit pollinators and attract animals to disperse seeds  <cit> . the flavonoids are often produced in vegetative tissues as well under stress conditions, such as high light intensity, cold temperature, nutrient deficiency and pathogen attack or senescence  <cit> . due to a multitude of biological and agricultural importance and favorable health benefits, the genetics and biochemistry of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway has been intensively studied in several plant species  <cit> . these studies indicated that flavonoid composition among plant species and even different tissues of a plant can be remarkably different  <cit> . further details about the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway are available in many publications  <cit> . a generalized scheme of the pathway is shown in figure  <dig> 

for many years, berries of the grapevine  have received more attention due to their significance as an important edible source of flavonoid compounds with nutrient and health benefits for humans  <cit> . different flavonoid compounds are largely localized in berry skin and play a critical role in the quality of wine by contributing to its astringency and color  <cit> . the major flavonoid classes accumulated in red-fruited grapevine berries are flavonols, proanthocyanidins  and anthocyanins, with anthocyanins accumulating mostly in berry skin and the tannins in seed  <cit> . thus, the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway in berries is regulated in a temporal and tissue-specific manner and the expression pattern of the pathway genes correlates to the synthesis of flavonoids in different grapevine berry tissues during fruit development  <cit> . the synthesis of flavonoids via the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway requires two classes of genes: structural genes that encode enzymes for synthesis of anthocyanins and other flavonoids, and the regulatory genes involved in spatial and temporal regulation of these structural genes  <cit> . although these two classes of genes are present in both red- and white-fruited grapevine cultivars, the color pigments are not expressed in white-fruited cultivars due to multiallelic mutations in the regulatory genes called myba <dig> and myba <dig>  <cit> . these two genes regulate expression of the udp-glucose:flavonoid 3-o-glucosyltransferase  gene, which mediates the conversion of anthocyanidins to anthocyanins by glycosylation  <cit> . thus, the last biosynthetic step of ufgt-mediated anthocyanin synthesis does not occur in white-fruited grapevine cultivars and hence these cultivars do not express color in their berries. in the case of red-fruited berries, anthocyanins are transported into vacuoles and ultimately accumulated in berry skin cells  <cit> . in general, berries from red-fruited cultivars show various grades of color depending on the quantity and composition of anthocyanins in the berry skin. proanthocyanidins are synthesized mainly at the green stage of berry development, whereas synthesis of anthocyanins begins at véraison  and continue to accumulate in berry skins during ripening  <cit> . although anthocyanins are present largely in berry skins of red-fruited grapevine cultivars, they can also accumulate in some cases in various plant organs such as leaves, flowers, stems, tendrils and berry flesh  <cit> .

grapevine leafroll disease  is the most serious and complex virus disease known to infect grapevines worldwide  <cit> . up to ten serologically distinct viruses, termed grapevine leafroll-associated viruses  and numbered sequentially glrav- <dig> to - <dig> in the order of their discovery, have thus far been documented in grapevines infected with glrd  <cit> . glravs are flexuous rods, 1400- <dig> nm long and 10- <dig> nm diameter with a monopartite, positive sense, single-stranded rna genome. they are phloem-limited and predominantly dispersed long distances via clonally propagated vegetative planting materials. some of the currently documented glravs have been shown to be spread by different species of mealybugs and scale insects  <cit> . among them, glrav- <dig>  is the most economically important and widely prevalent. the virus has the largest genome size  encoding  <dig> open reading frames and represents the most complex gene organization among the currently known closteroviruses infecting grapevines  <cit> .

it has been documented in several grape-growing regions that glrav- <dig> can cause reduced plant vigor and longevity, and significant losses in both yield and quality of berries  <cit> . in red-fruited wine grape cultivars infected with glrav- <dig>  mature leaves at the bottom portions of canes begin to show glrd symptoms at or soon after véraison. as the season progresses, the symptoms extend upward to other leaves and the foliar discolorations expand and coalesce to form a reddish-purple color within the inter-veinal areas of the leaf; a narrow strip of leaf tissue often remains green on either side of the main veins . by the later part of the season , a typical infection in a red-fruited cultivar will consist of green veins and red and reddish-purple coloration of inter-veinal areas  <cit> . in advanced stages, the margins of infected leaves roll downward, expressing the symptom that gives the disease its common name. white-fruited cultivars may express glrd symptoms as mild yellowing or chlorotic mottling and, in some cases, leaf margins may roll downward toward the end of the season. unlike white-fruited cultivars, the phenotypic expression of reddish-purple coloration of leaves in red-fruited cultivars due to glrd may be an indication of the accumulation of anthocyanins and could reflect the up-regulation of genes involved in their biosynthesis in glrav-3-infected symptomatic leaves. however, no studies have been conducted to elucidate the expression pattern of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes or analyze different flavonoids in grapevine leaves showing glrd symptoms.

in recent years, reverse transcription-quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction  has been widely employed as a powerful tool for investigating the expression of cellular genes in response to biotic and abiotic stresses  <cit> . throughout the manuscript, we used the abbreviation qpcr for quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, rt-qpcr for reverse transcription-qpcr and rt-pcr for 'traditional' rt-pcr. due to its high throughput nature, sensitivity and accuracy in quantifying target genes, rt-qpcr is capable of the relative or absolute quantification of target genes in a given sample over a large dynamic range of conditions  <cit> . considering its ability to discriminate between the expression of closely related genes and to quantify very weekly expressed genes, rt-qpcr is considered particularly useful for elucidating molecular mechanisms that underlie changes in gene expression  <cit> . even though rt-qpcr is a method of choice, the reliability and reproducibility of experimental results for quantitative gene expression is dependent on the quality of rna template and cdna, primer specificity, assay efficiency, experimental conditions and rigorous analysis of the data using appropriate quality controls  <cit> . to circumvent bias, normalization of relative quantities of the target genes is carried out widely using appropriate endogenous reference genes, also referred in earlier studies as housekeeping genes  <cit> . one of the most critical issues in rt-qpcr is the choice of reference genes used for gene expression analysis, since the expression of a number of such reference genes varies considerably under each experimental condition in different lab settings  <cit> . validation of reference genes is necessary, since the use of a single non-validated reference gene has been shown to significantly increase bias in experimental validation of gene expression changes ranging from more than 3-fold in 25% of the results up to 6-fold in 10% of the results  <cit> .

in this study, we evaluated six reference genes for their use in gene expression studies in virus-free green leaves and virus-infected leaves exhibiting glrd symptoms. using rt-qpcr assay, based on sybr green detection, we analyzed expression stability of these reference genes in grapevine leaves using the genorm algorithm  <cit> . a combination of two genes was identified as suitable candidates for normalization of gene expression data in both virus-free and virus-infected leaves. by using gene-specific rt-qpcr, in combination with a reliable normalization factor, we present evidence that up-regulation of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes occurred in symptomatic leaves of a red-fruited wine grape cultivar infected with glrav- <dig>  together with estimation of anthocyanins, flavonols and proanthocyanidins, these results indicated modulation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes towards accumulation of certain classes of end-products in grapevine leaves exhibiting glrd symptoms.

RESULTS
glrd symptoms in grapevine leaves
at the time of sampling in mid september, representing post-véraison stage of berry development, mature leaves at the bottom portion of canes in glrd affected merlot grapevines showed green veins and red and reddish-purple color in the inter-veinal areas . the margins of some of these leaves showed downward rolling. glrd symptoms were not observed in adjacent grapevines . symptomatic leaves from glrd affected grapevines and comparable leaves from adjacent grapevines not affected by glrd were tested by single tube-one step rt-pcr for the presence of different grapevine viruses. symptomatic leaves from glrd affected grapevines were tested positive for glrav- <dig> but not for other viruses . glrav- <dig> was detected in green veins as well as in reddish-purple inter-veinal areas  of symptomatic leaves from glrd affected grapevines . green leaves from adjacent grapevines were tested negative for these viruses.

chlorophyll and carotenoid pigments in symptomatic leaves
total chlorophylls and carotenoids were estimated in glrav-3-infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaves . total chlorophyll content in symptomatic leaves was less by  <dig> % when compared to green leaves. similarly, total carotenoids were less by  <dig> % in virus-infected symptomatic leaves. these results indicate reduced levels of both chrolophylls and carotenoids in virus-infected leaves exhibiting glrd symptoms.

*values are mean ± se. asterisk indicates significant difference between glrav-3-infected and virus-free leaves using one way anova test 

sequence specificity and amplification efficiency analysis of target genes
in initial experiments using total rna isolated from grapevine leaves, gene-specific sequences amplified by rt-pcr were cloned and nucleotide sequence determined . nucleotide sequence obtained for each gene showed high level of similarity  with corresponding gene sequence available in genbank, confirming the specificity of each amplicon to the respective gene. the amplification efficiency  of each gene-specific primer pair in rt-qpcr shown in table  <dig> indicated the suitability of primer pairs for rt-qpcr-based amplification and quantification of target genes. melting curve analysis for each amplicon showed a single peak , further confirming the homogeneity and specificity of amplicons produced in qpcr for all target genes. agarose gel electrophoretic separation of each amplicon showed a single dna fragment of the expected size with no visible primer-dimer products . no amplifications were observed in all control assays. all these results indicated that the total rna and the derived cdna template were free of contaminating genomic dna, demonstrating high quality of nucleic acid preparations obtained for gene expression level analyses by rt-qpcr.

1see legends for figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> for names of genes

*accession numbers indicate sequences generated from this study.

$primers were designed based on sequence available in genbank.

expression stability analysis of candidate reference genes
a total of six putative reference genes  were evaluated for their expression stability under our experimental conditions. since all rt-qpcr reactions were performed with cdna derived from equal quantity of total rna, transcript abundance of these six genes were analyzed by direct comparison of cq values, assuming equal cq for equal transcript number. as shown in figure  <dig>  the six reference genes were grouped into two arbitrary categories based on their cq values combined from both glrav-3-infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaf samples. four genes  showed higher transcript levels, since they presented cq values with a median between  <dig> and  <dig> cycles. the other two  were categorized as genes with relatively low transcript levels, since their median cq values were between  <dig> and  <dig> cycles.

the raw cq data for each reference gene was subsequently analyzed using genorm algorithm to evaluate their expression stability in virus-infected and virus-free samples and ranked according to their expression stability measure "m" . all six genes showed high expression stability and had m values lower than  <dig> , below the default limit of  <dig>  suggested by the genorm program. from this analysis, actin and nad <dig> genes were estimated to have the lowest m values, indicating that these two genes showed high expression stability in both virus-infected and virus-free samples . gapdh gene gave the highest m value and hence considered as having lowest stability in both types of samples under our experimental conditions. however, the m values for sand, ef1-a and ubiquitin were variable between the two types of samples, indicating differences in their expression stability due to virus infection. the expression stability of the six reference genes differed when m values were calculated by combining raw cq data of each gene from both virus-infected and virus-free samples . in this case, ef1-a and ubiquitin were estimated to have the lowest m values, followed by actin, sand and nad <dig> genes. based on these results, a subset of two genes  was used to calculate normalization factor  through the geometrical averaging of their raw cq values. the resulting nf was used to normalize raw cq data generated in rt-qpcr for flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes in virus-infected and virus-free grapevine leaves.

expression patterns of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes
the expression patterns of flavonoid upstream pathway gene , genes involved in the biosynthesis of different flavonoids  and a regulatory gene  were examined in glrav-3-infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaves. the distribution overview of expression levels of gene transcripts showed  that many of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes from virus-infected samples presented lower median cq values. this indicated higher transcript levels for these genes in virus-infected symptomatic leaves, assuming equal cq for equal transcript number, since all rt-qpcr reactions were performed with equal amount of cdna derived from equal quantity of total rna. using the two best reference genes identified  from gene expression stability analyses described above, we normalized the raw cq data for each gene from virus-infected and virus-free samples and their relative expression levels are shown in figure 5a&5b. in general, flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes analyzed in this study showed higher expression levels in virus-infected symptomatic leaves when compared with expression levels of corresponding genes from virus-free green leaves. the expression levels of these genes as fold increase in virus-infected symptomatic leaves over the corresponding values from virus-free green leaves is shown in table  <dig>  their expression levels ranged from two- to fifty-fold increase in virus-infected samples. among them, chs <dig>  f3'5'h, f3h <dig>  ldox and lar <dig> showed greater than 10-fold increase suggesting that these genes were expressed at higher levels in virus-infected leaves. myba <dig>  which regulates anthocyanin biosynthesis in grapevines via expression of the ufgt gene, was expressed by about 19-fold higher in virus-infected symptomatic than in virus-free green leaves . similar trend in expression levels of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes and myba <dig> was obtained when the two best reference genes , identified when expression stability of reference genes was calculated by combining raw cq data from both virus-infected and virus-free samples , were considered for data normalization . however, the values were slightly lower than those obtained when actin and nad <dig> were used as reference genes for data normalization. based on these results, it can be concluded that some of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes are significantly up-regulated in virus-infected symptomatic leaves when compared to expression levels of corresponding genes in virus-free green leaves.

1see legend for figure  <dig> for names of genes

*values are mean ± se.

among the three isogenes of chalcone synthase  that are involved in recruitment of flavonoid precursors to enter the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway, chs <dig> and chs <dig> showed about 4- and 3-folds higher expression levels, respectively, while chs <dig> exhibited about 37-fold increase in virus-infected leaves. these results indicate preferential up-regulation of chs <dig> in virus-infected symptomatic leaves when compared with virus-free green leaves. the two flavonoid hydroxylases, f3'h, which regulates the synthesis of cyanidin-based anthocyanins, and f3'5'h, which regulates the synthesis of delphinidin-based anthocyanins, were expressed at about 5- and 11-fold higher, respectively, in virus-infected symptomatic leaves compared to virus-free green leaves. higher expression levels of the flavonoid pathway genes like f3h <dig> , dfr , ldox , and ufgt  and lar <dig>  genes specific to anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins, respectively, in virus-infected symptomatic leaves indicate enhanced synthesis of anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins in these leaves. it is likely that the synthesis of more flavonols was also favored in virus-infected leaves due to ~4-fold higher expression levels of the fls <dig> gene. higher expression levels of lar <dig>  lar <dig> and anr indicate that these genes were contributing to the enhanced synthesis of proanthocyanidins in virus-infected leaves.

estimation of anthocyanins, flavonols and proanthocyanidins
to be able to correlate gene expression data with the accumulation of different flavonoid compounds, we analyzed the secondary metabolite constituents of glrav-3-infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaves. anthocyanins and flavonols were analyzed by hplc and proanthocyanidins were estimated by protein precipitation method as total tannins. figure  <dig> shows total amounts of anthocyanins, flavonols and proanthocyanidins and figure  <dig> shows hplc profiles of anthocyanins and flavonols from virus-infected and virus-free leaves. anthocyanins were not detected in virus-free green leaves , whereas two clearly discernible peaks  were observed in virus-infected leaves  with no corresponding peaks in virus-free green leaf samples. based on their retention times and spectral data, the two major peaks in virus-infected leaves were identified as cyanidin-3-glucoside and malvidin-3-glucoside. further analysis indicated that cyanidin-3-glucoside accounted for 61% and malvidin-3-glucoside accounted for 39% of total anthocyanins detected in virus-infected leaves. a minor peak, designated as # <dig> in figure 7b, was tentatively identified as peonidin-3-o-6-coumarilated. although total flavonols were detected in both virus-infected and virus-free leaves , they were 24% higher in virus-infected leaves than in virus-free leaves. as shown in figure 7c&7d, hplc analysis showed three clear peaks in both virus-infected and virus-free leaves. based on retention times, they corresponded to putative myricetin  and quercetin  derivatives, respectively, with quercetin derivatives accounting for about 69% and myricetin derivatives accounting for about 20% of total flavonols and the rest accounting for other unidentified flavonols. estimation of proanthocyanidins in leaves as total tannins showed that their concentration was 36% higher in virus-infected than virus-free leaves . it is important to note that the method we used to measure proanthocyanidins is limited to estimating total amount of these compounds rather than a method that provides structural information. potentially both delphinidin and cyandin sub-units are present in both types of leaf tissues. taken together, the above results  indicated that the three classes of flavonoids  are present in significantly higher amounts in virus-infected leaves and correlate with up-regulation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes shown in figure  <dig> and table  <dig> 

discussion
the necessity for ensuring quality-assurance measures in rt-qpcr analysis of gene expression is well recognized and a set of guidelines have been outlined for appropriate normalization strategy to control for non-specific variation between samples  <cit> . although a range of endogenous reference genes have been listed as good candidates for normalization of gene expression, identification of the most suitable reference genes for the given experimental conditions, rather than using reference genes published in the literature, is extremely important in functional genomics studies  <cit> . in addition, certain reference genes may be stably expressed in one plant species but are not be well suited for use in other species  <cit> . apart from other fields of research, this knowledge is highly relevant to studies in plant host-virus interactions, as viruses are known to modulate key cellular processes in plants which may involve changes in the expression of endogenous host genes normally used as reference genes in rt-qpcr  <cit> . moreover, viruses manipulate different host cellular transcription pathways and the extent to which these pathways are affected will be dependent on the specific virus-host combination  <cit> . consequently, we evaluated geometric averaging of multiple reference genes as a means to avoid experimental bias in gene expression data.

in this study, we analyzed a set of six putative reference genes  for their expression stability in leaf samples collected from a red-fruited wine grape cultivar  grown under field-conditions. since expression stability of reference genes is known to vary with environmental conditions under which plants are grown, the type of plant tissue used and under a diverse set of biotic and abiotic stress conditions, we validated the expression stability of these six genes under our experimental conditions using the genorm software and selected actin and nad <dig> to normalize rt-qpcr data obtained for the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes in virus-infected and virus-free grapevine leaves  <cit> . in a previous study, gapdh was ranked as one of the top three reference genes  for gene expression studies in grape berry development  <cit> . however, we found that gapdh is the least reliable in the context of our investigations on relative expression of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes in grapevine leaf samples . these results clearly highlight the importance of validating reference genes as the most invariant internal controls for a particular experimental condition prior to investigating the relative expression of target genes by rt-qpcr.

by using gene-specific rt-qpcr, we present evidence in this study, the first example to our knowledge, that overall up-regulation of pal, an enzyme that commits the flux of primary metabolism into the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway, and both "early"  and "late" genes  of the pathway occurred in glrav-3-infected symptomatic grapevine leaves . in red-fruited cultivars of wine grapes, anthocyanin pigments accumulate predominantly in berry skins displaying various shades of colors ranging from brick red to dark blue and their biosynthesis is developmentally triggered at the onset of véraison via the activation of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes  <cit> . under normal circumstances, these cultivars do not exhibit such coloration in their foliage during the growing season. thus, changes in leaf color  and accumulation of specific classes of anthocyanins  only in glrav-3-infected symptomatic leaves supported our hypothesis that expression of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes was activated in virus-infected leaves. although this study was based on the expression analysis of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes and qualitative and quantitative variation of anthocyanins, flavonols and proanthocyanidins, it should be noted that mrna expression is only one aspect of functional gene regulation of the pathway that result in changes in color of leaves in virus-infected plants. since changes in leaf coloration begins to occur soon after véraison, even though glrav- <dig> can be detected in leaves of infected grapevines during the entire season including pre-véraison, it remains to be studied if the specific induction of anthocyanins in virus-infected leaves during post-véraison is tightly coupled with a cascade of physiological and/or molecular events triggered as a consequence of virus-host interactions during véraison.

in plants, delphinidin- and cyanidin-based anthocyanins exhibit blue and reddish color, respectively, under the acidic conditions of plant vacuoles  <cit> . hplc profiling of total anthocyanins showed that both cyanidin-3-glucoside and malvidin-3-glucoside accumulated in virus-infected symptomatic leaves and they are virtually undetected in virus-free green leaves . we believe that presence of these two classes of anthocyanins, although cyanidin-3-glucoside is slightly but not significantly higher than malvidin-3-glucoside in virus-infected leaves, contributes to red and reddish-purple discoloration of virus-infected leaves. since f3'5'h regulates the synthesis of delphinidin-based anthocyanins and f3'h regulates the synthesis of cyanidin-based anthocyanins, expression profiles of these two genes in concert with increased expression of anthocyanin-specific gene ufgt and its transcription factor gene myba <dig> would ensure the flux of flavonoid intermediates towards the synthesis of these two classes of anthocyanins in virus-infected leaves. the levels of f3'h and f3'5'h gene transcripts observed in virus-free green leaves is in agreement with recent reports that f3'h gene was only slightly detectable and f3'5'h gene was expressed at non-detectable levels in green, fully expanded grapevine leaves  <cit> . our results also showed significantly higher levels of flavonols in virus-infected leaves than in virus-free leaves, and the predominant flavonols were quercetin followed by myricetin . bogs et al. showed that total amounts of proanthocyanidins decline with leaf maturity and the two lar isogenes have different patterns of expression with lar <dig> showing seed-specific expression and insignificant levels in mature leaves and lar <dig> readily present in different tissues, including leaves  <cit> . hummer and schreier reported that proanthocyanidins as condensed tannins can precipitate proteins and several methods using protein precipitation have been used to estimate proanthocyanidins in various agricultural products  <cit> . using this approach, we showed that higher amounts of proanthocyanidins are present in virus-infected leaves than in virus-free leaves  and the data correlate with strong induction of proanthocyanidin-specific genes; namely, lar <dig>  lar <dig> and anr. since lar and anr genes provide two separate pathways for the synthesis of the terminal units of proanthocyanidin polymers, specific induction of lar <dig> in virus-infected leaves  would suggest that this gene may be contributing towards higher amounts of proanthocyanidins  <cit> . overall, these results are compatible with our hypothesis that activation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes occurred in glrav-3-infected symptomatic leaves during post-véraison period resulting in de novo synthesis of specific flavonoid classes and leading to phenotypic expression of glrd symptoms. it is also likely that these flavonoid compounds confer protection from oxidative damage and/or against attack by opportunistic pathogens due to their antioxidant and free radical scavenging properties  <cit> .

the use of more sensitive and gene-specific rt-qpcr technique enabled us to study relative abundance of the three highly homologous chs gene family transcripts in virus-infected grapevine leaves. the results showed that three members of the chs family  identified to date in grapevine, accumulated to varying levels, with chs <dig> expression being significantly higher than the other two isogenes indicating its important role in color development in virus-infected leaves. this result is consistent with previous studies that chs <dig>  which is phylogenetically divergent from a cluster formed together by chs <dig> and chs <dig>  was predominant in grape berry skins of red-fruited cultivars during coloration  <cit> . the exact role of chs <dig> and chs <dig> in the biosynthesis of flavonoids may be insignificant, although their expression was implicated in the production of proanthocyanidins in unpigmented tissues of both red- and white-fruited grapevine cultivars  <cit> . among the two flavanone-3-hydroxylase isogenes, f3h <dig> showed higher expression levels than f3h <dig>  and lar <dig> of the two lar isogenes of leucoanthocyanidin reductase was expressed at higher levels in virus-infected leaves. no such differential expression was observed in chi isogenes. thus, members of multigenic families appear to be induced differentially during the biosynthesis of flavonoids in virus-infected leaves of cv. merlot showing glrd symptoms.

induced accumulation of anthocyanins and development of reddish-purple coloration in glrav- <dig> infected grapevine leaves appears to be analogous in some ways with stimulation of pigmentation in other plant species infected with taxonomically disparate viruses  <cit> . it has been shown that mottling symptoms present on the seed coats of virus-infected soybean plants or induction of floral anthocyanin pigmentation in petunias can be caused by suppression of chs posttranscriptional gene silencing  via the expression of a virus-encoded silencing suppressor protein and that the reversion to pigmentation in virus-infected tissues is correlated with an increase in the chs mrna level  <cit> . since chs is the first committed enzyme in the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway, it is tempting to speculate that modulation of ptgs suppression of chs isogenes by glrav-3-encoded silencing suppressor protein occurs during post-véraison in virus-infected grapevine leaves leading to a cascade of molecular events resulting in up-regulation of chs <dig> and the ensuing production of secondary metabolites conferring color to otherwise green leaves. however, identification of silencing suppressors of glrav- <dig> awaits further validation of this possibility.

an alternative explanation would be that, since grapevine leaves begin to show glrd symptoms only during post-véraison even though glrav- <dig> can be detected in infected plants throughout the season  and the virus is phloem-limited, appearance of reddish-purple coloration in symptomatic leaves could be due to a consequence of changes occurring in host metabolism and altered phloem translocation during véraison. in this context, up-regulation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes in glrav-3-infected merlot leaves may not entirely represent a host defense response to pathogen infection and, therefore, our results differ somewhat from other compatible plant-pathogen interactions in grapevine leaves and hybrid poplar, where genes encoding key enzymes of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway were strongly induced after infection with phytoplasma or fungal pathogens  <cit> . nevertheless, the present study contributes towards a better understanding of virus-host interactions leading to the development of glrd symptoms in red-fruited wine grape cultivars.

in the present study, we observed higher transcript levels of myba <dig> gene that encodes a myb transcription factor in virus-infected leaves . although other myb transcription factors have recently been reported in grapevines, our rationale for analyzing only myba <dig> was because of its main role in the regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis via expression of the ufgt gene  <cit> . however, further research is necessary to determine whether fine regulation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes in virus-infected leaves involves a combinatorial action of different r2r3-myb transcription factors, including basic helix-loop-helix  and wd <dig> factors expressed in a spatially and temporally controlled manner  <cit> .

it has been documented that the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway in fruits and vegetative tissues of plants is up-regulated by different environmental stress factors and in response to nutritional status  <cit> . it has also been suggested that in woody perennials like red-osier dogwood, anthocyanins accumulate during senescence to provide optical masking of chlorophyll in order to reduce the risk of photo-oxidative damage to leaf cells  <cit> . however, reduced levels of chlorophylls and carotenoids and higher amounts of specific classes of anthocyanins and the resulting changes in coloration of glrav-3-infected grapevine leaves during post-véraison may represent specific host-virus interactions as discussed above rather than a generalized abiotic stress response to environmental and/or nutritional imbalances. an integrated approach involving proteomic and metabolomic analyses combined with studies on modulation of cellular transcriptome would provide additional data for a comprehensive understanding of events that underlie changing colors of virus-infected grapevine leaves in red-fruited cultivars during post-véraison stage of berry development. such information would also help to delineate grapevine's response to compatible virus infections from generic stress responses stimulated by a variety of abiotic and environmental factors.

since berries in many red-fruited wine grape cultivars infected with glrd show uneven ripening with reduced levels of extractable anthocyanins from berry skins , the methodologies and results described in this study is providing leads for a deeper exploration of impacts of glrd on berry skin pigments at the molecular level. in addition, there are several outstanding questions in glrd-grapevine interactions that need to be addressed. they include: do other red-fruited wine grape cultivars exhibit similar responses in the expression of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes and the profile of flavonoids to infection with glrav-3? do genetically different glravs trigger homologous responses in different red-fruited wine grape cultivars? is the absence of dramatic symptoms in white-fruited wine grape cultivars an indication of non-responsiveness of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway to virus infection? indeed, glrd-grapevine offers an excellent model system to address these questions.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we compared the relative expression of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes between glrav-3-infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaves in a red-fruited wine grape cultivar  using rt-qpcr. the results showed up-regulation of genes in virus-infected symptomatic leaves suggesting modulation of the pathway towards de novo synthesis of certain classes of end-products and laid a foundation for deeper exploration of molecular mechanisms of biosynthesis and accumulation of flavonoids in virus-infected wine grape cultivars. the information on evaluation of reference genes suggests that validation of a set of reference genes as the most invariant internal controls for a particular experimental condition is essential for exploring genomics of plant-virus interactions in ecologically relevant, agriculturally important non-model perennial crops like grapevine under field conditions.

