BACKGROUND
among the numerous types of small rnas that have been investigated in recent years, pirnas have been of interest primarily because they seem to be essential for maintenance of germ cells. they range in size from 24–32 nt, complex with members of the piwi clade of argonaute proteins, and are enriched for a 5’ uridine . pirnas are present in a broad spectrum of metazoan species, and in the mouse they associate with three piwi family proteins: mili, miwi, and miwi <dig> . miwi <dig> is expressed at high levels in the prepachytene phase of spermatogenesis, where it complexes with pirnas derived mostly from retrotransposon sequences and is involved in epigenetic suppression of retrotransposon activity  <cit> . miwi is expressed in the pachytene stage of meiosis and is required for spermatogenesis. miwi-associated pirnas are of a different type and have been implicated in regulation of mrna and retrotransposon transcripts in differentiating spermatocytes , but may have other functions as well. when pachytene pirna sequences are aligned to the genome, they tend to cluster into large regions, reflecting their derivation from longer single-stranded primary rna pol ii transcripts  <cit> . these pirna clusters are found at syntenic regions in mouse, rat, and human  <cit> , although orthologous regions in mouse and human produce pirnas with different sequences  <cit> .

transposon-derived pirnas are produced via a ping-pong amplification loop in which primary pirnas antisense to transposon mrna sequences direct the cleavage of the transposon mrna, leading to the production of secondary sense pirnas which then direct the cleavage of the complementary sequence from the primary pirna transcript. this results in sense/antisense pirnas characterized by a 10-bp 5’ overlap, and secondary pirnas with an a at position ten  <cit> . in prepachytene mouse testis, these sense/antisense pirnas tend to be distributed along the length of a pirna cluster  <cit> .

less is known about the functions of pachytene pirnas. they are derived from single-stranded precursors, are not enriched for transposable element sequences, and do not show evidence of ping-pong amplification, suggesting that they are not involved in transposon silencing  <cit> . they cofractionate with polysomes, and so may be involved in translational control of gene expression  <cit> . a subset of pachytene pirna clusters are associated with spliced mrnas, particularly their 3’ untranslated regions  . although it is unclear how certain 3’ utrs are selected for pirna production, selection is not based simply on mrna levels or the expression of specific piwi proteins  <cit> . genes from which pirnas are derived have more isoforms and antisense transcripts, suggesting a connection between pirna production, antisense transcription, and alternative splicing  <cit> . however, it is still not clear if the 3’ utr is processed into pirnas, or if they are instead derived from an independent transcript. to address this question, we conducted a detailed analysis of 3’ utr pirnas in adult mouse testis, and from somatic tissues. a deep dataset of small rnas from adult mouse testis identifies many new 3’ utr pirna clusters, some of which are also present in somatic cells and are derived from rare and previously unannotated extended 3’ utrs. analysis of somatic pirnas from miwi <dig> null mice demonstrates that a subset of 3’utr clusters is dependent on miwi <dig>  an unexpected finding that supports a somatic role for miwi <dig>  additionally, we found small regions of sequence homology between intergenic and 3’ utr pirna clusters, suggesting a mechanism by which intergenic pirna production could select 3’ utrs of specific genes for processing.

RESULTS
deep sequencing of small rnas in the adult mouse testis
we sequenced small rnas from the adult mouse testis to a depth of approximately  <dig> million reads. adapter stripping, removal of known ncrnas  and collapsing of identical reads left approximately  <dig> million distinct small rna sequences . we compared our small rna sequences to six pirna datasets, available at the time of analysis, from the adult mouse testis: pachytene spermatocytes, round spermatids and type a spermatogonia  <cit> , mili- and miwi-immunoprecipitated pirnas and total small rnas  <cit> . of the stage-specific small rnas, our small rna sequences were most similar to small rnas from round spermatids and pachytene spermatocytes, capturing 48 % and 40 % of the previously identified unique sequences, respectively . our dataset captured 20 % and 22 % of confirmed pirna sequences, identified as binding to mili and miwi . however, previously identified pirna sequences represented at most 5 % of our rna sequences, suggesting that we have identified many new and less common small rna sequences.table  <dig> comparison of small rna sequences from adult mouse testis



despite the increased sequencing depth, our dataset is not saturated. the number of unique sequences is still increasing as a power function of read depth , and 72 % of the reads in our dataset are for sequences observed only once . this lack of saturation likely explains why we found at best only about half of the unique sequences from previously published datasets , and is consistent with previous findings that coverage of pirna datasets is incomplete  <cit> .fig.  <dig> deep sequencing of adult testis small rnas does not capture the full complexity of pirna-like species. even at extreme read depths, many new unique alignments are identified. a the number of observed unique sequences increases as a power function of read depth in our dataset . the curve does not approach saturation even at read depth > <dig> x <dig>  b frequency with which sequences are observed in the dataset. most are observed only once or a few times. c length distribution of uniquely aligned small rnas in adult testis, with duplicate reads removed. there is a distinct peak at 29 nt, with a distribution skewed toward smaller sizes. this size distribution is typical of adult testis pirnas. d genomic annotation of uniquely aligned small rnas in testis. the concentration in intergenic regions is typical of pirnas from the adult testis. repeat: 20 %; mrna: 12 %; intron: 5 %; intergenic: 63 %



we next aligned our unique small rna sequences to the mouse genome allowing up to one mismatch . approximately  <dig>  million sequences aligned uniquely to the genome . these small rna sequences had characteristics typical of pirnas, such as a length distribution with a single peak centered at 29 nt  and a 5’ uridine bias . they aligned primarily in non-repetitive intergenic regions  corresponding to previously described pirna clusters  <cit> , with the remaining sequences aligning to repetitive and genic  regions . of the genic sequences, most aligned to regions corresponding to processed mrna . due to the overall similarity with published pirna datasets, the pirna-like sequence length, and the 5’ uridine bias, it is likely we have identified many new murine pachytene pirna sequences.

a subset of pirnas align in clusters at 3’ utrs
our deep dataset allowed us to identify  <dig> clusters of small rnas that overlapped annotated 3’ utrs in a sense direction . these clusters had a median length of approximately  <dig>  kilobases , and the small rnas that aligned within these clusters had a length distribution similar to that of the total dataset  with an increase in the proportion having a 5’ uridine . additionally, we found that these regions were enriched for previously described mili- and miwi-associated pirnas  <cit>  when compared to random non-genic regions of the same size , and that the density of small rnas in our dataset is correlated with the density of confirmed pirnas in the same regions . these data suggest that the 3’ utr clusters we identified are pirna clusters.fig.  <dig> pirna clusters at 3’ utrs in adult testis. a length distribution of 3’ utr pirna clusters. blue bars denote clusters of pirnas aligning to annotated 3’utrs . orange bars denote clusters of pirnas aligning to regions immediately 3’ of annotated 3’utrs, which are here termed extended 3’ utrs or xutrs. b length distribution of pirnas aligning to 3’ utr pirna clusters 



we compared the genes having 3’ utr pirna clusters identified in our study with genes identified by reanalysis of previously published pirna datasets  <cit> . our  <dig> clusters significantly overlap with clusters obtained from previously reported pirna datasets, containing 92 % of the  <dig> 3’ utr pirna-producing genes identified in the dataset of robine et al.  <cit> , and 47 % of  <dig> identified in the data of gan et al.  <cit> .  <dig> genes were shared by the three datasets, while our dataset contributed an additional  <dig> genes. previous studies identified genes with 3’ utr pirna clusters as being involved in nucleic acid metabolism, zinc ion binding, transcription, and regulation-related processes  <cit> . our findings are consistent with this, as the top functional categories identified by ingenuity pathway analysis  are gene expression, post-translational modification, and rna post-transcriptional modification . our deeper dataset allowed ipa to identify enrichment for additional categories, including genes involved in infectious disease, the cell cycle, and dna replication, recombination, and repair .

under relaxed alignment conditions,  <dig> clusters  contain antisense reads with the 10-bp overlap typical of ping-pong amplification . this overlap occurred at  <dig> sites and involved  <dig>  rna sequences,  <dig>  of them antisense to the 3’ utr cluster. the antisense reads had a decreased 5’ uridine bias , a bias for an adenine at position  <dig> , and were localized in discrete sites generally containing one 10-bp sense/antisense overlap and covering less than 10 % of the cluster region . the best alignment for  <dig>  of these reads was antisense to the same 3’ utr sites . the remaining  <dig> reads  aligned optimally to pirna clusters distinct from the 3’ utr clusters where they were discovered, with  <dig> sequences aligning to intergenic pirna clusters . this suggests the possibility of an interaction between 3’utrs and intergenic pirna clusters that have regions of sequence similarity, although the rarity of these rnas does not support any extensive role for such a mechanism.

pirna clusters mark extended 3’utrs
some 3’ utr pirna clusters extend past the annotated 3’ utr . if the 3’ utr is the precursor that is processed to produce the pirnas, then pirnas should not align to regions beyond the 3’ utr; yet in some cases the greatest read depth lies 3’ of the annotated transcript. we identified  <dig> 3’ utr clusters that extended beyond the annotated transcript by more than 30 % of the length of the cluster. these clusters were up to approximately  <dig> kilobases  in length, with a median length of approximately  <dig>  kb .fig.  <dig> pirna clusters mark extended 3’ utrs. potential precursors of extended 3’ utr pirna clusters are detectable as 3’ utr isoforms in testis and in somatic tissues. a representative example of a pirna cluster that extends beyond an annotated 3’ utr. the annotated 3’utr is shown in purple and the pirna cluster is shown in red. individual pirna alignments are in blue  and red  at the bottom. genomic features are visualized using the integrative genomics viewer  <cit> . b unannotated portions of 3’ utr pirna clusters are enriched for polya+ rna expression when compared to randomly selected unannotated regions. we used an adult testis rna-seq dataset  <cit>  to determine expression of the unannotated portions of the extended 3’ utr clusters  or random intergenic regions of equal size . this indicates that the unannotated extended 3’utrs are transcribed in the testis. c expression of the unannotated portion of extended 3’ utr clusters  compared with expression of the corresponding annotated mrna  in the adult testis rna-seq dataset  <cit> . the annotated portions of genes are generally expressed at higher rpkm than the unannotated portion of the 3’utr. d schematic of northern blot probes, rt-pcr primers, and pcr amplicons. e northern blot of pdpr with an exonic probe  shows bands consistent with the length of the annotated mrna, plus a band consistent with addition of the unannotated region corresponding to the pirna cluster. the bands are visible only in brain. probing of the same blot with the unannotated 3’utr probe  shows a single band in the same position as the upper band in the exonic probe blot. f representative rt-pcr results of the three pdpr amplicons shown schematically in d and marked to the right, with  and without  reverse transcriptase during the cdna synthesis step . g summary of rt-pcr products obtained from  <dig> transcripts with extended 3’ utr pirna clusters. for each gene testis, brain, spleen, and liver were tested. all transcripts show evidence of an extended 3’utr in testis and most also have the extended 3’ utr in the other tissues as well



the putative extended 3’ utr regions are unannotated in the gene annotation  used for the analysis. however by using an rna-seq dataset from adult mouse testis  <cit>  we were able to detect significant expression of  <dig>  of these regions . most  of the unannotated portions of the pirna cluster precursors were expressed at a lower level than the corresponding annotated mrna . this finding is consistent with the hypothesis that these pirna precursors are rare 3’ utr isoforms rather than independently transcribed pirna precursors.

since rna-seq cannot demonstrate that reads from the extended 3’utr clusters are derived from the same transcript as the annotated mrna, we analyzed one of the highly expressed unannotated 3’ utr pirna precursors  by northern blotting of testis rna ; we also tested three somatic tissues because it has been suggested that pirnas may be expressed in somatic tissues  <cit> . northern blotting detected two brain transcripts, with lengths corresponding to the annotated mrna and to the annotated mrna plus the extended 3’ utr . we also carried out rt-pcr on  <dig> transcripts associated with pirna clusters extending beyond the annotated 3’utr. in  <dig> of the  <dig>  rt-pcr detected transcripts extending from the annotated portion of the mrna to the unannotated extended 3’utr . taken together, these data suggest that many pirnas aligning to regions beyond annotated 3’ utrs are processed from polyadenylated 3’ utrs that are not present in current genome annotations, i.e., the presence of an extended 3’utr cluster predicts the existence of a longer alternative 3’utr. for convenience, henceforth we will refer to these utrs as testis xutrs .

xutrs in somatic tissues
because we noted evidence of 3’ extended transcripts in brain , we sought evidence of xutrs in somatic rna-seq datasets from the encode project. this analysis strongly supports the expression of xutrs in a variety of tissues . most  testis xutrs are also present in somatic tissues; the unannotated regions have median expression levels  <dig> - <dig>  fold that of the annotated expressed mrna . the highest expression of xutrs was observed in cerebellum . these rna-seq findings are consistent with results of rt-pcr, which detects transcripts extending from annotated portions of the mrna to the unannotated pirna precursor in brain, spleen, and liver . this suggests that precursor transcripts for the xutrs are polyadenylated, less abundant than the canonical transcript, and in most cases not germline-specific.

since we find evidence of xutrs in somatic tissues, we asked if small rnas aligning to xutrs are present in somatic tissues. to address this question we sequenced small rnas from mouse liver and spleen. after processing the sequence data and removing sequences matching known noncoding rnas, we were left with approximately  <dig>  and  <dig>  unique small rna sequences in liver and spleen, respectively . we then identified small rnas mapping to the testis xutrs, and compared them with the rna-seq datasets from liver and spleen . this strategy identified three categories of somatic 3’utr, relative to the xutrs defined in the testis. in the first group, neither the xutr nor small rnas derived from it were expressed in liver or spleen  liver and  <dig>  spleen, bottom left quadrants in fig. 4a-b). in a second group, small rna density was proportional to rna-seq density at the xutr . finally, in many cases the xutr was present but no small rnas were detected  liver and  <dig>  spleen, bottom right quadrants in fig. 4a-b). in contrast to the testis, small rnas aligning to somatic xutrs are not pirna-like: their length distribution peaks around 23 nt , and they have a preference for 5’-a . the presence of these small rnas is not merely a consequence of high levels of expression, since many highly expressed genes lack somatic xutr small rna clusters .fig.  <dig> somatic small rnas align to xutrs defined in the testis. a and b. density scatterplots of poly-a mrna expression  versus expression of novel small rnas  at genes with xutrs. the intensity of the blue color is proportional to the number of genes with a given level of poly-a mrna and small rna expression, measured as log ; dots in areas of lowest regional density represent individual genes. plots are generated with smoothscatter in r.  <dig> testis xutrs have both mrna and smrna reads in liver , and  <dig> in spleen ; read densities of smrna and mrna at these clusters are positively correlated . many testis xutrs have mrna reads in these tissues but lack smrnas . c somatic small rnas aligning to testis xutrs are not pirna-like. length distribution of somatic small rnas aligning to testis xutrs in liver  and spleen : the peak at 23 nt indicates that somatic smrnas are shorter than adult testis pirnas. d novel small rnas aligning to testis xutrs are enriched for 5’ a in liver and spleen. background is the base frequency across these unannotated 3’ utr regions



our identification of somatic 3’utr-associated small rna clusters led us to ask whether there are tissue-specific somatic 3’utr pirna clusters that are not found in the testis . we identified  <dig> genes enriched for 3’ utr small rnas in the liver, and  <dig> in the spleen. similar to the somatic small rnas aligning to xutr defined in the testis , small rnas in these somatic clusters were not pirna-like, but had a peak length distribution of 23 nt  and enrichment of a and u at the 5’ base . many highly expressed genes in liver and spleen lacked these rnas, suggesting that small rnas identified in these clusters are not likely to be merely degradation products of highly expressed genes . go term analysis indicates that most genes from each of the three tissues are associated with terms that are found only for that tissue, i.e., each tissue has a distinct set of functions that is associated with extended 3’utrs and small rnas .

a subset of somatic 3’utr small rna clusters are miwi2-dependent
in surveying expression of piwi family members in somatic tissues, we noted expression of miwi <dig>  mrna in liver and spleen ; thus we considered the possibility that miwi <dig> participates in the pathway that produces somatic xutr-derived small rnas. to test this idea we sequenced small rnas from the liver and spleen of miwi2−/− mice, whose reported phenotype is limited to male sterility and defects in control of retrotransposons in the testis  <cit> . following removal of known ncrnas, relatively few small rna sequences mapped to the genome . comparison of wt and miwi2−/− somatic xutr clusters revealed that a set of clusters is absent in miwi2−/− tissues:  <dig> of the somatic xutr small rna clusters present in wt liver, and  <dig> of those found in the spleen, were absent from these tissues in miwi2−/− mice . the remaining somatic xutr small rna clusters present in wt mice were also present in the miwi2−/− mice.fig.  <dig> dependence on miwi <dig> defines two classes of somatic 3’ utr small rna clusters. a expression of miwi <dig> in mouse spleen and liver, assayed by quantitative rt-pcr. results are expressed relative to the level in adult mouse testis; expression is reported on a logarithmic scale, and shows the degree to which it is lower than expression in testis. b and c) density scatterplots of expression of small rnas aligning to 3’utr clusters in wild type mice  and miwi2−/− mice  in liver  and spleen . the intensity of the blue color is proportional to the number of genes with a given level of small rna expression, measured as log ; dots in areas of lowest regional density represent individual genes. plots are generated with smoothscatter in r. a subset of 3’ utr smrna clusters is absent in miwi2−/− mice . the gray line separates smrnas expressed at very low levels



to compare the properties of the miwi2-independent and miwi2-dependent somatic xutr clusters, we first removed clusters that had small rna density in the lowest quartile in the wt dataset and no reads in the miwi2−/− dataset . this filter, which removes the most weakly supported clusters, retained  <dig>  and  <dig>  miwi2-dependent 3’ utr clusters in liver and spleen, respectively . miwi2-dependent and independent clusters did not show differences in length distribution, 5’ base composition , or expression between genes . finally, we examined the expression of the coding region and 3’ utr in a subset of genes with miwi <dig> dependent and independent clusters of small rnas in wt and miwi <dig> ko mice. there were no significant and consistent differences in expression in wt and miwi <dig> ko liver and spleen between these two groups . although we can find no evidence that that knockout affects the expression of genes with miwi2-dependent somatic xutrs, the finding that some somatic xutr clusters are dependent on miwi <dig> provides in vivo evidence for a somatic activity of miwi <dig> 

discussion
we analyzed rnas uniquely aligning to 3’ utrs in a deep dataset of small rnas from the adult mouse testis, identifying approximately  <dig> new genes with 3’ utrs that may be pirna precursors, as well as nearly  <dig> clusters with pirnas that align to previously unannotated extended 3’ utrs. pirna-like small rnas aligning to many 3’utrs are also present in somatic tissues, where they appear to mark extended 3’utrs; a subset of these somatic clusters is missing from somatic tissues of miwi2−/− mice. this novel evidence that miwi <dig> has a role in the somatic production or maintenance of small rnas presents interesting problems for understanding of its functions. while these studies indicate a possible function for pirna-like rnas in modulating 3’utr length, the significance of this modulation is uncertain, however it may be related to recent evidence that pachytene pirnas, including the subset derived from the 3’ utrs of mrnas, can contribute to degradation of mrnas and retrotransposon transcripts during spermatogenesis .

although our dataset overlapped with 3’ utr pirna clusters identified by reanalysis of previously published pirna datasets  <cit> , due to the general lack of saturation in these datasets there were also many 3’utr clusters unique to each dataset. by combining the three datasets, we annotated  <dig> genes as producing 3’ utr pirna clusters in the adult mouse testis. of these genes,  <dig> were eligible for function and pathway analysis with ipa, which identified transcription and modification of protein as the top functions enriched in the combined gene set . these are consistent with the functional categories identified in previous reports  <cit> . however, by analyzing the combined datasets, certain canonical pathways gained significance. one example is the flt <dig> signaling in hematopoietic progenitor cells pathway , a pathway that stimulates the proliferation of stem cells and progenitor cells  <cit> .

the evidence we have found is consistent with the interpretation that pirnas and smaller somatic rnas are derived from extended 3’utrs, implying that their production may be connected in some way to regulation of 3’utr length. the 3’ utr is critical for regulating mrna stability, localization, and translation . part of this regulation is influenced by 3’ utr length, which has been shown to vary with cellular proliferation and reprogramming  <cit> . shorter 3’ utr isoforms are generally expressed in cells with higher proliferation, such as ips cells, cancer cells, and the testis , with a shift toward longer 3’ utr expression as cells differentiate during embryogenesis  <cit> . mrnas with these shorter 3’ utr isoforms have increased stability and protein expression  <cit> , suggesting that shortening of 3’ utrs in testis, perhaps involving the production of pirnas, could lead to increased expression of the associated genes. the evidence that extended 3’utrs, and small rnas derived from them, are also present in somatic tissues implies that this mechanism may be broadly active, but play a much more prominent role in differentiation of spermatocytes. recent work has indicated that pachytene testis pirnas are involved in degradation of retrotransposon transcripts and mrnas ; it remains to be established how these findings relate to those described here. we do not posit a causal relationship between the small rnas we describe and the shortening of 3’utrs, because our evidence does not directly demonstrate such a relationship.

perhaps the most intriguing finding of this study is that small rnas aligning to extended 3’utrs are also found in somatic tissues, and that a subset of these somatic 3’utr clusters is absent in mice lacking a functional miwi <dig>  gene. the small rnas aligning to extended 3’utrs in somatic tissues differ from canonical pirnas: they are shorter, lack the predominant 5’ uracil, and much less abundant than their testis counterparts. we assessed the role of miwi <dig> in these clusters because we and others have found pirnas in somatic tissues and cancer cells  <cit> , and we find low levels of miwi <dig> mrna in somatic tissues . no phenotype except male sterility has previously been noted in miwi2−/− mice  <cit> , although we have found that knockdown of miwi <dig> expression results in differentiation of mouse erythroleukemia  cells  <cit> . the absence of somatic xutr clusters is in effect a phenotype in miwi2−/− mice, but any consequences of this absence must be subtle: we find no apparent change in expression of the genes associated with these utrs in miwi2−/− mice, and no other effects have been reported. miwi <dig> has been shown to associate with pirnas in the prenatal testis, and to mediate transcriptional silencing and methylation of retrotransposons at this stage of development  <cit> . if it is involved in the generation or maintenance of small rnas derived from 3’utrs in somatic cells, this would imply some very different function, perhaps related to the recently demonstrated role of miwi degradation of rna transcripts .

CONCLUSIONS
using a very deep dataset of pirnas from mature mouse testis, we show that clusters of pirnas mark extended 3’utrs that have not been previously annotated. these clusters are present on many mrnas expressed in the testis, but also in somatic cells. a subset of somatic 3’utr-derived small rna clusters are dependent on miwi <dig>  miwi <dig> is a piwi protein that has been shown to associate with pirnas in the prenatal testis, and to mediate transcriptional silencing and methylation of retrotransposons at this stage of development. its potential involvement in the generation or maintenance of small rnas derived from 3’utrs in somatic cells would imply some very different function. these findings extend the biological scope of miwi <dig> function, and also indicate the existence of a class of extended 3’utrs that are processed into small rnas.

