BACKGROUND
fungi can produce plant hormones in axenic cultures when supplemented with the appropriate precursors  <cit> . for production of the hormone indole-3-acetic acid , tryptophan must be supplied: no iaa is produced without external tryptophan, and the amount of iaa increases with increasing tryptophan concentrations  <cit> .

various effects of iaa on fungi have been reported. iaa and gibberellic acid were reported to affect yeast sporulation and cell elongation, but the effects of iaa were not uniform and varied according to growth conditions, such as vitamin content in the culture medium  <cit> . iaa also induced invasive growth in saccharomyces cerevisiae, suggesting that it activates the pheromone map kinase pathway  <cit> . in neurospora crassa, iaa reduced the 'spore density effect' and germination occurred at high densities in the presence of auxin  <cit> . in aspergillus nidulans, iaa partially restored cleistothecium formation and fertility of a tryptophan-auxotrophic strain  <cit> . external application of iaa has been shown to have various effects in additional fungal species, but it has been difficult to determine whether the observed phenotypes represent the physiological effects of endogenous fungal iaa  <cit> .

the possible role of fungal iaa in plant diseases is also ambiguous. auxin compounds produced by antagonistic and pathogenic pythium spp. were shown to stimulate plant growth  <cit> . pre-treatment of potato tubers at the inoculation sites attenuated the extent of fusarium eumartii damage and was correlated with a decrease in several of the fungu's extracellular hydrolytic activities  <cit> . an iaa-overproducing strain of the mycorrhizal fungus hebeloma cylindrosporum had a more pronounced impact on pinus pinaster cortical cell elongation and radial diameter than the wild-type strain  <cit> . it should be noted that in that study iaa production was determined under culture conditions in the presence of high tryptophan concentrations and in-planta production of iaa by the mycorrhizal fungus was not verified. iaa-overproducing fusarium strains were generated by expressing the bacterial iaam and iaah genes in two species pathogenic to orobanche  <cit> . the transgenic strains produced more iaa in culture and demonstrated enhanced virulence on the host plants. again, in-planta production of iaa was not determined.

most fungi produce iaa from the amino acid tryptophan through the indole-3-pyruvic acid  pathway  <cit> . genes of the ipy pathway have been recently identified in the smut fungus ustilago maydis  <cit> . two indole-3-acetaldehyde dehydrogenase genes  were identified and Δiad1Δiad <dig> mutant strains were produced. these mutants were blocked in the conversion of both indole-3-acetaldehyde and tryptamine to iaa. furthermore, deletion of two aromatic amino acid aminotransferases  in the Δiad1Δiad <dig> mutant background resulted in a further decrease in iaa production. iaa levels were reduced in plants infected with the mutant strains compared to wild-type infected plants, but tumor formation was unaffected. thus, although these results strongly suggest that u. maydis produces iaa within the plant, they do not provide answers as to the possible role or effect of fungus-produced iaa on disease development.

we previously showed that colletotrichum gloeosporioides f. sp. aeschynomene  produces large quantities of iaa in axenic culture  <cit> . unlike in other fungi, the major iaa-biosynthesis pathway in c. gloeosporioides is the bacterial indole-3-acetamide  pathway. although external addition of tryptophan was necessary for the production of iaa in axenic cultures, in-planta production of iaa by the fungus was also demonstrated  <cit> . to gain insight into the possible roles of iaa, we developed a screen for auxin-induced genes in c. gloeosporioides. here we report the identification and characterization of cgopt <dig>  a c. gloeosporioides iaa-responsive gene, which is involved in mediating fungal responses to iaa.

RESULTS
isolation and characterization of cgopt1
in search of iaa-induced fungal genes, a suppressive subtraction hybridization  library was prepared from mycelia grown in media with  or without  iaa. putative differential clones were sequenced and analyzed by blastx and their expression was verified by northern blot analysis . only three clones showed consistent induction by iaa: cas <dig> , which showed homology to an integral membrane protein , cas <dig>  which showed homology to an oligopeptide transporter , and cas <dig> , which showed homology to a sugar transporter . the cas <dig> clone was further characterized.

the full-length sequence of the cas <dig> est was obtained. blastx analysis showed strong homology to opts from various organisms: schizosaccharomyces pombe isp <dig> , aspergillus oryzae opt , neurospora crassa isp4-like , and candida albicans opt <dig> . in addition, the cas <dig> predicted protein contained  <dig> transmembrane-spanning domains and the consensus sequence spyxevrxxvxxxddp , both of which have been found in all previously described opts  <cit> .

an unrooted parsimony-based phylogenetic tree grouped cas <dig> with opts and opt-like proteins from other fungi . opts from several other fungi and some plants are grouped in distinct clades, while the other type of peptide transporter  is grouped in a separate clade. these analyses clearly demonstrated that the predicted peptide belongs to the opt family and that it encodes for a putative oligopeptide transporter. the gene was therefore named cgopt <dig> for colletotrichum gloeosporioides opt . the predicted protein contains  <dig> amino acids, has a predicted mass of  <dig>  kda, and a pi of  <dig> . the gene includes three exons separated by two introns of  <dig> and  <dig> bp.

induction of cgopt <dig> gene expression by iaa
expression of cgopt <dig> was below detection levels in resting spores, strongly enhanced during spore germination and then reduced again to basal levels during mycelia development . addition of iaa to the mycelia enhanced cgopt <dig> gene expression, confirming transcriptional activation by auxin .

further expression analyses were performed using a transgenic strain of c. gloeosporioides, popt-gfp <dig>  in which the gfp reporter gene is regulated by the cgopt <dig> promoter. the gfp signal in spores was enhanced during germination with a peak at  <dig> h and then it decreased, similar to gene-expression results obtained by northern blot analysis . to evaluate the response to auxin, the popt-gfp6-transgenic isolate was grown in czapek dox  medium supplemented with iaa and the gfp signal was monitored  <dig> h after culture inoculation. gfp fluorescence was enhanced by iaa in a concentration-dependent manner, with saturation at  <dig> μm iaa . no change in gfp fluorescence was detected in media supplemented only with ethanol .

silencing of cgopt <dig> transcription by rna interference 
cgopt1-silenced mutants were generated and characterized. because homologous integration does not work well in c. gloeosporioides f. sp. aeschynomene, mutants were generated by rna silencing. the wild-type strain was co-transformed with the rnai cassette optri and the ggfp plasmid  <cit> , which was used to confer resistance to hygromycin b. some of the hygromycin-resistant colonies showed discoloration and reduced sporulation. spores were collected from culture plates of these isolates and germinated for  <dig> h in pea extract, conditions under which cgopt <dig> gene expression is normally high . variable levels of reduced cgopt <dig> expression were noted in all isolates . the phenotype of the cgopt1-silenced mutants was determined using isolates ori <dig> and ori <dig> 

pathogenicity
spore-inoculation experiments were performed using several spore dilutions:  <dig>   <dig> ×  <dig>  and  <dig> spores/ml. in all experiments, the cgopt1-silenced mutants caused delayed and reduced symptoms compared to wild-type-infected plants . for example, in a typical experiment using  <dig> spores/ml, the wild-type-infected plants developed severe symptoms  <dig> days post-inoculation, and all six plants died after  <dig> days, whereas four out of six ori51- or ori83-infected plants showed only minor or no symptoms.

pigmentation and sporulation
the cgopt1-silenced mutants showed several morphological differences compared to the wild-type strain. when grown on solid regeneration  medium, they produced more aerial hyphae than the wild-type cultures and failed to accumulate the typical orange pigment . the mutants also produced fewer spores than the wild type . the differences in sporulation between the wild-type and mutant strains were more significant in young cultures and decreased after longer periods of culturing, suggesting delayed sporulation rather than a direct effect on spore formation.

to further characterize the sporulation defects in the cgopt1-silenced mutants, we compared sporulation in complete darkness: the wild type is known to produce less spores when grown in the dark vs. in the light. under conditions of complete darkness, the wild type and cgopt1-silenced mutants produced similar numbers of spores, lower than the number of spores produced in the light . thus, only light-induced sporulation was affected in the mutants, while sporulation in the dark was unaffected.

next we tested the possible effect of iaa on sporulation. wild-type and mutant strains were cultured on media with  <dig> μm iaa. the plates were kept in the dark to prevent photo-oxidation of iaa, and to eliminate light-induced differences in sporulation between the wild type and mutants. iaa significantly enhanced sporulation in wild-type cultures under these conditions, while it had no effect on sporulation of the cgopt1-silenced mutants . furthermore, the effect of iaa on sporulation in wild-type cultures was dose-dependent: a small increase in spore production was observed at  <dig> μm iaa, and production was further enhanced by  <dig> μm and  <dig> μm iaa . no change was observed in the sporulation of the mutants, regardless of iaa concentration. these results showed a clear and consistent phenotype caused by iaa, which is abolished in the cgopt1-silenced mutants.

colony morphology
while characterizing the transcriptional response to iaa, we noticed the development of more compact mycelium in the presence of auxin. to further examine this phenotype, we tested the effect of iaa on the development of mycelia in liquid culture. in reg medium, the wild-type colonies accumulated intense orange pigmentation, while the silenced mutants developed a very pale orange color . this phenotype was similar to that observed on solid reg plates . iaa greatly reduced pigmentation in wild-type cultures, whereas it had no effect on the mutants, which retained their light orange color .

a difference was noted in the morphology of wild-type and mutant colonies. in reg medium, the wild type developed pellets surrounded by long hyphae, which became more compact with shorter hyphae when iaa was added . under these conditions, the cgopt1-silenced mutants developed compact pellets without free hyphae, and this morphology did not change in the presence of iaa. in cd medium, the wild type developed more compact pellets than in reg medium, which became even denser in the presence of iaa . the cgopt1-silenced mutants developed pellets with very long hyphae  in cd medium and again, this morphology was not altered by iaa. thus, the wild-type isolate developed more condensed pellets in iaa-containing media, while the morphology of the cgopt1-silenced mutants differed from the wild type, and was unaffected by iaa.

discussion
in a previous report, we showed that c. gloeosporioides produces auxin both in culture and in planta  <cit> . this raised the possibility of auxin involvement in the regulation of fungal development and pathogenicity, and of the existence of auxin-responsive genes regulating fungal responses to iaa. as a first step towards identifying the putative iaa-responsive fungal genes, we constructed a ssh library using mycelia from auxin-containing medium as the tester. under culture conditions, over 95% of the iaa that is produced by c. gloeosporioides is secreted into the medium  <cit> . we therefore used a relatively high iaa concentration , assuming that the endogenous concentrations would be at least 10-fold lower. we also added  <dig> μm iam, the intermediate product of iaa production in c. gloeosporioides  <cit> . the ssh yielded limited information on putative iaa-induced genes since only three clones showed consistent induction by iaa. thus, although putative iaa-induced genes were identified, the results from the ssh approach do not support a massive change in gene transcription by iaa. however, the number of genes that could be tested by ssh was limited and more conclusive results might be obtained through robust transcript analysis using microarrays when such tools become available in c. gloeosporioides.

cgopt <dig> exhibited consistent induction by iaa and was therefore further analyzed. characterization of the gene as a putative opt was strongly supported by its overall homology to other opts, as well as by the presence of the conserved spyxevrxxvxxxddp sequence and  <dig> transmembrane domains, which are common to all opts  <cit> . further analyses, including complementation of yeast mutants, are needed to determine that cgopt <dig> is indeed an oligopeptide transporter and to find substrate specificity.

in s. cerevisiae, there are two genetically and physiologically distinct proton-coupled peptide transporter systems: the ptr  and the opt  protein families. members of the ptr and opt families differ in function and they do not share significant sequence homology . ptr proteins are common in all organisms and transport di- or tripeptides. opt proteins are found only in plants and fungi and transport 4- and 5-amino-acid peptides  <cit> . metabolically, the transport of small oligopeptides is important as an amino acid, carbon, and nitrogen source  <cit> . therefore, silencing of cgopt <dig> would be expected to reduce the uptake of nutrients from proteinaceous sources, which might have an effect on growth and development. further, cgopt <dig> might facilitate incorporation of metabolites or small peptides that can be used as signalling molecules e.g., during plant infection.

cgopt <dig> was activated in the presence of iaa in a concentration-dependent manner. transcription was already enhanced at  <dig> μm iaa and was further enhanced at higher concentrations, with saturation at  <dig> μm. these concentrations are much higher than the iaa levels in plants but are within the range of iaa amounts produced by c. gloeosporioides  <cit> . lack of activation by acetic acid, indole-3-ethanol  or tryptamine ruled out possible activation of cgopt <dig> by auxin-induced changes in ph, or as a general response to indoles. nevertheless, at this stage it is impossible to determine whether up-regulation of cgopt <dig> in the presence of iaa is a direct response to iaa or rather, an indirect response to other changes that might be brought about by iaa. further, induction by iaa does not necessarily imply that it would be involved in iaa transport, especially because c. gloeosporioides produces large quantities of iaa, so induction might be through endogenous rather than exogenous iaa.

in addition to the iaa-induced transcription of cgopt <dig>  the gene was differentially expressed during fungal development, particularly during spore germination. cgopt <dig> transcript could not be detected in resting spores, it was highly induced during germination, and then it declined during mycelium formation. this expression pattern is opposite to that of the vacuolar copper-transporting gene cgctr <dig>  which is necessary for the initial stages of germination and is highly expressed in resting spores and down-regulated immediately after spore germination  <cit> . therefore, cgopt <dig> is probably important during germ-tube formation and elongation, but is not required for the initiation of spore germination. silencing of the gene provided additional evidence for the involvement of cgoptt <dig> in development as well as pathogenicity: cgopt1-silenced mutants displayed reduced sporulation and pigmentation, and were less pathogenic than the wild-type strain. these pleiotropic effects suggest association of cgopt <dig> with several different processes.

iaa appears to have an enhancing effect on processes such as sporulation, spore germination, and germ-tube elongation. however, the effects of iaa vary with experimental conditions, and opposite results might be obtained. in our sporulation assay, we took special care to eliminate possible interference and side effects from experimental parameters such as solvent, medium, or light. iaa was applied to filter paper, the ethanol was evaporated, and then the filter was placed between two layers of agar to avoid direct contact with the fungus. additionally, because sporulation is enhanced by light, the experiments were conducted under both light and dark conditions. under both conditions, we observed consistent and significant enhancement of sporulation in the wild type by iaa . this procedure therefore provided a reliable assay for the determination of responses to iaa in the wild type and cgopt1-silenced mutants.

the cgopt1-silenced mutants exhibited reduced sporulation compared to the wild type when grown in the light. this difference was not observed in the dark, where both the wild type and mutants produced reduced, but equal numbers of spores . thus, cgopt <dig> is probably associated only with light-dependent sporulation, and is not required for light-independent sporulation. however, iaa had no effect on sporulation in the mutants, unlike the significant enhancement of sporulation observed in the wild-type strain. these results suggest that iaa and light enhance sporulation through different pathways, and that cgopt <dig> is associated with the iaa-dependent pathway, but not the light-dependent one. in addition, morphological differences were observed between the wild type and cgopt <dig> mutants when grown in liquid culture, and the addition of iaa induced morphological changes in the wild type, but had almost no effect on the mutants . thus both sporulation and pellet morphology, which differ between the wild type and cgopt1-silenced mutants, are affected by iaa in the wild type but not in the cgopt <dig> mutants. these results suggest that cgopt <dig> might be associated with developmental pathways that are also affected by iaa. the abolishment of a response to iaa in the cgopt <dig> mutants is surprising and further research is needed to determine the connection between cgopt <dig> and iaa.

CONCLUSIONS
although fungi are capable of producing iaa, its purpose, if any, is unclear. here we present evidence that iaa promotes sporulation and causes changes in growth morphology in the fungal plant pathogen c. gloeosporioides. these results suggest the importance of iaa to fungal development and reproduction. in addition, we identified an iaa-responsive gene which appears to be involved in mediating iaa's effects. at this stage however, the underlying mechanism is unknown and further investigation is needed.

