BACKGROUND
comparative biology has contributed enormously to the understanding of evolution  <cit> . in the last decade the comparative approach has extended to genomes, enabling us to study how phenotypic diversity is encoded in the genome. although the relationship between genotype and phenotype is complex, current next generation sequencing technology has made a great contribution in genotype-phenotype mapping. it allows for the inspection of whole genomes and transcriptomes in a relatively unbiased way, and it enables investigations beyond model species. we can now extend the comparison of traits that have been long studied in one model species to closely related species, and to lines experimentally selected for changes in traits, in order to better understand the evolution of that trait  <cit> . in this way we can contrast differences between species and lines of the same species to gain insights into long and short term evolutionary changes.

one trait that shows remarkably fast evolution and dramatic changes among species is the immune response to parasites. the hosts’ ability to defend against parasites has to continuously evolve and re-adjust to the co-evolving parasites  <cit> . these hosts’ defense mechanisms often consist of specific immune responses that effectuate the clearance of the parasite. when the hosts co-evolve with their local parasite communities, they may change the investment, or even acquire novel immunity traits in the arms’ race with the parasites  <cit> .

in insects, immune responses against parasitoid wasps have evolved multiple times  <cit> . parasitoids are insects that lay eggs on or in other arthropods, killing the host during the development. they are among the most abundant and species-rich arthropod groups, and due to their lethality, exert a strong selection pressure on their hosts  <cit> . insect species are often natural hosts to different parasitoid species  <cit> , showing large variation in the mechanisms and effectiveness of their immune responses, even among closely related species and among natural populations .

the mechanism of immune response against parasitoids has been well documented in d. melanogaster. it involves the recognition of the parasitoid egg by the host, followed by an increase and differentiation of hemocytes  that surround the egg, leading to the formation of multicellular capsule, which is melanized. the differentiation of hemocytes is a critical step in the process, and produces three main types of cells: 1) lamellocytes, which are responsible for forming the capsule around the egg, and are usually not present in unparasitized larvae 2) plasmatocytes, which phagocytize small pathogens and can differentiate further into lamellocytes  <cit>  and 3) crystal cells, which contain the melanin that is deposited in the capsule  <cit> . the immune response against parasitoid is associated with variation in the constitutive or induced numbers of hemocytes per species within the melanogaster group in drosophila. generally, higher constitutive hemocyte loads or stronger induction correlate to higher levels of immunity  <cit> . a similar pattern was found after experimental selection for increased parasitoid resistance within a single population of d. melanogaster  <cit> . interestingly, however, natural populations of d. melanogaster that vary in parasitoid resistance did not show this correlation, possibly suggesting that the genetic basis for the fine-tuning of the immune responses has evolved differently among various populations  <cit> .

the changes in the gene expression that mediate this immune response have been investigated with microarrays in d. melanogaster  <cit> . an important conclusion from these studies was that lines that were experimentally selected for increased resistance to parasitoids showed changed expression in a large number of genes, but did not evolve a constitutive increase in expression of immune genes. this implies that the evolved increased immunity in the selection lines did not consist of a simple pre-activation of the inducible immune response, but involved a different set of genes   <cit> . moreover, comparisons of the genome sequences after the experimental selection for increased parasitoid resistance and control lines revealed significant changes in large numbers of genome regions, suggesting that at short evolutionary timescales, the modulation of immune responses against parasitoids acts mostly on standing genetic variation across a large number of loci  <cit> .

for drosophila species other than d. melanogaster, less information is available about the mechanisms and genes involved in the immune response against parasitoids. in a previous study we showed that this type of immune response and the lamellocytes that mediate the encapsulation, are restricted to a monophyletic clade within the melanogaster group and has been secondarily lost in one species within this group, d. sechellia  <cit> . by comparing the sequences of genes differentially expressed during the immune response after parasitoid attack in d. melanogaster across multiple species, we hypothesized that this novel trait involved the recruitment of new genes on existing immune pathways  <cit> . to infer whether these genes are indeed associated with the evolution of this trait in the melanogaster lineage, we first need to verify that they are also associated with the immune response after parasitoid attack in the other species. by characterizing the transcriptional responses to parasitoid attack in drosophila species, we can contrast how short- and long-term evolution affect expression of  genes.

in this study we aim to test the hypothesis that short- and long-term evolutionary processes may lead to substantial dissimilarities in the genetic basis of a trait. we use a comparative approach to characterize how similar the transcriptional response is to an immune challenge, i.e. parasitoid attack, in four closely related species and in four different strains of a single species. these drosophila species and lines all rely on lamellocyte-mediated encapsulation for the immune response against parasitoid, but differ substantially in their level of immunity against parasitoids. we compared the transcriptional activity during the immune response after parasitoid attack, using rnaseq, in different species  and in experimentally selected lines of d. melanogaster. we analysed gene expression in drosophila larvae after parasitoid attack and their respective controls at two different time points,  <dig> and  <dig> hours after parasitization, which reflect the start and end of the immune response  <cit> . the specific questions we addressed are 1) which genes change in expression in response to attack by the parasitoid asobara tabida in these four closely related species? 2) what are the similarities and differences in the transcriptional responses compared to d. melanogaster 3) how short-term selection processes for higher parasitoid resistance affect gene expression during the immune response after parasitoid attack? and 4) how does the function and orthology of differentially expressed genes reflect the evolutionary history of the immune response against parasitoids?

RESULTS
the rna-seq experiment consisted of  <dig> samples from four species, d. melanogaster, d. simulans, d. sechellia and d. yakuba. for d. melanogaster four lines were used, two selected for increased parasitoid resistance and two non-selected. for each of the other three species one line was used. gene expression in larvae was compared between parasitized and non-parasitized treatments at two time points,  <dig> and  <dig> hours  after parasitization. these time points correspond to the peaks of gene expression in the initiation and completion of the immune response after parasitoid attack in d. melanogaster  <cit> . three biological replicates were obtained for each line, treatment and time point. these lines and species differed in their level of resistance against parasitoids .
fig.  <dig> experimental design and workflow. schematic representation of samples, experimental design and analysis workflow




sequenced reads were processed as shown in fig.  <dig> to obtain estimates of gene expression for each gene. normalization and differential gene expression analysis on the counts was analysed using the package edger   <cit>  implemented in r . in order to study the intra- and inter-species variation, we implemented two alternative normalizations: 1) a species-specific normalization to investigate the response of each species independently, using four lines of d. melanogaster or one line for the remaining species and 2) an all-species normalization to investigate the common response among all species, using one line per species and the orthologous genes to d. melanogaster. differential gene expression was considered significant at a false discovery rate  threshold < <dig>  . a summary of the number of differentially expressed genes  between parasitized and non-parasitized larvae in the different analyses is shown in fig.  <dig> 
fig.  <dig> summary of the number of significant deg. summary of the number of significant deg in each contrast a for 5h and b for 50h after parasitoid attack. the number of deg is shown in horizontal barplots . vertical barplots show the overlap in differentially expressed genes in the categories indicated by the filled dots




gene expression in response to parasitoid attack in four drosophila species
unfortunately, the power to detect differences in gene expression was very low in the single-species analyses, except for d. melanogaster. for the latter we could combine four lines , which with replicates resulted in  <dig> parasitized samples  per time point, while we only had three parasitized samples  per time point for the other species.

when comparing the gene expression in response to parasitoid attack for each species separately, we found great differences in the number of deg in d. melanogaster compared to the other species. at 5h and 50h, respectively, the number of deg was  <dig> and  <dig> in d. melanogaster ,  <dig> and  <dig> in d. simulans ,  <dig> and  <dig> in d. sechellia  and  <dig> and  <dig> in d. yakuba . this is largely explained by the difference in samples sizes  per species .

between-species variation
to search for similarities and differences in genome-wide responses to parasitoid attack among the  <dig> drosophila species, we had to increase the power of comparison across species without introducing bias due to differences in the number of lines. we normalized all species together  and used only one line of d. melanogaster, “c1” . the statistical analysis was applied to  <dig> genes that were present in all species. we found large variation in overall patterns of gene expression between species, with gene expression in d. yakuba samples being least similar to the other species . the expression distance between d. yakuba and all other species at 50h appeared to have been enhanced by technical problems during sequencing of one batch, and consequently this species was discarded for further analysis at the 50h time point.

the analysis of the data that was normalized with all species led to  <dig> and  <dig> deg at 5h and 50h, respectively . some of these genes were consistently up-regulated in all species whereas other genes were up-regulated only in a subset of the species, suggesting that the addition or exclusion of species influenced the statistical significance of deg. to investigate this, we analysed subsets of species , and found  <dig> and  <dig> significant deg at 5h and 50h, respectively, including the significant deg found for all species . the number of deg increased with the increase of species, particularly in the subset d. melanogaster-d. simulans; but decreased when including d. yakuba . this may be a consequence of the similarity in the response shared among d. melanogaster and d. simulans, and the greater dissimilarity in the response of d. yakuba.
fig.  <dig> expression of the significantly deg after parasitoid attack in  <dig> drosophila species at 5h.  counts per million  of parasitized  and control 


fig.  <dig> expression of the significantly deg after parasitoid attack in  <dig> drosophila species at 50h.  counts per million  of parasitized  and control 




contrasting the two normalizations thus led to different subsets of deg. some of the significant deg found in the per-species analyses overlapped with the all-species normalization at 5h. the increase in the number of deg by combining species confirms that the low numbers of deg in the per-species analysis is indeed largely due to difference in statistical power. it also indicates that the genetic basis of the immune response to parasitoid attack is at least partially shared among the four species. at 50h, the number of differentially expressed genes was smaller for the all-species normalization and no overlap was found with the per-species normalization . no statistical power was gained by combining different species, indicating that the completion of the immune response was more variable among the species.

within-species variation after selection for increased parasitoid resistance
when focusing on the gene expression within d. melanogaster, we found that all lines initiated the response against the parasitoid attack in a similar way , but that the termination of the response was less consistent across lines . the clustering did not reveal a clear pattern in terms of resistance  among the significant deg due to parasitization. thus, to better understand the effect of selection, we tested two models. one that considered constitutive differences in expression  and another that considered the interaction between selection and parasitization. these two models were tested for each time point independently. neither of the models showed significantly differential expression between selection and control lines .
fig.  <dig> heatmap of significantly deg in d. melanogaster at 5h. colors represent the cpm values for all lines, treatments and replicates. the first  <dig> columns present the gene expression in larvae that were parasitized  in lines that had been selected  for increased resistance and their respective unselected control lines , and the second  <dig> columns the expression in not-parasitized control  larvae


fig.  <dig> heatmap of significantly deg in d. melanogaster at 50h. colors represent the cpm values for all lines, treatments and replicates. the first  <dig> columns present the gene expression in larvae that were parasitized  in lines that had been selected  for increased resistance and their respective unselected control lines , and the second  <dig> columns the expression in not-parasitized control  larvae




for d. melanogaster we also analysed the differential exon usage, which reflects the expression of transcript isoforms. exon usage was compared using the r package dexseq  <cit>  between 1) parasitized and non-parasitized  samples, 2) selected and non-selected  samples and 3) the interaction between parasitized and selected . genes showing significant differential exon usage are listed in table  <dig> . three of these genes, cg <dig>  tep <dig> and cg <dig> were also found to be differentially expressed after parasitization in d. melanogaster.




orthologous and functional annotations of differentially expressed genes
together all models and normalizations produced  <dig> deg , of which  <dig> genes were found expressed in all species, lines and time points . we classified these  <dig> genes in eight broad functional categories, according to their gene ontology : “humoral”, “cellular”, “signalling”, “receptors”, “melanization”, “stress”, “proteolysis” and “morphogenesis” ; and in three general orthologous classes according to their presence-absence pattern across drosophila species : “single copy ortholog”  for genes that have exactly one copy in each species, “paralog”  for genes with multiple orthologs in more than two species, and “lineage restricted”  for those genes present only in a  subset of species. these genes were clustered based on the median  fold changes in expression of parasitized versus control samples .
fig.  <dig> heatmap of deg from all analyses, species and time points. genes were included only if they were differentially expressed in at least one species, line or timepoint, and were expressed in all species . the data for d. yakuba at 50h is excluded due to technical problems. the colors of the heatmap indicate the  median fold change of the three replicates. the fold change was calculated as the ratio of counts per million of parasitized to control samples. the distance matrix was calculated using pearson correlation and clustered using “ward.d2”. each gene was annotated with eight functional and three orthologous categories 




cluster g <dig> is composed largely of humoral, single-copy-orthologous genes, that showed strong up-regulation at 5h for most species, regardless of the level of resistance. some genes did not show up-regulation in d. sechellia, the species that has lost the immune response against parasitoid. other genes were not up-regulated in d. yakuba. at 50h, most genes did no longer show strong up-regulation, except for some that remained strongly up-regulated in d. simulans. the genes in this cluster may be considered a core set of immune genes that react to a general immune challenge, including parasitoids.

cluster g <dig> is composed of genes with strong up-regulation at both 5h and 50h in d. melanogaster and d. simulans. this set contains proteolytic and immune genes of both the humoral and cellular response, which are mostly lineage-restricted. in d. sechellia, almost none of these genes were differentially expressed, and also in d. yakuba only a few of the genes were up-regulated at 5h after parasitoid attack. thus, this set includes mostly genes that are restricted to the clade that can launch an immune response against parasitoids, and some of the genes are up-regulated in all  <dig> species with this immune response, but not in d. sechellia.

cluster g <dig> is composed of down-regulated genes at both 5h and 50h mostly in d. melanogaster, and consists largely of single-copy-orthologous genes, some in the cellular immune response. finally, cluster g <dig> contains a subset of genes that show upregulation mostly at 50h in d. melanogaster and d. simulans, but not in d. sechellia. these genes consist of both single-copy-orthologous and lineage-restricted genes, with various functional annotations.

discussion
in order to contrast how short- and long-term evolution affect gene expression, we compared intra- and inter-species differences in genome-wide gene expression after parasitoid attack using rna-seq. we studied four drosophila species: d. simulans, d. sechellia, d. yakuba and d. melanogaster, for the latter species we compared two lines selected for higher resistance to parasitoids with two non-selected lines. these species and lines differ in their ability to immunologically respond to the infection by parasitoid wasps. we found that phenotypic differences between species were to a large extent reflected in the expression profiles. the species that had lost parasitoid resistance, d. sechellia, failed to upregulate several genes that were upregulated by the resistant species. interestingly, also the three resistant species showed substantial variation in transcriptional responses to parasitoid attack: some genes were upregulated by only a subset of these species, or exclusively in one of the species. in contrast, within d. melanogaster, the responses of the selection and control lines was remarkably similar, despite their phenotypic differences in resistance.

intraspecific variation in gene expression
this study follows up on previous work on d. melanogaster using microarrays and re-sequencing  <cit> . besides extending the knowledge beyond the model species d. melanogaster, the comparison of results with different techniques  is a valuable practice as it informs us about the robustness of conclusions previously drawn. the microarray studies implicated several hundreds of genes that changed expression during the response to parasitoid attack  <cit> , and during larval development in selection lines with increased resistance   <cit> . the genome sequencing revealed sequence changes that occurred during the evolution of increased parasitoid resistance  <cit> . in the current study, we investigated how gene expression in these selection lines responded after parasitization. we identified  <dig> genes that were differentially expressed in response to parasitoid attack in d. melanogaster and  <dig> in total across the  <dig> species. of all these genes,  <dig> had also been identified by the microarray experiment that compared parasitized vs non-parasitized larvae,  <dig> with the microarray experiment that compared selected vs non-selected lines and  <dig> with the genome sequencing comparing selected vs non-selected lines . the overlap between the results of microarrays and rna-seq approaches is considerable, indicating robustness of previous findings on the changes in gene expression in response to parasitoid attack.

in the current study, we did not find genes that were significant differentially expressed when comparing selected vs non-selected d. melanogaster lines. the absence of significant genes between selected vs non-selected lines was surprising since  <dig> genes with constitutive differential expression were previously found  <cit> . there are several possible explanations for this discrepancy. first, the studies measured different aspects: the  changes during development of the larvae that were less susceptible but without exposing them to parasitoid attack  versus the  changes in response to parasitoid attack . secondly, the studies had different designs: we used three biological replicates per line for  <dig> time points, while the earlier microarray study used five biological replicates for  <dig> time points. thus, we may have had insufficient power to detect subtle differences between lines that would have been detected in the microarray study. thirdly, the microarray study used only one selected line, and some of the significant genes in that study may therefore have been caused by random genetic drift rather than by selection. finally, different biases are inherent to microarray and rna-seq. one difficulty of rna-seq is to understand whether anomalies in coverage are biological or are due to technical artifacts arising from library preparation  <cit> . although normalization methods should account for this, it has been shown that the variation introduced by the different steps can cause strong over- or under-estimation of gene expression  <cit> , which hinders the power to detect differential expression, in particular when such differences are small. on the other hand, microarrays have a low sensitivity for detecting differential expression in genes that are expressed at low levels, low power for genes that are constitutively highly expressed, and are limited to the genes that are represented on the array.

in contrast to the absence of significant differences in expression between selected vs non-selected, we found a high level of replication between parasitized vs non-parasitized in the current study and the microarray study by  <cit> . this may be the consequence of a highly canalized response, producing more consistent differences in gene expression across lines and different species, especially at early stages of the immune response. additionally, the fold-changes in gene expression in response to parasitoid attack are generally larger, which perhaps suggests that the analysis of rna-seq data is more robust for the detection of large fold change differences in expression than more subtle changes.

in our rna-seq study we investigated differences in transcript structure, which was not possible in previous microarrays. we showed that seven genes had differential exon usage, three of which were also differentially expressed. although it is not yet clear how the use of transcript isoforms affects the efficiency of the response, this could expose an additional molecular level where selection can potentially act. changes in exon-usage may affect protein-protein interactions in a molecular network, while the phenotypic outcome depends largely on epistatic interactions among genes within the existing genetic networks. in order to understand short-term selection and the extent to which selection experiments are repeatable at a molecular level, it is important to consider a wide range of levels, from exons, to genes, gene families, pathways and protein-protein interaction networks.

interspecific variation in gene expression
the current study also revealed that many of the genes that were differentially expressed during the immune response against parasitoids in d. melanogaster showed similar transcriptional responses in closely related drosophila species. at the inter-species level we found that the expression profiles of d. melanogaster and d. simulans were most similar to each other, as expected given their phylogenetic proximity. the large dissimilarities in the transcriptional responses of d. sechellia, which lost this immune response, also supports the importance of these genes in the immune response against parasitoid.

the current study also revealed a number of genes that were differentially expressed in d. melanogaster in response to parasitoid attack, but not in both of the two other species that have strong immune responses. these genes could either be less closely associated to the immune function, or they could indicate dissimilarity in the genetic basis of immunity among species. it was, for example, intriguing to find substantial dissimilarity in the expression profile of d. yakuba in response to parasitoid attack. it thus appears that d. yakuba regulates its immune response differently from d. melanogaster and d. simulans, although the three species show a phenotypically similar immune response to parasitoids  <cit> . some genes that were upregulated by d. melanogaster and d. simulans did not change expression in d. yakuba , while others were already highly expressed in unparasitized d. yakuba . it is relevant to note that d. yakuba had the highest and fastest resistance during the phenotypic characterization , which could mean that part of the patterns may be explained by the timing of the transcriptional response . interestingly, some species of the obscura and ananassae group are able to resist parasitoids through a very different mechanism, using different types of hemocytes  <cit> , which is likely to have evolved independently  <cit> . future gene expression studies on these more distant groups could be valuable to understand the molecular basis of these independently evolved responses to parasitoid attack.

in this study we were able to characterize general patterns that may be common in the immune response against parasitoids. when combining all species and all lines together , we found a core set of immune genes that was activated early in the response, regardless of the host resistance level. most of these genes are humoral and are conserved across the drosophila genus  <cit> . a second set of genes was activated throughout the response, except in d. sechellia . interestingly, this set contains six of the genes we had previously identified as new and fast changing in the drosophila clade, that can resist parasitoids through melanotic encapsulation . these genes may reflect an immune response that is more specific to parasitoid attack, and are therefore key for further studies. finally, there is a number of genes that are differentially expressed after parasitization in d. melanogaster and d. simulans, but not in d. yakuba. perhaps these genes are not required for inducing the immune response itself, but have been recruited during the co-evolution with parasitoids by the ancestor of d. simulans and d. melanogaster, possibly modulating the immune response or mitigating costs of the immune response.

essential to the immune response against parasitoids is the proliferation, differentiation and migration of hemocytes that form the capsule around the parasitoid egg. similarly to previous studies  <cit>  we found no differential expression of genes involved in the hemopoiesis process. since hemopoiesis is an important component of the development, it is possible that changes that lead to differential expression are selected against during evolution. the levels and differentiation of hemocyte could be regulated by other molecules with less pleiotropic effects. for example, we did find genes involved in melanization and cell adhesion, both of which are important for the cellular response. several of these genes were down-regulated  or were only activated in the later time point . in particular, we were able to confirm the lack of expression of the lamellocyte specific prophenoloxidase ppo <dig> in d. sechellia . we previously proposed that ppo <dig> is non-functional in d. sechellia, which correlated with the lack of immunological and transcriptional response in this species  <cit> . recently, loss of function of the ppo <dig> gene was indeed shown due to an inactivating mutation which introduces a stop codon, generating a truncated version of the protein  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study provides an important dataset to understand the evolution of the immune response against parasitoids in drosophila. we showed both notable similarities and differences among closely related drosophila species in their transcriptional responses to parasitoid attack. based on this we can now generate various hypotheses that need to be tested with additional experimental approaches. while replicating previous studies in d. melanogaster in a combined experiment, we also report for the first time the gene expression profiles after parasitoid attack in d. simulans, d. sechellia and d. yakuba. our results show that in the short-term, selection does not seem to act on a pre-activation of the immune response . instead, it may target alternative pathways or mechanisms , which have an impact on the coordination and speed of the response. across drosophila species, the immune response against parasitoid involves different sets of genes: 1) a core of immune genes that expresses early and independent of the level of resistance of the species, and are mostly conserved and 2) a set of immune and proteolytic genes, which are mostly lineage-restricted to the melanogaster subgroup while 3) not all species that can resist parasitoids in this melanogaster subgroup show the same changes in expression for the same set of genes. this supports the hypothesis the encapsulation ability in the melanogaster subgroup depends on the expression of new genes that act on existing pathways.

