BACKGROUND
in  <dig> robert koch ushered in microbial pathology by establishing a causal relationship between bacillus anthracis microbes and the disease anthrax  <cit> . distributed worldwide, bacillus anthracis is a gram positive bacterium capable of infecting the widest range of animals of any known pathogen  <cit> . the bacterium is normally found as an endospore in soil where a chance encounter with an animal can permit entry through a wound, food or inhalation leading to germination of the spore into a vegetative bacterium. the vegetative phase is relatively short consisting of only 20– <dig> generations. the bacterium is believed to spend large periods of time in spore form thus slowing evolutionary changes and explaining the monomorphic nature of the bacterium  <cit> . human infection occurs most commonly through accidental exposure to infected animals or animal products, such as hides or carcasses. 95% of infections occur via the cutaneous route and more rarely through gastrointestinal and pulmonary routes  <cit> . the disease is difficult to diagnose because early symptoms are relatively non-specific and, when left untreated without prompt antibiotic intervention, can lead to fatality with rates ranging from 20% for cutaneous exposure to as high as 100% for pulmonary anthrax. the high morbidity is due to a rapid overwhelming of host defenses, fulminant septicemia of vegetative cells and the action of bacterial toxins expressed from vegetative cells. once inside the host, the spores are engulfed by macrophages where they are transported to lymph nodes and germinate to become vegetative cells that eventually disseminate through blood and lymph causing septicemia and toxemia. the vegetative cells express three monomeric proteins: protective antigen , lethal factor  and edema factor  from genes encoded on the pxo <dig> virulence plasmid  <cit> . pa facilitates toxin entry by binding to receptors tem <dig> and cmg <dig> on the surface of human and animal cells. binding triggers pa cleavage leading to formation of a heptameric or octameric pore that binds and translocates ef and lf into the cytosol. in binary complexes with pa, ef and lt are referred to as edema toxin  and lethal toxin  respectively. et is an adenyl-cyclase that enhances camp production and disrupts water homeostasis leading to kidney failure and death. lt is a zinc protease that cleaves mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases  and induces pro-inflammatory cytokines and cellular apoptosis  <cit> . antibodies predominantly directed against pa are the basis of current vaccines that are used prophylactically  <cit> .

the dramatic lethal consequences of an accidental spore release at sverdlovsk in the former soviet union and the deliberate release of anthrax through letters in the us in  <dig> have renewed interest in neutralizing this pathogen  <cit> . the complete sequence of bacillus anthracis and several of its close relatives is available  <cit> . this potentially allows for systematic study of all the genes contributing to the success of this important pathogen. however, a complete dissection of bacillus anthracis is hampered by the difficulty of transforming the bacteria  and by relatively few simple ways to manipulate the genome genetically  <cit> . shatalin and neyfakh used a temperature sensitive  plasmid to deliver a selectable marker flanked by upstream and downstream regions homologous to the gene to be disrupted  <cit> . through the manipulation of temperatures and screening of antibiotic markers, a chromosomal integrant could be obtained. janes and stibitz have created an elegant set of plasmids to make markerless gene disruptions in two distinct steps  <cit> . in the first step, a plasmid is constructed with an i-scei site flanking a genetic marker to be replaced and delivered on a ts replicon using an erythromycin selection marker. on introduction of this plasmid in bacillus anthracis, the plasmid can integrate into the chromosome at the low frequency of homologous recombination using the homology of genomic sequences cloned into the plasmid. on shifting to a restrictive temperature the plasmid is cured and it is possible to select for those rare chromosomal integration events. after appropriate steps to verify the success of the first step, a second plasmid expressing i-scei is introduced. this leads to cleavage at the i-scei site and stimulating recombination via double strand break repair which either leads to the desired recombination product or restoration to the parental chromosomal configuration. the desired product must be obtained through physical screening of individual colonies. finally, leppla and colleagues have exploited a selectable marker flanked by the loxp sites of the site-specific recombinase cre to leave a single loxp site at the site of marker integration which could then direct larger genome scale deletions through multiple rounds of loxp marker insertion at distant sites and site-specific recombination between them  <cit> .

many group ii introns exhibit the ability to insert into dna through a now well understood series of biochemical reactions  <cit> . the natural mobility of the ll.ltrb intron has been harnessed into a highly efficient gene targeting technology to achieve gene disruption through intron insertion in a number of gram positive and gram negative bacterial hosts  <cit> . the ability to engineer a group ii intron to insert at desired genomic locations, distinguishes group ii introns from other insertional elements like transposons that either integrate randomly at a low frequency or insert at a high frequency but only at a specific genomic locus like the atttn <dig> site. frequently, the engineered group ii introns insert at their newly programed insertion sites in the genome at frequencies high enough to be detectable by simple colony screening. the high efficiency of insertion allows gene disruption without the introduction of an antibiotic marker into the chromosome and the efficient sequential creation of multiple knockouts at disparate chromosomal sites. we have adapted the ll.ltrb intron insertion technology for application to bacillus anthracis and demonstrate the remarkable simplicity with which gene inactivation through intron insertion can be rapidly achieved.

RESULTS
group ii intron based gene inactivation
group ii introns in general, and the ll.ltrb group ii intron in particular, have been engineered into an efficient gene disruption system  <cit> . we have adapted this system for rapid gene inactivation in bacillus anthracis. group ii introns are autocatalytic rna molecules  <cit> . some group ii introns exhibit a property of “homing” where the intron recognizes the dna equivalent of its cognate exon junctions and inserts itself via retrotransposition  <cit> . the biochemical basis of this intron insertion has been deduced  <cit> . for example, the ll.ltrb intron interrupting a relaxase in lactococcus lactis is excised from its flanking exons through rna catalysis assisted by an intron encoded protein ltra  <cit> . the ltra protein acts as a scaffold for efficient rna directed catalysis but also encodes a reverse transcriptase and dna endonuclease that are used for intron integration into dna targets  <cit> . the spliced ll.ltrb intron remains associated with ltra to form a rnp particle. the intron component of the rnp can recognize dna exon sequences resembling exon junctions through a combination of exon recognition elements  within the intron and dna recognition preferences of the ltra protein  <cit> . on encountering a suitable target, the rna component of the rnp can integrate through reverse splicing of the intron rna into the dna target, followed by an ltra directed cleavage of the bottom dna strand which generates a primer that allows copying of the intron into dna via the reverse transcriptase activity of ltra.

a vector permitting group ii intron gene inactivation using screening
to adapt group ii introns for targeted gene disruption in bacillus anthracis we cloned the ll.ltrb intron and ltra protein under the control of a cadmium inducible promoter  <cit>  using a gram positive/gram negative shuttle vector prb <dig> as a backbone  <cit> . this vector offers a pub <dig> origin of replication for gram positives and a cole <dig> origin for gram negatives. the selection markers are kanamycin/neomycin in gram positives and ampicillin in gram negatives. for proof of principle, we changed the sequences in ebs1/δ and ebs <dig> within the intron to direct the intron to orf b of the is <dig> insertion sequences which has  <dig> copies in the bacillus anthracis genome . figure 1a shows general features of the vector and the modified base pairing interactions within ebs1/δ and ebs <dig> that allow the intron to recognize and insert itself into is <dig> orf b which are shown in figure 1b. the plasmid shown in figure 1a was introduced into bacillus anthracis sterne by electroporation and kanamycin resistant colonies were obtained. a single colony was grown overnight and induced with 10 μm cadmium for 90 minutes. dilutions were plated on lb without antibiotic selection and individual colonies were screened for presence of the intron insertion using pcr primers flanking the insertion site. figure 1c shows that this intron is remarkably efficient, and that every colony screened yielded a pcr product consistent with intron insertion into orf b of is <dig>  direct sequencing of the pcr product confirmed that the intron did successfully integrate at the desired locus. figure 1c also shows that in most cases a pcr product that is consistent with an intron free genomic product is also detectable, which suggests that the intron has not integrated at all three possible insertion sites. in two cases  a single pcr product is seen which is consistent with intron insertion in all three potential insertion sites. the remarkable efficiency of this intron represents the upper end of intron targeting efficiency  <cit> ; i.e. 100% insertion efficiency for all colonies screened with  <dig> in  <dig> colonies showing an intron insertion into three independent chromosomal insertion targets. for other targets we have examined, the intron efficiency is considerably lower requiring extensive arduous pcr screening to obtain a single insertion.

a vector using genetic selection for detection of group ii intron gene insertion
to address the problem of finding intron insertions for less efficient introns, we have engineered a vector with a retrotransposition activated kanamycin resistance marker that allows selection of intron insertion events  <cit> . figure  <dig> illustrates the main features in this vector. an erythromycin resistance marker was introduced into a prb <dig> shuttle vector. group ii intron expression was driven using an ntr promoter previously identified by using a promoter trap strategy  <cit> . the kanamycin resistance marker that is conditionally expressed only after intron insertion was created by total dna synthesis and used codons optimized for low gc organisms. this marker is expressed under its own promoter and is cloned at a known neutral site in domain iv of the intron in an antisense direction relative to the group ii intron expression. a td self-splicing group i intron interrupts the kanamycin resistance coding sequences in the same orientation as the ll.ltrb group ii intron. as a result of this configuration, the kanamycin resistance marker in the donor plasmid is silent. any leak-through expression from its own promoter leads to a non-functional protein since the group i intron interrupting it cannot be spliced out due to its antisense orientation relative to kanamycin expression. group ii intron rna transcripts will, however, also have the td intron autocatalytically removed restoring the continuity of the kanamycin coding sequence. if these transcripts are used as substrates for site-specific intron integration through reverse splicing into dna targets and reverse transcription, the kanamycin marker can then be expressed. thus successful retrotransposition events are marked by a gain of kanamycin resistance which allows for selection of rare intron integration events. as a proof of principle, we have designed introns to insert at bas <dig>  and bas <dig> . the regions within the intron that interact with dna insertion sites were changed in order to direct the intron to insert between nucleotides 343: <dig> of the bas <dig> gene as well as between nucleotides 1794: <dig> of the bas <dig> gene. the reengineered plasmid vectors were introduced into bacillus anthracis sterne by electroporation and selection on erythromycin plates. transformants were regrown in liquid media containing erythromycin and plated on lb agar with kanamycin to select for putative intron integration events. kanamycin resistant colonies were screened for successful intron insertion by using pcr primers that flanked the site of intron insertion. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  all kanamycin resistant colonies for bas <dig> show a pcr product consistent with group ii intron insertion. for bas <dig>  only one of the  <dig> colonies is consistent with intron integration at the desired site. the pcr products were sequenced and indicate precise intron integration at the desired locus.

CONCLUSIONS
the vectors described here introduce a new tool for genetic manipulation of bacillus anthracis. the ability to directly select for an insertional inactivation of a gene using very few manipulations will accelerate our ability to probe the role of the numerous uncharacterized genes in the genome of this important pathogen and uncover new targets for vaccination strategies or useful targets for therapeutic intervention. while the vectors were developed and tested in bacillus anthracis, the plasmid backbone used to build the vector is derived from pub <dig> a staphylococcus aureus plasmid that has been extensively used in bacillus subtilis <cit> . these vectors are therefore likely to be able to be used across the bacillus genus including other members of the bacillus cereus group such as bacillus cereus and bacillus thuringiensis.

