BACKGROUND
although taxonomy implies abrupt disjunctions between biological entities, we know that speciation usually involves non-instantaneous change  <cit> . the existence of hybrids and the implications of hybridisation have long intrigued evolutionists  <cit> , however the incorporation of gene flow into speciation models has only recently gained acceptance  <cit> .

genetic introgression occurs when two genetically distinct populations come into contact enabling individuals from each to interbreed. when this occurs through secondary contact the process has usually been regarded as hybridisation  <cit> , however, broader definitions of hybridisation accommodate the continuum from normal intraspecific mating to rare interspecies exchange  <cit> . the fertility of resulting offspring mediates gene flow between populations. this situation underpins the popular biological species concept  <cit> , but the frailty and circularity of the a priori assumption that species are always reproductively isolated is readily demonstrated  <cit> . stark reminders that hybridisation is not a valid test of species status come from observations that it is also a potent force in plant speciation that can result in the rapid formation of distinct and reproductively isolated taxa  <cit> .

since the 1960’s, direct measures of variable genetic loci have provided strong evidence that genomes are not unitary and exchange of loci between populations may be uneven  <cit> . where gene flow between somewhat distinct genomes is not contained by the formation of hybrid zones  <cit>  or abrupt speciation  <cit> , it can have numerous outcomes; reinforcement of reproductive barriers, the evolution of a new species, the loss of one or both parental species, limited adaption due to homogenization, or provide a means to pass adaptive traits between populations  <cit> .

gene flow may therefore result in species with mosaic genomes, comprised of alleles from different ancestral populations, which has been described as a potentially important evolutionary mechanism for the formation of many animal species  <cit> . indeed, allelic leakage may be fairly persistent where gene flow is mediated not by extrinsic geophysical barriers, but by locus-specific selection  <cit> . empirical data showing the maintenance of incipient species in the face of ongoing gene flow between populations are gradually accumulating, aided by increasingly sophisticated genetic tools  <cit> .

historically, one of the most informative animal groups in this field of study have been orthoptera and in particular grasshoppers  <cit> . here we report on flightless new zealand short-horned grasshoppers . most of the fifteen new zealand species, in four endemic genera, occupy subalpine native grasslands above the tree line  <cit> . prior to the arrival of humans in new zealand , the landscape was mostly dense forest  <cit> . grasshopper habitat was therefore mostly in the mountain ranges of the south island, although a few species occur at lower altitude in areas with semi-arid climate or braided river-beds .

the species sigaus australis appears, on the basis of mtdna sequence data, to encompass several narrow endemics and one widespread species  <cit> . typical sigaus australis are relatively large  and abundant in south island subalpine grasslands between  <dig> and 1800 m asl. sympatric with this widespread species is the microendemic sigaus childi, which is restricted to a low-lying, semi-arid region of about 100 km <dig> around the town of alexandra  . sigaus australis is also present in this region, but the two species are readily distinguished by their appearance. an intriguing feature of s. childi is that their colour patterns appear to be specific to the substrate on which individuals are found. colour patterns within s. childi range from almost white or grey on quartz pebbles, brown and red on schist gravels, to green and black like the tumbling lichen  that grows on rocks in some areas of central otago. although, inferences of camouflage are subjective they support the conjecture that these grasshoppers are under selection by visual predators. sigaus australis are more boldly patterned, often with longitudinal stripes, and tend to be colour-pattern variable within locations.figure  <dig> 
sample map. sample locations in south island, new zealand, of the sigaus australis complex grasshoppers used in this study. the two main species sigaus australis  and sigaus childi  are morphologically very different; s. childi tends to be smaller and more camouflaged to its local habitat than s. australis. the ‘central group’ and ‘area of sympatry’ defined here are used to analyse subsets of the specimens. hatched circles represent locations with both species present.



sigaus childi, although morphologically distinct, could not be distinguished from s. australis using mtdna data  <cit> . perhaps s. childi evolved recently and has retained ancestral mtdna haplotypes , or has exchanged genetic information since diverging  <cit> . or perhaps divergence has occurred and been maintained despite gene flow. genetic exchange between populations might be experienced at different rates across the genome; selection could operate on some loci to limit local exchange of alleles even when net  gene flow continues. these alternatives make different predictions about the pattern of morphological and genetic character sharing . in order to understand the evolution of this system we applied six types of data; morphology, mtdna sequencing, microsatellite genotyping, multi-copy nuclear sequencing, single nucleotide polymorphisms  and spatial position. we used these putatively independent data to contrast species integrity as characterised by morphology  and neutral characters that allowed us to test the stability of species delimitation, assess the extent and evenness of gene flow and thus gain an understanding of where these grasshopper populations are in the speciation continuum.figure  <dig> 
alternative hypotheses. alternative hypotheses to explain the relationship between morphological differentiation and gene flow in this study of grasshoppers in new zealand. two morphologically defined species exist that have a common ancestor and may share identical alleles due to decent, but as distinct species derived alleles are also expected.  an abrupt speciation event is expected to result in accumulation of distinct traits and genotypes, including at neutral loci.  sharing of neutral genetic alleles might be maintained by ongoing gene flow whilst alleles at some loci are subject to selection. morphological difference is an observable expression of genetic loci under diverging selection.  hybridisation or reticulation is expected to result in individuals with intermediate forms.



RESULTS
morphology
discriminant analysis of traditional morphological data collected from species description traits of  <dig> adult grasshoppers revealed strong support for the two entities sigaus childi and s. australis . all  <dig> adult s. childi were readily separated from the remaining sample containing s. australis.table  <dig> 
discriminant analysis



summary of classification with cross-validation

true group
predicted group
s. australis
s. childi

s. australis
0

s. childi
0
28
28
28
 <dig> 
discriminant analysis with cross-validation using the character states employed in traditional species diagnosis for adult grasshoppers of the sigaus australis complex in south island, new zealand. sigaus childi  individuals were correctly grouped together. the total squared difference between the two groups was  <dig> 



principal component analysis also revealed two distinct groups; s. childi vs. all other s. australis specimens in the analysis with these groups further subdivided into males and females . the first four components of the pca accounted for >95% of the variation. thus the morphometric data based on traditional taxonomic characters suggest there are just two morphological entities: s. childi and s. australis.figure  <dig> 
pca traditional species diagnostics. principle component analysis using morphological character states used in traditional species diagnostics of adult sigaus grasshoppers from south island new zealand. morphologically, sigaus childi is readily separated from s. australis, f = females ; m = males .



geometric analysis of the grasshopper pronotum gave a similar result to that of traditional morphology. pca analysis of the  <dig> landmark measurements showed two major groupings ; one composed of s. australis and the other composed of s. childi. all s. childi individuals grouped together due to their distinctive pronotum shape. variation within s. childi was likely due to their extremely cryptic shape formed by the ‘broken’ edge of the pronotum resulting in little uniformity within species. the s. childi mean was significantly different from s. australis over the entire range  and s. australis in the area of sympatry .figure  <dig> 
genetic and morphological structure within
sigaus
grasshoppers in south island new zealand.  variation in the shape of the pronotum using digital imagery of sigaus grasshopper pronotum shape :  pca for both species from all areas, with pronotum shape changes indicated along the pc <dig> axis. the two major groupings comprise s. childi separated from s. australis  pca for just individuals from the area of sympatry , with pronotum shape changes indicated along the pc <dig> axis. within the area of sympatry there was no clear evidence of morphological intermediates.  neighbour joining tree of mtdna haplotypes  and a distribution map showing the spatial distribution of haplogroups. the circled clades  are used in the network analysis .  genetic structure genotype data  for the sigaus grasshoppers:  results from the  <dig> rad-seq snps of the two species in sympatry, s. australis and s. childi k =  <dig>  microsatellite genotypes from s. australis populations at k = 2;  microsatellite genotypes from s. australis and s. childi individuals  at k = 2;  microsatellite genotypes from s. australis and s. childi individuals from the area of sympatry  at k =  <dig> 



the pca of pronotum shape from those grasshoppers sampled within the area of sympatry was scrutinised for evidence of hybrids . however, within the area of sympatry, not only did the means of s. australis and s. childi differ  but there was no overlap between the two forms. thus we found no evidence of morphological intermediates in adults or juveniles.

mitochondrial dna sequence
partial cytochrome oxidase subunit i was sequenced from  <dig> grasshoppers and combined with  <dig> previously published sequences  <cit>  . a total of  <dig> haplotypes were identified in the alignment  representing  <dig> individuals . six haplotype clusters were identified that were each geographically restricted within the range of sigaus australis . the mtdna clusters did not correspond to current taxonomic groups or morphological types. mtdna sequences from s. childi fell in several parts of the sigaus australis complex phylogeny . network analysis revealed the extent of sharing between s. australis and s. childi . as a result of interspecific sharing, some s. childi have haplotypes more similar to haplotypes in s. australis than other s. childi. no single mtdna clade can be confidently construed as being primarily associated with s. childi ancestry. the high genetic diversity detected at alexandra appears to be a result of the meeting of three distinct mtdna clades that otherwise have separate ranges.figure  <dig> 
minimum spanning networks. minimum spanning network of four of the six mtdna  haplogroups  within the sigaus australis grasshopper complex, show sharing  of identical haplotypes between s. childi  and s. australis . haplotype spot size is proportional to number of individuals with a particular haplotype and branch length estimates nucleotide differences.



no evidence for isolation by distance was detected among the mtdna diversity within the s. australis complex . although the mtdna diversity within clades also did not fit a model of isolation by distance there was a non-significant positive relationship  and the power of this test was limited by smaller within-clade sample sizes. there was no statistical support for population genetic differentiation between s. childi and s. australis from either the central group fct =  <dig>  , or from the area of sympatry fct =  <dig>  .

microsatellites
the three microsatellite loci surveyed each had between  <dig> and  <dig> alleles. no evidence of linkage disequilibrium was detected and hardy-weinberg expectations were met in the majority of population samples. a positive relationship between geographic distance and genetic differentiation  supported a model of isolation by distance for sigaus australis  . analysis of s. australis microsatellite data  using structure  <cit>  showed evidence of extensive gene flow among populations. the optimum Δk was k =  <dig> , which is consistent with a grouping of populations in central otago .

analysis of microsatellite data from 57 s. australis and 13 s. childi individuals resolved the same geographic subdivision of genetic variation: k =  <dig> . there was no support for k =  <dig>  which was unexpected given that the data encompassed two morphologically distinct species and spatial structure had already been indicated. it is important to note that although the microsatellite dataset covers a similar geographical range to that of the mtdna dataset there is little similarity in the genetic structure detected. to reduce the possible influence of uneven sample size of the two species we restricted the data to include sampling only from the area of sympatry . structure  <cit>  analysis found no support for genetic partitioning within these data , contrary to the expectation that the two morphologically defined species would represent discrete genetic units .

as with the mtdna data we sought evidence of genetic structure concordant with taxonomy and morphology using analysis of the correlation of genotypes between species by grouping the samples according to the morpho-species s. australis and s. childi and estimating fct. no significant genetic differentiation between the morpho-species was found within the central group: fct =  <dig>  , or the area of sympatry fct = − <dig>  , although these samples were not all taken from the same generation. this result was consistent with the inference from structure.

nuclear sequencing
we amplified and sequenced the its region  from  <dig> grasshoppers. some of the grasshoppers had unambiguous single its sequence but many had more than one its sequence, consistent with these grasshoppers being heterozygotes of mixed ancestry. of twenty-five grasshoppers  collected near the township of alexandra,  <dig>  had more than one sequence which differed by the presence of an indel approximately 100 bp from the its <dig> forward primer. sequences of its <dig> from these individuals were unambiguous except at single nucleotide polymorphic sites , confirming that these grasshoppers carried more than one its sequence per genome. there were  <dig> snps in the set of unambiguous sequences. however the presence of an indel near the start of its <dig> meant grasshoppers with more than one sequence had only  <dig> observable snps. only one of the  <dig> grasshoppers from outside the alexandra area  appeared to have more than one its sequence per genome that involved the large indel. however, many individuals  had an independent 8 bp insertion that occurred in all their copies of its. when more than one its sequence was detected in a grasshopper dna, we found that ambiguity could parsimoniously be explained by combinations of unambiguous  sequences that we separately identified in other grasshoppers. we detected only one copy of its in a genome-wide survey of sigaus australis, suggesting that there was only one family of its in these grasshoppers; sequence variation within this family occurs where individuals have recently exchanged genetic material.

rad-seq snps
the illumina sequencing provided  <dig> , <dig> forward reads of 100 bp for the  <dig> grasshoppers, of which  <dig> , <dig> were retained after quality checks in process_radtags.pl . these comprised between  <dig>  and  <dig>  reads per individual with a total of  <dig>  loci. three individuals  were removed due to low coverage. from these data sets we identified  <dig>  loci that occurred in > <dig> individuals and these were subjected to further selection based upon coverage per population. the lindis population was removed from subsequent analysis as several individuals failed to produce data of sufficient quality  and most of the putative-loci resolved were not represented in the other samples. of  <dig>  loci,  <dig> were retained as they occurred in ≥ 50% of the two populations . the relatively low proportion of loci that were represented across both population samples was due to insufficient representation of their very large genome despite our protocol involving quanitification and compensation for this. nevertheless we obtained ample data for our purpose.

the distribution of pairwise  fst values for each of the  <dig> putative-loci revealed the high frequency of low scores expected in the absence of significant structure . a test for deviations from expected frequencies of neutral loci in bayescan indicated that one marker may have been subject to diversifying selection, log > <dig> alpha  <dig>  . a blast search of the sequence containing this snp did not result in any matches to known sequences on genbank. mean population pairwise fst was low , with a confidence interval that effectively included zero , providing little evidence that these samples represent more than one population, with random mating. population differentiation estimated with structure suggested extensive sharing of genetic material among populations, with no species structure detected . this was confirmed by analysis in migrate-n, which indicated extensive gene flow between the species in the zone of sympatry .figure  <dig> 
snp loci.  frequency distribution of locus specific fst values for each of the  <dig> snp loci sampled between the grasshoppers sigaus childi and sigaus australis in sympatry.  bayescan plot of  <dig> snp loci with a single marker  >1) showing slight departure from neutrality; the vertical line is the 5% po threshold of false discovery.
migration rates



all loci
mean
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
nm
extensive gene flow between the grasshoppers sigaus australis
 <dig> and s. childi
 <dig> in sympatry was revealed using migrate-n with  <dig> rad-seq snp makers. theta θ is an estimate of population size, θ = 4neμ in the snps, where ne is population size and μ is mutation rate, population size was generally large as is expected for grasshoppers. mutation scaled migration rates  were converted into nm  via θ1m2->1 = 4 nm <dig>  the results show extensive gene flow in both directions.



discussion
we found morphological support for two distinct entities consistent with their existing taxonomic treatment as species: sigaus australis and sigaus childi. sigaus australis has a comparatively wide geographic range that can be subdivided into a number of phylogeographically distinct mtdna haplogroups. sigaus childi is nested within s. australis in terms of habitat, geographic range and genetic diversity; in stark contrast to its clear morphological distinction. despite occuring in sympatry, no phenotypic intermediates were detected. we found no evidence of genetic partitioning in putatively-neutral mtdna sequence, microsatellite, its sequence loci or snp data. none of the mtdna diversity detected within sigaus australis is concordant with current taxonomic subdivision. microsatellite allele frequencies within s. childi are indistinguishable from those within sympatric s. australis suggesting recent  gene flow. the snp data show no population structure and extensive gene flow between the two species in sympatry, with one marker showing some sign of diversifying selection. the presence of more than one its1-its <dig> sequence within the genomes of single grasshoppers is also consistent with recent gene flow near the township of alexandra. concerted evolution normally results in homogenisation of variation in the rrna cassette containing its  <cit> .

a possible explanation for this lack of genetic differentiation is that s. childi is a phenotypic variant of s. australis generated by different local environmental conditions. extreme plasticity is known to occur in other grasshoppers such as the locust  which has two distinct life history strategies that are partitioned in time  <cit> . indeed, s. childi is restricted to a limited lowland habitat in contrast with the subalpine environment experienced by most s. australis. the lowland conditions of central otago have been described as semiarid  <cit> , but despite altitudinal separated from subalpine areas, these habitats are climatically similar in terms of their extreme day/night and seasonal temperature cycles. more pertinent is the fact that s. australis and s. childi are sympatric in the lowland semiarid environment of central otago. they occur at the same places at the same times with, for example, specimens of both morphotypes used in our analysis collected as adults within metres of each other in little valley, alexandra on the same day. these circumstances are inconsistent with an interpretation of phenotypic differences being driven by environmental induced plasticity. although we cannot exclude this possibility, a novel type of micro-environmental control of grasshopper development would need to be invoked.

alternatively, the observed morphological divergence but lack of genetic structure is consistent with strong character specific selection in the presence of high levels of gene flow or incipient speciation . under both such circumstances neutral genetic markers, such as those examined, may not detect population structuring  <cit> . contemporary introgression can be difficult to distinguish from incomplete lineage sorting  <cit> , however the sharing of identical mtdna haplotypes and sharing of alleles across neutral nuclear loci in these two species suggests that very recent and/or ongoing reticulation is more likely. gene flow is expected to homogenise variation between species and it has traditionally been considered that speciation is unlikely to proceed in the presence of gene flow. many models of speciation have emphasized partitioning of populations by some extrinsic process  as a prerequisite  <cit> . however, if selection on particular loci is sufficiently intense, the effects of gene flow could be mitigated. models that accommodate permeability of putative species boundaries and acknowledge that selection can be locus-specific rather than genome wide are not new  <cit> , and empirical data that demonstrate this process are emerging  <cit> .

different evolutionary responses to selection could explain the observed morphological distinction. sigaus childi, is a small, highly cryptic species of grasshopper suggesting it has been or is under selection from visual predators. in contrast, sigaus australis, is a larger grasshopper, usually with more striking colour markings that are more easily observed against the substrate, suggesting a different mode of predator avoidance. although the two species appear to share the same neutral alleles; they remain morphologically distinct with a single genetic marker showing some evidence of diversifying selection between the two species. all individuals examined fell into one of two morphological groups and no specimens could be classed as morphologically intermediate within the area of sympatry even when juveniles were examined. the apparent lack of morphological intermediates  suggests that selection, even in today’s highly modified environment, is intense. it should be noted, however, that f <dig> phenotypes are often not intermediate between parentals and this might also explain our observations  <cit> . the conservation status of s. childi limited our sample sizes and precluded any observation of mating behaviour and juvenile colouration and survival where the species are sympatric. further examination might reveal morphological intermediates.

situations where speciation and selection are most likely to be observable in nature are those with high environmental heterogeneity, temporal instability and/or novel environments  <cit> . not surprisingly many examples of contemporary speciation in action therefore come from anthropogenic settings  <cit> , and this may be relevant to these sigaus grasshoppers. the south island of new zealand was settled by polynesian colonists starting about 800 years ago, and this was accompanied by episodes of scrub and forest fire  <cit> . expansion of grass and herbs following reduction of forest that may previously have formed a habitat barrier between the alpine and lowland grasshoppers may have facilitated population mixing. the area now shared by s. childi and s. australis was further modified by european introduction of plants and grazing animals, and mining practices in the last 150 years. these changes could have facilitated increased gene flow, but were analogous to the effects of pleistocene climate cycling. disentangling their respective influence on the grasshoppers is not simple  <cit> .

the taxonomic status of these species is problematic, as traditional methods cannot resolve the conflicting information from morphology and genetics resulting from the process of evolution. although s. childi is not genetically isolated from s. australis it is morphologically well differentiated, and in our relatively small snp dataset we were able to find one marker possibly under selection. models of speciation with gene-flow predict a continuum from partially isolated populations to reproductive isolation  <cit> . in the sigaus system divergence seems to be at an early stage; sigaus australis and sigaus childi do not appear to be losing morphological distinction, but our neutral genetic data does show extensive gene flow. the absence of any morphological hybrids suggests selection is intense, removing relatively conspicuous intermediates and holding these two species apart. this may provide them the opportunity to diverge at other loci.

CONCLUSIONS
the findings of our study endorse charles darwin’s original dynamic view of speciation  <cit> , but are contrary to those expected from a more restrictive but popular view of species as reproductively isolated units  <cit> . there is a grand irony that while for many, genetic methods are seen as tools for testing species status , genetic data are actually the key to revealing that speciation is not clear cut  <cit> . in our study we found that the only characters that reliably distinguished species were morphological, whilst  <dig> neutral genetic markers showed that distinct morphotypes do not correspond to genetically isolated units.

