BACKGROUND
in the genus yersinia there are three pathogenic species that can cause different diseases such as bubonic plague or gastrointestinal disorders. yersinia enterocolitica is an important human pathogen that can also provoke a variety of extraintestinal clinical syndromes, e. g. systemic arthritis. the main strategy used by yersinia to overcome the host immune system is the blockage of phagocytosis by cells of the innate immune system and the silencing of inflammatory reactions  <cit> . for this purpose yersinia translocates at least six so-called yersinia outer proteins  into the host cell via a type iii secretion system  <cit> . the yop effector proteins interfere with different eukaryotic cell signaling pathways and/or disrupt the cytoskeleton in a specialized way. for example, yoph is a phosphotyrosine phosphatase that inactivates components of focal adhesion complexes in mammalian cells  <cit>  and induces apoptosis of infected t cells  <cit> . two other yop effectors, yopj/p and yopm, affect components of signal transduction pathways in the cytosol or nucleus. yopj is a cysteine protease that inhibits mapk and nf-κb signaling pathways and promotes apoptosis in macrophages  <cit> . yopm consists mainly of leucine rich repeats, accumulates in the nucleus and has apparently no enzymatic activity  <cit> .

another yersinia effector protein attacking the mammalian cell cytoskeleton is yope. in cooperation with other yops yope disrupts the actin cytoskeleton  <cit> , blocks phagocytosis  <cit>  and inhibits inflammatory responses  <cit> . in vitro, yope is a gtpase activating protein  for rhoa, rac <dig> and cdc <dig> although the substrate specificity may differ inside the cell  <cit> . more recently yope has been found to inactivate also rhog  <cit> . infection studies on mice have shown that yope is a very important virulence factor for the pathogenesis of all pathogenic yersinia  <cit> . yope is targeted to a perinuclear compartment recently identified as the golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum, and this localization appears to be an important factor determining the substrate specificity for the gtpases  <cit> .

studies in which yops have been ectopically expressed in mammalian cells  <cit>  or, less frequently, yeast cells  <cit>  have proved useful to understand the roles of these effectors. more recently the social amoeba dictyostelium discoideum has been found helpful for the analysis of bacterial virulence factors as has been shown for legionella pneumophila, pseudomonas aeruginosa, mycobacterium spp. and vibrio cholerae  <cit> . the advantage of the social amoeba as a new host model organism for bacterial pathogenicity lies in its ability to phagocytose, which brings dictyostelium in close relationship to professional mammalian phagocytes  <cit> . the structural and regulatory components necessary for the rearrangement of the cytoskeleton during phagocytosis are highly conserved from simple eukaryotes to man  <cit> . as the cytoskeleton is one of the major targets of pathogens, dictyostelium appears as a suitable alternative for the analysis of cellular aspects of pathogenesis. dictyostelium is genetically tractable, its genome is sequenced and a well characterized collection of cytoskeleton and signaling mutants are available  <cit> , and host determinants of susceptibility and resistance to infections can easily be identified  <cit> . a considerable advantage of dictyostelium over mammalian cell cultures is the fact that it is easy to cultivate, as the cells grow in inexpensive media without the need for a co <dig> atmosphere.

we investigated whether dictyostelium is a suitable model for translocated yersinia effector proteins by expressing yope, yoph, yopj and yopm of y. pseudotuberculosis and measuring their effects on vegetative growth. yope, which appeared to be largely membrane-associated, proved to be highly toxic for dictyostelium. we therefore examined the influence of yope on phagocytosis, f-actin content and distribution, actin polymerization response after camp stimulation, and chemotaxis. the phenotype elicited by yope in dictyostelium can be explained, at least in part, by inactivation of one or more rho family gtpases. because yope appears to affect pathways conserved from amoeba to man, dictyostelium constitutes an appropriate model to study virulence factors that target structural and regulatory components of the actin cytoskeleton.

RESULTS
expression kinetics of yersinia yop effectors in dictyostelium with an inducible tet-off vector system
in order to study the effects of yersinia virulence factors on dictyostelium we expressed yope, yoph, yopj and yopm with an inducible vector system regulated by tetracycline  <cit> . the yope, yoph, yopj, and yopm genes of y. pseudotuberculosis were cloned as gfp-fusion constructs or single genes in the tetracycline responsive vector pmb <dig> and expression over time was analyzed on northern and western blots. fig. 1a shows that transcription of yope was strongly induced  <dig> hours after removal of tetracycline and remained at higher levels even after  <dig> hours. a very small amount of the yope mrna was also detectable in the presence of tetracycline, indicating that the promoter is not completely off under non-inducing conditions. very similar results were obtained for expression of yoph in this system . synthesis of all n-terminal tagged gfp-yop fusion proteins was observed after 6– <dig> hours and maximum protein expression was found between 12– <dig> hours . only gfp-yoph was partially degraded, whereas all other fusion proteins appeared stable. in contrast, no expression of any of the proteins was detectable in the presence of tetracycline.

yope inhibts growth of dictyostelium
first we tested whether growth of dictyostelium in liquid culture was affected by in vivo expression of yop effectors. growth measurements over several days showed that the growth of yope and gfp-yope expressing cell lines was drastically reduced in comparison with non-induced cell lines . at the beginning, growth of yope expressing cells was significantly reduced, with generation times of about  <dig> hours in comparison with  <dig> hours of the non-induced controls. after  <dig> days, the cells of the same culture started to regrow, albeit slower than the control cells with generation times of  <dig> and  <dig> hours. unlike yope, growth of dictyostelium cell lines expressing other yops or their gfp-fusion derivatives showed no noticeable difference between induced and non-induced cell lines . comparable results were obtained when the cells were plated on klebsiella lawns and the plaque numbers were counted after  <dig> days. only the plaque numbers of yope or gfp-yope expressing cell lines were reduced in comparison with the non-induced cell line .

we next investigated whether the growth defect of gfp-yope expressing cells is due to a defect in cell division. however, dapi staining of gfp-yope expressing cells showed no alteration of the distribution of nuclei numbers compared to the non-induced cells, irrespective of whether cells were grown in suspension or on substrate . in both conditions most of the cells of all cell lines were mononucleated , the rest remained mainly binucleated.

yope associates with intracellular membranes
because yope was the only effector eliciting alterations in dictyostelium, we analyzed the yope expressing strain in more detail. from yope it was known that it localizes at the perinuclear membrane of mammalian cells  <cit> . in dictyostelium gfp-yope appears to associate with intracellular membranes, particularly with the golgi apparatus and less conspicuously with the endoplasmic reticulum , as shown by immunofluorescence using the golgi marker comitin and the er marker protein disulfide isomerase . an association of yope with other membrane compartments is also possible, however colocalization with markers for other compartments, like vata , or vacuolin  was not conclusive in fixed cells . fractionation of the gfp-yope expressing cells in cytosol and membranes confirmed that yope is predominantly membrane-associated . gfp-yope appeared broadly distributed in a discontinuous sucrose gradient of a cell lysate, indicating that the protein associates to multiple membrane compartments .

inhibition of phagocytosis by yope expression
the inhibitory effect of yope on phagocytosis is well documented in mammalian cells  <cit> . because dictyostelium is a professional phagocyte, we investigated this parameter in detail. we first scored individual cells fixed after exposure to fluorescently labeled yeast particles and observed that cells that express gfp-yope have less frequently internalized yeast particles compared to cells of the same population that lack visible gfp-yope . when we calculated uptake rates along the whole range of expression levels we observed that in the gfp-yope strain the uptake rate roughly correlated inversely with the expression levels of the fusion protein, with strong expressors  displaying a significantly reduced uptake rate. gfp alone had no deleterious effect on the rate of particle uptake .

yope expression results in altered f-actin content and distribution
because yope is a gap for rho gtpases, which have been mainly implicated in regulation of actin remodeling, we investigated whether expression of yope resulted in changes in the amount and distribution of actin. when gfp-yope expressing cells were fixed and stained with an actin specific monoclonal antibody, we observed a weaker staining and a less conspicuous cortical accumulation of actin in cells that express gfp-yope compared to cells of the same population that lack visible gfp-yope . this is apparent in the intensity profiles across the cells of both populations . quantification of f-actin levels revealed that vegetative gfp-yope expressing cells contained significantly less f-actin  than the parental strain although the total amount of actin was unaltered .

yope expression causes deficient actin polymerization and impaired rac <dig> activation in response to camp
in dictyostelium stimulation with camp elicits fast and highly transient changes in the f-actin content and constitutes an excellent tool to monitor alterations in the signaling pathways that regulate actin polymerization. we therefore determined the time course of actin polymerization upon camp stimulation in gfp-yope expressing cells . in control cells stimulation with camp resulted in a rapid and transient  <dig> -fold increase in the amount of f-actin followed immediately by a second lower polymerization peak that lasted until approximately  <dig> seconds. in contrast, gfp-yope expressing cells showed a single, significantly lower f-actin peak  shortly after stimulation with camp.

we then studied whether the altered f-actin response had an effect on the motility of the amoeba. for this, aggregation competent cells were allowed to migrate toward a micropipette filled with  <dig>  mm camp and time-lapse image series were taken and used to generate migration paths and calculate cell motility parameters . we found that both in the absence or presence of camp, gfp-yope expressing cells and the control strain exhibited a similar behavior: cells became polarized, formed streams and migrated toward the tip of the micropipette .

time-lapse image series were captured and stored on a computer hard drive at  <dig> seconds intervals. the dias software was used to trace individual cells along image series and calculate motility parameters. objects whose speed was < <dig> μm/min were excluded from the analysis. persistence is an estimation of movement in the direction of the path. directionality is calculated as the net path length divided by the total path length, and gives  <dig>  for a straight path. directional change represents the average change of angle between frames in the direction of movement. values are mean ± standard deviation of approximately  <dig> cells from at least three independent experiments. control cells are cells of the parental mb <dig> strain. * p <  <dig>  relative to the same strain in buffer .

the actin polymerization response upon camp stimulation depends on the activation of rho gtpases  <cit> . to investigate whether the alterations elicited by yope expression result from impaired activation of rac we used a pull-down assay to quantitate activated rac <dig> upon camp stimulation. in control cells the chemoattractant elicited a rapid and transient increase of activated rac <dig>  this peak of activated rac <dig> was absent in gfp-yope expressing cells , suggesting that the defects observed in this strain are due, at least in part, to impaired rac <dig> activation.

yope partially blocks the effects of rach
the spectrum of alterations elicited by yope in dictyostelium suggest that several rho gtpases may be affected by this protein. our attempts to determine the specificity of yope against a panel of dictyostelium gst-fused rho gtpases in pulldown experiments were hampered by the rapid degradation of gfp-yope upon cell lysis. the subcellular localization of yope, in particular the association with several membrane compartments, suggested that rach might be one of the rho gtpases targeted by yope. if that is the case, expression of yope in a strain that overexpresses rach should revert, to some extent, the defects characteristic for rach overexpression i.e. impaired growth and reduced fluid phase uptake  <cit> . because strong overexpression of rach abolishes growth and pinocytosis, we generated a dictyostelium strain that moderately overexpressed gfp-rach. cells of this strain displayed a growth defect in nutrient medium  and a moderate pinocytosis defect . these defects were no longer apparent when gfp-rach and myc-tagged yope were co-expressed, suggesting that rach could also be a target of yope.

discussion
in this study a tetracycline controlled vector system was successfully used for de novo expression of yersinia virulence-associated yop effector proteins in dictyostelium. we found profound alterations in the amounts and localization of filamentous actin and in processes that depend on a functional actin cytoskeleton in cells expressing yope. in contrast, expression of yoph, yopj and yopm did not cause obvious alterations. in mammalian cells yoph silences early phagocytosis signals by dephosphorylation of components of focal adhesion complexes such as fak, p130cas and fyb. the protease yopj is known to inhibit mapk and nf-κb pathways and to promote apoptosis  <cit> . no homologues of the focal adhesion proteins have been identified in the dictyostelium genome, and a nf-κb pathway, as well as a caspase-mediated apoptosis pathway are also absent in this organism. this would explain the absence of effects of yoph and yopj in dictyostelium. similarly, although gfp-yopm accumulated in the nucleus of dictyostelium  as in yeast and mammalian cells  <cit> , its expression caused no measurable defects under standard growth conditions. it is possible that its targets are absent or are modified in a way that they cannot be recognized by the virulence factor in dictyostelium.

yope specifically targets the microfilament system of dictyostelium, and this results in decreased basal levels of polymerized actin and less accumulation of actin at the cell cortex. the effects of yope on the actin cytoskeleton have been widely studied in diverse mammalian cell types, like epithelial cells  <cit> , fibroblasts  <cit> , macrophages  <cit>  and dendritic cells  <cit> , where introduction of yope causes disruption of actin filaments. yope targets the actin cytoskeleton indirectly via modulation of small rho gtpases, and we show that this is also the case in dictyostelium. in the dictyostelium genome there are no homologues of rhoa and cdc <dig>  but more than  <dig> rac like genes have been identified  <cit> . here, we present indirect evidence showing that yope acts on rac <dig> and probably also on rach. however, not all rac-like proteins of dictyostelium seem to be affected by the gap activity of yope, as the first peak of the f-actin response upon camp stimulation was not completely abolished and chemotaxis remained largely unaffected. this f-actin response depends mainly on racb, racc and rac <dig>  <cit> . similarly, the growth defect of yope and gfp-yope expressing cells is not a result of inhibited cytokinesis, suggesting that race  <cit>  or other rac proteins primarily regulating this process are not substrates of yope.

in dictyostelium yope is predominantly membrane-associated but is not restricted to a particular compartment. it distributes rather broadly, with some enrichment at the golgi apparatus. in mammalian cells yope is targeted to a perinuclear membrane compartment, and residues 54– <dig> of yope were sufficient for its intracellular localization  <cit> . more recently that compartment has been identified as the golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum in agreement with our data in dictyostelium  <cit> . it has been discussed whether the intracellular localization of yope contributes to the substrate specificity of its gap activity for different rho gtpases, like rac <dig>  <cit>  and more recently rhog  <cit> . as yope overexpression reduces growth in nutrient medium and the ability of dictyostelium to phagocytose it seems rather likely that it affects small gtpases implicated in endocytosis. several racs have been found implicated in the regulation of fluid and particle uptake in dictyostelium, including rac <dig>  racb racc, racg and rach  <cit> . by virtue of its wide membrane localization yope is therefore in a position to inactivate diverse rac proteins in dictyostelium. notably, rach localizes at the golgi apparatus, er, and the nuclear envelope  <cit> , suggesting that yope might counteract its function. in agreement with this, we found that yope is able to block the effects of overexpressing rach. it is tempting to speculate that some of the toxic effects caused by yope in mammalian cells might be caused by inhibition of the activity of rho family gtpases other than those that have been investigated more extensively.

CONCLUSIONS
in mammalian cells the yersinia outer membrane protein yope has been shown to stimulate gtp hydrolysis of rhoa, cdc <dig> and rac <dig> resulting in disruption of the cytoskeleton and inhibition of phagocytosis. by ectopically expressing yope in dictyostelium, we show that similarly rac <dig> and possibly also rach are in vivo targets of this bacterial effector protein. this indicates that more gtpases might be affected by yope, and this might depend on the intracellular localization of the virulence factor. as processes like endocytosis and actin polymerization can be analyzed in great detail, dictyostelium offers a great potential for studies of phenomena at the interface of bacterial and eukaryotic interaction.

