BACKGROUND
lungfishes  diverged from the main vertebrate stock in the early devonian   <cit>  and together with coelancanths and the extinct osteolepimorphs comprise the sarcopterygii . while it is generally agreed that tetrapods evolved from sarcopterygian fish, phylogenetic relationships within the sarcopterygii have been the subject of considerable debate  <cit> . a recent consensus, based on the analysis of nuclear dna  <cit>  mitochondrial dna  <cit>  and ribosomal rna gene sequences  <cit> , is that lungfishes rather than coelacanths are the closest living relatives of the tetrapods.

worldwide, there are six extant species of lungfishes: four in africa, one in south america and one in australia. all african  and south american  lungfishes belong to the lepidosirenidae; the australian lungfish  is the only surviving species in the ceratodontidae  <cit> . compared with the other species of lungfishes, which have paired lungs, neoceratodus has a single lung and uses predominantly gill respiration, only breathing air during periods of increased activity or when water quality is poor  <cit> . based on this and other morphological, molecular and palaeontological evidence, neoceratodus is considered to be the more primitive lungfish species  <cit> .

although originally considered to be rather degenerate  <cit>  and of little behavioural importance  <cit> , the visual system of the lungfish represents something of a conundrum. the eyes of lungfishes are small relative to body size when compared with other vertebrates  <cit>  and have low spatial resolving power  <cit> . moreover, behavioural studies of both captive and wild populations of neoceratodus suggest that, except during the breeding season, they are predominantly crepuscular or nocturnal in habit  <cit> . nevertheless, the retina of neoceratodus has at least three morphologically distinct cone photoreceptor types, some of which contain brightly coloured oil droplets or spectral filters  <cit> , and expresses multiple visual pigment opsin genes  <cit> . coloured oil droplets/spectral filters  are characteristic of strongly diurnal  non-mammalian vertebrates, such as birds, turtles and lizards  <cit>  and are thought to improve colour vision by tuning the spectral sensitivity functions of the cones  <cit> ; densely pigmented spectral filters are generally absent from nocturnal or crepuscular species  <cit>  because they absorb light and reduce absolute sensitivity.

thus, the polychromatic visual system of the lungfish is at odds with its known behavioural characteristics and raises a number of interesting questions with regard to the neuroethology of the lungfish, the function and utility of coloured oil droplets and the evolution of the tetrapod visual system. to investigate these issues, we have measured some of the most important parameters of the visual ecology of neoceratodus forsteri: the spectral absorption characteristics of the visual pigments and spectral filters  of the retinal photoreceptors, the spectral transmittance of the ocular media, the spectral distribution of the ambient light in a typical lungfish habitat and the spectral reflectance of relevant objects in its environment. using these data, we have modelled the performance of the lungfish visual system with respect to its ability to distinguish both real and theoretical coloured objects.

RESULTS
photoreceptor visual pigments, spectral filters and spectral sensitivity
the retina of the australian lungfish is duplex, containing both rod and cone photoreceptors. microspectrophotometry showed that juvenile lungfish possess four types of single cone photoreceptor with visual pigments maximally sensitive to ultraviolet , short- , medium-  and long-wavelengths  and, therefore, have the potential for tetrachromatic colour vision. uvs cones are the only photoreceptor type not found in the retina of the adult lungfish. the retinae of both juveniles and adults also contain a single type of mws rod . we did not observe double cones in the lungfish retina, a finding that supports previous anatomical studies  <cit> . on the basis of spectral bandwidth and the fit of the absorbance spectra to visual pigment templates  <cit> , all visual pigments are considered to be porphyropsins , as is typical of other freshwater fish  <cit> .

ej <dig>  ±  <dig> 
ej <dig> 
ej <dig>  ±  <dig> 
ej <dig> 
ej <dig>  ±  <dig> 
values are ±  <dig> standard deviation. λmax, wavelength of maximum absorbance. the cut-off wavelength  and wavelength of half maximum measured absorptance  are supplied for comparison with other microspectrophotometric studies involving densely pigmented spectral filters. the λcut is the wavelength of the intercept at the value of maximum measured absorptance by the line tangent to the absorptance curve at the λmid, as defined by lipetz  <cit> . rods do not contain spectral filters and dimensions are only given for sub-cellular regions that contain spectral filters. c refers to the colourless oil droplets found in the ultraviolet-  and short-wavelength-sensitive  single cones. e and p refer to the diffuse yellow pigment located in the ellipsoid and paraboloid  regions, respectively, of the medium-wavelength-sensitive  single cones. r refers to the red oil droplets in the lws single cones. superscripts a and j refer to spectra measured in adult and juvenile lungfish, respectively.

the inner segments of uvs and sws cones contain one or more colourless oil droplets with minimal absorbance over the measured spectral range . mws cones possess a dense, granular, yellow pigmentation in both the ellipsoid and paraboloid regions of the inner segment that absorbs strongly below  <dig> nm. a single spherical, ruby red oil droplet occupies the entire width of the ellipsoid of the lws cones and absorbs all wavelengths below  <dig> nm. calculations of spectral sensitivity, taking into consideration the filtering effect of the coloured intracellular spectral filters  and the ocular media , reveal peak sensitivities for the four cones in juvenile lungfish at  <dig> nm,  <dig> nm,  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm . in adult lungfish, increased absorption of short wavelengths by the ellipsoidal  pigments in the mws cones and the red oil droplet in the lws cones shifts the peak sensitivities of these photoreceptors to  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm, respectively . to the best of our knowledge, the calculated peak sensitivity of the adult lungfish lws cone is the most long-wavelength-shifted of any vertebrate photoreceptor studied to date.

the spectral transmittance characteristics of the ocular media of the juvenile and adult lungfish differ considerably, particularly at short wavelengths . the ocular media of the juvenile transmit well across most of the measured spectrum, but absorb strongly below about  <dig> nm and block all wavelengths below  <dig> nm. the ocular media of the adult eye appear yellow to the human eye and transmittance decreases gradually as wavelength decreases; light below  <dig> nm is absorbed completely.

the effect of spectral filters in lungfish cone photoreceptors on colour discrimination ability
assuming that the four cone types in the juveniles and the three cones types in the adult subserve tetrachromatic and trichromatic colour vision systems, respectively, we modelled the effect of intracellular spectral filters on the colour vision abilities of the lungfish. to do this, we estimated the total number of theoretical surface colours that the visual systems of both adult and juvenile lungfish can discriminate, with and without spectral filters . all surface colours occupy an elementary volume  within a mathematical representation of observer colour space known as an 'object-colour solid'  <cit> . the reduction of overlap between adjacent spectral channels due to the coloured filters is beneficial for colour discrimination, because it increases the volume of object-colour solid  <cit>  . however, the cost of spectral filtering is an increase in signal noise due to the decreased quantum catch of the visual pigment.

*

g and g <dig> denote the shape factor  of the object colour solid with and without spectral filters in the cone photoreceptors, respectively; b is the gross benefit due to the change in shape of the colour solid and is defined as g/g0; d is the factor describing the cost of the spectral filters due to increased signal noise. the overall  benefit is given as r = b/d. discrimination thresholds are assumed to be limited by noise in receptor channels arising from fluctuations in the number of absorbed photons, i.e. shot noise under dim-light conditions. the benefit of spectral filters should be greater in brighter conditions; for details see methods and  <cit> . because at a depth of  <dig>  m uv light is not present in significant amounts , the uv receptor was not used in calculations for the juvenile lungfish at this depth. the overall benefit to colour discrimination of the spectral filters in dim light is a factor of about  <dig>  and is similar between juvenile and adults and between different habitat depths.

calculations made with real habitat irradiance spectra measured at the surface of the water and also at  <dig>  m depth  show that, even in dim light when fluctuations in the number of absorbed quanta  limit visual performance, the yellow ellipsoidal/paraboloidal pigments and red oil droplet filters should improve the ability of juvenile and adult lungfish to discriminate colours by a factor of about  <dig>  . although not modelled here, the improvements to colour vision should be more prominent in bright light, when noise in the photoreceptor channels is no longer determined by shot noise  <cit> .

reflectance spectra from objects of likely behavioural relevance to lungfish, such as macrophytes, rocks, sandy substrate and lungfish body colours , were plotted in the trichromatic colour space  of the adult and the tetrachromatic colour space  of the juvenile . for both juvenile and adult lungfish, receptor colour spaces were calculated with and without the spectral filtering effects of red oil droplets and yellow ellipsoid/paraboloid pigments. in each case, the colour loci of theoretical monochromatic stimuli, which define the extent of the colour space, were also plotted at  <dig> nm intervals across the spectrum. in both age groups, the presence of spectral filters in the cone photoreceptors displaces the monochromatic loci towards the vertices and expands the available colour space. this is analogous to the expansion of the volume of the object-colour solid shown in fig.  <dig>  most of the 'real' objects  have relatively low absolute reflectances and/or reflectances that vary relatively little across the spectrum. consequently, these data plot close to the achromatic point at the centre of the colour space . nevertheless, the loci of these real spectra are more widely dispersed  than they otherwise would be if the lungfish lacked intracellular spectral filters in the mws and lws single cones. although these results are largely qualitative  the modelling suggests that the presence of coloured filters has the potential to improve the colour discrimination ability of both juvenile and adult lungfish, as is thought to be the case for birds and turtles  <cit> .

discussion
our results show that the australian lungfish neoceratodus forsteri has the potential for a complex colour vision system based on either trichromacy  or tetrachromacy . they also show that, by reducing the overlap of the spectral sensitivities of adjacent spectral cone types, short-wavelength-absorbing spectral filters in certain cone types improve colour discrimination ability, despite the unavoidable reduction in total photon catch. previous studies have highlighted the theoretical advantages of retinal spectral filters for colour discrimination in terrestrial birds and semi-aquatic freshwater turtles  <cit> , but this is the first study to demonstrate the potential benefits to a purely aquatic animal, even in dim light where shot noise would limit visual performance. it is possible that the increase in signal noise due to absorption of light by the coloured filters is partially offset by the comparatively large diameter of the lungfish's photoreceptor inner and outer segments , which would capture more light than the narrower photoreceptors typically found in the retinas of, for example, teleost fish living in a similar habitat . similar to neoceratodus in this regard is the upstream migrant of the southern hemisphere lamprey, geotria australis, which also has relatively large photoreceptors compared to other aquatic vertebrates and has dense, granular yellow pigmentation in the ellipsoid region of certain cone types  <cit> .

it remains to be determined whether or not the red cone oil droplets in lungfish and tetrapods are derived from a similar structure in a common ancestor. to date, lungfish are the only truly aquatic animals to have red oil droplets. some ray finned  fish, such as the killifish fundulus heteroclitus  <cit> , four-eyed fish anableps anableps  <cit> , sturgeon acipenser shrenckii  <cit>  and the bowfin amia calva  <cit>  have oil droplet-like structures in their cone ellipsoid region that are either non-pigmented or, in the case of anableps, contain a pigment resembling reduced cytochrome c that absorbs strongly below  <dig> nm  <cit> . amongst the amphibia, which diverged from the main vertebrate stock some  <dig> million years after the dipnoi , only some frogs  have photoreceptor oil droplets. in the green frog, rana clamitans, the oil droplets are described as "colourless"  <cit> , although they are reported to have considerable absorption of wavelengths below about  <dig> nm . the strawberry poison frog, dendrobates pumilio, is a diurnal species and its oil droplets are truly colourless, having negligible absorption across the spectrum  <cit> . in fact, of the extant 'higher' vertebrate taxa, red oil droplets are only found in birds and turtles. although red oil droplets are retained in, and presumably useful to, both marine  <cit>  and freshwater turtles  <cit> , the fact that these groups are secondarily aquatic  <cit>  suggests that either they evolved independently in terrestrial reptiles, or were lost from the lineage that gave rise to the amphibians.

the red oil droplets of lungfish lws cone photoreceptors resemble closely those of some terrestrial vertebrates and, therefore, provide circumstantial support for the findings from molecular genetic studies that lungfishes are more closely related to the ancestors of the tetrapods than other extant sarcopterygian fish , which lack coloured oil droplets. however, the considerable plasticity of the vertebrate visual system requires that we must exercise caution in making such inferences, as other members of the sarcopterygii, such as the ancestors of the coelacanth, may have lost coloured oil droplets/spectral filters following their divergence from the tetrapod lineage.

there may be other reasons for having yellow and red spectral filters besides colour vision. these include the absorption of scattered short-wavelength light, which would improve visual contrast detection by the mws and lws single cones in the same way that uv-blocking 'haze' or yellow filters improve contrast in photography  <cit> . ultraviolet-absorbing filters may also protect the retina against damaging short-wavelength light  <cit> . however, the presence of a dedicated uvs cone type in the retina of the juvenile lungfish suggests that ultraviolet wavelengths are important in lungfish behavioural ecology, at least during specific lifecycle stages, and that they have strategies to cope with any uv-induced retinal damage.

uvs cones were not found in the retina of the adult lungfish and, although they may have been present in such low numbers that they were overlooked during the microspectrophotometric study, the greatly increased absorption of short wavelengths by the ocular media of adults, compared to those of juveniles , suggests that the amount of ultraviolet light reaching the adult retina is relatively very low and that ultraviolet sensitivity may be of little importance to the adults. hatchling lungfish are predominantly carnivorous, feeding on worms and small crustaceans  <cit> . as their dentition develops, from sharp cones to crushing molariform tooth plates, their diet changes to include snails and other molluscs, larger crustaceans and, eventually, considerable amounts of plant material, such as the macrophyte vallisneria spiralis  <cit> . uv sensitivity may be important to hatchling lungfish that prey on daphnia or other planktonic prey; zooplankton often absorb or scatter uv wavelengths differently to the surrounding water and this enhancement in visual contrast may be used by predators for initial detection of, or discrimination between, preferred prey species  <cit> . however, ultraviolet sensitivity does not appear to be essential for zooplanktivory, at least in certain habitats: seahorses and pipefish  are highly specialised visual zooplanktivores that apparently lack uv visual pigments and have ocular media that block wavelengths below  <dig> nm  <cit> . moreover, the juvenile lungfish examined in this study that were found to have uvs cones would probably no longer feed predominantly on planktonic prey.

the apparent loss of uvs cones from the adult lungfish retina reflects the situation observed in some teleost fishes that also show ontogenetic shifts in preferred habitat. for example, surface-feeding juvenile yellow perch  have small single cones containing a  <dig> nm λmax visual pigment that are lost entirely from the retinal mosaic as the fish matures and becomes demersal  <cit> . brown trout  and rainbow trout  also lose their uvs cones  during development  <cit>  and, like the lungfish, may revert from a potentially tetrachromatic colour vision system based on  <dig> cone visual pigments as juveniles to a trichromatic system as adults. ultraviolet light is absorbed rapidly with increasing depth, especially in fresh water . perhaps unsurprisingly, older trout lacking uvs cones tend to live in deeper water than uvs cone-bearing juveniles  <cit> , an ontogenetic trend reflected in the behaviour of neoceratodus  <cit>  that may explain the absence of uvs cones in the adult retina.

at the other end of the spectrum, the peak sensitivity of the lws cone  in adult neoceratodus is, to our knowledge, the most long-wavelength-shifted of any vertebrate photoreceptor studied to date. a shift in spectral sensitivity towards longer wavelengths may be adaptive for animals living in nutrient-laden 'green' freshwater habitats, which are relatively richer in red light compared to most marine environments  <cit> . habitat irradiance may, at least in part, explain the use of  <dig> -didehydroretinal as the visual pigment chromophore in many freshwater fish  <cit> , lampreys  <cit>  and also neoceratodus. this chromophore creates visual pigments with long-wavelength-shifted λmax compared to the same visual pigment  protein when conjugated with 11-cis retinal, and extends the extreme long wavelength limit of vertebrate visual pigment λmax  from about  <dig> to  <dig> nm  <cit> . moreover, taken together with the peak sensitivity of the mws cones , which is long-wavelength-shifted from the location of the visual pigment λmax by the yellow ellipsoidal/paraboloidal pigmentation, the enhanced long-wavelength sensitivity of neoceratodus suggests that the discrimination of objects differing in their reflectance at long wavelengths is very important. in this regard, it is interesting to note that many of the macrophytes, including those  that lungfish use for food, shelter or spawning  <cit> , have reflectance spectra that differ predominantly at wavelengths above  <dig> nm ; our modelling  shows how the red and yellow spectral filters potentially improve the ability of lungfish to discriminate between these macrophytes visually.

the spectral sensitivity of the rod photoreceptor of neoceratodus is also shifted considerably towards longer wavelengths, having a visual pigment with a λmax at  <dig> nm. this spectral shift is mostly the result of the use of  <dig> -didehydroretinal rather than 11-cis retinal as the chromophore and is similar to the situation observed in the  <dig> -didehydroretinal-based rod visual pigments of teleost fish such as the rudd scardinius erythrophthalmus   <cit>  and the european perch perca fluviatilis   <cit> . like neoceratodus, these fishes often inhabit green fresh water bodies that are relatively richer in long wavelengths of light.

the enhanced long-wavelength-sensitivity of the photopic visual system of neoceratodus may also play a role in the assessment of body colouration in conspecifics. neoceratodus are strongly countershaded , having an olive-green to dark brown colouration on the dorsal surface and a pale underside that varies from light orange to pinkish red in adults . juveniles are generally lighter in colour. the pink belly colour is apparently brighter in the breeding season, particularly in males  <cit> , and the assessment of body colouration may be involved in mate choice, although this has yet to be investigated behaviourally.

CONCLUSIONS
the lungfish has a complex retina with a single type of rod and either  <dig>  or  <dig>  cone photoreceptor types. some of the cones possess coloured intracellular filters that tune the spectral sensitivity functions of the photoreceptors, enhancing the ability to discriminate between objects on the basis of colour, including those of ecological significance. in this respect, the visual system of the lungfish is much more like that of a turtle or a bird than an amphibian or a fish. the close phylogenetic relationship of the lungfish to the ancestors of the tetrapods, suggests that many of the ocular characteristics seen in extant terrestrial vertebrates may have evolved in water prior to the transition onto land.

