BACKGROUND
in the post-genomic era, with the abundance of sequencing data, the functional interpretation of these sequences constitutes a key challenge. in particular, the identification of biologically relevant differences or shared patterns against a backdrop of functionally meaningless variation is of interest. in computational sequence analysis, this corresponds to detecting unusual patterns relative to a 'background' model  <cit> . the quality of this model directly affects analysis performance. tools for homology detection by sequence similarity, like fasta  <cit>  or blast  <cit> , or the identification of functional sites by pattern conservation in multiple sequence alignments  <cit>  traditionally assume positional independence of residues. more recent approaches, including hidden-markov-models   <cit> , allow a local dependency structure. in either case, proteins are considered as 'slightly edited random sequences'  <cit> . indeed, the complexity of protein sequences reaches 99% of the maximum possible complexity   <cit> . amino acids can apparently often be exchanged for alternatives with similar physicochemical properties  <cit> , with the exception of key residues, such as those contributing to an active centre  <cit> .

interestingly, the same models are typically used for different types of analysis and for all the sequences studied. increasingly, however, the power and advantages of adjusting background models so that they explicitly take the nature of the studied data sets and/or the question at hand into account are being recognized. one of the first such applications of background-hmms tailored for the detection of selected functional domains was introduced by pfam  <cit> . recent statistics assessing sequence similarity now can adjust the expected frequencies for each protein  <cit> . on the other hand, problem-specific background models have been developed, where e. g., advanced secondary-structure background models are used for scoring multiple alignments  <cit> .

while standard background models in general perform well in the analysis of globular protein domains, they are known to break down in regions of stronger compositional bias or low complexity, giving nonspecific false positives. in general, these regions are not conserved, and are therefore assumed to be tolerated as neutral and consequently filtered and excluded  <cit> . in contrast, accumulating evidence suggests functional roles of biased regions  <cit> , as is for example reflected in the involvement of single amino acid repeats  in a number of diseases  <cit> . furthermore, saars can also be an important factor in transcriptional regulation  <cit>  and protein interaction networks  <cit> , affect morphological changes  <cit> , and may facilitate adaptive processes  <cit> . as a result, the study of these particularly simple amino acid repeats is attracting increasing interest, despite the difficulty of detecting biased regions of potential biological relevance  <cit> .

with the unexpected abundance of single amino acid repeats, detection of those with potential biological function is particularly challenging. as the observed frequency of saars cannot be captured by standard models  <cit> , an exploration of more complex approaches becomes necessary. we here introduce and validate an empirical background model constructed specifically for this application, which adapts to the characteristics of the studied data set. our approach is then demonstrated on a practical use case. we thus demonstrate how alternative, appropriate background models can be constructed successfully also in challenging cases. these methods are directly applicable to more general related questions regarding biased or low-complexity regions, while similar empirical constructions will be helpful in other situations in which the established standard models break down.

RESULTS
in a comparison of the three kingdoms  <cit> , bacteria and archaea typically had much fewer single amino acid repeats  than eukaryotes. consequently our analysis focused on eukaryotes.

model choice
as the standard sequence model of positional independence is, in fact, a markov model of order zero, higher order markov models were obvious candidates for an attempt to capture more complex structures in protein sequences. prediction performance was assessed for saars of length five in a comprehensive set of non-fragmented eukaryotic proteins. statistically, under the standard model, repeats shorter than five are already expected by random chance for typical protein lengths  <cit> . incidentally, five residues is also the shortest repeat-length that has been implicated in diseases  <cit> . markov models of orders zero to three were considered, including the most complex markov model that is meaningful for this pattern length .

non-local models of repeats are apparently required. the parameters of such models have to be learned from multiple sequences, which will differ in amino acid composition and length. we know that both of these affect the expected number of repeats. protein sequences, however, do not uniformly occupy the corresponding high dimensional parameter space. moreover, while repeats in general are unexpectedly frequent, they still constitute relatively rare events, with many proteins not containing repeats at all. for investigations of general functional associations of repeats, one wants a model that has balanced positive and negative errors for realistic sets of proteins. to this end, models can directly be tuned for the correct prediction of repeats observed in the tested protein sets. optimizing average prediction performance for groups of proteins may moreover allow simpler models of satisfactory quality.

in order to allow comparative analyses of saar abundance, we introduce and validate a dedicated zero-inflated relevance vector machine model . first, the probability that a given protein has at least one repeat is assessed. then, the conditionally expected number of repeats is modelled by an rvm. figure  <dig> plots the ratio of observed and predicted counts  for repeats of lengths five to ten . the horizontal whiskers show the mean values for a selection of amino acids . the vertical whiskers represent the prediction uncertainty. comprehensive graphs for all amino acids are provided in suppl. fig. s <dig>  the typical deviations from the model prediction were less than 2% across all amino acids and saar lengths, with more than 90% of all observations being within 10% of the prediction . in contrast to the markov models, which vastly under-predicted the occurrence of longer repeats , the introduced zirvm captured the observed dependencies of the repeat frequencies on the repeat length. similarly, the observed dependencies on the other model parameters - the amino acid composition and the protein length - were traced well by the prediction . the complementary suppl. figs can be found in additional file  <dig>  despite its better performance, strikingly, the combined model is three orders of magnitude less complex than the best performing markov model. we were therefore also interested in examining an even simpler application specific approach, where a standard polynomial fit replaces the more powerful rvm, giving a zero-inflated polynomial model . figure  <dig> compares the three models  for each amino acid , showing the ratios of observed versus predicted counts of repeats of length five . model standard deviations are indicated by whiskers. both application-specific models outperformed the markov model, with the zirvm model being the overall winner by a clear margin. in particular, the value of one, representing perfect agreement of prediction and observation, lies within less than one standard deviation of the zirvm model prediction for all amino acids.

similarly when considering, for each amino acid, the mean prediction error  for all repeat lengths, both application-specific models did much better than the markov model . it is noteworthy that even the simple application-specific zipol model easily outperformed the more complex markov model. examining predictions for individual amino acids and repeat lengths, statistically significant deviations from the model were observed for 81% and 60% of the markov and zipol predictions, respectively. both models performed worse in the apparently harder prediction of frequent longer repeats. in contrast, no significant deviations were observed for the zirvm model at all . consequently, protein sets with typical repeat frequencies can be used as reference sets with the application-specific models. see additional file  <dig> for suppl. figs.

use case: saars in signal peptides
in order to demonstrate the benefits of a dedicated background model, we apply the introduced application specific model in an analysis of the over-representation of single amino acid repeats in signal peptides. the amino-end of the growing polypeptide chain of secreted and many membrane proteins contains a signal peptide, with a central part rich in hydrophobic amino acids. it has been observed that the location of many saars shows a positional bias towards the termini of polypeptides  <cit> . although a possible association of leucine repeats with signal peptides has been suggested earlier  <cit> , there has been no systematic study of repeat enrichment in signal peptides. in particular, a quantitative test is not possible without an appropriate background model to account for the effects of varying amino acid composition and sequence lengths on the observed repeat counts.

we now consider how application specific background models enable quantitative studies, and how the models can adapt to address specific questions, also adjusting to interim results as an analysis progresses. in the first investigation phase of this use case, a zirvm background model was trained on a comprehensive set of proteins without signal peptides and signal anchors. this allows an examination of

hypothesis  mature sequences of secreted and type i membrane proteins do not differ regarding the distribution of repeats from proteins with no signal sequence.

a model of the repeat distribution in proteins without a signal peptide would thus also capture the observed frequencies of repeats in the mature parts of proteins that had that transient peptide cleaved off. if this hypothesis holds - i. e., a common model can be learned from the comprehensive set of proteins with no signal sequences - then we can formulate the central question of the use case as follows:

hypothesis  signal peptides show an unusual enrichment of certain repeats .

the 'null hypothesis' expectation for the first test was that the ratio of observed and predicted repeat counts in the mature sequences would not be significantly different from the distribution of this ratio for proteins without signal peptides. although this was indeed the case for longer repeats of the three strongly hydrophobic amino acids f, i, and v, surprisingly, highly significant differences were observed otherwise, affecting more than 80% of all amino acid/repeat length combinations . as a result we can strongly reject hypothesis .

the observation that the mature parts of secreted and type i membrane proteins have a distinct repeat distribution is actually interesting in its own right. furthermore, this result changes the kind of related questions that we can ask and how we can test them, highlighting the need to first explicitly validate the  underlying assumptions of hypotheses. in particular, we now know that there is no common background distribution, making the original, simple formulation of the second hypothesis void. background models fitted on proteins without signal peptides are in general not appropriate for examining a potential enrichment of repeats in signal peptides relative to the mature parts of the protein.

such an analysis becomes possible after adapting the background model. by training on mature sequences of secreted and type i membrane proteins we can test the use case question as

hypothesis  signal peptides show an unusual enrichment of certain repeats sequences relative to the mature parts.

interestingly, a strong, significant over-representation was only found for leucine repeats, but not for any of the other hydrophobic amino acids abundant in signal peptides: figure  <dig> plots a measure of the enrichment of repeats in signal peptides. for this we compare the saar frequency in the whole protein  to the frequency in the mature parts, for repeat lengths from five to ten . in order to see results for different amino acids on a comparable scale, we consider ratios of observed saar counts versus counts predicted by the background model. if there is no enrichment, these ratios will be one, both for the whole protein and the mature parts. any deviation for the whole protein indicates indicates over- or under-representation of saars in the signal peptide. we therefore plot the difference between the ratios for whole and mature protein in terms of model standard deviations , and test for enrichment .

while the figure examines the hydrophobic residues most frequent in signal peptides , we here actually report results for all amino acids . it is noteworthy that in a complete survey of all eukaryotic proteins for saars of all amino acids there was no trend for enrichment of repeats in signal peptides other than the reported general significant overrepresentation of leucine repeats. this was unexpected, considering that the also hydrophobic alanine is similarly abundant in the core region of signal peptides and that the related hydrophobic amino acids isoleucine and valine are also frequent there. while it is understood that this hydrophobic region is required for interaction with the signal recognition particle, recent work has uncovered a surprising complexity of signal sequences  <cit>  and suggested additional functions such as in the modulation of protein biogenesis  <cit> . the unusual enrichment of leucine repeats in signal peptides of eukaryotes may thus serve another purpose, although their exact role yet remains to be investigated by experiments.

CONCLUSIONS
recent developments in sequence analysis have made it increasingly apparent that empirical adjustments or novel application-specific approaches are required to define a suitable baseline for each study. in particular, the identification of biologically relevant differences or shared patterns - against a backdrop of functionally meaningless variation - corresponds to identifying unusual observations relative to an appropriate 'background' model. the quality of the background model directly affects the performance of an analysis. for example, adjustments of statistics for protein amino acid composition have considerably improved existing sequence analysis tools for homology detection  <cit> . still, regions of stronger compositional bias are traditionally filtered because they lead to a localised breakdown of the classic background model, making them more difficult to study quantitatively  <cit> .

in this manuscript, we have explored the suitability of more complex sequence models and application-specific approaches for the investigation of biased regions, using specific sequence repeats as example. interestingly, even the most complex local sequence models could not predict the high frequency of the observed repeat regions. in contrast, application-specific zero-inflated models consistently performed better, despite their much lower dimensionality. in particular, we could show that a zero-inflated rvm model  captured the multi-variate dependencies well. it was also flexible enough for application in different scenarios, adapting to the reference data and question at hand.

these observations are, moreover, of wider relevance: biased regions are abundant in most organisms. although not conserved in general, certain biased regions are increasingly implicated in functional roles  <cit> . for traditional sequence similarity based methods of homology detection in the study of protein structure and function, however, biased regions have to be filtered. in contrast, an observed significant enrichment of biased regions in certain protein classes or selected sequence parts can aid functional comparisons at the feature level  <cit> . we have here chosen to study single amino acid repeats , which form a particularly simple class of biased regions. nevertheless, their high frequency and their potential functions are not fully understood  <cit> . saars have, however, anecdotally been identified as causing a number of diseases  <cit> , constituting an important factor in transcriptional regulation  <cit>  and protein interaction networks  <cit> , affecting morphological changes  <cit> , and contributing to the facilitation of adaptive processes  <cit> .

in our use case for the application specific model, we identified general differences in the repeat distribution between proteins without a signal peptide and the mature parts of proteins remaining after cleavage of these transient regions. considering this evidence of the heterogeneous nature of protein space, we next focused on proteins with signal peptides, adapting the background model accordingly. relative to the mature sequences, further investigation identified leucine repeats as highly enriched in eukaryotic signal peptides, in contrast to repeats of any other amino acid. this is remarkable because it sets leucine apart from the remaining hydrophobic residues frequently found in signal peptides. as we have shown in a study of smaller scope elsewhere, these repeats are actually better conserved than their surrounding host sequence, suggesting a yet unknown function  <cit> . we have shown here that this is unique to leucine and that no other amino acids exhibit a similar trend for significant enrichment in signal peptides.

to summarize, in challenging sequence analysis situations the construction and validation of appropriate background models can become necessary. using a specific case of studying biased regions as an example, we have shown the breakdown of both the standard sequence model of positional independence and higher-order local predictors. we have then illustrated the usefulness of dedicated, application-specific background models in the detection of biologically interesting signals. besides highlighting the importance of selecting a suitable background model, our use case also shows how the question examined actually defines what constitutes the 'background', and thus determines an appropriate reference training set.

