BACKGROUND
lipid metabolism has a key role to play in human longevity and healthy ageing. this has been emphasized by recent genetic studies examining the lipoprotein phenotype in individuals with exceptional longevity
 <cit> . it is highly probable such subjects with exceptional longevity and favourable lipoprotein profiles have avoided cvd. cvd is the primary cause of mortality in developed countries, with almost 40% of males and 30% of females in the united kingdom over the age of  <dig> years living with the condition
 <cit> . of the components of lipid metabolism, elevated ldl-c has consistently stood out as a risk factor for cvd
 <cit> . this cholesterol sub-fraction has been connected to atherosclerosis, a process regarded as the underlying pathogenesis for coronary heart disease  and stroke, the leading forms of cvd
 <cit> . studies have repeatedly demonstrated that regardless of physical activity levels and nutritional status, ldl-c has been shown to rise with age in both males and females in a diverse range of groups
 <cit> . understanding why ldl-c rises with age is complex; nevertheless rodent studies have indicated that increases in intestinal cholesterol absorption or possibly a decrease in the plasma clearance rate of ldl-c may have a mechanistic role to play
 <cit> . in this paper we examine the hypothesis that these two mechanisms are central to understanding why ldl-c increases with age. to test this hypothesis a number of steps were required. firstly, it was necessary to study both intestinal cholesterol absorption and ldl-c plasma clearance within an integrative framework which incorporated the other fundamental biological components of this complex system
 <cit> . this required incorporating the interactions of the individual elements of this system. secondly, it was important to investigate changes both to intestinal cholesterol absorption and ldl-c clearance over an extended period of time. clearly it would have been difficult to test our hypothesis within this framework using conventional in vivo or in vitro techniques as such approaches can be resource intensive, expensive, time consuming, unpractical and potentially unethical
 <cit> . furthermore, whole-body cholesterol metabolism is a complex system with a variety of non-linear interactions among its various components, including both positive and negative feedback and complex crosstalk between elements such as cholesterol synthesis and absorption
 <cit> .

utilizing a mechanistic mathematical model offered an alternative means of overcoming these difficulties and presented a cheap, ethical and practical way of investigating our hypothesis
 <cit> . however, as existing computational models of cholesterol metabolism were either of an intracellular nature, lipoprotein kinetic focused, or compartmental in nature, they failed to incorporate the ageing process or address the holistic nature of our question and were thus determined to be unsuitable
 <cit> . consequently we constructed a whole-body mathematical model of cholesterol metabolism which was used to explore changes to both the rate of intestinal cholesterol absorption and the hepatic rate of clearance of ldl-c from the plasma. the model showed that of these two mechanisms, changes to the rate of ldl-c removal from the plasma with age had the most significant effect on cholesterol metabolism. the model was constructed using a series of coupled ordinary differential equations . additionally, the model was coded in the systems biology markup language  format and submitted to the biomodels database to facilitate its updating and future exchange
 <cit> . to build the model a wide variety of data was used including previously published data from a range of fields such as molecular biology, nutrition, physiology and biochemistry.

whole-body cholesterol metabolism
cholesterol has a vital role to play in the human body. it is a key constituent of all cell membranes being involved in membrane fluidity; it is the precursor of steroid hormones which control a range of physiological functions, and bile salts, which are necessary for the intestinal absorption of cholesterol, fats and lipid soluble vitamins
 <cit> . the mechanisms underpinning cholesterol metabolism interact to preserve the balance of cholesterol in the body. this balance is maintained by coordinated interactions between cholesterol absorption, excretion and synthesis.

intake, absorption and excretion
cholesterol from both the diet and bile is taken up by the small intestine daily. cholesterol absorption is an inefficient process and can vary significantly from person to person. the percentage of cholesterol absorbed in healthy subjects  is in the range of 29-80%
 <cit> . the heterogeneity in cholesterol absorption has been attributed to its complexity, which involves a large number of enzymes and transport proteins in a multi-step process, however the way these mechanisms interact to regulate absorption efficiency remains unknown
 <cit> . it is clear that during digestion, bile acids are released from the liver and gall bladder into the intestine and as cholesterol is practically insoluble in aqueous environments, the bile acids serve to create lipid micelles
 <cit> . the micelles are then transported to the brush border of jejunal enterocytes, where the cholesterol is transferred into the enterocytes. at this point the story becomes nebulous, as the mechanism by which micellar cholesterol is absorbed through the brush border membranes independent of bile salt uptake remains a mystery. a long standing hypothesis suggests that cholesterol absorption occurs by passive diffusion down a concentration gradient
 <cit> . however, recent evidence supports the hypothesis that protein facilitated mechanisms are involved in cholesterol uptake by the enterocyte
 <cit> . when cholesterol is inside enterocytes, it has been suggested that it can be transported back to the intestinal lumen by a class of membrane proteins known as adenosine triphosphate binding cassette transporters. it has been proposed that these transporters may serve to efflux cholesterol from the enterocyte back into the intestinal lumen for excretion
 <cit> . although the precise mechanisms of cholesterol absorption are not yet fully understood, it is known that cholesterol not transported back to the intestinal lumen is esterified in the enterocyte by acyl-coa-cholesterol acyltransferase , assembled and packaged, together with triglycerides, into chylomicrons. chylomicrons are just one of many lipid carriers, known as lipoproteins, found in the circulation of mammals. according to their density, lipoproteins are categorised as chylomicrons, very low density lipoproteins , intermediate density lipoproteins , low density lipoproteins  and high density lipoproteins 
 <cit> . chylomicrons transport absorbed cholesterol via the lymph to the liver
 <cit> .

the liver and whole-body cholesterol metabolism
the liver is the central organ involved in cholesterol metabolism. it is actively involved in the uptake of cholesterol from lipoproteins, is an important site for de novo synthesis and is capable of storing cholesterol as esters after esterification by acat. furthermore, it is involved in the secretion of cholesterol-containing lipoproteins and is the sole organ capable of removing excess cholesterol from the body, either by secretion into bile or by conversion into bile acids
 <cit> . bile acids are synthesised from cholesterol in the liver and facilitate the solubilisation of cholesterol, a prerequisite for cholesterol absorption. bile acids are released postprandially and will not solubilise dietary lipids unless above a critical concentration. the concentration gradient is generated by two factors. firstly, bile acids are powerful acids that are impermeable to cell membranes. secondly, the majority of bile acids are reabsorbed from the small intestine and return to the liver via the portal vein, where they are taken up by hepatocytes and re-secreted into bile
 <cit> . the conservation of bile acids by active absorption from the small intestine results in a hepatic pool of bile acids that cycles several times with each meal. in humans, the bile acids circulate between six and  <dig> times per day, while around  <dig> mg of bile acids is lost daily through faecal excretion. a decreased return of bile acids to the liver is compensated for by increased de novo synthesis from cholesterol in order to maintain the bile salt pool
 <cit> . cholesterol not converted to bile acids or secreted into bile can be released from the liver into the circulation and transported to peripheral tissue. the liver secretes vldls and on entering the circulation vldls are hydrolysed by lipoprotein lipase 
 <cit> , leading to the formation of vldl remnants and idls. idls are either taken up by the liver or further hydrolysed to ldls, which are the main cholesterol carrier in the blood
 <cit> . ldl is taken up by the liver or by peripheral cells, either independently or via the ldl-receptor . expression is high in the liver but ldlrs are also expressed in peripheral tissue
 <cit> . hepatic ldlr  expression is transcriptionally regulated in response to intracellular cholesterol levels
 <cit> .

reverse cholesterol transport
the flux of cholesterol from peripheral tissue to the liver is known as reverse cholesterol transport . this pathway plays a vital role in maintaining cholesterol balance, with its action resulting in the movement of cholesterol from peripheral tissue to the liver
 <cit> . consequently rct presents the only route for excess cholesterol generated in peripheral tissue to be eliminated from the body. hdl plays a crucial part in rct
 <cit> . hdl synthesis takes place in the liver and intestine, commencing with the generation of nascent particles, small discoidal structures lacking cholesterol. hdl acquires free cholesterol from the cell membranes of several tissues, which is esterified by the action of lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase , resulting in cholesteryl ester-rich, mature hdl particles. the transport of high density lipoprotein cholesterol  to the liver may follow several routes. in the presence of the enzyme cholesteryl ester transport protein , a portion of cholesterol esters from the hdl particle can be redistributed to other lipoproteins  in exchange for triglyceride
 <cit> . this cholesterol is delivered back to the liver via the ldlr. an alternative route involves the mature hdl particle binding directly to scavenger receptors bi  on the liver
 <cit> .

cholesterol synthesis
almost all the tissues in the body are capable of synthesizing cholesterol from acetyl-co enzyme a  in a series of enzyme-mediated steps that are mainly restricted to the endoplasmic reticulum . the major rate-controlling enzyme in this pathway is 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coa  reductase. cholesterol homeostasis is regulated in two ways, firstly, when the content of unesterified cholesterol in cells increases, the expression of the ldlr protein decreases. furthermore, two key enzymes involved in cholesterol synthesis are repressed, thus, any subsequent increase in cellular cholesterol diminishes. when cholesterol levels fall, these pathways are reactivated
 <cit> .

dysregulation of cholesterol metabolism with age
the interaction between cholesterol absorption, synthesis, and excretion maintains whole- body cholesterol metabolism. a change to any of them can significantly influence the others. for example, numerous studies have shown that inhibition of cholesterol synthesis results in increased intestinal cholesterol absorption
 <cit> . the close interaction between absorption and synthesis in maintaining cholesterol balance is consolidated by studies, which have shown that interference with cholesterol absorption is associated with increased cholesterol synthesis
 <cit> . dysregulation of cholesterol metabolism can lead to high levels of ldl-c, while population studies have consistently demonstrated that ldl-c rises with age in both males and females
 <cit> . the reason for an increase in ldl-c in so many individuals across both genders remains unknown. furthermore, the intrinsic mechanisms that contribute to the rise in ldl-c with age remain incomplete; however a picture is beginning to emerge of potential candidates. a significant finding was the discovery that there is a gradual reduction in the rate of clearance of ldl-c from the circulation with age
 <cit> . adding further to this is the evidence that the number of hepatic ldlrs  diminish with age in certain species
 <cit> . additionally, it has been reported that there is an increase in intestinal cholesterol absorption efficiency with age in rats
 <cit> . however, to date no single intrinsic mechanism or combination of intrinsic mechanisms has conclusively been attributed to the rise in ldl-c with age
 <cit> . consequently our whole-body mathematical model investigated the hypothesis that age-related changes to the rate of intestinal cholesterol absorption and the rate of removal of ldl-c from the plasma could be responsible for the rise in ldl-c with age in humans.

RESULTS
results overview
using the values listed in tables one and two, a sensitivity analysis was conducted, followed by a number of simulations that examined the key questions associated with this research. the model was able to replicate many of the integral features of whole-body cholesterol balance and displays qualitative behaviour similar to that observed in experimental studies
 <cit> . for example, plasma ldl-c levels rose in response to increases in the intake of dietary cholesterol, however this was somewhat more sensitive than that predicted by a meta-analysis of the experimental literature, as for every 100mg/day increase in dietary cholesterol there was a ≈10mg/dl increase in ldl-c . changes to cholesterol absorption were also investigated and the model showed that for every 10% increment in the rate of cholesterol absorption, this resulted in a  <dig>  mg/dl increase in ldl-c. finally, the model was used to investigate the hypothesis that age related changes to cholesterol absorption/a decrease in the clearance of ldl-c from the circulation result in the rise of ldl-c with age. the model showed that of these two mechanisms, changes to the rate of removal of ldl-c from the circulation had the most significant impact on ldl-c levels with age.

predictive capability of the model
the model demonstrated that increasing cholesterol absorption from 50% to 80% and running a simulation from age  <dig> years to age  <dig> years resulted in an increase of plasma ldl-c by as much as  <dig> mg/dl . however, reducing the number of hepatic ldl receptors had a profound impact on the system, as an increase of  <dig> mg/dl in ldl-c was witnessed by age  <dig> years in response to a reduction in the number of these receptors by 50% . these rises were compared to that found in population studies  with changes to the rate of clearance of ldl-c clearly having the more significant impact on ldl-c levels.

sensitivity analysis-cholesterol absorption
the initial concentrations of the various species are summarised in table
 <dig>  where quantitative data was available, these values reflected the numbers found in the literature. a sensitivity analysis of the model was also conducted as the parameter values differ considerably in terms of their magnitude  and we wanted to establish how changes to these parameters would affect the concentrations of key species. cholesterol absorption  is an example of one of the key parameters that was altered. the initial value of this parameter was set so that 50% of cholesterol entering the small intestine would be absorbed. however, although cholesterol absorption is tightly regulated, it is a process that can vary significantly from one individual to the next
 <cit> . this range was used to test the sensitivity of the model to changes in k <dig>  the impact variations in cholesterol absorption has on ldl-c levels in the model is shown in .

sensitivity analysis-dietary cholesterol
a literature review using pubmed revealed the existence of almost  <dig> publications containing information relating to the response of plasma cholesterol to dietary cholesterol feeding. these investigations were performed in both young and old individuals. importantly among these publications, a meta-analysis by mcnamara  revealed that in response to increased levels of dietary cholesterol, plasma cholesterol plateaus at high levels of cholesterol intake
 <cit> . the meta-analysis by mcnamara also reported that the total plasma cholesterol response to dietary cholesterol is  <dig>  mg/dl per mg/day cholesterol increase . of this,  <dig>  mg/dl is in the ldl-c fraction. therefore, for each  <dig> mg/day increase in dietary cholesterol intake in the model, a  <dig>  mg/dl increase in ldl-c was expected. importantly, mcnamara reported that this increase is independent of other types of lipid in the diet and the baseline plasma cholesterol level. therefore, the model was exposed to a decrease of  <dig> mg/day and increases of up to  <dig> mg/day of dietary cholesterol . a ≈ <dig> mg/dl increase in ldl-c was observed for every 100mg increase in dietary cholesterol which was 8mg greater than the value predicted in the meta-analysis by mcnamara. we also conducted a sensitivity analysis of the parameter k <dig> to highlight the different steady-state levels of ldl-c for various intakes of dietary cholesterol . no increase in hdl-c was observed in response to changes in dietary cholesterol.

hypothesis testing- ageing and cholesterol absorption/ldl-c plasma removal
aging results in a rise in ldl-c in both sexes 
 <cit> . the reason for an increase in ldl-c in so many individuals across both genders remains unknown and the issue is the subject of debate as nutritional status and physical activity levels may differ within the population sample. the intrinsic mechanism that contribute to the rise in ldl-c with age remain incomplete; however a picture is beginning to emerge of potential candidates. as mentioned previously, rodent studies have shown that cholesterol absorption efficiency increases markedly with aging
 <cit> . it was also mentioned that there is a gradual reduction in the rate of clearance of ldl-c from the circulation with age in rodents. adding further to this is the evidence that the number of hepatic ldlrs diminish with age in certain species
 <cit> . when cholesterol absorption efficiency was increased in 10% increments between 50% and 80% by age  <dig> years,  <dig>   <dig> and 34mg/dl increases respectively, in ldl-c were observed . next, reducing the number of hepatic ldl receptors  was investigated. the number of hldlrs was reduced in the range 90– <dig> by age  <dig> years. this was done by gradually decreasing the rate of synthesis khrs. this had a significant effect on the model as ldl-c raised by  <dig> , <dig>  and 11mg/dl respectively . a parameter scan of khrs was also conducted .

discussion
we have constructed a whole-body mathematical model of cholesterol metabolism using data from a wide variety of sources and integrated this data within a series of coupled odes. previous computational models have focused on the intracellular regulation of cholesterol metabolism
 <cit>  or have focused on the metabolic fate of a particular lipoprotein or their receptor mediated endocytosis
 <cit> , while other mathematical models of lipid metabolism have centred on compartmental approaches, where by lipoproteins are represented by compartments
 <cit> . our model attempts to include all the major components of whole-body cholesterol balance and to our knowledge is the first model of its type built using such a framework. our model provides an insight into the complex interplay of cholesterol metabolism with the aging process. the model has many areas that require further development, however, when the model progresses in the future it would be worthwhile to investigate how changes to different combinations of parameters affect the overall behaviour of the system, as the model indicates that the dysregulation of cholesterol metabolism with age may involve perturbations to several components of this system. in tandem with investigating changes to combinations of parameters, the model may also be used to investigate combination therapy that may help to mitigate the effects aging has on cholesterol metabolism. for example, it would be straightforward to include hypothetical interventions that investigate different dietary regimes and also include the effects of variations in physical activity. for example, based on available literature the simple assumption could be made that consuming  <dig> g/day of fibre reduces cholesterol absorption by 15%
 <cit> . therefore, the parameters could be adjusted accordingly to reflect this. similarly the effect of consuming plant sterols, which are known to reduce cholesterol absorption
 <cit>  could easily be investigated, as consumption of  <dig>  to  <dig>  g/day of plant sterols has been shown to lower both total and ldl-c concentrations by 10% to 15%, respectively in a variety of different population groups
 <cit> . thus, this could be investigated by making alterations to the rate of cholesterol absorption in the model.

as mentioned previously the model is by no means the finished product and several assumptions were made during the building of the model, which were necessary as considerable uncertainty still surrounds cholesterol metabolism. for example, in the majority of cases the functional form that best describes a reaction remains unknown. we did however include a number of feed-back and feed-forward equations to describe the behaviour of cholesterol and bile salt synthesis as these are known to be subject to this type of action. at steady state, parameter values attempted to reflect a generic normolipididemic  <dig> year old male. although parameter values were chosen for the model from available published literature, the ranges of parameter values are quite broad; however, given the nature and diversity of the literature used this was unavoidable. on certain occasions, parameter values simply did not exist, therefore reasonable values were chosen based on the published literature. an area of the model that could be developed further in the future is the kinetic parameters of the various enzymes involved in a number of the reactions. presently, most of these enzymes have arbitrary values of  <dig> assigned to them to indicate that they have ‘normal’ enzymatic activity. in the future it would be worthwhile to use a resource such as brenda to amend these enzymes to include km and kcat values
 <cit> . despite these limitations it is hoped that in the future the model will prove to be a useful tool for testing nutritional and lifestyle interventions that would be difficult, challenging or perhaps unethical to conduct using convention means.

building the model has highlighted priorities for future experimental work, for example the need for experimentalists to work closely with computational modellers in order to generate appropriate quantitative data that is of benefit to systems biology models such as this one. such data could be used to expand and enhance our model leading to a better understanding of cholesterol metabolism, particularly the interrelationship between cholesterol synthesis and absorption. this improved model could be used to gain additional insights into the factors associated with cholesterol metabolism that help to confer increased longevity and healthy aging. appropriate dietary intervention strategies based on such models could be used to decrease the risk of cvd and prolong healthy aging. models could be tailored for an individual’s dietary, biochemical, genetic and social circumstances and as such models can be coded in sbml they would be relatively easy to extend, enhance and improve as more quantitative data becomes available. furthermore, it would be worthwhile combining our model with existing models, such as that of atherosclerosis progression
 <cit> . the portable nature of sbml also makes this a very realistic possibility, especially if models that are being merged have been designed using sbml
 <cit> . moreover, the model could be used to investigate crosstalk between cholesterol metabolism and fatty acid metabolism.

CONCLUSIONS
from the evidence presented in this paper it is clear that cholesterol metabolism is a complex multi-component system. changes to this multi-component system as a result of the ageing process can lead to high levels of plasma cholesterol particularly ldl-c. there is an indisputable link between elevated levels of ldl-c and the risk of developing atherosclerosis, with population studies indicating that ldl-c rises with age in both sexes in a large number of individuals
 <cit> . it is therefore unsurprising that recent genetic studies have associated lipid metabolism with longevity as it is apparent that maintaining cholesterol balance is vital to cardiovascular health
 <cit> .

we developed a whole-body computational model to investigate the hypothesis that an increase in the rate of cholesterol absorption and a reduction in the rate of removal of ldl-c from the plasma were integral to understanding the dysregulation of cholesterol metabolism with age. we were of the opinion that existing models of cholesterol metabolism were limited and could not offer a sufficiently deep understanding of how an entire biological system changes with age, thus in this work a conscious effort was made to represent the interactions throughout the body. results from the sensitivity analysis of the model indicated that the model requires further fine-tuning in the future before it could be used as a comprehensive tool for predicting changes to ldl-c in response to dietary cholesterol/fats and intrinsic aging. none the less we used the model to investigate aging and it demonstrated that changes to the rate of removal of ldl-c to half its original value at age  <dig> years resulted in a  <dig> mg/dl rise in this cholesterol sub fraction, which is intimately connected with cvd. the model contrasts with other models of cholesterol metabolism in that it is implemented in a whole-body fashion and provides a template for building a quantitative systems level understanding of cholesterol metabolism and its interaction with aging. in the future the model could contribute to a better understanding of cholesterol metabolism so that the wider population could benefit in the same way as those individuals with exceptional longevity have from an altered lipid profile.

