BACKGROUND
cancer is a complex family of multigenic diseases, where it is hard to single out a specific mechanism common to all its variants. furthermore, a recent study  <cit>  suggested that random replication errors play a major role in the emergence of cancer, with a correlation found between the number of cell divisions and the lifetime risk of cancer in different tissue types. sixty-five percent of variation in the risk of cancer was shown to be explained by the number of cell divisions alone  <cit> , with the heritable component explaining only up to 10 % of variation  <cit> . there is also extensive evidence regarding the role of acquired de novo mutations in the autism spectrum disorder . the involvement of long genes in autism was also noted  <cit> , where the increased length was demonstrated to both multiply the probability of acquired mutations  <cit>  and result in a decreased expression level of the long genes caused by impaired topoisomerases discovered to be crucial for the expression of the genes longer than 200 k nucleotides   <cit> .

the study of tomasetti and vogelstein  <cit>  demonstrated the differential effect of random replication errors caused by a varying frequency of cell divisions in different tissues. in this work, we explore the possibility that even within a fixed number of cell divisions, there can still be differences in random mutation/genetic error burden of different genes and pathways, depending on the gene length and splicing complexity. we present analyses of all the genes in the human genome with a particular focus on the ones involved in cancer-linked pathways. we show that the gene length and splicing complexity are partially decoupled in defining their respective increase in cancer-linked pathways. our work is a systematic study of the prior evidence of long genes involved in autism  and cancer  <cit> , providing important evidence for the relevance of gene length in other multigenic diseases . in addition, we present the number of splice variants as another gene factor with significant overall increase in the pathways linked to multigenic diseases.

RESULTS
gene length and number of splice variants are increased in cancer pathways
we explored the distribution of gene metrics in different pathways defined in the kyoto encyclopaedia of genes and genomes   <cit> , and found a marked increase in both the transcript length  and the number of transcripts , the latter reflecting the splice variants, for the genes in cancer pathways. in this context, the number of splice variants were analysed taking into account their partial dependence on gene length  <cit> , as well as a number of studies where particular cancer variants were associated with impaired splicing .fig.  <dig> enrichment of long transcripts and genes with greater number of transcript variants in cancer pathways. a distribution of the pathway-averaged ltr transcript length in cancer  and other  pathways. b distribution of the pathway-averaged ntr number of transcripts in cancer  and other  pathways. in the boxplots , each box is constructed via the median, first and third quartiles of the distribution. the whiskers show the range of values that are within the  <dig>  times iqr . individual points indicate the outliers. c-h distributions of gene length and exon/intron composition descriptors in cancer  and other  pathways. the plots are for the ltr transcript  length , lex summed exon length , lint summed intron length , average lint length of a single intron , lint/lex summed intron to summed exon length ratio  and average lex length of a single exon  for all the genes in other and cancer pathways. the p-values quantifying the significance of a positive shift in the distributions for the cancer pathways, as compared to others, are shown on top of each plot. data from each of the c-h plots come from  <dig> cancer-linked and  <dig> other genes



the y-axes in fig. 1a, b depict the values of the transcript length  and number of transcript variants  respectively, averaged for all the genes in each pathway across the cancer  and other  sets. for each gene, only the length of the longest transcript was considered. genes in cancer pathways have on average a  <dig> -nt-long transcript and  <dig>  splice variants, as compared to  <dig>  nt and  <dig>  in other pathways . the p-values demonstrating the significance of the positive shift in cancer pathways are shown in fig. 1a, b. we used the mann–whitney nonparametric test, with the alternative hypothesis of the distribution average in cancer pathways being shifted towards greater values relative to the average of its comparison counterpart. the additional tests, comparing the numbers from randomly sampled equal numbers of pathways from cancer and other sets, confirmed the significance of the overall increase in ltr and ntr for the genes in cancer pathways .

in order to explore the factors that are behind the gene length increase in cancer pathways, we assessed the distributions of the ltr transcript  length, lex summed exon  length, lint summed intron length, average lint length , lint/lex total intron to exon length ratio, and average lex length  for all the genes in cancer and other pathways. where multiple transcripts were present for a gene, data from its longest transcript was taken. the comparison of the distributions is shown in fig. 1c-h, from where we can infer significant cancer-linked shifts in all the metrics for different gene elements  except the average exon length , which is rather similar in the genes involved in cancer vs. other pathways.

gene length and number of splice variants are increased in pathways of other multigenic diseases
the distributions of ltr transcript length  involved in each kegg pathway are shown in fig. 2a. the cancer pathways are coloured in red. some of the pathways that are markedly rich in long genes are associated with neuronal processes , which could potentially be a contributing factor for the observed involvement of long genes in the etiology of autism spectrum disorder  <cit>  . the link between  <dig> of the noted neurological kegg pathways and asd is further revealed via the enrichment analysis of the published  <dig> genes significantly associated with asd , where we showed an enrichment of those genes in the long-term potentiation, long-term depression and ca2+ signalling pathways. we used the david gene annotation server  <cit>  for the enrichment analysis, with homo sapiens genes set as the frequency background for normalisation.fig.  <dig> genes in the pathways linked to multigenic diseases are, on average, longer and have more splice variants. a distribution of ltr in each of the  <dig> kegg pathways, in the ascending order of the ltr median values. the horizontal dashed line in  denotes the 200 k-nt threshold for a transcript length, known to be relevant in defining the topoisomerase-dependent transcription of the genes that are longer  <cit> . ltr values are calculated for each unique gene, taking the length of the longest transcript, prior to splicing. b the fraction of genes  with number of transcripts greater than  <dig> in each of the  <dig> kegg pathways. the names of the kegg pathways, ordered in the way corresponding to the indices in x-axes, can be found in notes s <dig> and s <dig> in additional file  <dig> for the plots  and . the cancer-linked pathways are highlighted in red, as opposed to blue for the rest. some pathways from the rest, still related to cancer or other multigenic diseases are indicated with arrows



we next investigated all kegg pathways with regard to the fraction of genes that have greater than  <dig> splice variants . the results are shown in fig. 2b, where the pathways are arranged in ascending order of ntr >  <dig> gene fraction. the cancer pathways are indeed accumulated in the rightmost side of the plot , containing more genes with multiple splice variants. furthermore, among the other pathways rich in genes with multiple splice variants are p <dig> signaling and apoptosis , as well as the same neuronal and type ii diabetes mellitus pathways also enriched with long genes .

cancer pathway enrichments with long genes and genes with multiple splice variants are partially decoupled
above, we showed the increase of the overall gene length and the number of splice variants in cancer pathways. the same gradual shift can be noted while investigating the proportion of cancer-pathway-associated genes from all the genes found in different binned ltr and ntr intervals . however, since the gene length is also known to be positively linked to the number of splice variants  <cit> , it is difficult to separate both effects from the data presented so far. we have, however, investigated the distributions of the genes involved in cancer and other pathways while stratifying our data and looking at either the ltrvariation in different fixed ntr categories  or the ntr variation in relatively narrow fixed ltr intervals .fig.  <dig> gene length and number of splice variants are also decoupled in their linkage to the gene involvement in cancer pathways. a presents the ltr  of the genes via a 3000-nt window binning and shows the increase of the fraction of genes appearing in cancer pathways as ltr increases. b the zoomed region below  <dig> -mln-nt length for ltr. c shows the increase of the fraction of genes appearing in cancer pathways as the ntr number of transcripts increase. the number of genes that have a given ntr is shown on top of each bar. d the zoomed region below  <dig> for ntr, where more than  <dig> unique genes form each bar. e, f density plots showing the density kernel estimates for the genes in other  and cancer  pathways respectively, calculated from the number of genes spread across varying ltr  and ntr . please note, that the colour only denotes the density of the points, and, there is actually a positive correlation between ltr and ntr when taking the average values of ltr  <cit>  for each ntr value. the red asterisks show the ltr intervals where the positive ntr shift in cancer vs. other pathways is significant. the blue asterisks show the ntr values where the positive ltr shift in cancer vs. other pathways is significant. for further details, see figures s <dig> and s <dig> in additional file 1




in the two-dimensional representation of the gene count frequency with respect to ltr and ntr , the stratified examination of the data is equivalent to comparing the outlined horizontal and vertical bands along both axes in fig. 3e, f. such comparison presented a significant positive shift, separately for both ltr and ntr variation, among the genes in the cancer vs. other pathways. the shift in gene length was significant when considering the genes with only  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  splice variants . likewise, a significant positive shift in number of splice variants was noted for the genes stratified in 0 k-25 k , 25 k-50 k  and 50 k-75 k  ranges of transcript length . the low significance of the other ranges for ltr and ntr can be attributed to fewer data coming from cancer pathways within those ranges.

pathways enriched in top genes by transcript length, summed exon length and number of splice variants
we examined the top genes that have the longest summed exon  or the longest transcript  in our dataset . for each category , unique genes were selected out of all transcripts with the lex or ltr  being longer than the corresponding median value, by twice the standard deviation . the pathway enrichment was then estimated via the david gene annotation server  <cit> , with homo sapiens genes set as the frequency background for normalisation. the resulting list of significantly enriched pathways is presented in fig.  <dig>  tables s <dig> and s <dig> in additional file  <dig> fig.  <dig> the kegg pathway enrichment analysis for the top genes by lex summed exon and ltr transcript lengths. accounted for are the genes that have the lex or ltr metrics  greater than the median by twice the standard deviation. the significantly enriched kegg pathways are revealed via david gene functional annotation server, taking homo sapiens as a correction background. the outcomes are presented as a heatmap, grouped by the presence/absence in both lex and ltr categories, with individual rows ranked by the lowest significance score in {lex, ltr} pair for each row. the p
ease significance scores for the enrichment are shown in a -log
 <dig> scale , with the original distribution histogram and colour coding shown at the lower-right corner. the notations in the brackets mark the pathways linked to cancer , neurological , cardiological  and other  multigenic pathological conditions. the full list of genes that appear in each enriched pathway can be found in additional file 3




as can be seen from the results, many of the revealed pathways are again linked to neuronal processes . the other two classes of kegg pathways are the ones linked to cancer/cell differentiation , which are especially enriched in the genes with longest lex, and, pathways associated with various cardiomyopathies , where there is a growing evidence  on the role of various de novo mutations in the family of diseases. furthermore, type ii diabetes mellitus, another multigenic disease  <cit>  the linked kegg pathway of which is enriched with long genes , is revealed again. interestingly, the neurological pathways appear to be more enriched with the top genes by longest ltr transcripts, as compared to lex summed exon. this may indicate the presence of general selection in neurological pathways favouring longer transcripts , potentially, to accommodate additional control mechanisms for gene regulation at the dna level, achievable due to the noted specificities  in the transcription of the long genes  <cit> .

the kegg pathway enrichment analysis for the genes that have more than  <dig> transcript variants is summarised in table  <dig>  showing many cancer-linked pathways along with the ca2+ signaling pathway. the latter may have roles in both asd  and cardiomyopathies.table  <dig> the kegg pathway enrichment analysis for the genes with number of transcripts greater than 3

p
the significantly enriched kegg pathways are revealed via david gene functional annotation server, taking homo sapiens as a correction background. the p
ease significance scores for the enrichment are shown along with the number of hit genes. the notations in the brackets mark the pathways linked to cancer , neurological  and cardiological  conditions. the full list of genes that appear in each enriched pathway can be found in additional file 3




since the genes in kegg pathways are manually curated to have high consistency and close link to the underlying biochemical network, we have used the kegg pathway enrichment outcomes throughout the discussion. however, we also performed similar analyses using gene ontology  terms  <cit> , revealing many terms that are related to the found kegg pathways . the full set of results from both kegg and go enrichment analyses can be found in additional file  <dig> 

number of somatic mutations found in different genes is correlated with gene length
one of the ways a long gene can have more pronounced involvement in multigenic diseases could be through the increased propensity for mutation. the longer the gene, the higher the probability that within a certain number of replication events  the gene may acquire a mutation, as also reflected in the accumulated and fixated germline mutations  <cit> . to directly demonstrate this non-specific link between the number of somatic mutations found in different genes and the gene length, we explored the genome-wide set of cancer-linked somatic mutations, deposited in the cosmic database  <cit> . please note, it is hard to differentiate which mutations are causing cancer and which are the consequences of cancer in such datasets, hence this analysis is only for demonstrating the link between the number of mutations and gene length, rather than for drawing quantitative conclusions. it complements the above kegg pathway exploration, where the cancer pathways are manually curated to contain whole gene networks with members consistently linked to the pathogeneses of different types of cancer. the outcome for the number of somatic mutations is presented in fig. 5a while jointly considering both coding and non-coding mutations against the transcript  length.fig.  <dig> the relations among the overall number of recorded cancer-linked somatic mutations, transcript length and number of splice variants. a linear correlation between the overall number of cancer-linked mutations in different genes and their transcript length. the cancer-linked somatic mutations  are counted from both the coding and non-coding regions, for the longest transcript of each gene, and plotted against the ltr length of that transcript. the correlation coefficient  and the linear model fit  are shown. b relation between the overall number of cancer-linked mutations and the number of ntr transcript variants in different genes. the individual boxplots  describe the distribution of the overall number of mutations found in the longest transcript of each gene, selected from the genes with fixed ntr number of available transcripts



a strong correlation is noted , with, on average,  <dig>  mutations per 1000-nt-long transcript  recorded in the cosmic database. similarly, the number of mutations that occur only within coding sequences  correlate with the cds lengths , as presented in figure s <dig> in additional file  <dig>  for the latter dependence, there are, on average,  <dig>  mutations recorded per 1000-nt-long cds, which might be the reflection of both a greater rate of spontaneous mutations in exons  <cit>  and the more comprehensive exploration and greater amount of recorded data for exons in the cosmic database owing to the application of predominantly exome-targeted sequencing techniques. to this end, such comparisons between mutation numbers inferred while comparing different datasets or different parts of genes from the same dataset are not conclusive and should be carried out with caution. figures s7a, b in additional file  <dig> present the versions of fig. 5a and figure s <dig> zoomed on the densely populated regions. we also show the relation between the numbers of somatic mutations and of splice variants , which reflects a certain degree of proportional dependence .

CONCLUSIONS
our results highlight that the pathways linked to cancer and other multigenic diseases are enriched with long genes and genes that have increased number of splice variants . the observation of the latter enrichment generalises and reinforces the prior proposals of the splicing process as one of the cancer-causing factors, if impaired . taking into account the presence of a directly proportional dependence between the gene length and the number of splice variants  <cit> , we have taken additional steps to demonstrate  that the significance of both factors in defining the gene presence in cancer pathways are in part decoupled from each other.

we showed that the overall increase in gene length in cancer pathways is accompanied by the increase in both summed exon  and intron  lengths. the lint/lexratio is elevated as well , indicating a non-proportional increase in intron over exon sizes, most probably associated with the retrotransposonal infiltration of genes  <cit> , where the transposable elements are less fatal  while inserted within introns.

we presented a systematic survey of all the kegg pathways for long genes and genes with multiple splice variants . in addition to cancer pathways, the results showed a significant presence of long genes and genes with multiple splice variants in pathways linked to neuronal processes that may have a role in asd, cardiomyopathies, and type ii diabetes - all complex multigenic diseases with myriads of evidence on their link with the acquisition of different de novo mutations .

we analysed the genome-wide data on the reported  <dig>  million cancer-linked somatic mutations, demonstrating a logically expected link between the gene length and the number of recorded somatic mutations . this points out that long genes might simply have higher probabilities to incur a mutation. there are, however, many other ways for the long genes to become associated with multigenic diseases. long genes may provide more options for interactions with other gene products , hence increasing the number of factors that can potentially affect their expression and integrity  <cit> . it has recently been discovered that topoisomerases play a role in the expression of genes longer than 200 k nt  <cit> , perhaps owing to the necessity to remove supercoiled structures in long dna segments to be transcribed. this introduces yet another mechanism by which the homeostasis of long genes can become vulnerable due to possible impairments in topoisomerases. we show that, although this mechanism may be relevant for the neurological pathways, cardiomyopathies and type ii diabetes , all of which contain genes longer than 200 k, the mechanism is probably not definitive for cancer pathways, as most of the genes there are below the 200 k-nt threshold for the length .

overall, the outcomes of this study extend our understanding of how simple characteristics of genes can associate with cancer and a wider range of multigenic diseases. we anticipate the combined usage of the gene length and the number of splice variants to become an important component in the algorithms for identifying novel genes with significant risks of association with multigenic diseases, where we can also take advantage of the availability of intrinsic, context-dependent probabilities for nucleotide substitutions at all the base positions in each gene  <cit> .

