BACKGROUND
notwithstanding other so called 'model organisms', of which whole genome sequences have been obtained, the ecology of the model organism daphnia sp. is outstandingly well known. therefore it is a challenge to investigate gene/environment interactions for major ecological interactions of this cladoceran. in most freshwater lakes and ponds, daphnia sp. is the major consumer of algae and cyanobacteria and is also the most important prey for predatory invertebrates and planktivorous fishes. in line with its intermediate position in the food chain, daphnia sp. populations can be controlled by predation  or resources . however, the impact of top-down and bottom-up factors on daphnia sp. population dynamics shows a pronounced seasonality  <cit> . predation pressure is low in spring, but peaks with the appearance of young-of-the-year fishes and fourth-instar larvae of chaoborus water midges in early summer and remains moderate until fall  <cit> . bottom-up factors become a major constraint on daphnia sp. population growth, particularly in eutrophic lakes in the summer when mass developments of toxic cyanobacteria lead to a suppression of daphnia sp. biomass  <cit> . the low predictability of intensity and seasonality of both predation pressure and dominance of toxic cyanobacteria should lead to the evolution of plastic instead of fixed adaptations  <cit> . indeed, adaptive phenotypic plasticity in daphnia magna to both toxic cyanobacteria and predator-borne chemical cues has been reported  <cit> . daphnia magna has been shown to reduce size at first reproduction  in response to kairomones from fish whereas chemical cues from larvae of chaoborus flavicans led to increased sfr; both responses have been proven to be adaptive as fishes and chaoborus differ in size-selectivity of their prey  <cit> . a different kind of phenotypic plasticity constitutes the enhanced tolerance of d. magna against cyanobacterial toxins upon exposure to a toxin producing cyanobacterium. the recent release of the daphnia pulex genome sequence  creates the opportunity to precisely identify candidate genes that differ in their expression in response to predator-borne chemical cues  and to a toxic cyanobacterium as a first step to decipher the underlying molecular mechanisms of adaptive phenotypic plasticity in d. magna.

toxin production is a characteristic feature of several strains of the bloom-forming freshwater cyanobacterium microcystis aeruginosa. a large variety of cyclic heptapeptides, termed microcystins , have been identified in m. aeruginosa. wild type m. aeruginosa pcc <dig> produces relatively large amounts of two microcystin variants ; experiments with a microcystin-free mutant of this strain  <cit>  have led to the conclusion that microcystins contribute to the daphnid poisoning by m. aeruginosa  <cit> .

the microcystins of m. aeruginosa pcc <dig> are known to inhibit protein phosphatases  <dig> and 2a in warm-blooded animals and in daphnia sp  <cit> ., which suggests that the poisoning effect of microcystin-lr in daphnia sp. is due to the inhibition of these two protein phosphatases. however, it remains entirely unclear which major physiological pathways in daphnia sp. are affected by the binding of microcystin to protein phosphatases  <dig> and 2a.

for single clones of d. magna it has been shown that they develop tolerance against a microcystin producing cyanobacterium  <cit> . although the physiological mechanisms have not been elucidated, this increased tolerance can be transferred to the offspring via maternal effects  <cit> . for a better understanding of the process of physiological adaptation of daphnids to toxic cyanobacteria, it is important to examine the genes that are differentially regulated in the presence of microcystins. to achieve this goal we quantified the expression of a set of genes involved in the basic metabolism in d. magna when cultured on a m. aeruginosa pcc <dig> mutant in which the production of microcystins had been knocked out, or on the microcystin-synthesizing wild type strain. as a reference cyanobacterium, we used a strain of synchecoccus elongatus which is non-toxic to daphnids  <cit>  and easily ingested; a strain of the green alga scenedesmus obliquus which is widely used as standard food for daphnids was used as reference for high quality food  <cit> .

much of the recent evidence for inducible defences in freshwater ecology which has contributed to the general understanding of predator-prey interactions has been derived from experimental studies with daphnids. despite considerable progress in the understanding of inducible defences, the underlying plasticity has rarely been studied at a molecular level. only recently has the response of d. magna to kairomones from fish and invertebrates been investigated on the protein level, and it has been shown that a clone of d. magna that was isolated from a habitat where it coexists with fishes and invertebrate predators responds with a decrease in the proteins actin and alpha-tubulin  <cit> . we hypothesized that this decrease might be due to a change in transcription of the actin and alpha-tubulin genes and that these genes might function as targets for predator-borne chemical cues. we therefore exposed the same clone of d. magna as pijanowska & kloc   <cit>  to similar kairomones and quantified the transcription levels of putative target genes.

RESULTS
kairomone experiment: effects on the life-history of daphnia magna
in two different life-history experiments the size at first reproduction  of d. magna grown in water exposed either to sunbleaks  or larvae of chaoborus flavicans was determined. the sfr of d. magna grown in fish incubation water was significantly lower than sfr of the control group , whereas sfr of d. magna raised in chaoborus incubation water was significantly higher than sfr of d. magna grown in kairomone-free water .

kairomone experiment: identification of reference genes and normalisation factors
in the kairomone experiment, the relative expression of the six candidate reference genes in the different treatments was analysed by genorm  and ranked according to increasing variability . genorm calculated five normalisation factors. pair wise comparison of sequential normalisation factors showed a low level of variability between the three most stable reference genes . in accordance with the recommendation of vandesompele et al.   <cit>  to use a minimum number of three reference genes, the normalisation factor generated from the three least variable genes  was used for normalisation in further analyses. the normalized values of the three reference genes showed little variation across treatments, resulting in low values of sd .

d. magna was raised either in a predator-free environment  or in incubation water of leucaspius delineatus .

avalues are mean of n =  <dig> replicates ± sd. expression levels are displayed relative to the mean control level

bsd is the variation of one reference gene across treatments.

d. magna was raised either in a predator-free environment , or in incubation water of larvae of chaoborus flavicans .values are mean of n =  <dig> replicates ± sd. 

aexpression levels are displayed relative to the mean control level

bsd is the variation of one reference gene across treatments

kairomone experiment: relative normalized expression of the target genes actin and alpha-tubulin
the mean relative expression of actin in the fish-kairomone treatment was significantly higher than in the respective control , whereas the mean relative expression of actin was significantly lower in the chaoborus-kairomone treatment than in its respective control . chemical cues from fishes led to a  <dig> -fold increase in the relative expression of actin , and chemical cues from chaoborus larvae decreased actin expression  <dig> -fold . the standard deviation of the relative expression of actin across fish-kairomone treatments was  <dig>  and was thus around four orders of magnitude higher than sd in the reference genes . the standard deviation of the relative expression of actin across chaoborus-kairomone treatments was  <dig>  and had thus almost the same sd across treatments as the reference genes .

a different response was found in the mean relative expression of alpha-tubulin. there was a significant  <dig> -fold increase between fish-kairomone treatment and control , and also a significant  <dig> -fold increase of the mean relative expression of alpha-tubulin between control and chaoborus-kairomone treatment . the standard deviation of the relative expression of alpha-tubulin across fish-kairomone treatments was  <dig>  and was thus around four orders of magnitude higher than sd in the reference genes . the standard deviation of the relative expression of alpha-tubulin across chaoborus-kairomone treatments was  <dig>  and had thus almost the same sd across treatments as the reference genes .

kairomone experiment: relative normalized expression of non-reference genes
the non-reference genes in the fish-treatments  showed values of sd across treatments  that were at least four orders of magnitude higher than those of the normalised values of the three reference genes . the same non-reference genes in the chaoborus-treatment showed values of sd across treatments  that were at least  <dig>  orders of magnitude higher than those of the normalised values of the three reference genes  with one exception . these findings suggested a treatment-dependent expression. all non-reference genes showed significantly different expression between the fish-treatment , the chaoborus treatment and their respective controls , which indicated kairomone-dependent expression. the most striking effect was the up-regulation of cyclophilin  by fish kairomone  and its down-regulation  by chaoborus kairomone . the other non-reference genes were all up-regulated in the kairomone treatments relative to their respective control, with a stronger effect of fish kairomone  than of chaoborus kairomone .

d. magna was raised in either a predator-free environment  or in incubation water of leucaspius delineatus .

avalues are mean of n =  <dig> replicates ± sd. expression levels are displayed relative to the mean control level

bsd is the variation of one reference gene across treatments

d. magna was raised in either a predator-free environment , or in incubation water of larvae of chaoborus flavicans .

avalues are mean of n =  <dig> replicates ± sd. expression levels are displayed relative to the mean control level

bsd is the variation of one reference gene across treatments

microcystin experiment: effects on the growth of daphnia magna
four different treatments were analysed in the microcystin experiment. the green alga s. obliquus, a good food-alga, served as calibrator. to account for potential general cyanobacterial effects, s. elongatus was included in the experimental design. the aim was to be able to differentiate between the wild type and the mutant of m. aeruginosa pcc  <dig> 

growth rates of d. magna in the microcystis treatments were significantly lower than on s. obliquus or s. elongatus . however, no differences in growth on the wild type or the mutant of m. aeruginosa pcc  <dig> were observed after four days . d. magna on the wild type strain of m. aeruginosa died on day five, whereas all animals kept on the mutant survived.

microcystin experiment: normalisation factors and identification of reference genes
the relative expression of nine candidate genes was analysed by genorm and ranked according to increasing variability . genorm calculated eight normalisation factors. pair wise comparison of sequential normalisation factors showed a relatively high level of variability between the three least variable reference genes . the overall effect of using more reference genes was rather small. for this reason, and to simplify experimental handling, only the three least variable genes  were used as reference genes.

after normalisation, all genes were further analysed. the effects between feeding the wild type or the mutant strain of m. aeruginosa pcc  <dig> were significantly different  in every gene. however, the normalised values of the three reference genes showed variation across treatments in the range of  <dig>  -  <dig>  , whereas the across-treatment variation was several times higher in three other genes: gapdh ; sucdh  and ubc . these three genes of basic metabolism were treated as target genes, and we investigated whether their expression is regulated by the treatments.

avalues are mean of n =  <dig> replicates ± sd. expression levels are displayed relative to the mean control level

bsd is the variation of one reference gene across treatments

microcystin experiment: relative expression of the target genes gapdh, sucdh and ubc following normalisation
the mean relative expression of gapdh in the microcystin-free treatments with s. elongatus, s. obliquus and the mutant of m. aeruginosa pcc  <dig> ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig> , whereas the treatment with the microcystin-producing strain of m. aeruginosa showed a relative expression of over  <dig>  the pattern of the relative expression of ubc was similar. expression in the treatments with the green alga and the microcystin-free cyanobacteria ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  whereas the treatment with m. aeruginosa wild type showed a relative expression of >  <dig>  . the target gene sucdh showed a higher relative expression in the microcystin-free mutant of m. aeruginosa  than in the microcystin-free treatments with the green alga  and s. elongatus ; however, the relative expression of sucdh in the wild type of m. aeruginosa was even 16-folds higher than in the calibrator .

resolving gene identities by homology to the daphnia pulex genome
the d. magna candidate gene sequences were used for protein database searches for d. pulex homologs in the dappu v <dig>  draft genome sequence assembly  and annotation. phylogenetic trees were subsequently constructed from the aligned amino acids. fifteen protein sequences for actin could be found. the protein sequence of the orthologous actin in the d. pulex sequence  clustered with five other sequences . the highest similarity  was found with two paralogous sequences . p-distances ranged from 0% to  <dig> % indicating a very high variability between all of the actin paralogs. sixteen d. pulex proteins with significant sequence similarity to cyclophilin could be found. the cyclophilin protein sequence of the orthologous d. pulex sequence  clustered with another sequence . cyclophilin showed a very high variability with p-distances between  <dig> % and  <dig> %. for gapdh six significant protein sequence hits could be revealed. the gapdh protein sequence of the orthologous d. pulex sequence  clustered significantly with another sequence . gapdh showed a very high variability with p-distances between  <dig> % and  <dig> %. twenty-three significant protein sequence hits for ubc were found. the ubc protein sequence of the orthologous d. pulex sequence  clustered significantly with two other sequences . the highest similarity showed dappu- <dig> . the variability between paralogs was very high with p-distances between  <dig> % and  <dig> %. two different alpha-tubulin loci containing the orthologous est wfes <dig> from wfleabase were unearthed. for both loci taken together  <dig> significant protein sequence hits could be found. the alpha-tubulin protein sequences of the orthologous d. pulex sequences  both clustered significantly with three other sequences . dappu- <dig> showed 91% similarity to alpha tubulin p  <dig> , and. dappu- <dig> was similar to alpha tubulin p  <dig> . the variability of alpha-tubulin was very high .

discussion
the occurrence of cyclic heptapeptides, termed microcystins, is widespread in cyanobacteria and not restricted to the genus microcystis; mass development of microcystin-producing cyanobacteria can constitute a high risk for intoxication of humans and livestock  <cit> . numerous studies have been carried out in order to determine the ecological significance of microcystin production in cyanobacteria. the availability of the mcy- mutant of pcc <dig>  which is genetically identical to the wild type except for its inability to synthesize microcystins  <cit> , made it possible to more precisely analyse the role of microcystins in daphnid poisoning. life-table experiments with the wild type and the mcy- mutant of pcc <dig> with daphnia galeata have shown that the wild type was poisonous to d. galeata, whereas the mutant strain had no lethal effects  <cit> . these findings and similar results for d. magna  <cit>  suggest that microcystins play a role in the defence of m. aeruginosa against zooplankton grazing.

feeding on the cyanobacterium m. aeruginosa led to significantly reduced growth of d. magna compared to animals grown on the high quality food alga s. obliquus  <cit>  or the non-toxic cyanobacterium s. elongatus  <cit> . although there was reduced growth in d. magna feeding on m. aeruginosa compared to the reference cyanobacterium, there was no difference between the wild type and the mcy- mutant treatment. however, a specific microcystin effect became evident on day five, when d. magna raised on the wild type strain died, whereas no mortality was observed in d. magna raised on the mutant strain.

in an in-vitro system, microcystin-lr has been shown to inhibit protein phosphatases  <dig> and 2a in crude extracts of daphnia sp  <cit> . however protein phosphatase  <dig> and 2a each comprise a family of protein serine/threonine phosphatases with a wide range of different specificities that are mediated by different interactors  <cit>  and regulatory subunits  <cit> . hence it remains entirely unclear which specific physiological pathways in daphnids are affected by the binding of microcystin to protein phosphatases  <dig> and 2a.

here for the first time in-situ effects of dietary microcystins on gene expression of daphnids were investigated. the experiments presented in this paper were designed to identify genes involved in the general metabolism in d. magna in which the expression level responds to the presence of microcystins. we therefore compared the effects of the microcystin-producing wild type m. aeruginosa pcc <dig> and the mcy- mutant of this strain on the relative expression of genes involved in basic metabolism. we found substantial up-regulation of gapdh  and ubc  in response to the presence of microcystins in the food of d. magna, which demonstrates that certain enzymes of glycolysis and protein catabolism are significantly up-regulated when daphnids ingest microcystins. for the first time a specific gene regulation in response to dietary microcystins has been demonstrated in daphnids. this up-regulation might have enabled d. magna to avoid a microcystin-specific depression of growth until day four but could not prevent mortality on day five of the growth experiment.

upon exposure to the microcystin-producing wild type of m. aeruginosa pcc <dig>  d. magna has been shown to develop a tolerance against this toxic strain within an individual's lifespan and to transfer this tolerance to the next generation through maternal effects, a fact that has been interpreted as an inducible defence against microcystin  <cit> . it remains to be tested which role the observed up-regulation of gapdh and ubc plays in the inducible tolerance of d. magna to microcystins. furthermore, clones of d. magna have been shown to differ in their tolerance to m. aeruginosa pcc <dig>  <cit> , which suggests a genetic basis for increased toxin tolerance. it remains to be investigated whether the up-regulation of gapdh and ubc contributes to the tolerance to m. aeruginosa pcc <dig> 

in addition to the microcystins in pcc <dig> wild type, both the wild type and mcy- mutant pcc <dig> produce other classes of secondary metabolites of unknown biological activity  <cit> . d. magna feeding on either of these two strains revealed a substantial up-regulation of sucdh, and it remains to be seen which cyanobacterial compounds induce this up-regulation of a key enzyme of the tricarboxylic acid cycle. in order to account for possible general effects of cyanobacteria on expression of the investigated genes, we fed synechococcus elongatus to d. magna. this cyanobacterium is easily ingested by daphnids and does not contain toxins or inhibitors  <cit> . the effects of s. elongatus on gapdh, ubc and sucdh were negligible compared to the afore mentioned effects of m. aeruginosa, which indicates that the up-regulation of the tested loci of gapdh, ubc and sucdh in d. magna is a specific and not a general response to cyanobacterial secondary metabolites. it would be interesting to see, if this holds true for all different paralogs of the affected genes or if the up-regulation is restricted to specific clusters or single paralogs of these highly variable genes .

predation is an important stressor in aquatic communities, and many studies using daphnia sp. have contributed to an understanding of the adaptive value of inducible anti-predator defences in the genus daphnia. achieving a better understanding of the mechanisms and constraints of the evolution of inducible anti-predator defences requires more research on the mechanisms of inducible defences at the molecular level. only recently has this field been started to be explored. our work was stimulated by the paper of pijanowska & kloc,   <cit> , who used a clone of d. magna which has been shown to be plastic with regard to life-history traits and behaviour  <cit>  in response to kairomones from fish and chaoborus. pijanowska & kloc   <cit>  have shown a dramatic decrease of the proteins actin and alpha-tubulin in this clone of d. magna when it was exposed to kairomones from planktivorous fish or the larvae of chaoborus water midges. these identical effects of vertebrate and invertebrate kairomones suggested that actin might play a major role in anti-predator responses in d. magna in general. using the same clone of d. magna, we here demonstrate that an exposure to chemical cues from both invertebrate and vertebrate predators results in a change in actin expression. however, although significant, the  <dig> -fold  increase and  <dig> -fold  decrease in actin expression was rather moderate and did not reflect the dramatic decrease of the protein actin reported by pijanowska & kloc  <cit> . the same holds true for the weak although significant increase in the gene alpha-tubulin in the fish  and the chaoborus treatments . since we found two possible alpha-tubulin orthologous protein sequences in d. pulex, which were very similar to each other , we concluded that the effect on the expression holds true for all paralogs in their cluster. therefore, the substantial decrease of actin and alpha-tubulin on the protein level reported by pijanowska & kloc  <cit>  could be a posttranslational process, e.g. mirna-mediated regulation or increased degradation, as has been suggested by the authors  <cit> . we conclude that these loci of actin and alpha-tubulin are no strong target genes for anti-predator defences. however, construction of phylogenetic trees reveals very high variability between the different paralogs of actin and alpha-tubulin . it remains to be tested if the decrease of actin and alpha-tubulin on the protein level reported by pijanowska & kloc  <cit>  is caused by another paralogous sequence sharing the same gene name.

following normalisation to nf, it turned out that the expression of 28s, ubc, 18s and cyclophilin was affected by the type of kairomone. genes involved in protein biosynthesis  and protein catabolism  were up-regulated by kairomone. these effects were considerably stronger for fish kairomone. the expression of cyclophylin , a gene involved in protein folding, was up-regulated in the presence of kairomones from vertebrate and down-regulated by kairomones from invertebrate predators. the finding that the two kairomones differ in their effect on cyclophylin in d. magna is in accord with the observation that the life-history response of this clone of d. magna differs between kairomones released from fish or chaoborus  <cit> . cyclophilin, could serve as a potential target gene for further analysis of kairomone effects on daphnids. it remains to be seen how cyclophilin is involved in mediating kairomone effects on life history of daphnids and if this is specific to the orthologous sequence and to related paralogous sequences of cyclophilin.

our study is the first detailed study that investigates effects of kairomones from vertebrate and invertebrate predators and of microcystin on gene expression of genes involved in different basic metabolic processes in d. magna. kairomones from both vertebrate and invertebrate predators led to the well-established adaptive shifts in sfr in d. magna giving evidence for biologically active incubation water from either predator. similarly, evidence for specific effects of microcystin comes from the higher mortality of d. magna on the wild type strain than on the mutant of m. aeruginosa pcc  <dig>  calculating a combination normalisation factor based on the geometric mean of three genes for the kairomone experiment and for the growth experiment, stressor-specific regulation of some of the genes involved in basic metabolism is demonstrated.

all target genes in daphnia show a surprisingly high variability between paralogs. if such a high variability holds true for other genes in d. magna, this could hint at a highly plastic genome, which might be adaptive for an animal that living in a very complex aquatic environment and therefore has to maintain a high potential for adaptations.

CONCLUSIONS
three  of the seven genes investigated  were found to be stable across the kairomone treatments and were used as reference genes for normalization. although significant, no substantial kairomone-dependent regulation of actin and alpha-tubulin was found, indicating that the dramatic decrease of actin and alpha-tubulin at the protein level in response to kairomones  was not due to a regulation of the transcription of the actin and alpha-tubulin loci investigated here. therefore these gene loci cannot serve as target genes in the analysis of kairomone effects on d. magna. if this holds true for the other paralogs sharing the same gene name remains to be tested. however, the expression of other genes involved in protein biosynthesis, protein catabolism and protein folding, especially the regulation of cyclophilin by kairomones, indicated major effects on protein folding. these genes have the potential to serve as target genes in further analysis of kairomone effects on the life history of daphnids.

three genes  proved to be stable across microcystin-free and microcystin-containing cyanobacterial food treatments and were used for normalization. two of the candidate genes  were shown to have toxin-specific regulation and were clearly up-regulated when microcystins were present in the food. this indicates that microcystins strongly affect protein catabolism and glycolysis in d. magna when the animals ingest microcystins via the natural route of exposure, i.e. uptake of microcystin-containing food items; it remains to be seen which role the observed up-regulation of gapdh and ubc plays in the inducible tolerance of d. magna to microcystins.

the construction of phylogenetic trees is an essential step in target gene analysis in daphnia in order to account for the high variability between different paralogs. phylogenetic trees of the different paralogs are indispensable for clustering the utilized loci with similar ones and to delineate them from others. related paralogs might have a similar relevance within the genome. this approach is especially important in an organism like daphnia sp. with p-distances showing a very high variability between different paralogs.

