BACKGROUND
a major goal of modern genetics is to determine which genes are associated with which human phenotypes. over the course of the last few decades, studies uncovering the basis for mendelian diseases have been extremely successful, typically identifying causal mutations in single genes  <cit> . however, most human phenotypes, e.g. complex diseases such as cancer or neurological diseases, are controlled by multiple genes, each of which has a minor contribution to the disease phenotype  <cit> . therefore, to effectively identify genes that are related to complex phenotypes, the approach must consider groups of genes rather than studying genes in isolation. numerous methods have been developed for identifying gene modules from protein-protein interaction  networks  <cit> , metabolic networks  <cit> , or transcription-regulatory networks  <cit> , however these network data are often lack human phenotype-specific information.

in this study, we identified gene modules that are specifically coexpressed in datasets that study particular human phenotypes. identifying phenotype-specific modules in human is far more difficult than in model organisms because the phenotypes can only be observed rather than working directly with the biological pathways that define them. ideally, these biological pathways should be reverse-engineered from data taken from individuals that display particular phenotypes. public repositories of microarray data are a valuable resource for this type of analysis because they contains hundreds of well annotated expression datasets that span a wide variety of phenotypic conditions. it is known that identifying co-expression modules frequently occurring across multiple microarray datasets significantly enhances the signal to noise ratio  <cit> . here, we identified co-expression modules that are present recurrently and specifically in datasets of one phenotype by using the remaining datasets as a background.

using these phenotype-specific coexpression modules, we performed a systematic prediction of gene-phenotype associations by integrating three data sources: previously known associations derived from literature text mining, gene ontology annotations, and protein-protein interactions. a previous study designed an approach to identify gene modules in human ppi networks and used them to predict novel gene-phenotype associations  <cit> . our approach differs from this in that it integrates hundreds of microarray datasets in parallel to identify modules, and then superimposes protein-protein interactions as well as phenotype and functional annotations to make predictions.

the systematic annotation of gene-phenotype associations provides us with the opportunity to perform the first global analysis of gene pleiotropy in human. gene pleiotropy has the potential to explain the vast human phenotypic diversity, considering that the number of human genes is far fewer than originally anticipated  <cit> . several large scale studies of pleiotropy have been performed on model organisms such as yeast  <cit>  and c. elegans  <cit> . in humans however, pleiotropy is often only recognized following the in-depth analysis of a single gene or gene family  <cit> . to our knowledge, no comprehensive determination or prediction of which genes exhibit pleiotropic behavior throughout the entire human genome has been previously performed. based on our modular approach, we have defined a novel concept, modular pleiotropy, as the pleiotropic behavior of genes resulting from their presence in their modules, as we have shown that changes in module membership can define a gene's pleiotropic behavior. to further understand the underlying mechanisms of phenotypic diversity, we utilized the rapid accumulation of chip-chip datasets, measured under various phenotypic conditions, and tested whether the phenotype specificity of our modules, as well as specific instances pleiotropy, could be attributed to dynamic phenotype-specific gene regulation.

by integrating  <dig> human microarray datasets representing  <dig> phenotypes, we have identified  <dig>  phenotype-specific modules. we subsequently predicted  <dig>  novel gene-phenotype associations covering  <dig>  genes, and showed that  <dig> % of genes are associated with multiple phenotypes, and can thus be considered pleiotropic. we collected  <dig> chip-chip datasets, annotated them with matching phenotypes, and confirmed that dynamic transcriptional regulation is an important force driving the formation of phenotype-specific modules. our module-based approach has the advantage of not only predicting pleiotropy, but also suggesting how a gene is pleiotropic, exerting different phenotypic functions in different transcriptional and regulatory contexts.

we have provided all the data from our study, including the gene phenotype database we constructed via text mining, our phenotype-specific modules, and our novel phenotype predictions, in our online phenotype prediction database  <cit> .

RESULTS
systematic annotation of gene-phenotype association
our approach identified phenotype-specific modules preferentially coexpressed in microarray datasets that study particular phenotypes, and we used these modules to perform systematic phenotype prediction, study gene pleitropy, and integrated phenotype-specific transcription factor binding data to build dynamic regulatory networks . we collected  <dig> human microarray datasets from the ncbi gene expression omnibus   <cit> . by mapping the dataset annotations onto umls  <cit>  phenotype terms we obtained  <dig> phenotype classes each of which contained at least  <dig> microarray datasets. for the purposes of this paper, we employ a broad interpretation of the term phenotype, which includes diseases, tissues, and cell types.

we previously designed a multiple objective simulated annealing  algorithm that robustly identifies groups of genes that are preferentially coexpressed in datasets of a specific phenotype class  <cit> . the simulated annealing procedure was designed to optimize four characteristics of phenotype-specific coexpression modules: size, density, specificity for the phenotype datasets, and a summary statistic of module density which we term density differential. the goal of this approach was to identify genes modules that exhibit a coexpression signature which is specific to the phenotype in which they were identified, and therefore are likely to represent processes inherent to the phenotype.

applying this approach, we identified  <dig>  phenotype-specific coexpression modules that met our criteria of a minimum size of  <dig>  minimum density of  <dig> , and a minimum phenotypic enrichment p-value of less than  <dig>  after fdr correction. these modules spanned  <dig> phenotypes and had an average size of  <dig> . a more detailed description of this algorithm is outlined in the methods section.

in this study, starting with the phenotype-specific modules, we predicted gene phenotype associations by additionally incorporating the following three data sources: our database of gene-phenotype associations obtained from text-mining of the gene reference into function  resource, the gene ontology database, and protein-protein interaction data .

we trained a different random forest classifier for the  <dig> phenotypes for which the phenotype-specific coexpression modules contained genes with generif entries with the same phenotype. each classifier therefore depended on the the set of genes that were known to be associated with the training phenotype via generif text mining, to which we refer to as gp. our model contained  <dig> predictor variables, and contained one observation for each gene in the phenotype-specific modules. if a gene appeared in more than one module, the predictor variables were averaged across the modules.

given a previously unannotated gene gi, which is a member of module mpj , we predicted whether gi is associated with phenotype p by considering the following predictive features: i) the enrichment of the members of mpj for genes in gp; ii) the degree of go annotation similarity between gi and mpj ∩ gp; iii) and the number of protein-protein interactions between gi and mpj ∩ gp. the first predictor variable was the negative log p-value of the hypergeometric test for enrichment of genes in the module for genes in gp. the second predictor variable was derived from protein-protein interaction  data. the ppi score was calculated by summing the total number of protein-protein interactions between the current gene and genes from gp in the same module. the remaining three predictor variables were derived from the three subtrees of go  as follows. for a pair of genes in the same module, the go score for a subtree was calculated by first identifying all go terms shared between the two genes. once this set of distinct matching terms was established, the go score was calculated by summing up the negative log p-values of the significance of matches to genes in gp.

these classifiers trained on the predictive features discussed above predicted  <dig>  gene-phenotype associations covering  <dig>  genes. for a cumulative recall  of at least 20%, the precision of our predictions was approximately 65%. as the stringency of the cutoff parameter increases the precision continues to climb above 80%. this indicates that if we restrict the classifiers to a small number of predictions they become extremely accurate, which would be an ideal set to pursue in a clinical setting. the precision-recall plot, which differs from a roc plot by only plotting statistics related to positive predictions, for three classifiers compared to randomly generated modules is shown in figure  <dig>  each of our predictions is scored based on the fraction of classification trees from the random forest that voted for the prediction. table  <dig> shows the predictions with the best scores for the  <dig> highest scoring predictions, stratified by phenotype, along with supporting evidence from published papers and gene ontology. generif does not contain all published papers that discuss a gene's association with a phenotype, so the published papers listed in this table represent information not used by the classifier. the first prediction is adrb <dig> for the phenotype "urologic diseases." the potential for this gene to be involved in urologic diseases is supported by its presence in the human urinary bladder urothelium, as well as its regulation of urinary function  <cit> . five of the predictions in this table are for phenotypes related to the immune system, such as "phagocytes," "inflammation," "lymphocyte," "monocyte," and "bone marrow cells." many of these predictions are supported by both literature and their go annotations which include myeloid cell differentiation, inflammatory response, and immune response. two other interesting predictions are the chemokine genes cxcl <dig> and cxcl <dig> for the phenotypes "bone marrow cells" and "inflammation" respectively. chemokines are master controllers of the migration of leukocytes, which originate in bone marrow and directly effect many functions related to the immune system including inflammation. the remaining predictions shown in the table are related to cancer and epithelial tissue related phenotypes.

each phenotype is listed with the predicted gene, the gene's description, and the proportion of decision trees from the random forest classifier that predicted its association to the phenotype. the final two columns provide supporting evidence in the form of a pubmed id for a published work or a gene ontology annotation that is consistent with the phenotype.

to provide a more comprehensive analysis of our predictions, rather than just highlighting the highest scoring predictions, we performed functional enrichment analysis on each predicted set of associated genes for each phenotype. this analysis revealed that the majority of phenotype enriched biological processes are consistent with the functionality of the phenotype, which supports the quality of our predictions. for example, in the phenotype "squamous cell carcinoma," our predicted genes are enriched for go annotations related to skin cancer such as dna replication, keratinization, and epidermis development. go annotations are also consistent with the phenotypes for tissues. the phenotype "brain" is enriched for synaptic transmission and monovalent inorganic cation transport. we highlight additional examples of significantly  overrepresented go terms within predicted gene sets for phenotypes in table  <dig> 

dna replication 
immune system process 
keratinization 
the prevalence of gene pleiotropy
our large-scale gene-phenotype association prediction provided us with a unique opportunity to systematically study gene pleiotropy. the simplest definition of pleiotropy, a gene being annotated with multiple umls phenotype terms, is inadequate here. for example, tal <dig> is annotated with both "leukemia" and "immunoproliferative disorders," but these do not constitute two distinct phenotype associations because one is simply a more general phenotype than the other. other groups have employed phenotype distance metrics and declared two phenotypes different when their distance exceeded a certain threshold  <cit> . however, this type of method relies on the selection of an arbitrary threshold, which can significantly affect the results. here, we defined pleiotropy using the structure of the parental links within the umls phenotype ontology. we considered a gene pleiotropic if it was annotated with at least two phenotypes, neither of which is a descendant of the other.

applying this definition of pleiotropy to only the disease phenotypes revealed that  <dig> % of the  <dig>  genes in our study are associated with at least one pair of distinct phenotypes. it should be noted that this percentage is likely to be an over estimate of pleiotropic genes, since umls text mining of generif terms can lead to incorrect annotations and therefore pleiotropy. the addition of our phenotype predictions resulted in  <dig> novel pleiotropic genes. furthermore,  <dig> genes that were previously pleiotropic were annotated with a new phenotype distinct from all previous annotations, resulting in a new case of pleiotropy.

pleiotropy can be determined and observed in a variety of ways. in this study, we predicted whether a particular gene exhibits pleiotropic behavior based upon its membership in phenotype-specific coexpression modules. we therefore term this type of pleiotropy modular pleiotropy, in which a gene's pleiotropic behavior is determined by module membership. an example that illustrates this phenomenon is depicted in figure  <dig> involving two modules, one specific to "nervous system disorders" and the other to "neoplasms, glandular and epithelial." these modules share six genes related to the extracellular matrix, the substrate upon which cells migrate, proliferate, and differentiate. it is not surprising to find these genes associated with epithelial cancer, as many studies have shown that the extracellular matrix is heavily involved in tumor progression and metastasis  <cit> . the extracellular matrix also plays a major role in the development and repair of the central nervous system, supporting its presence in both modules  <cit> . in each of the two overlapping modules, the remaining, unshared genes also include genes from the extracellular matrix and additional genes that are highly specific to the phenotypes in which the modules were discovered. these include the well known alzheimer's susceptibility locus apoe, an actin gene differentially expressed in schizophrenia patients , a brain-specific tubulin associated with behavioral defects , and a tubulin polymerizer that serves as a neuroprotectant . the neoplasms module also contains genes related to the extracellular matrix, and genes with known roles in neoplastic processes such as tumor progression, tumor necrosis induction, tumor suppression, and tumor invasion  <cit> .

we would also like to highlight an interesting prediction of pleiotropy for the gene bgn, which is present in both modules. this prediction is supported by the refseq entry for this gene, which states that it is thought to transfer growth factors between cells and that it may promote neuronal survival. some additional evidence for bgn's activity in cancer was discovered by a study that showed bgn controls cell growth in pancreatic cancer cells  <cit> . studies have demonstrated bgn's potential role in the human nervous system as well, as bgn is overexpressed in rats after brain injury and it sustained the survival of rat neocortical neurons in culture  <cit> .

the above example nicely illustrates the power of our classification method to make reliable phenotype predictions, and in particular to identify pleiotropy and its modular context.

phenotype-specific transcriptional regulation
we hypothesized that regulatory networks are not static relationships between transcription factors and their target genes, but rather dynamic networks that vary to dictate different observed phenotypes, such as tissue types and diseases. thanks to the accumulation of chip-chip experiments, each of which provides genome-wide tf binding data derived under particular phenotypic conditions, we were able to test this hypothesis by determining whether tf binding detected under a phenotypic condition preferentially occurs in genes belonging to modules specific to the same phenotype. this concordance between or phenotype-specific coexpression modules and phenotype-specific binding from chip-chip data also serves to independently validate the phenotype-specificity of our modules.

we compiled  <dig> chip-chip datasets from the public repositories and also manually collected results from literature publications. these data include  <dig> tfs and  <dig>  target genes, which can be found on our online phenotype prediction database  <cit> . applying our text mining procedure to these datasets resulted in a total of  <dig> phenotypes including diseases, tissues and cell types. of these  <dig> phenotypes, we focused on the  <dig> phenotypes that were also studied by the microarray datasets we had collected. this provided us with one of the most comprehensive collections of regulatory data available, with the phenotypic conditions that each dataset studied.

for each phenotype-specific module, we tested the member genes for enrichment of tf binding derived from chip-chip datasets that study related phenotypes. out of the  <dig> chip-chip phenotypes,  <dig> exhibited a statistically significant preferential binding , indicating that target genes from chip-chip data are more likely to form coexpression modules in microarray datasets whose phenotype annotations match those of the chip-chip experiment. the full table of p-values resulting from this analysis are available online on our phenotype prediction database  <cit> .

one example of a phenotype that exhibits preferential chip-chip binding is "prostatic neoplasms," which is studied by a single chip-chip dataset profiling androgen receptor binding. the phenotype-specific preferential binding is shown in figure  <dig>  the proportion of phenotype-specific modules for this phenotype that are significantly enriched for androgen receptor binding  is over  <dig> times higher than the modules specific to other phenotypes. this strong over representation of significant binding enrichment for our modules demonstrates the ability of our method to detect evidence of phenotype-specific tf binding, despite being provided only a small fraction of the complete transcriptional regulatory information related to this phenotype.

the second example in the figure is the more general phenotype "malignant neoplasms". the distribution of tf binding enrichment is more continuous for this example due to the larger number of related phenotype-specific modules and chip-chip datasets. as with the previous example, there is a higher relative frequency of significantly bound modules specific to phenotypes that match the phenotype of the tf binding. also, the frequency of the most significant binding enrichment  within the distribution of the related phenotype-specific modules is more than twice as high as the frequency of all other enrichment p-values. this can be attributed to the much higher quantity of chip-chip data available for this phenotype, which allowed for more significant binding for our transcription modules. this result implies that as more chip-chip data becomes available, we would expect to see the significance of binding enrichment of our phenotype-specific modules continue to increase. although the complete set of phenotype-specific binding is not available, we were still able to construct portions of these dynamic transcriptional networks by combining phenotype-specific coexpression modules with tf binding from the same phenotypes. for example, figure  <dig> shows two overlapping modules, each specific to different phenotypes, and each significantly enriched for phenotype-specific binding that matches its phenotype. the two modules are each preferentially coexpressed in datasets studying a specific phenotype: one "squamous cell neoplasms" and the other "immunoproliferative disorders."

as with the previous example of pleiotropy, these two modules are phenotype specific and are enriched with genes related to each phenotype. the "squamous cell neoplasms" module contains ten genes, five of which were previously annotated with the phenotype, and is also significantly enriched for go terms consistent with cancer of squamous tissue: keratinocyte differentiation  and epidermis development . the seven gene "immunoproliferative disorders" module contains four genes that were annotated with the phenotype, as well as being enriched for go annotations related to the immune system such as leukocyte chemotaxis  and defense response . the modules share two pro-inflammatory calcium binding genes, s100a <dig> and s100a <dig>  that are implicated together in a number of diseases  <cit> . s100a <dig> was previously annotated with both phenotypes, making it an example of a pleiotropic gene confirmed by its presence in two coexpression modules.

our analysis of phenotypic conditions of the chip-chip data revealed that each of these modules were significantly enriched for phenotype-specific tf binding. the binding for the "squamous cell neoplasms" module was derived from  <dig> chip-chip datasets that study the related phenotype "epithelial cells." the module is significantly enriched for the usf <dig> transcription factor  which binds serpinb <dig> and serpinb <dig> in epithelial cells, as well as marginally enriched for creb  which binds ivl and s100a <dig> 

the binding for the 'immunoproliferative disorders" module was derived from datasets that study "myeloid cells," which was studied by  <dig> datasets. the majority of the binding was by the transcription factor nf-kb, which in myeloid cells binds three genes  and is known to play a role in regulation of the immune system as well as types of cancer  <cit> . this included both shared genes , and a gene that performs cytoprotective and anti-apoptotic roles in neutrophils   <cit> . this concordance between microarray expression data and regulatory chip-chip data demonstrates that our approach of finding phenotype-specific transcription modules can not only identify gene-phenotype relationships, but that it can be combined with tf binding data to further explain the molecular mechanisms and regulatory pathways underlying phenotypes and pleiotropy.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a method to determine the phenotypic effects of particular genes in humans, where phenotype prediction is far more difficult than in model organisms. this difficulty is largely due to our inability to study the underlying biological pathways directly, for example by inducing mutations or otherwise perturbing phenotype-related pathways. our approach circumvents this limitation because the identified gene modules are preferentially active in datasets that study a particular phenotype, and thus are likely to represent phenotype-specific pathways. using public resources that provide phenotype data, such as umls and generif, we made novel predictions that we believe will be useful in a clinical setting, further our understanding of disease pathways, and serve as potential drug targets.

in addition, we propose that regulatory networks should be viewed as dynamic networks with topology dependent upon the phenotypic conditions that they model. since chip-chip experiments examine binding data under specific phenotypic conditions, their data provide a static snapshot of this dynamic regulatory network. our results support this hypothesis by demonstrating preferential binding of transcription factors to coexpression modules in similar phenotypes.

our pleiotropy analysis, complemented by our phenotype predictions, indicates that pleiotropy in humans may be a more widespread phenomenon than previously thought. further study of how coexpression partners change in different tissues and the role phenotype-specific transcriptional regulation plays in shaping these changes will provide deeper insight into the underlying cause of phenotypic diversity as well as genetic pleiotropy.

