BACKGROUND
host-pathogen interactions are ubiquitous in nature, leading to coevolutionary dynamics that are predicted to drive rapid evolution of the immune system. it is now increasingly clear that this coevolutionary "arms race" leads to increased rates of protein evolution in genes encoding components of the immune system across a large number of taxa  <cit> . recent work in mosquitoes  <cit>  and fruit flies  <cit>  has suggested that the immune system may also be unusual in the rate at which new genes are recruited into the system, and existing components of the system turn over by gene duplication or loss. genes encoding effector proteins , and particularly antimicrobial peptides , often have lineage-restricted patterns of homology and show very rapid rates of gene turnover within gene families  <cit> . most strikingly, two multigene families – the drosomycin antimicrobial peptide family  <cit>  and the turandot family  <cit>  of induced but otherwise uncharacterized proteins – appear to be evolutionary novelties restricted to d. melanogaster and related species in the sophophora subgenus of drosophilids  <cit> . this pattern is in contrast to genes encoding components of immune-related signaling pathways, which are typically found as single copy orthologs even among distantly related insects  <cit> , and have identifiable homologs in mammals  <cit> . together, these observations suggest that disruption of stoichiometry, dosage, and other conserved interactions among signaling pathways is usually deleterious, leading to very low tolerance of gene copy variation among signaling pathways and preservation of single-copy orthologs across deep evolutionary time. conversely, these observations suggest that pathway outputs retain flexibility, allowing novel effectors to be easily recruited into the system, potentially leading to rapid, and perhaps advantageous, proliferation of effector components across evolutionary time.

if this model is correct, effector proteins should be recruited and lost from the immune system at a relatively high frequency, which implies that novel components of the immune system remain to be discovered in species of drosophila distantly related to d. melanogaster. it has long been recognized that highly divergent insect clades often harbour unique antimicrobial peptides: gambicin in mosquitoes  <cit> , lebocin in bombyx  <cit> , thanatin from the bug podisus maculiventris  <cit> , and many others . however, the evolutionary dynamics of the acquisition of novel effector components in the innate immune system have not been considered previously. while the genome sequences of twelve drosophila species  <cit>  have allowed the discovery of many novel genes across this phylogeny, functional annotation still depends largely on homology to known d. melanogaster genes. thus, our knowledge of the gain and loss of immune function genes has a strong ascertainment bias, and is restricted to genes that are paralogous to known genes in d. melanogaster.

in this study, we used short-read sequencing technology to characterize the transcriptional response to infection in d. virilis, a member of the drosophila subgenus that last shared a common ancestor with d. melanogaster and the rest of the sophophora subgenus  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . short-read sequencing technology allows identification of differentially expressed genes without the need for prior annotations, and thus is ideal for detecting induced components of the d. virilis immune system that lack homologs in d. melanogaster. here, we demonstrate that short-read sequencing of oligo-primed double-stranded cdna provides a robust and accurate method to identify differentially transcribed regions of the genome. we then use this approach to sequence cdna from infected and uninfected samples of d. virilis to characterize the genes that are induced by infection, and use that sequencing data to annotate novel components of the d. virilis immune system. furthermore, using a lc-ms/ms proteomic approach, we identify immune-regulated protein constituents of the d. virilis hemolymph that validate novel transcripts that had been identified by the short-read cdna sequencing as being responsive to infection in d. virilis.

RESULTS
aligning sequencing reads to the reference genome and identified genes regulated by infection
we generated between  <dig>  and  <dig>  million  <dig> bp reads from one lane of illumina/solexa sequencing for each of four biological samples: naïve  d. melanogaster iso- <dig> ,  <dig> hours post-challenge  d. melanogaster iso- <dig> , naïve  d. virilis 15010- <dig>  , and  <dig> hours-post challenge  d. virilis 15010- <dig>  . infected flies were challenged by artificial infection with a mixed culture of one gram-negative bacteria  and one gram-positive bacteria ; see methods for details. prior to mapping these sequencing reads to the reference genome, we filtered low complexity reads, low quality reads, and repetitive reads , resulting in between  <dig>  and  <dig>  million useable reads from each of the four samples . to map reads to the reference, we used a combination of mosaik  and blast  <cit> , which allowed us to map between  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the reads that passed our filters, representing  <dig>  to  <dig>  million reads . we then identified expressed regions in each species as described in the methods. overall, we identified  <dig>  expressed regions in d. melanogaster;  <dig>  of those regions were associated with a total of  <dig>  annotated genes . in d. virilis, we identified  <dig>  expressed regions, of which  <dig> were associated with  <dig> genes . further details of our methodology are provided in the methods.

using a hidden markov model , we assigned each expressed region to one of five states: strongly induced by infection, induced by infection, not regulated by infection, repressed by infection, or strongly repressed by infection. each state is defined in the hmm by the binomial probability of observing the number of reads aligned to each base from the infected sample, given the total number of reads that align to each base; because the number of reads that map from the infected and naïve samples is not equal, the binomial probably for the unregulated class is not expected to be  <dig>  . we infer that  <dig>  and  <dig>  expressed regions are induced by infection in d. melanogaster and d. virilis, respectively .

binomial probability of observing x infected reads aligned to a base, out of n total reads aligning to that base, estimated based on the hmm described in the text, and median corrected induction  for each class .

validation of cdna sequencing by comparison to published microarray data
because the transcriptional response to infection has been extremely well characterized in d. melanogaster , we can validate our short-read cdna sequencing approach by comparison to previous studies. we compiled data from four microarray experiments published between  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit>  that compared gene expression in infected and naïve d. melanogaster and characterized genes as up-regulated or down-regulated. based on the definitions from each study, we count how many times a gene was defined as 'up-regulated' or 'down-regulated' across the four studies. there are  <dig> genes that are both present in our list of expressed regions and significantly regulated by infection on at least one of the four microarrays; those that are up-regulated in multiple microarrays are substantially more likely to be strongly induced in our data . furthermore, genes induced in more microarrays are more likely to be assigned to an induced state by our hmm .

additionally, we can quantitatively compare induction between our study and the previously published microarray where the infection protocol and sampling time post-infection where most similar to our study . despite differences in the line  and sex  of the flies, and the species and pathogenicity of bacteria used , we still find a significant correlation between induction measured by microarray in degregorio et al.  <cit>  and induction measured by our method . however, this correlation is much weaker when limited to genes that are weakly induced , and much stronger when limited to genes that are strongly induced . while these results demonstrate considerable consistency between induction measured by short-read sequencing of oligo primed, double-stranded cdna and induction measured by traditional microarray methods, they also suggest that higher depth of coverage may be needed to accurately assay weakly induced genes. however, at least for identifying strongly induced genes, short read sequencing approaches appear to be robust and accurate, suggesting that this approach may prove to be a simple and cost-effective way to identify differentially regulated genes in poorly annotated genomes in response to any number of treatments of biological interest.

the transcriptional response to infection in d. virilis and d. melanogaster
we identified  <dig> expressed regions that appear to be induced by infection in d. virilis. because of the 3' bias in our cdna preparation, the relatively low coverage of our sequencing, and the lack of annotation of 3' utr sequence in the d. virilis genome, only about 5% of these induced regions overlap with an annotated exon. to attempt to associate a greater percentage of induced regions with genes, we analyzed the genomic region in more detail for these  <dig> regions, and preliminarily assigned expressed regions to annotated gene models if they were fewer than  <dig> bp from the 3' end of the nearest gene model, and more than  <dig> kb from the 3' end of all other gene models . we eliminated from further analysis induced regions  located on minor scaffolds , leaving a total of  <dig> candidate induced regions in d. virilis,  <dig> of which can be preliminarily associated with  <dig> d. virilis genes.

in order to understand the similarities between the d. melanogaster and d. virilis immune responses, we focused on the  <dig> genes in d. melanogaster  and the  <dig> genes in d. virilis  associated with induced regions. we used three approaches to identify orthologs and paralogs of these gene models. first, for any gene model included in the manual homology annotation of immune system genes  <cit> , we used the homology and orthology assignments from that work. for the remaining genes, we used homologs annotated by flybase. if flybase reported no homolog, we verified the absence of homologs by reference to the homology assignments generated by the drosophila  <dig> genomes consortium  <cit> .

of the  <dig> induced genes in d. melanogaster ,  <dig> have no identifiable homologs in d. virilis,  <dig> have homologs in d. virilis, and  <dig> have ambiguous homology. genes associated with expressed regions assigned to state  <dig>  are significantly more likely to lack homologs in d. virilis that genes associated with expressed regions assigned to state  <dig> . as highly induced genes are much more likely to represent effectors, this result is expected based on the analysis of sackton et al.  <cit> , which showed that effector proteins are much more likely to have lineage restricted patterns of homology than immune system genes as a whole.

this same pattern seems to hold in d. virilis, suggesting that the high rate of turnover in effector proteins may be quite general. in d. virilis, the  <dig> gene models associated with induced regions  include  <dig> with no identifiable homologs in d. melanogaster and  <dig> with homologs in d. melanogaster. like in d. melanogaster, genes associated with expressed regions assigned to state  <dig> are more likely to lack homologs that those associated with expressed regions assigned to state  <dig>  although this pattern is not significant .

in both species, gene models that are highly induced  encode significantly shorter predicted polypeptides than induced  gene models . furthermore, in both species gene models that lack homologs in the other species are significantly shorter than those gene models that have homologs . because it can be difficult to infer homology patterns between highly divergent short peptides, we cannot rule out the possibility that the deficiency of gene models with detectable homologs among the highly induced class reflects high rates of divergence rather than lack of homologs, although the observation that immune effector proteins tend to be highly conserved at the protein sequence level among drosophilids  <cit>  suggests against this interpretation.

the putatively induced genes that have identifiable homologs between species reveal broad similarities in the transcriptional response to infection between d. melanogaster and d. virilis. as expected based on our comparison of the d. melanogaster induced genes to previous microarray studies, most of the highly induced genes are antimicrobial peptides, turandots, and other immune-induced peptides such as the ims . we also see other immune genes such as pgrp-sb <dig>  transferrin  <dig>  and tepii strongly induced after infection in d. melanogaster. in d. virilis, homologs of many effectors or putative effectors are identified as induced in our sample. the genes associated with expressed regions assigned to state  <dig> in d. virilis encode attacins, cecropins, metchnikowin, diptericins, pgrp-sb <dig>  and a protein with homology to im <dig>  we also find evidence for induction of homologs of two additional peptidoglycan recognition proteins  and the d. virilis homologs of relish, mp <dig>  and necrotic . given the limitations of our sequencing strategy in detecting weakly induced genes, we have almost certainly not detected all induced signalling and recognition genes in d. virilis. thus, in the next section, we focus on the most strongly induced category of genes in both species, the amps.

differences in the members of amp families induced after infection
despite the overall similarity of the transcriptional response to infection in d. virilis and d. melanogaster, notable differences exist in the pattern of induction of members of amp gene families. the d. melanogaster genome encodes  <dig> antimicrobial peptides that are members of seven gene families. these peptides can be broadly grouped into three categories: cysteine-rich peptides characterized by pairs of disulfide bonds , peptides with an amphiphilic α-helical conformation , and proline or glycine rich peptides . five of these families – diptericins, cecropins, attacins, metchnikowin, and defensin – have homologs in d. virilis, encoding total of  <dig> known antimicrobial peptides; drosocin and drosomycins are absent from the entire drosophila subgenus  <cit> .

most of these amps are strongly induced after infection . in d. virilis,  <dig> of the  <dig> amps are highly induced  after infection; the remaining  <dig> are not expressed in our sample. in d. melanogaster,  <dig> of the  <dig> amps are highly induced, an 11th is moderately induced , and a 12th appears to be very weakly expressed, but not induced . among the homologous amp families, the diptericins are the most strongly induced in both species: marginally so in d. melanogaster , and strikingly so in d. virilis . furthermore, in both species diptericins represent the largest fraction of total amp transcription in the infected sample , and diptericin expression is dominated by a single paralog , although when non-homologous amp families are included, dro dominates overall transcription in the infected d. melanogaster sample. the extent to which one amp predominates is strikingly different between species, however: in d. melanogaster, dro, mtk, drs and dpt are all transcribed at high levels in the infected sample, whereas no other amp is transcribed at nearly the level of dpt in d. virilis , suggesting that the spectrum of antimicrobial peptides produced after infection may be narrower in d. virilis than in d. melanogaster. there are also differences in the relative transcription level of paralogs within the cecropin, attacin, and diptericin amp families. in the d. virilis sample, one member of each family tends to dominate transcription , whereas in d. melanogaster the relative transcription of paralogs within a amp family is less skewed .

1not detected in our sample.

1not detected in our sample.

on a broader scale, in both species the proline- and glycine- rich peptides represent most of the total amp transcription . again, though, d. melanogaster appears to transcribe a broader spectrum of antimicrobial peptides in response to infection, with a substantial fraction of the total transcription of amps in d. melanogaster associated with cysteine-rich  amps. this analysis of course excludes any uncharacterized amps in d. virilis. however, as discussed below, the most promising candidates for novel d. virilis amps appear to be in the glycine- and proline- rich family, suggesting that d. virilis may in fact produce a narrower range of amp types in response to our artificial infection protocol. in is possible that this observation could be attributable to differences in the ability of the bacterial species used to replicate efficiently between d. virilis and d. melanogaster, resulting in differences in the nature of the infection experienced by the two species of drosophila. alternatively, d. virilis and d. melanogaster differ at a number of ecological traits, any of which could potentially lead to different selective pressures for the diversity of amps produced: d. melanogaster is tropical, d. virilis is holarctic; d. melanogaster breeds on a wide range of substrates, typically rotting fruit, d. virilis breeds on sap fluxes  <cit> . while it is tempting to speculate, a fuller understanding of the diversity of d. virilis amps and the persistence of differences in transcription in response to multiple challenges will be needed before the hypothesis that d. virilis responds to infection with a narrower and less diverse range of amps can be established.

novel components of the d. virilis immune system
as noted above, a number of d. virilis gene models associated with induced regions do not have identifiable homologs in d. melanogaster or other species of the melanogaster species group. in this section, we discuss these putative novel components of the d. virilis immune system in more detail . broadly speaking, these ten gene models fall into three classes: those encoding predicted proteins that are apparently not secreted ; those encoding predicted proteins that are short, secreted, negatively charged, and appear to be distantly related to the im proteins in d. melanogaster; and those encoding short, positively charged, secreted proteins that are often proline or glycine rich and may represent novel amps. predicted proteins were considered secreted if signalp  <cit>  predicted a signal peptide.

*these gene models are paralogs

for proteins with a predicted signal peptide, molecular weight and net charge of the predicted mature peptide were computed using the expasy web server.

gene models lacking a signal peptide
two putatively induced d. virilis gene models lack a signal peptide. one, dvir_gleanr_ <dig> is a short protein  that is moderately induced . the second, dvir_gleanr_ <dig>  is somewhat longer,  <dig> amino acids, but is highly repetitive, consisting of  <dig> repeats of a 12– <dig> amino acid motif. the repetitive nature of this predicted gene makes identifying putative homologs difficult; we fail to detect any via blast, and no homologs in any species are reported in drosophila  <dig> genomes consortium  <cit> . this gene model is flagged as potentially representing a repeat-contaminated gene model, suggesting that this result may be artefactual.

secreted, im-like peptides
two gene models in d. virilis that are putatively associated with an induced region, dvir_gleanr_ <dig> and dvir_gleanr_ <dig>  have strong evidence for a signal peptide, and are short , suggesting the possibility that these are novel effector proteins. however, they are unlikely to be antimicrobial peptides. almost all antimicrobial peptides have a net positive charge; the predicted proteins encoded by these two gleanr models both have a negative net charge. the proteins with the closest homology are the im proteins of d. melanogaster. these are a family of short, strongly induced peptides of unknown function.

putative novel amps
the remaining three gleanr models, plus the two non-gleanr gene models  that appear to be strongly induced by infection, are all secreted peptides with predicted molecular weights between  <dig> and  <dig> kd and predicted positive charge at physiological phs . all three have homologs in d. mojavensis and d. grimshawi, the two species with sequenced genomes that are most closely related to d. virilis, but not in any other species of drosophila with sequenced genomes. in addition dvir_gleanr_ <dig> and the non-gleanr gene model are both ~18% proline, which combined with their patterns of induction, size, and charge suggests that they might be similar in function to the proline-rich family of amps, including abaecins and apidaecins from bees , as well as mtk and dro from drosophila .

protein constituents of the d. virilis hemolymph
in order to further characterize the d. virilis immune response, we used a proteomic approach  to analyze the protein constituents of d. virilis hemolymph, in both naïve  and immune-challenged flies. previous work in d. melanogaster has focused on identifying proteins that increase in concentration in the hemolymph after immune challenge  <cit> , characterizing the proteins involved in clotting  <cit> , and mapping the proteins present in larval hemolymph in an unchallenged state  <cit> . this wealth of information about the protein constituents of hemolymph in d. melanogaster thus provides a comparative context for proteomic studies of other species of drosophila.

in order to characterize the protein content of the d. virilis hemolymph, we used two methods. first, we assessed the relative concentration of each identified protein using the empai statistic implemented in mascot  <cit> . this statistic is calculated based on the fraction of potentially observable peptides that are in fact observed in the sample for any given protein. second, we used the itraq chemistry , which uses tags to mark each sample , to estimate the relative abundance of each identified protein in the infected and uninfected samples using the software proteinpilot .

in general, the protein constituents of the d. virilis hemolymph show substantial homology to previously identified components of the d. melanogaster hemolymph . in the total  sample,  <dig> % of the total protein is composed of d. virilis proteins with d. melanogaster homologs that have been identified as present in the d. melanogaster hemolymph. another  <dig> % of the total protein in d. virilis hemolymph is consists of proteins with d. melanogaster homologs that have not been previously characterized as components of the d. melanogaster hemolymph. finally,  <dig> % of the d. virilis hemolymph is composed of proteins without d. melanogaster homologs. surprisingly, one of these proteins  represented 20% of the total protein content of the d. virilis hemolymph; this protein has identifiable homologs in d. mojavensis and d. grimshawi, but no other species of insect with sequenced genomes, and has no significant blast similarity to any other proteins in genbank. thus, while the most common protein in d. virilis hemolymph appears to be an evolutionary novelty, the general spectrum of hemolymph proteins between d. melanogaster and d. virilis appear broadly conserved.

the changes in protein concentration in the d. virilis hemolymph we observe after infection are largely consistent with our expectations based on our transcriptional data. we see a significant correlation between transcriptional induction and changes in protein concentration , although only a small fraction of the total expressed regions we observe in our transcriptional data can be associated with proteins identified in the d. virilis hemolymph. consistent with our observation that genes encoding homologs of diptericin are the most strongly induced amps in d. virilis , we find that diptericin homologs are also the proteins that increases most in concentration after infection . finally, one of the putative novel amps identified in our transcriptional analysis  is the protein that increases in concentration second most in our hemolymph sample , providing further evidence for a potential antimicrobial or immune role for this protein.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we used short read cdna sequencing to characterize the transcriptional response to infection in d. virilis and d. melanogaster. we show that even a relatively small number of sequencing reads  can produce reliable estimates of induction, at least for strongly induced genes, consistent with recent results suggesting high technical repeatability of this approach  <cit> . by comparing the relative induction of amp gene families in d. melanogaster and d. virilis, we show that significant differences in the relative induction of different peptides exist between species. the striking increase in induction of dpt homologs in d. virilis relative to d. melanogaster is supported by the observation that dpt homologs represent  <dig> % of the protein in d. virilis hemolymph from infected flies, far higher than any other amp. finally, we show that some predicted d. virilis genes that lack homologs to d. melanogaster share characteristics with the proline-rich amp superfamily, and the protein encoded by at least one of these genes is detectable in the hemolymph of infected flies, suggesting that d. virilis likely possesses lineage-restricted immune system components, and that the pattern we observe in d. melanogaster is general. taken together, these results suggest that novel downstream components of the immune system can be rapidly integrated of relatively short time scales. the adaptive potential of gene gain and loss should not be overlooked in the evolutionary dynamics of host immune systems.

