BACKGROUND
methionine adenosyltranferases  catalyse the synthesis of s-adenosylmethionine  from adenosine triphosphate  and methionine. mat is abundant in all three domains of life, and the cofactor sam is essential for a variety of different enzymatic reactions. in addition to its function as methyl group donor for c-, n-, s- and o-methylation, sam participates in the biosynthesis of polyamines and is a source of 5′-deoxyadenosyl radicals that are involved in a broad range of radical-initiated reactions, such as isomerisation, elimination and insertion reactions
 <cit> . recently, an additional function of sam has been shown, involving dipolar ylide intermediates
 <cit> . as mats are the only known enzymes catalysing the synthesis of sam, they are believed to be housekeeping enzymes and have been suggested as tools for phylogenetic analyses
 <cit> . among the most extensively studied mats are the bacterial representatives from escherichia coli ,
 <cit> bacillus subtilis <cit>  and several streptomyces species
 <cit> , as well as the enzymes derived from selected eukaryotic organisms, such as saccharomyces cerevisiae <cit> , rattus norvegicus <cit> , and homo sapiens 
 <cit> . mats catalyse the formation of sam in a two-step process: in the first step first sam is formed in a sn <dig> reaction from methionine and the adenosine moiety of atp; in the second step the triphosphate is cleaved to yield pyrophosphate and orthophosphate and the products are released . each enzyme dimer has two active sites at the interface of the monomers, and a range of structures with active site ligands such as substrates, products and inhibitors are available. atp derivatives with non-hydrolysable bonds in the phosphate chain, such as adenosine 5′-triphosphate , trap the enzyme after the first catalytic step  and have been useful tools in the elucidation of the reaction sequence
 <cit> . based on ecmat structures with different ligand combinations a putative mechanism has been suggested, where a conserved histidine acts as an acid to protonate atp at the o5′-atom , followed by the formation of sam
 <cit> . another, substantially different mechanism that involves extensive movements of the substrate atp in the active site has been proposed for the mat from r. norvegicus <cit> .

in contrast to mats from eukaryotes and bacteria, only two orthologs from archaea have been described
 <cit> . after the initial description of an mat from sulfolobus solfataricus  by porcelli in 1988
 <cit> , it took more than a decade to identify a metk gene encoding mat in an archaeon due to the distinct phylogeny of these enzymes
 <cit> . whereas eukaryotic and bacterial mat share up to 59% of sequence identity , this figure is around 20% for the archaeal sequences with respect to the other domains of life
 <cit>  . beside their importance from an evolutionary point of view, archaeal enzymes are of great interest for technical applications, mainly due to their origin from extremophilic organisms, often leading to high stability
 <cit> . the mat from methanocaldococcus jannaschii   has been characterised in detail concerning kinetic parameters, optimal reaction conditions, inhibitors and alternative substrates
 <cit> , as well as for its unfolding behaviour
 <cit> . during these studies, a homology model of mjmat, based on the α-subunit of the human matii, has been generated, predicting that archaeal mats exhibit a topology very similar to the eukaryotic and bacterial enzymes
 <cit> . more recently, a crystal structure of ssmat has become available in the pdb database , but no associated data has as yet been published.

in the following we present the structural and functional characterisation of mat from thermococcus kodakarensis , a new member of the group of archaeal mats. the sulphur-reducing, hyperthermophilic archaeon t. kodakarensis is classified in the phylum euryarchaeota and is found in many high-temperature environments. it grows optimally at a temperature of 85°c and is able to survive up to 100°c
 <cit> . since  <dig>  when the genome sequence of t. kodakarensis was determined
 <cit> , many enzymes involved in several pathways were investigated
 <cit> .

RESULTS
optimisation of the hplc assay
the standard method of determining mat activity is by using 14c-labelled methionine in a cation exchange filter assay. in addition, a few hplc-based protocols have been described for the direct detection of sam formed. after some initial tests we decided to use a scx stationary phase and adapted conditions similar to those described by kamarthapu et al. <cit> . a good separation of atp and sam could be achieved ; the assay is also readily usable in conjunction with detection by mass spectrometry.

cloning and initial characterisation of tkmat
the gene encoding mat from t. kodakarensis <cit>  was identified by a pblast similarity search using the sequence from m. jannaschii as the query. only one gene product was identified , which we cloned from genomic dna to be heterologously expressed in e. coli bl21rp. after purification via nickel affinity chromatography, sds-page analysis showed a single band between  <dig> and  <dig> kda corresponding to the calculated mass for a single, his-tagged subunit of  <dig>  kda. in contrast to most eukaryotic and bacterial mats that form tetramers
 <cit> , the archaeal mats described so far are homodimers in solution. tkmat follows this trend, as only a single protein peak with a mass of  <dig> kda was detected in size exclusion chromatography, corresponding to the homodimer . cd denaturation studies resulted in a t <dig> of 85°c . the enzyme converted methionine and atp to sam , kinetic parameters are summarised in table 
 <dig> .

overall structure of tkmat
tkmat was crystallised by sitting drop vapour diffusion. the crystals belonged to the monoclinic space group c <dig>  with four monomers of the enzyme per asymmetric unit. diffraction data was collected to a maximum resolution of  <dig>  Å, and the structure was solved by a combination of sad using a semet derivative of tkmat and molecular replacement using the ssmat structure  as a search model. overall, the structure of tkmat closely resembles bacterial and eukaryotic mats : the peptide chain folds into three structural – but not topological – domains forming a disc-shaped, trigonal prism. two such monomers are stacked to form a tightly assembled dimer. tkmat appears as a dimer in solution, but was found in the crystal packing as a tetramer, which is quite similar to those reported for the mats from e. coli <cit>  or r. norvegicus <cit> . the three domains of the mat monomer are commonly described as n-terminal, central and c-terminal domain and consist of non-consecutive stretches of the mat polypeptide
 <cit> . compared to bacterial and eukaryotic mats, tkmat and mjmat contain an additional β-strand at the n-terminus  that forms a part of the c-terminal domain. the other significant structural difference between archaeal mats and their eukaryotic and bacterial counterparts is an extension of the central two β-strands pleated in the sheet of the central domain .

similarities and differences in the active site
the location of the active site can be predicted from the accumulation of water molecules at the dimer interface and is confirmed when superimposed with mat structures containing ligands such as pdb entries 1rg <dig> , 2p <dig>  or 4k0b . key residues involved in substrate/product stabilisation and catalysis are conserved throughout all available mat structures . as described before for mats we use asterisks  to identify amino acids from the second monomer of the dimer. important examples are: the histidine thought to act as the catalytic acid in sam formation ; the aromatic amino acid which is π-stacked with the adenine moiety of atp/sam ; the hydrophobic residue interacting with the methionine side chain ; and two aspartates coordinating the ribose hydroxyl groups . asp <dig>  and asp  <dig>  also coordinate the methionine amino group; in ecmat another residue  provides additional stabilisation. other residues conserved in the active sites of bacterial and eukaryotic mats are not found in the active site of tkmat. however, the functional residues in archaea are conserved in the two available structures. the most obvious examples for such different stabilising strategies are the hydrogen-bonding networks coordinating the carboxyl group of the methionine moiety, and the adenine amino group. in ecmat and hsmat the carboxyl group is stabilised by a glutamine from the central domain  and a lysine from the c-terminal domain , whereas in archaeal mats it interacts with a histidine and an asparagine from the loop region of the central domain  and another asparagine . the adenine amino group is stabilised by a hydrogen bond with the carbonyl of an arginine in hsmat and ecmat , as opposed to the side chain carboxyl of an aspartate  of the other monomer in the archaeal structures .

the amino acids involved in the stabilisation of the triphosphate are divers between different mats. that, and the fact that the ligands bound derive from different steps of the reaction aminophosphonic acid, pyrophosphate, phosphate), makes a comparison imprecise.

access to the active site
the four monomers of tkmat within the asymmetric unit are similar in structure, but while the monomers within each homodimer aligned with a root-mean-squared displacement  for all atoms of  <dig>  Å  and  <dig>  Å , the corresponding monomers in different dimers were nearly identical . these differences in structure manifest primarily in the β-sheet and the adjacent loops of the c-terminal domain, where a significant asymmetry of the functional dimer of up to  <dig> Å is present, a similar behaviour can also be observed in other mat structures. the flexible loop that is suggested to control access to the active site at the dimer interface in mats
 <cit>  involves residues 145– <dig> in tkmat. in “closed” structures containing bound ligands such as sam, this part of the protein forms a helix covering the active site , whereas in most “open” structures the loop is disordered and the active site consequently is accessible
 <cit> . tkmat is the first structure where the flexible helix is well resolved in all four monomers in an open conformation; it assumes a position close to the outside plane of the monomer and leaves the entrance to the active site open .
 <dig>  b)ecmat dimer in closed conformation . see also additional file
 <dig> 

discussion
the high thermostability observed for tkmat matches the optimal growth temperature of the hyperthermophilic archaeon t. kodakarensis very well; similar behaviour was described for the homologous enzymes from s. solfataricus and m. jannaschii <cit> . the kinetic parameters obtained are in a similar range to those reported for other mats, only the km value for atp is significantly higher. however, the assays as well as the reaction conditions used in the single experiments, differ widely making a direct comparison difficult .

the similar overall structures of archaeal and bacterial/eukaryotic mats suggest that these enzymes share an early common ancestor from which they evolved independently, explaining the low similarity in their amino acid sequences. the tetrameric arrangement found in the crystal occurs in all mats of known structure, but is frequently only generated through crystallographic symmetry operations. this is in particular the case in eukaryotic and bacterial mats, where the tetramer shows  <dig> symmetry that can coincide with crystal symmetry. in contrast, the tkmat tetramer is generated as a dimer of dimers with a significantly smaller torsion of about 30° . the same arrangement is present in the structure of ssmat and might be characteristic for archaeal mats. the only exception from this observation is the structure of the burkholderia pseudomallei mat , with a less pronounced torsion of only 35°.

the additional β-strand in the c-terminal domain is also present in the corresponding s. solfataricus structure, but was not represented in the homology model for mjmat, as this was based on the human structure where the β-strand is absent
 <cit> . however, the first  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids of the enzymes from human and rat, respectively, were not ordered in the corresponding crystal structures, so that the presence of the additional β-strand in solution cannot be excluded in these enzymes. in archaeal mats the additional β-strand extends the β-sheet of the c-terminal domain to match the four-stranded sheets found in the n-terminal and central domains, and therefore might add to the higher stability of archaeal mats by providing a direct connection between the n- and c-termini of the peptide chain within a stable secondary structure. the extended β-sheet in the central domain might also exhibit stabilisation effects by wrapping around the loops at the edge of the n-terminal domain .

a major difference between tkmat and other mat structures without any bound ligands is that the helix covering the active site is completely defined in the structure. one exception to this is a structure of ecmat that was crystallised at low temperatures 
 <cit> . here, the loop was modelled in a quasi-closed conformation but does not show the ordered helical secondary structure visible in ecmat structures with bound sam . until now the flexible loop was thought to be disordered in the open conformation, however all four monomers in the asymmetric unit of the tkmat crystal showed the same ordered helix in the open structure. the higher intrinsic stability of the thermophilic enzyme could explain why this region is well defined in the structure of tkmat. however, in the corresponding open structure from s. solfataricus , another thermophilic organism, the loop is not defined.

our data supports the mechanism of substrate binding described for ecmat where residues from the flexible loop form their respective interactions with the substrates after they have entered the active site along with movement of the flexible helix into the closed position
 <cit> . the position of these residues  are clearly different in the open and closed structures . some of the active site residues responsible for substrate/product binding in ecmat and other bacterial and eukaryotic mats, including the putatively catalytic histidine, are conserved in tkmat, while some functional groups appear to be stabilised in a different manner. a closer inspection of the active site based on co-crystallised substrates, products or inhibitors will show if these differences are responsible for the variation in the substrate range described for the archaeal mat from m. jannaschii, in comparison to ecmat
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we present the structure of a thermophilic, archaeal mat that displays several novel features in comparison to mats from bacteria or eukarya, including extended β-sheets that may be responsible for the increased stability of mats from thermophilic organisms. sam is an important cofactor for a wide range of enzymatic reactions. enzymes from thermophilic organisms are often used as biocatalysts for technical applications due to their high stability
 <cit> . commercially available sam is usually extracted from yeast, however for some applications such as the generation of sam-derivatives or isotope-labelled compounds using isolated enzymes might be advantageous. the structure described here will serve as a basis for the rational design of mat variants to further extend the substrate range.

