BACKGROUND
culture-independent studies of microbial communities are revolutionising our understanding of microbiology and revealing exquisite interactions between microbes, animals and plants. two widely used techniques are deep sequence surveying of pcr-amplified marker genes such as 16s rrna, or whole-genome shotgun metagenomics, where the entire complement of community dna is sequenced en masse. while both of these approaches are powerful, they have important technical caveats and limitations, which may distort taxonomic distributions and frequencies observed in the sequence dataset. such limitations, which have been well reported in the literature, include choices relating to sample collection, sample storage and preservation, dna extraction, amplifying primers, sequencing technology, read length and depth and bioinformatics analysis techniques  <cit> .

a related additional problem is the introduction of contaminating microbial dna during sample preparation. possible sources of dna contamination include molecular biology grade water , pcr reagents  and dna extraction kits themselves  <cit> . contaminating sequences matching water- and soil-associated bacterial genera including acinetobacter, alcaligenes, bacillus, bradyrhizobium, herbaspirillum, legionella, leifsonia, mesorhizobium, methylobacterium, microbacterium, novosphingobium, pseudomonas, ralstonia, sphingomonas, stenotrophomonas and xanthomonas have been reported previously . the presence of contaminating dna is a particular challenge for researchers working with samples containing a low microbial biomass. in these cases, the low amount of starting material may be effectively swamped by the contaminating dna and generate misleading results.

although the presence of such contaminating dna has been reported in the literature, usually associated with pcr-based studies, its possible impact on high-throughput 16s rrna gene-based profiling and shotgun metagenomics studies has not been reported. in our laboratories we routinely sequence negative controls, consisting of ‘blank’ dna extractions and subsequent pcr amplifications. despite adding no sample template at the dna extraction step, these negative control samples often yield a range of contaminating bacterial species , which are often also visible in the human-derived samples that are processed concomitantly with the same batch of dna extraction kits. the presence of contaminating sequences is greater in low-biomass samples  than in high-biomass samples , suggesting that there is a critical tipping point where contaminating dna becomes dominant in sequence libraries.table  <dig> 
list of contaminant genera detected in sequenced negative ‘blank’ controls



phylum
list of constituent contaminant genera

afipia, aquabacterium
e, asticcacaulis, aurantimonas, beijerinckia, bosea, bradyrhizobium
d, brevundimonas
c, caulobacter, craurococcus, devosia, hoeflea
e, mesorhizobium, methylobacterium
c, novosphingobium, ochrobactrum, paracoccus, pedomicrobium, phyllobacterium
e, rhizobium
c,d, roseomonas, sphingobium, sphingomonas
c,d,e, sphingopyxis

acidovorax
c,e, azoarcus
e, azospira, burkholderia
d, comamonas
c, cupriavidus
c, curvibacter, delftia
e, duganella
a, herbaspirillum
a,c, janthinobacterium
e, kingella, leptothrix
a, limnobacter
e, massilia
c, methylophilus, methyloversatilis
e, oxalobacter, pelomonas, polaromonas
e, ralstonia
b,c,d,e, schlegelella, sulfuritalea, undibacterium
e, variovorax

acinetobacter
a,d,c, enhydrobacter, enterobacter, escherichia
a,c,d,e, nevskia
e, pseudomonas
b,d,e, pseudoxanthomonas, psychrobacter, stenotrophomonas
a,b,c,d,e, xanthomonas
b
aeromicrobium, arthrobacter, beutenbergia, brevibacterium, corynebacterium, curtobacterium, dietzia, geodermatophilus, janibacter, kocuria, microbacterium, micrococcus, microlunatus, patulibacter, propionibacterium
e, rhodococcus, tsukamurella
abiotrophia, bacillus
b, brevibacillus, brochothrix, facklamia, paenibacillus, streptococcus
chryseobacterium, dyadobacter, flavobacterium
d
, hydrotalea, niastella, olivibacter, pedobacter, wautersiella
deinococcus
the listed genera were all detected in sequenced negative controls that were processed alongside human-derived samples in our laboratories  over a period of four years. a variety of dna extraction and pcr kits were used over this period, although dna was primarily extracted using the fastdna spin kit for soil. genus names followed by a superscript letter indicate those that have also been independently reported as contaminants previously. aalso reported by tanner et al.  <cit> ; balso reported by grahn et al.  <cit> ; calso reported by barton et al.  <cit> ; dalso reported by laurence et al.  <cit> ; ealso detected as contaminants of multiple displacement amplification kits . icl, imperial college london; ub, university of birmingham; wtsi, wellcome trust sanger institute.



many recent publications  describe important or core microbiota members, often members that are biologically unexpected, which overlap with previously-described contaminant genera. spurred by this and by the results from negative control samples in our own laboratories when dealing with low-input dna samples, we investigated the impact of contamination on microbiota studies and explored methods to limit the impact of such contamination. in this study we identify the range of contaminants present in commonly used dna extraction reagents and demonstrate the significant impact they can have on microbiota studies.

RESULTS
16s rrna gene sequencing of a pure salmonella bongori culture
to demonstrate the presence of contaminating dna and its impact on high and low biomass samples, we used 16s rrna gene sequence profiling of a pure culture of salmonella bongori that had undergone five rounds of serial ten-fold dilutions . s. bongori was chosen because we have not observed it as a contaminant in any of our previous studies and it can be differentiated from other salmonella species by 16s rrna gene sequencing. as a pure culture was used as starting template, regardless of starting biomass, any organisms other than s. bongori observed in subsequent dna sequencing results must therefore be derived from contamination. aliquots from the dilution series were sent to three institutes  and processed with different batches of the fastdna spin kit for soil . 16s rrna gene amplicons were generated using both  <dig> and  <dig> pcr cycles and returned to wtsi for illumina miseq sequencing.

s. bongori was the sole organism identified in the original undiluted culture but with subsequent dilutions a range of contaminating bacterial groups increased in relative abundance while the proportion of s. bongori reads concurrently decreased . by the fifth serial dilution, equivalent to an input biomass of roughly 103salmonella cells, contamination was the dominant feature of the sequencing results. this pattern was consistent across all three sites and was most pronounced with 40 cycles of pcr. these results highlight a key problem with low biomass samples. the most diluted 20-pcr cycle samples resulted in low pcr product yields, leading to under-representation in the multiplexed pool of samples for sequencing as an equimolar mix could not be achieved . conversely, using  <dig> pcr cycles generated enough pcr products for effective sequencing , but a significant proportion of the resulting sequence data was derived from contaminating, non-salmonella, dna. it should be noted though that even when using only  <dig> pcr cycles contamination was still predominant with the lowest input biomass .figure  <dig> 
summary of 16s rrna gene sequencing taxonomic assignment from ten-fold diluted pure cultures and controls. undiluted dna extractions contained approximately  <dig> cells, and controls  were template-free pcrs. dna was extracted at icl, ub and wtsi laboratories and amplified with  <dig> pcr cycles. each column represents a single sample; sections  and  describe the same samples at different taxonomic levels. a) proportion of s. bongori sequence reads in black. the proportional abundance of non-salmonella reads at the class level is indicated by other colours. as the sample becomes more dilute, the proportion of the sequenced bacterial amplicons from the cultured microorganism decreases and contaminants become more dominant. b) abundance of genera which make up > <dig> % of the results from at least one laboratory, excluding s. bongori. the profiles of the non-salmonella reads within each laboratory/kit batch are consistent but differ between sites.



sequence profiles revealed some similar taxonomic classifications between all sites, including acidobacteria gp <dig>  microbacterium, propionibacterium and pseudomonas . differences between sites were observed, however, with chryseobacterium, enterobacter and massilia more dominant at wtsi, sphingomonas at ub, and corynebacterium, facklamia and streptococcus at icl, along with a greater proportion of actinobacteria in general . this illustrates that there is variation in contaminant content between laboratories, which may be due to differences between reagent/kit batches or contaminants introduced from the wider laboratory environment. many of the contaminating operational taxonomic units  represent bacterial genera normally found in soil and water, for example arthrobacter, burkholderia, chryseobacterium, ochrobactrum, pseudomonas, ralstonia, rhodococcus and sphingomonas, while others, such as corynebacterium, propionibacterium and streptococcus, are common human skin-associated organisms. by sequencing pcr ‘blank’ negative controls, specifically pcr-amplified ultrapure water with no template dna added, we were able to distinguish between taxa that had originated from the dna extraction kits as opposed to dna from other sources . sixty-three taxa were absent from all pcr blank controls but present at > <dig> % proportional abundance in one or more serially-diluted s. bongori samples , suggesting that they were introduced to the samples at the dna extraction stage. these include several abundant genera observed at all three sites, such as acidobacteria gp <dig>  burkholderia, unclassified burkholderiaceae and mesorhizobium. it also includes taxa, such as hydrotalea and bradyrhizobium, that were only abundant in samples processed by one or two sites, possibly indicative of variation in contaminants between different batches of the same type of dna extraction kit.

quantitative pcr of bacterial biomass
to assess how much background bacterial dna was present in the samples, we performed qpcr of bacterial 16s rrna genes and calculated the copy number of genes present with reference to a standard curve. assuming a complete absence of contamination, copy number of the 16s rrna genes present should correlate with dilution of s. bongori and reduce in a linear manner. however, at the third dilution copy number remained stable and did not reduce further, indicating the presence of background dna at approximately  <dig> copies per μl of elution volume from the dna extraction kit .figure  <dig> 
copy number of total 16s rrna genes present in a dilution series of
s. bongori
culture. total bacterial dna present in serial ten-fold dilutions of a pure s. bongori culture was quantified using qpcr. while the copy number initially reduces in tandem with increased dilution, plateauing after four dilutions indicates consistent background levels of contaminating dna. error bars indicate standard deviation of triplicate reactions. the broken red line indicates the detection limit of  <dig> copies of 16s rrna genes. the no template internal control for the qpcr reactions  was below the cycle threshold selected for interpreting the fluorescence values , indicating the contamination did not come from the qpcr reagents themselves.



shotgun metagenomics of a pure s. bongori culture processed with four commercial dna extraction kits
having established that 16s rrna gene sequencing results can be confounded by contaminating dna, we next investigated whether similar patterns emerge in shotgun metagenomics studies, which do not involve a targeted pcr step. we hypothesised that if contamination arises from the dna extraction kit, it should also be present in metagenomic sequencing results. dna extraction kits from four different manufacturers were used in order to investigate whether or not the problem was limited to a single manufacturer. aliquots from the same s. bongori dilution series were processed at ub with the fastdna spin kit for soil , mobio ultraclean microbial dna isolation kit , qiamp dna stool mini kit  and psp spin stool dna plus kit . as with 16s rrna gene sequencing, it was found that as the sample dilution increased, the proportion of reads mapping to the s. bongori reference genome sequence decreased . regardless of kit, contamination was always the predominant feature of the sequence data by the fourth serial dilution, which equated to an input of around 104salmonella cells.figure  <dig> 
summary of the metagenomic data for the
s. bongori
ten-fold dilution series , extracted with four different kits. each column represents a single sample. a sample of ultrapure water, without dna extraction, was also sequenced . a) as the starting material becomes more diluted, the proportion of sequenced reads mapping to the s. bongori reference genome decreases for all kits and contamination becomes more prominent. b) the profile of the non-salmonella reads  is different for each of the four kits.



samples were processed concurrently within the same laboratory. if the contamination was derived from the laboratory environment then similar bacterial compositions would be expected in each of the results. instead, a range of environmental bacteria was observed, which were of a different profile in each kit . fp had a stable kit profile dominated by burkholderia, psp was dominated by bradyrhizobium, while the qia kit had the most complex mix of bacterial dna. bradyrhizobiaceae, burkholderiaceae, chitinophagaceae, comomonadaceae, propionibacteriaceae and pseudomonadaceae were present in at least three quarters of the dilutions from psp, fp and qia kits. however, relative abundances of taxa at the family level varied according to kit: fp was marked by burkholderiaceae and enterobacteriaceae, psp was marked by bradyrhizobiaceae and chitinophagaceae. the contamination in the qia kit was relatively diverse in comparison to the other kits, and included higher proportions of aerococcaceae, bacillaceae, flavobacteriaceae, microbacteriaceae, paenibacillaceae, planctomycetaceae and polyangiaceae than the other kits. kit mb did not have a distinct contaminant profile. this was likely a result of the very low number of reads sequenced, with  <dig> reads in dilution  <dig>   <dig> reads in dilution  <dig> and fewer than  <dig> reads in subsequent dilutions . although read count is only a semi-quantitative measure of dna concentration, this may indicate that levels of background contamination from this kit were comparatively lower than the other kits tested.

comparatively few contaminant taxa that were detected in the ‘blank’ water control, which was dominated by pseudomonas, were detected in the serially diluted metagenomic samples. this provided further evidence that the observed contamination was likely to have originated in large part from the dna extraction kits themselves. these metagenomic results, therefore, clearly show that contamination becomes the dominant feature of sequence data from low biomass samples, and that the kit used to extract dna can have an impact on the observed bacterial diversity, even in the absence of a pcr amplification step. reducing input biomass again increases the impact of these contaminants upon the observed microbiota.

impact of contaminated extraction kits on a study of low-biomass microbiota
having established that the contamination in different lots of dna extraction kits is not constant or predictable, we next show the impact that this can have on real datasets. a recent study in a refugee camp on the border between thailand and burma used an existing nasopharyngeal swab archive  <cit>  to examine the development of the infant nasopharyngeal microbiota. a cohort of  <dig> children born in 2007/ <dig> were sampled every month until two years of age, and the 16s rrna gene profiles of these swabs were sequenced by  <dig> pyrosequencing.

principal coordinate analysis  showed two distinct clusters distinguishing samples taken during early life from those taken from subsequent sampling time points, suggesting an early, founder nasopharyngeal microbiota . four batches of fp kits had been used to extract the samples and a record was made of which kit was used for each sample. further analysis of the otus present indicated that samples possessed different communities depending on which kit had been used for dna extraction  and that the first two kits’ associated otus made up the majority of their samples’ reads . as samples had been extracted in chronological order, rather than random order, this led to the false conclusion that otus from the first two kits were associated with age. otus driving clustering to the left in figure 4a and b , were classified as achromobacter, aminobacter, brevundimonas, herbaspirillum, ochrobactrum, pedobacter, pseudomonas, rhodococcus, sphingomonas and stenotrophomonas. otus driving data points to the right  included acidaminococcus and ralstonia. a full list of significant otus is shown in additional file 1: table s <dig>  once the contaminants were identified and removed, the pcoa clustering of samples from the run no longer had a discernible pattern, showing that the contamination was the biggest driver of sample ordination . new aliquots were obtained from the original sample archive and were reprocessed using a different kit lot and sequenced. the previously observed contaminant otus were not detected, further confirming their absence in the original nasopharyngeal samples .figure  <dig> 
summary of the contaminant content of nasopharyngeal samples from thailand. a) the pcoa plot appears to show age-related clustering; however, b) extraction kit lot explains the pattern better. c) when coloured by age, the plot shows the loss of the initial clustering pattern after excluding contaminant otus from ordination. d) the proportion of reads attributed to contaminant otus for each sample, demonstrating that the first two kits were the most heavily contaminated. e) genus-level profile of contaminant otus for each kit used.



this dataset, therefore, serves as a case study for the significant, and potentially misleading, impact that contaminants originating from kits can have on microbiota analyses and subsequent conclusions.

discussion
results presented here show that contamination with bacterial dna or cells in dna extraction kit reagents, and the wider laboratory environment, should not only be a concern for 16s rrna gene sequencing projects, which require pcr amplification, but also for shotgun metagenomics projects.

contaminating dna has been reported from pcr reagents, kits and water many times . the taxa identified are mostly soil- or water-dwelling bacteria and are frequently associated with nitrogen fixation. one explanation for this may be that nitrogen is often used instead of air in ultrapure water storage tanks  <cit> . contamination of dna extraction kit reagents has also been reported  <cit>  and kit contamination is a particular challenge for low biomass studies, which may provide little template dna to compete with that in the reagents for amplification  <cit> . issues of contamination have plagued studies, with high-profile examples in the fields of novel virus discovery, such as in the false association of xmrv and chronic fatigue syndrome  <cit> , and the study of ancient dna of early humans and pathogens  <cit> . the microbial content of ancient ice core samples has also shown to be inconsistent when analysed by different laboratories  <cit> .

the importance of this issue when analysing low biomass samples, despite such high-profile reports of reagent contamination, apparently remains underappreciated in the microbiota research community. well-controlled studies, such as in segal et al. who examined the lung microbiota through bronchoalveolar lavage sampling, report their results against the backdrop of copious sequenced ‘background’ controls  <cit> . however, many recent dna sequence-based publications that describe the microbial communities of low-biomass environments do not report dna quantification on initial samples, sequencing of negative controls or describe their contaminant removal or identification procedures. our literature searches have indicated that there are a number of low biomass microbiota studies that report taxa, often statistically noteworthy or core members, that overlap with those we report here from our negative control kit reagents and water . while it is possible that the suspect taxa are genuinely present in these samples, in many cases they are biologically unexpected: for example, rhizosphere-associated bacteria that have been implicated in human disease  <cit> . tellingly, laurence et al.  <cit>  recently demonstrated with an in silico analysis that bradyrhizobium is a common contaminant of sequencing datasets including the  <dig> human genome project. having demonstrated the critical impact that contaminating dna may have on conclusions drawn from sequence-based data, it becomes important to be able to determine which observations are genuine. for environmental samples, such as soil or water, the problem of identifying contaminants requires special attention as the contaminants may be taxa that are indistinguishable from those genuinely present in the samples.

a number of methods have been devised to treat reagents in order to reduce potential contamination, including: gamma  <cit>  or uv radiation , dnase treatment , restriction digests  <cit> , caesium chloride density gradient centrifugation  <cit>  and dna intercalation and crosslinking with 8-methoxypsoralen  <cit> , propidium monoazide  <cit>  or ethidium monoazide  <cit> . however, tests of these methods show varying levels of success. radiation may reduce the activity of enzymes, dnase inactivation can also damage the polymerase, restriction enzymes may introduce more contaminating dna, and unbound dna intercalators inhibit amplification of the intended template  <cit> . an alternative to decontamination is to preferentially amplify the template dna using broad range primer extension pcr  <cit>  but this, and the treatment of the pcr reagents, cannot account for contamination introduced through dna extraction kits.

a simple in silico approach for microbiota studies is to identify contaminants that are sequenced using negative controls or contaminant databases in order to screen them out of downstream analysis  <cit> . in the event that contaminating organisms are discovered that are also biologically plausible and should not be excluded from the analysis, alternative approaches could be employed  <cit> . statistical approaches and basic visualization to compare relative abundances or rank-order information between negative controls and samples may help determine if taxa are also real. alternative bioinformatics approaches, such as oligotyping  <cit> , could potentially provide fine-grained discrimination between contaminant otus and genuine otus assigned to the same genus or species. for shotgun metagenomics studies, use of strain-specific genes or use of phylogenetic information across multiple marker genes may also provide necessary discrimination. deviation from a neutral model of community formation to compare source  and recipient communities may also be useful in this context  <cit> .

by adding negative sequencing controls  it is possible to identify reads originating from contamination, and distinguish them from those derived from actual constituent taxa. we have developed a set of recommendations that may help to limit the impact of reagent contamination . with awareness of common contaminating species, careful collection of controls to cover different batches of sampling, extraction and pcr kits, and sequencing to monitor the content of these controls, it should be possible to effectively mitigate the impact of contaminants in microbiota studies.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that bacterial dna contamination in extraction kits and laboratory reagents can significantly influence the results of microbiota studies, particularly when investigating samples containing a low microbial biomass. such contamination is a concern for both 16s rrna gene sequencing projects, which require targeted pcr amplification and enrichment, and also for shotgun metagenomic projects which do not. awareness of this issue by the microbiota research community is important to ensure that studies are adequately controlled and erroneous conclusions are not drawn from culture-independent investigations.

