BACKGROUND
quorum sensing is a widespread mechanism of intercellular communication among bacteria controlling its gene expression as a function of cell density. two major quorum sensing pathways, with characteristic signalling molecules, ai- <dig> and ai- <dig>  have been identified <cit> . luxs is one of the principal components in the biosynthetic pathway of ai- <dig>  the universal signal for bacterial inter-species communication. in some organisms, quorum sensing by luxs has been shown to have a profound effect on pathogenicity by affecting toxin production or flagellar morphogenesis and hence motility and colonization. however, in some other species it has no direct pathogenic role and known to affect the metabolism. luxs is a small metalloenzyme with zn ion at its active site, which was later predicted to be fe by zhu et al <cit> . sequence alignment studies have indicated the presence of an invariant hxxeh motif <cit>  and the metal ion is tetra-coordinated by the side chains of the two histidines of this motif and cysteine, the fourth coordination site being occupied by a water molecule <cit> . luxs was shown to exist as a homodimer in its biologically active form by dynamic light scattering studies <cit> , the two identical active sites being formed at the dimer interface <cit> . this protein catalyzes the non-redox cleavage of a stable thioether bond in the sam  cycle to produce ai- <dig> as shown schematically in figure  <dig>  such enzymatic reactions are rare in nature and these enzymes require redox-active cofactors. however, luxs is unique as it does not require any redox-active cofactor to catalyze this chemically difficult reaction <cit> .

protein association plays a dominant functional role such as specific recognition, signal transduction, regulation of gene expression and studies have shown that the symmetry in an oligomer plays an important role as it defines the overall architecture of the protein, and thus its function <cit> . luxs is a biologically active homodimer and extensive research has been carried out to explain the principles underlying protein association, with an aim to characterize the interface <cit> . characterization of the protein-ligand interface using network approach has given important insights into the effects of ligand binding and chain connectivity on network communication in the protein dihydrofolate reductase  <cit> . the dimerization domain was shown to be very important in relation to the structure and function of luxs as is evident from the occurrence of the active site at the dimer interface. yet another evidence for the importance of the homodimer is apparent from the studies of electrostatic potential and conserved residues on the monomer surface <cit> . the crystal structures of luxs from only four organisms are available in the pdb in their dimeric states, and it has been proposed to contribute a unique fold to the alpha-beta family of proteins <cit> . interestingly the protein structures superpose very well at the backbone level  and this information does not provide any clue to the diversity in the function of luxs. in the present study, we have highlighted the intricate details of side chain interactions at the dimeric interface, in order to distinguish luxs structures from different sources.

graph theoretical approaches have proved to be useful in capturing the side-chain interactions in a collective way through the representation of protein structures in the form of protein structure networks  <cit> . for example, the analysis of the interface clusters in psn has given insights regarding the sequence signature motifs responsible for the different types of quaternary association in legume lectins <cit> . also, structural domains and domain interface residues in multi-domain proteins were successfully identified by graph spectral analysis <cit> . protein network analysis has also provided insight into the domain-domain interactions in proteins in the context of allostery <cit> . the importance of minor side-chain variations in the light of 'allostery without a backbone conformational change' has also been established <cit> . recently, crucial residues involved in the oligomerization of m. smegmatis dps were predicted from graph based method and has been experimentally proven to be crucial for the functional oligomeric state of the protein <cit> . the aim of the present study is to exploit the advantages of psn graphs for the characterization of the interface in case of luxs from bacteria of various species. our study has revealed the potential of psn graphs as an analytical tool in judging differences in side-chain interactions; the backbone level having almost no differences at all. the interfaces are characterized in several selected structures  and the results are extended to luxs family of proteins in general. an indirect correlation between the dimeric interface organization and the biological function such as pathogenesis is brought out from these studies. additionally, potential sites of mutation at the interfaces are also identified. some of them are shown by previous studies to be structurally and functionally important residues in luxs.

RESULTS
crystal structures of luxs from four organisms  are available in pdb <cit> . structures of luxs dimers from  <dig> other organisms are modelled as described in the methods section and our dataset is divided into six distinct classes  on the basis of the biological activity of the organism and/or the proposed effect of luxs on pathogenesis. interface cluster analysis is performed on the psns of luxs from these  <dig> structures and the results are presented below.

classification of luxs from  <dig> organisms on the basis of their effect on pathogenesis and/or biological manifestations. i – luxs mutation affects biofilm formation; ii – luxs mutation affects motility/flagella formation/metabolism; iii – luxs from organisms belonging to the bacillus sp.; iv – luxs from extremophiles; v – luxs mutation affects toxin production; vi – luxs from probiotics. the abbreviations for the modelled structures are preceded by an 'm' to indicate that these structures are modelled using modeller.

interface cluster analysis of luxs
the protein dimer is considered as a connected network of nodes and edges as described in the methods section. the side chain interactions at the dimer interface are captured at different threshold values of interaction strength . the number of interface clusters varies from  <dig> to  <dig> . however, three of them are consistently present in most of the structures in geometrically equivalent positions, occupying the three vertices of an isosceles triangle as shown schematically in figure  <dig>  two of the clusters  host the active site residues and the third one  is at the apex of the dimer with the exposed loop residues arranged in a mini-triad form. cartoon representations of all the interface clusters  at imin = 6% are shown for one representative member for class  in figure  <dig> and the residues present in these interface clusters are summarized in additional file 1: table s <dig>  it is interesting to see a different pattern of interface clustering in terms of the size of the cluster and its distribution across the interface in each class  in spite of the fact that their backbone rmsds  are considerably small. for instance, it is noted that the maximum similarity at the backbone level among the four pdb structures of luxs is observed between h. pylori and b. subtilis . however, their interface cluster representations show prominent dissimilarities in size and distribution as shown in figure 3; the b. subtilis interface cluster being of approximately half the size of that of h. pylori. although, the total number and size of interface clusters also vary within a class, but the overall topological distribution of the amino acid residues at the interface within a class is uniform as depicted pictorially for class ii and iii in additional file 2: figure s <dig> respectively. thus, we find that our interface clusters exhibit certain characteristic properties that can be related to the biological activities, which will also be elaborated more in other sections.

distribution of active site residues in the interface clusters
luxs has been reported to contain two identical active sites at the dimer interface including residues from both the subunits. the properties of luxs in terms of active site, invariant sequence motif  and the metal ion coordination has been discussed in the background section. our investigation focuses on the distribution of the active site residues in the interface clusters. the results indicate that the active-site interface clusters reproduced the similar symmetric distribution of the active sites at the dimer interface in most of the classes . however, the probiotics  and some of the extremophiles  exhibit different type of association where specifically only one of the active site cluster is part of the interface cluster whereas the second active site cluster is made by the residues of only a single subunit. this is shown pictorially in figure  <dig> 

a general geometric pattern of two active site interface clusters and the mini-triad apex cluster is noted at the interface for classes . the active site clusters are made up of residues  from one subunit and a phe residue from the other subunit. thus, the active site of subunit a is supported by the phe residue of subunit b and vice versa. mini-triad in the apex cluster mentioned here is found to be unanimously present in our interface clusters for all the classes  at high side chain interaction strengths  except for the luxs from bacillus sp.  in which such mini-triad is absent from the interface clusters.

on close inspection of the mutual orientation of the three invariant interface clusters, it is noted that they arrange themselves in the form of an isosceles triangle with comparable distances as shown in figure  <dig>  however, in probiotics  and some extremophiles  it is noted that this triangular pattern on the interface is distorted as shown in figure  <dig>  either by the absence of the three his or the phe or both from the interface clusters.

the results indicate that the isosceles triangular pattern at the interface is violated  in three cases: class iii in which the mini-triad is absent from the interface cluster and class vi and some members of class iv in which the interface clusters contained the active site only from one subunit .

active site residue participation at the dimeric interface clusters of luxs as evaluated at two interaction strength of imin = 6% and 8% from classes i to vi. + refers to the presence of either of the active site cluster i or ii in the interface clusters, – means active site clusters are completely absent from interface clusters, ** means both active site cluster i and ii are present in the interface clusters.

interface signature motifs
the interface cluster analysis enables the identification of sequentially apart, but structurally proximal residues. as mentioned above, the three clusters  are common to most of the structures. in addition, interface clusters at other locations are also present in most cases. here we have analysed the occurrence of residues at the interface coming from structurally similar positions in all the interface clusters. the residues are generally conserved completely or partially within a given class emphasizing its evolutionary importance for organisms within a particular class. however, the his and the phe residues in the active site clusters are completely conserved across all the families. such an analysis of position specific residues in the interface clusters brings out the class specific signature motifs of the interfaces. the results are summarized in table  <dig> and they are pictorially represented in figure  <dig>  from the table it is evident that most of the residues appearing in the signature motif are conserved either completely or partially within the class. however the residues in the mini-triad which was discussed previously are generally not conserved. interestingly, it is observed that the mini-triad motif is absent from the class iii signature motif in contrast to the other classes. the signature motif is plotted and marked on the superposed backbones of the all members of a particular class for class v and vi in figure  <dig> respectively.

the numbering of residues is done for one representative member of each class . complete conservation of the residues is indicated in bold and the bold italics indicate semi-conservative mutation within the class; the normal font indicates no conservation within the class. fraction of conserved/partially/non conserved residues at the interface that forms the interface signature motif is also given. the conservation information is based on the proteins taken in this study and within a class .

* any definite motif was absent in class i

#  refers to the residues from both the chains.  or  refers to the residues from a single chain.** /.

apex cluster at the dimer interface 
a triad cluster  formed by the amino acids belonging to a stretch of five residue sequence, with two of the residues arising from one subunit and the third one coming from the other subunit is identified in luxs protein dimers. the general sequence representation of the triad is x , x+ <dig> , and x+ <dig>  where x represents an arbitrary residue number; a and b represents the two subunits of the protein. there is substantial variation in the type of the amino acids in these motifs. however, a careful examination has revealed consistency in the amino acid type belonging to a particular class . this repeating triad forms a kind of bridge between the two subunits of the dimeric protein since one of the three residues in this pattern always comes from the other chain; and this triad always appears in our interface clusters even at high interaction cut-offs. such an interface triad is identified in all classes with the exception of the bacillus sp. . also, for m1the in class iv the mini-triad motif is absent from the sequence itself as becomes evident from the multiple sequence alignment in figure  <dig> 

the triad motif identified at the dimer interface from the structures is searched in the sequence space of  <dig> luxs proteins from different organisms.  <dig> different patterns are found for the triads and we found the frequency of occurrence of each pattern in the dataset and plotted them as shown in figure  <dig>  these motifs are majorly conserved within a bacterial species as becomes evident from additional file 1: table s <dig> and additional file 3: figure s2; for instance, gxkxd is mainly present in the streptococcus sp. and lactobacillus sp. in our dataset. these motifs are present in the interface clusters of most of the classes which we have selected for analysis except for class iii , in which the motif is vxxg and it is not a part of the interface cluster. the general chemical nature of the triad motif for our dataset is found to be g/polar, basic/polar and acidic. this triad motif is violated only in case of two classes: the mini-triad motif is not very uniformly retained in case of the interface clusters of the probiotics with the xth residue  being usually replaced by a polar th residue. also for the bacillus sp. the acidic residue is replaced by gly and the xth residue is usually val. such a difference in sequence motif is indeed correlated with the structure motif. strikingly, the bacillus family luxs proteins lack the mini-triad in the apex cluster at the interface.

hub analysis and extremophiles
the extremophiles deserve a special mention in terms of the hub analysis, the details of the method given in the methods section. it is noted that for the extremophilic luxs proteins in our dataset  one particular characteristic core  hub is retained at very high cut-offs  for all the members of this class as shown in the additional file 1: table s <dig> except m1psy  in which no hubs are detected beyond imin = 8%. hubs at such high imin values are not detected for members from any other class in our dataset. this "persistent hub"  and the four other connected residues  and their analogues in the other members of this class  are thus identified as characteristic of the extremophilic class of luxs proteins. one reason for the absence of the "persistent hub" from m1psy is that in its sequence tyr  is mutated to ala. the multiple sequence alignment <cit>  within class iv shows that the hub and its connecting residues are mostly completely/partially conserved as shown in figure  <dig>  the hub is identified as an important site for mutation and its location  with respect to the active site cluster in 1inn is shown pictorially in figure  <dig>  which reveals its vicinity to the active site. it should be noted that the sequence of the radiation-resistant bacteria d. radiodurans  and d. geothermalis  and the hyperthermophile t. thermophilus  are more similar to each other than that of the psychrophile p. ingrahamii   which is also reflected in the hub and its connecting residues.

identification of key residues at the interface by graph theoretical analysis
graph theoretical analysis is useful in understanding the role of the residues in holding the integrity of the interface. the nature of connections among amino acid residues in the largest interface cluster hosting one of the active site clusters are depicted in figure  <dig> <cit>  for a representative member from each class  respectively. mostly, the interface cluster containing the second active site  has lesser amino acid residues than the one described above, thus reflecting some asymmetry in the size of the two active site containing interface clusters. also, there is prominent asymmetric distribution within the clusters, with the majority of amino acid residues coming from one chain and being supported by only few residues from the other chain in the dimer.

it is evident from the connections derived among the amino acid residues for the two active site containing interface clusters that apart from the immediate active site residues, other residues like phe and glu in the vicinity of the active site also play a major structural and functional role. the glu residue is highly connected in the active site interface clusters and appeared to be at the cluster centre in some cases . the participation of glu in the active site interface cluster also assumes importance by the fact that in the catalytic reaction of luxs, glu plays a major role as a general acid/base as has been shown earlier by mutation studies. for class , the active sites on either subunit contain a closely connected network among all the three his, and phe and glu near the active site at imin = 6%. so this ensemble of three his, and phe and glu near the active site is identified to be necessary for luxs function in relation to pathogenesis in these classes. however, for the probiotics  and some extremophiles   only one subunit has the three his and phe in the interface clusters; the other subunit does not present the active site at all as a part of the interface cluster at imin = 6%. we propose that both the active sites and the important residues in its vicinity are required for the proper functioning of the protein in relation to pathogenesis.

potential sites of mutation
from crystallographic studies by lewis et al <cit>  it was known that glu <dig>  arg <dig> and asp <dig>  were important for substrate binding in luxs. this is supported by our results of interface cluster analysis. moreover, glu <dig> is sequentially highly conserved, and was proposed to have a role as a general acid/base in the mechanism of luxs action. it was shown by zhu et al <cit>  that mutation of glu <dig> in b. subtilis luxs to ala <dig> and gln <dig>  the luxs activity was completely lost, indicating the importance of glu <dig>  this is also observed from our analysis which shows that for b. subtilis, glu <dig> is connected to the active site residues  in one of the interface clusters in 1j <dig> and its mutation would thus definitely distort the active site geometry.

the interface cluster analysis enables prediction of amino acid residues apart from the active site that are potential sites of mutation; this would warrant experiments to verify them. we propose that for class v of luxs proteins, the residue arg <dig>  and its analogues in the other structures play the role of the second general acid/base in the catalytic reaction. similarly, for class vi, this function is attributed to arg <dig> . so it is proposed that their mutation is likely to render the luxs protein inactive similarly as was shown previously by zhu et al. for b. subtilis luxs. also, the repeated occurrence of the sequentially conserved phe <dig>  and its analogues in the interface clusters for all the structures at various interaction strengths asserts its importance. on inspection of its position in the structure, we found it stabilising the active site core through π-stacking interactions. so these are potential sites of mutation and calls for experimental validation. also the amino acid residues at the mini-triad identified at the apex of the protein structure are potential sites of mutation.

the extremophilic class  is shown to retain one particular characteristic core hub as described previously at very high cut-offs  and this hub residue  is thus proposed to be an important site for mutation experiments as well.

discussion
bacteria have efficiently imbibed mechanisms for communication within themselves and the environment. quorum sensing is a mode of such crosstalk as a function of cell density and has been divided into two categories  with their characteristic signalling molecules, autoinducer  <dig> and  <dig> respectively. luxs is the precursor protein of autoinducer  <dig>  although the quorum sensing, in general, can directly influence pathogenicity by controlling bacterial gene expression as a function of cell density, it is the unique feature of luxs induced quorum sensing system to control bacterial metabolism. so luxs driven quorum sensing has the ability to control not only pathogenicity but also the 'overall well-being' of the organism. the effect of luxs mutation manifests in different ways in different organisms. as an example, for the organisms like h. influenza, s. epidermis, and h. pylori, e. coli, it has been shown that mutation of luxs affect biofilm development and metabolism/motility/flageller morphogenesis <cit>  respectively , whereas for organisms like v. cholera, c. perfringens, the effect was shown to be related to toxin production <cit>  .

in the present study we have analyzed the quaternary association features of the available and modelled structures of luxs from  <dig> different organisms. our study indicates the presence of distinct key dimer association features in the luxs protein from different species related to the biological manifestation of the protein. this fact has enabled us to classify our dataset into six categories and perform a detailed analysis in order to characterize their interface. a simple analysis of the protein structures over our dataset at the backbone level is largely elusive and predicts the structures to be highly similar. however, finer differences exist at the side-chain level, which has become evident through our analysis of the interface clusters. a detailed description of cluster sizes, number of residues in the clusters is provided in the additional file 1: table s <dig>  there is a wide variation of the interface cluster size and their orientation, although their backbone rmsds are comparable , which accounts for the range of finer diversities existent within the structure of the same protein from different organisms.

our analysis has also enabled the prediction of signature motifs of completely/partially conserved sequentially apart but structurally proximal residues at the dimer interface for each class. since these signature motifs appeared because of their spatial proximity, it would not have been possible to identify these motifs by sequence comparisons alone. based on similar cluster analysis studies, it was predicted previously that the quaternary association of lectin from lotus tetragonolobus did not correspond to any known type of association pattern <cit>  and indeed a new type of association was later discovered for this protein by crystallographic studies <cit> . this type of analysis would at least enable, in this case, to predict, a priori, the probable physiological function of the luxs protein from a given organism by superposition of interface clusters  and comparison of the motif obtained with the signature motifs from the different classes. these identified motifs can serve as possible epitopes for luxs inhibitor design as they are highly vulnerable structurally conserved regions of the protein within a particular class. however, for organisms sharing the same niche, e.g. belonging to the enterobacterial group, like helicobacter pylori, escherischia coli and salmonella typhimurium , it becomes exceedingly difficult to target the luxs of a particular organism without any effect on the other. on close inspection of the side chain interface clusters of these three organisms, it was found that they are mostly superposing implying a very large similarity in their structures even at the side chain level. so it is not possible in such cases to target one without influencing the other. however, as discussed later in the context of the mini-triad motif, some level of discrimination is possible.

our study reveals the presence of a triangular pattern at the interface that is constituted by three most important clusters as shown in figure  <dig>  the probiotics and some extremophiles and class iii members manifest an exception as this geometric pattern is distorted in them. probiotics are beneficial bacteria and includes lactobacillus, and bifidobacterium species. they possess numerous potential therapeutic properties including anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer activities and other features of interest <cit> . in recent years, studies with in vitro cell culture and animal models clearly demonstrated protective effects of probiotics for anti-tumor and anti-cancer effects <cit> . it was shown previously that l. acidophilus secreted molecule that either inhibited quorum sensing signal or underwent direct interaction with bacterial transcriptional regulators, controlling the transcription of enterohemorrhagic e. coli o <dig> genes involved in colonization <cit> . however, both the genomes have the luxs gene homologue. it was also proposed that ai- <dig> might interfere with the normal functioning of commensal organisms in the gut by competing with their communication and thus, taking colonization advantage <cit> . so it is intriguing to note the difference of the geometric pattern of distribution of the active sites on the dimer interface as is captured by our interface cluster analysis. it is striking that the probiotics actually contained the luxs protein that contributed to virulence and related phenomenon in several bacterial species. thus, it is proposed that this geometric pattern at the dimer interface might play an important role in the behavioural outcome of luxs in relation to its function; absence of which distinguishes the probiotics from the rest of the organisms considered in our study in terms of function.

another important observation from our analysis is the presence of a mini-triad at the apex of the dimer which presented itself in the interface clusters throughout for all the structures in our dataset except for class iii  in which it is absent from the interface cluster. however, this set of residues does not show up as conserved in multiple sequence alignment studies of the  <dig> proteins in our dataset. its position in the structure at the apex of the dimer and also the repeated occurrence in the protein interface cluster indicate that it might be an important site for mutation; we hypothesize that their mutation might reorient or distort the dimerization interface. also, we find that there is a marked difference in the chemical nature of the residues constituting the mini-triad motif between h. pylori  and that of s. typhimurium and e. coli , although they share a very high similarity even at the side-chain level. this mini-triad is a highly accessible target for small molecules as they are in the exposed regions of a loop at the apex of the protein dimer. these small molecules may be potential drugs leading to a perturbation at the dimer interface, targeting specifically e. coli and s. typhimurium luxs but not h. pylori luxs.

graph theoretical analysis is helpful to visualize the actual global connectivity in the protein structure network at a given interaction strength. from this analysis, we predict that it is an ensemble of amino acid residues that dictates the function of luxs. so we predict few potential sites of mutation in the luxs protein. some of our predictions of possible sites of mutation have been already experimentally justified; some would warrant experimental verification.

the results of hub analysis reveal a special characteristic feature in the extremophilic class ; the recurrent presence of a core hub at a high interaction strength . furthermore, the asymmetry of the interface discussed before also manifests within the core of the protein as shown by the presence of the "persistent hub" in one chain and not in the other. it was shown previously that hubs in real world networks provide robustness to such networks <cit> . previous studies have also demonstrated that the thermophilic proteins contained more hubs than their mesophilic analogues <cit>  and these hubs were found to be important for the overall integrity of the structure of such proteins. the "persistent hub" and its connecting residues are thus recognized as potential sites for de-stabilizing mutations in the luxs proteins from extremophiles .

the luxs family of proteins  mostly share a high sequence similarity among various species, subsequently sharing a high level of structural similarity at the backbone level. also there is over-representation of some species such as streptococcus, lactobacillus in our available dataset as shown in additional file 3: figure s <dig>  however, among these  <dig> luxs proteins we find a wide variety of bacterial species such as the pathogens, commensals, probiotics and the most prominent representatives of the human intestinal microbiota . in a nutshell, our analysis reveals the extent of finer structural diversity that can remain hidden within the structure of the same protein from different organisms with the same quaternary association and the same fold at the backbone level. our method is robust enough to capture minor differences of side-chain orientation at the level of quaternary association, which gives rise to such diversity in function globally. however, luxs orthologues are present in many more organisms. metagenomic approaches, in which the genetic material collected from various environments is cloned directly into surrogate hosts, has given us a key to the huge repository of genetic diversity in bacteria. such approaches will definitely give an even more descriptive idea about the structural conservation <cit>  of the ai- <dig> precursor protein in the human gut, bustling with a microbial agora.

our analysis focuses on the structural properties of a single protein across a dataset to summarize its effect on the typical phenotypic/biological features. however the recent metagenomic data curations have suggested the presence of trillions of organisms in the human intestinal microbiota <cit> . but not all of these organisms contain the luxs proteins and ai- <dig> does not have a signalling role in all the organisms. this definitely narrows down the complexity but then also the system is too complex to be predicted at the structural level of a single protein. a systems biology approach considering the whole network of events has to be employed to decipher the complex puzzle of the human intestinal microbiota. our method is a contribution to this converging pipeline in terms of the fact that our classification at the structural level can be used to group similar categories for a larger dataset. but nevertheless to understand the overall machinery of luxs activity and to target luxs clinically, we need a more holistic view at the systems level.

CONCLUSIONS
the protein structure network graphs are constructed for the  <dig> luxs proteins considered in our dataset. our results indicate presence of completely/partially conserved signature motifs at the dimer interface of the luxs protein for class  in relation to their biological function. our results show the presence of an ensemble of residues at the active site, all of which are required for the proper functioning of luxs as s-ribosylhomocysteinelyase and thus potential sites of mutation are predicted. we also identify a definite geometric pattern in the form of an isosceles triangle at the dimer interface which we predict to be important for luxs function. also, a mini-triad formed by the residues of both the subunits, arising from a stretch of five residue amino acids is found at the apex of the dimer  and is predicted to have structural and thus, functional implications which would call for experimental verifications. this mini-triad on an exposed loop of the protein may be a potential epitope for the design of specific inhibitors of luxs enzyme. our characterization of the dimer interface for the probiotic luxs also makes prediction of their notable characteristic structural features. also the results of hub analysis reveal the presence of a core hub that is characteristic of the luxs from extremophiles  and are proposed to contribute robustness to the system. so our analysis emphasizes the importance of the implications of differences in side-chain orientation on functional diversity. to conclude, our study is an attempt to bridge the structure of luxs protein to its function with special emphasis on the interactions at the dimer interfaces; and hence towards the general phenomenon of quorum sensing in bacteria.

