BACKGROUND
the reverse engineering of biological systems from experimental data often cannot be achieved on first principles. this is as much a reflection of the lack of plausible hypotheses as it is an indication of excessive parametric sensitivity when alleged mechanistic formulations are at hand. consequently, there is a critical need for a description of dynamic behaviors that can be used as a machine learning tool , but with parameters capable of shedding light on the topology of the underlying mechanisms. biochemical systems theory  <cit> , offers such formalism, especially in the form of s-systems, where kinetic-order coefficients characterize the topology of a biological network as well as the magnitude of each interaction. a drawback of this approach is that the parameterization of s-systems is a difficult problem, even for five metabolic species  <cit> . in a previous report  <cit> , we proposed to overcome this challenge by tracing each species independently with a universal function of time, x = f, such that dx/dt = g, and where g = df/dt is deduced symbolically from the neural network transfer function; see also  <cit> . the independency of each metabolic profile allows solving the s-system linearization problem by decoupling it, which reduces the computational effort in the system parameters identification by preventing numerical integration. in the earlier report we suggested using artificial neural networks  with optimized topology and early stopping procedures  <cit> . the distinctive advantage of using an ann is that it is a universal function  <cit>  with a closed form for which we were able to determine the first derivative symbolically  <cit> . the ann solution, however, is not without problems. the most significant issue is that its discriminant function often leads to artifacts in its derivatives, which distort the solution, even when they are not visually apparent in the smoothed signal. the artifacts reflect the sigmoidal transfer function of the ann model. that conclusion drove the pursuit of an entirely implicit solution that is driven solely by the experimental data and is free of all parametric bias.

the task of inferring signal from noisy time series falls into the general category of developing denoising filters. in an effort extracting signal from noise in chromatograms, paul eilers  <cit>  recently proposed a "perfect smoother", which is basically a matrix form of a much older implicit method known as whittaker's smoother  <cit> . those works  <cit>  are the starting point for the procedure introduced here. consideration of the denoising problem as the task of "learning" an arbitrary signal suggests the possibility of applying principles from information theoretic learning  <cit> , which allows signal scaling without causing bias in signal extraction. specifically, the use of quadratic renyi's entropy for assessing the learning process offers a foundation for the re-identification of smoothers based on error entropy minimization . this procedure has been successfully applied to chaotic time series prediction and in nonlinear system identification, where the mean square error was replaced by error entropy as cost function, for instance, in the training of ann models  <cit> . in this report, we explore the use of error entropy as optimization criterion for reconfiguring the whittaker's smoother. in complementary research, we, as well as many others, have been working on parameterization procedures for s-systems , implicitly assuming that noisy time series and their slopes could efficiently be smoothed by some unidentified procedure. the algorithm reported here describes such a procedure.

RESULTS
metabolic profiles
the proposed signal extraction method was tested with an application to metabolic profiles. these had been measured with in vivo nmr methods at a sequence of time points and quantify glycolysis in the lactic acid producing bacterium lactococcus lactis  <cit> . the experimental data are very interesting because the underlying molecular mechanisms are relatively well understood, because of the high frequency of sampling, and because the data have a complicated time course and noise structure. they were therefore recently proposed as a reference case study for testing reverse engineering methods for biological networks  <cit> . the data were included in our open source matlab toolbox and stand-alone gui application, described in the section availability and requirements.

in addition to the data analysis described above, the performance of the proposed filter was evaluated for simulated data, in an effort to assess its ability to detect and filter different noise structures correctly. these tests included the processing of noise-free signals, where the smoothing procedure succeeded in automatically determining splines with appropriate order. these and other tests can be verified by either running the matlab code, provided as a open-source, in the appropriate programming environment or using the corresponding stand-alone , public domain application, for which no commercial license is needed .

discussion
in this report, rényi's second-order entropy of the cross-validation error entropy  was used as optimization criterion for the parameters estimation in whittaker's smoother. the optimization process is based on gradient ascent of the information potential of cve in λ direction, where parzen windows with gaussian kernel are used for the pdf estimation. in general, this type of pdf estimation faces one particular problem: the kernel size σ. this variable is crucial for convergence of the gradient method because it causes the algorithm to reach an optimal local minimal if its value is misestimated. the estimation of kernel size from the data covariance has yielded good results in some applications  <cit> . in our software, the user can choose an alternative automatic method that uses a machine learning kernel  <cit>  or set the value of σ manually. the effect of this parameter for specific data sets can therefore be studied by systematically screening a range of values for the particular application. although we found the automatic setting to be generally satisfactory, this is only an empirical result, which suggests that pdf estimation warrants further investigation.

the application of the proposed combined procedures  described in the methods section to the lactococcus data demonstrates the quality of the smoothing algorithm . most impressive may be that these results were obtained in a fully automated fashion. as we suspected in previous analyses of biological systems and their reverse engineering  <cit> , the results here suggest that the structure of the noise appears to be specific to distinct phases of the molecular machinery underlying the observed behavior. for example, figure  <dig> clearly indicates that depletion of glucose is associated with relatively little noise in the signal from intermediate metabolites . the exhaustion of substrate , however, triggers a synchronized effect in all but one of the metabolites, which results in a marked increase in noise and is reflected by the synchronized break point in the corresponding window segmentations. since the analytical method  does not change and the window segmentation procedure is applied to each metabolite independently, the sharp increase in signal noise may be best interpreted as a change in the functioning of the glycolytic machinery, which for instance could be mediated by a shift in the nadh/nad ratio  <cit> . the synchronized succession of distinct periods with relatively invariant noise structure may be specific to biological processes, where a succession of dynamic behaviors is often associated with a shift between physiological states. the windowing approach reveals these shifts.

it should be noted that the reliance on cross-validation implies that time points at the edges of each window cannot be used for signal extraction. this loss at break points might appear to be a significant drawback of the filtering procedure. however, as established in prior work  <cit> , the identification of decoupled systems is discontinuous in nature as it consist on the generation of pairs of  values. therefore, it suffers only mildly from a few missing or omitted data points. more important is that multiple independent time series are available to narrow the boundary estimates for the system parameters to the point where the topology of the biological network can be inferred with reliability.

CONCLUSIONS
the goal of developing a "perfect smoother" that can be used as an automated tool for signal extraction has been an elusive goal in the field of signal processing. based on historical work that started with the whittaker's smoother and was advanced by cross-validation in eilers' smoother, here we take that approach one step further by removing the parametric bias of using squared deviations as an optimization criterion. in its place we proposed an informational measure of variation in the form of cross-validated error entropy. the crucial step of the proposed methodology is the identification of the matrix format of the cve  that permits a closed-form solution for its derivative with respect to the smoothing parameter λ . that solution is also used to segment the signal in windows where the consideration of the neighboring values would decrease the optimality of within-window signal extraction. the resulting algorithm is fully automated and was successfully applied to reference, notoriously difficult biological time series. applicability to signal extraction in other areas may be anticipated.

