BACKGROUND
most organisms, ranging from bacteria to higher plants and animals, change their behaviour in response to day–night alternations. in particular, photosynthetic organisms alter their intracellular activities adaptively because of their great reliance on light. the unicellular cyanobacterium, synechococcus elongatus pcc  <dig>  is distinguished by its extraordinary change in global transcriptional profile dependent on light or darkness. when synechococcus cells are transferred from the light to the dark, transcription of most of the genes on the genome is dramatically and rapidly suppressed , while the transcription of a small subset  of genes is up-regulated . consequently, there is a dramatic reduction in the total transcript level, reaching about  <dig> % within  <dig> hours  <cit> , while its mechanism is yet to be elucidated fully. we note that the circadian clock is not essential for the dark-dependent genome-wide transcriptional change, while it modulates some dark-/light-induced transcription in a time-of-day-dependent manner  <cit> .

because synechococcus is an obligate photoautotroph, we initially expected that dark acclimation would affect the intracellular environment greatly through inhibition of photosynthesis, possibly accompanying reduction of the photophosphorylation-derived atp level. doolittle suggested a plausible decrease in the rate of energy-consuming rna synthesis upon partial inhibition of photosynthetic activity  <cit> . accordingly, some studies reported that intracellular atp content decreases within several hours by the dark incubation in synechococcus  <cit> . thus, inhibition of photosynthesis would repress genome-wide transcription generally, by primarily inhibiting energy-requiring mrna synthesis.

in the present study, we found that treatment with two photosynthesis inhibitors under illumination mimicked nocturnal transcriptional suppression, and the level of photosynthesis inhibition under illumination was actually correlated with that of transcriptional repression. this observation supports the hypothesis that nocturnal depression of the transcription occurs through the cessation of photosynthesis as we expected. however, dark incubation or inhibition of photosynthesis did not reduce cellular atp content significantly even after transcriptional repression started, at least under our experimental conditions. therefore, shortage of cellular atp content would not be a main cause of repressing atp-requiring transcription in the dark. conversely, when cellular atp content in the dark was reduced by inhibiting respiratory electron flow, the dark-induced transcriptional repression was attenuated, thereby keeping the total mrna at a higher level compared with that under dark conditions. these findings strongly suggest that nocturnal transcriptional suppression is an active process requiring atp mainly for degrading mrna.

synechococcus cells under illumination require de novo transcription for their survival, while we found that the dark-acclimated cells were able to survive for at least  <dig> hours without de novo mrna synthesis, as if they became dormant in the dark. these observations suggest that the nocturnal transcriptional attenuation is a predictive feed-forward regulation before the cells experience the critical atp reduction following longer  dark incubation.

RESULTS
genome-wide transcriptional repression triggered by inhibition of photosynthetic activity
to examine whether inhibition of photosynthesis triggers dark repression/induction even under light, we applied two photosynthesis electron transport inhibitors, 3-- <dig> -dimethylurea  and  <dig> -dibromo-3-methyl-6-isopropylbenzoquinone  , and analysed the effects on dark-repressed/induced gene expression profiles. note that we have confirmed that either  <dig> μm dcmu or  <dig> μm dbmib was sufficient to block electron transport completely by monitoring the effective quantum yield of photosystem ii , /fm′ becoming approximately equal to zero in the light . cells were grown in the light, acclimated to two  <dig> hour/ <dig> hour light–dark  cycles, and then returned to the light. at  <dig> hours in the light after the ld cycles, we kept cells in the light, acclimated them to the dark, or treated them with each of the inhibitors under the light for  <dig> or  <dig> minutes, and then subjected the cells to transcription analyses. we observed the changes after  <dig> minutes and  <dig> minutes from the addition of the stimuli because the rate of transcript variability is highest in  <dig> minute dark incubation, and total mrna decreased up to about  <dig> % within  <dig> minutes  <cit> . initially, we performed northern blot analyses on three representative dark-repressed genes , which were remarkably repressed and induced upon light-to-dark transition within  <dig> minutes, respectively . in the cells treated with dcmu or dbmib under illuminated conditions, the levels of expression of dark-repressed genes, petj, kaibc, and rbp <dig>  decreased, while those of dark-induced genes, gifa, syc1260_c, and hspa, increased . as exemplified by hspa, which was less up-regulated by dcmu than by dbmib, the extent of dark repression/induction seemed generally greater with dbmib than with dcmu. these data suggest changes in the expression of all six genes through the cessation of photosynthesis in the dark. note that longer treatments with dcmu or dbmib up to eight hours also down-regulated and up-regulated the expression of kaibc and gifa under illumination . although the level of expression of kaibc was not reduced to zero, even without dbmib it is reduced within eight hours because of its circadian clock function  <cit> . moreover, treatment with dbmib  <cit>  and dcmu  <cit>  affects circadian clock function, possibly through antagonising the function of kaia by enhancing the phosphorylation of kaic. therefore, longer treatment with these inhibitors may cause complex effects on transcriptional profiles of clock-controlled gene expression, as exemplified by kaibc and many other representative dark-repressed genes. to avoid this confusion, we further focused on the transcriptional and metabolic changes within one hour after dark-acclimation or inhibitor treatment, which should be sufficient to dissect the mechanism triggering dark-induced global expression changes.fig.  <dig> inhibition of photosynthetic electron transport mimicked dark-repression-like genome-wide transcription profiles under illumination without dramatic loss of atp content. a temporal expression profiles of representative dark-repressed or -induced genes using three independent northern hybridisation analyses. we normalized the data for dark-repressed genes to the average value of illuminated samples , while the data for dark-induced genes were normalized to the average value of dark-incubated samples . bars indicate the standard deviation. b organisation of synechococcus expression profiles in the light, dark, and light with two inhibitors, dcmu and dbmib. the data of all genes were normalized to the value at time  <dig> , corresponding to  <dig> hours in the light, and sorted by induction levels in the dark. c total mrna pools estimated from the sum of mrna hybridisation signals normalized to genomic dna signals under each condition. we normalized the signals at time  <dig> in the light to  <dig> . plots indicate the results from each independent experiment . d the plot of pca scores. upper plot shows the pc <dig> score of each profile only. filled circles and open circles indicate the samples at 30- and 60-minutes incubation, respectively. l  <dig> indicates scores of samples at time  <dig>  for panels b to d, we used averaged data from two independent experiments. e transition of the atp level when photosynthetic activity was inhibited partially or completely. we transferred cells grown in the light for  <dig> hours to each condition at time  <dig>  we normalized the atp levels to the average value of control samples collected in the light at time − <dig> to  <dig> . bars indicate the standard deviation from triplicate cultures dbmib  <dig> -dibromo-3-methyl-6-isopropylbenzoquinone, dcmu 3-- <dig> -dimethylurea, pca principal component analysis



subsequently, we performed a dna microarray analysis to examine global gene expression profiles in the presence or absence of the inhibitors. as shown in fig. 1b and c, our dna microarray analysis confirmed that the levels of most transcripts decreased immediately after dark acclimation so that the total mrna levels decreased to about  <dig> % of those in the light within  <dig> minutes, while a subset of genes, shown in yellow in fig. 1b, were up-regulated, as reported previously  <cit> . the expression of most genes in the presence of either dcmu or dbmib under illuminated conditions was similar to that in the absence of inhibitors under dark conditions . the microarray profiles of any of the above-mentioned six representative genes  were essentially the same as those observed by northern analysis , validating the method. as shown in fig. 1c, treatment with dcmu or dbmib in the light reduces total mrna levels, as does dark acclimation, while the magnitude of the reduction was somewhat larger with dbmib than that with dcmu. to compare these transcription profiles more comprehensively, we performed a principal component analysis . figure 1d shows the results of the pca and indicates that the difference in transcription profiles between the illuminated samples and dark-acclimated samples is represented primarily in pc <dig>  moreover, pc <dig> and pc <dig> account for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the variance of expression data, respectively, such that pc <dig> accounts for  <dig>  variables more than pc <dig>  to discuss how closely inhibition of photosynthesis under illumination imitated the transcription profiles of the samples incubated in the dark, we analysed the effects of the inhibitors using the pc <dig> scores. the top of fig. 1d shows the projection onto the first principal component. in the presence of dcmu or dbmib, the plots of pc <dig> scores were closer to those of dark-acclimated samples than those of illuminated samples. in addition, the pc <dig> scores of dbmib-treated samples were closer to those of dark-incubated samples than to those of dcmu-treated samples. scatter plot analyses were performed to confirm these results by comparing the induction ratio of all tested genes upon dark transition, and the results from the addition of the inhibitors under continuous illumination . again, treatment with two inhibitors under illuminated conditions caused similar expression changes to dark incubation, while dbmib resulted in effects more similar to effects seen in dark acclimation as observed in the scatter plots and correlation value than effects seen after dcmu treatment.

we also investigated which genes were significantly expressed in continuously illuminated samples under each condition. we used a modified version of dunnett’s t test , which has been used in our previous microarray analysis  <cit> . by using this test, we initially identified  <dig>  genes that were significantly dark-regulated , encompassing about  <dig> % of all tested  genes. among the dark-regulated genes,  <dig>   significantly changed their expression patterns after treatment with dcmu or dbmib, strongly supporting that most of the dark-regulated transcriptional changes are a result of inhibition of photosynthesis . in addition, the number of the genes with altered expression levels after treatment with dbmib is larger than that after treatment with dcmu , as consistent with the previously mentioned tendency. that is probably because dcmu only blocks the linear electron flow, while dbmib inhibits both linear and cyclic electron flows . thus, treatment with dbmib inhibits photosynthesis more stringently  than dcmu, such that the levels of cellular activity requiring photosynthesis  are correlated with that of transcriptional changes.

suppression of genome-wide transcription without reduction of atp
among various intracellular changes upon dark acclimation, dramatic reduction of atp could be a major trigger of dark-induced transcriptional repression. the stronger suppressive effect of dbmib on mrna level than that of dcmu is also consistent with this possibility, because the inhibition of both linear and cyclic electron flows with dbmib would result in greater effects on atp synthesis than inhibiting linear electron flow with dcmu alone . rust et al.  <cit>  reported that the ratio atp/ was reduced within several hours in the dark after transfer from light; however, it did not change much after incubation in the dark for one hour, while the same group more recently reported that it was reduced up to about 60– <dig> % of that in the light within one hour in the dark under a different illumination schedule with lower light intensity  <cit> . therefore, we checked the change of atp content under our experimental conditions upon light-to-dark transition in more detail using an atp-luciferase assay. after cells were transferred to the dark, their atp level transiently decreased, reaching about  <dig> % of that under illumination, while it rapidly recovered up to 80– <dig> % within  <dig> minutes. this level was maintained for at least for one hour . note that maintaining about 80– <dig> % of the atp content at one hour after dark acclimation is consistent with findings by rust et al.  <cit> . we interpreted this recovery as the energy supply from respiratory electron transfer in the dark because some studies of atp synthesis in cyanobacteria indicated that atp synthesis in the dark must primarily rely on respiration . consistent with this assumption, addition of dbmib or kcn, inhibitors of respiratory electron transport  <cit> , inhibits the recovery of atp levels in the dark .fig.  <dig> requirement of atp maintenance for transcription in representative dark repressed or induced genes under dark conditions. a loss of atp recovery in the dark resulting from the respiratory electron transport inhibitor, dbmib or the inhibitor of cytochrome c oxidase, kcn. we analysed and represented data as shown similarly in fig. 1e. b temporal expression profiles of representative dark repressed or induced genes obtained from three independent northern hybridisation analyses when dbmib was used as the inhibitor of respiration. c attenuated dark-induced transcriptional changes for representative dark repressed or induced genes when the cells were treated with kcn for the inhibition of respiration. each plot shows the results of two independent northern blot analyses. for panels b and c, data representation is consistent with that in fig. 1a
dbmib  <dig> -dibromo-3-methyl-6-isopropylbenzoquinone



surprisingly, however, under light conditions we observed the recovery of atp levels after addition of dbmib, which should inhibit photosynthesis as well as respiration . by contrast, under light conditions the atp levels dramatically decreased upon addition of dccd, an inhibitor of f1fo-atpase . taken together, the results suggest the formation of atp involving a proton gradient formed by the light-driven electron transfer that would detour re-oxidation of plastoquinone at the cytochrome b6/f complex. alternative oxidases that directly oxidise plastoquinol by oxygen would be candidates because of the electron detour route. indeed, the presence of a dbmib- or cyanide-insensitive respiratory pathway has been reported  <cit> . however, these alternative electron pathways are not generally assumed to contribute to atp production. moreover, the involvement of either photosystem  i or ps ii is rather difficult to assume. because the electron transfer rate through ps ii estimated from the parameter Φii, decreased to about  <dig> % of basal levels upon addition of dbmib , the involvement of ps ii in the process of atp formation should be limited. similarly, involvement of ps i would be difficult to assume, judging from the fast oxidation kinetics of p <dig> upon illumination in the presence of dbmib . apparently, dbmib is able to diminish the electron transfer to p <dig>  a plausible explanation for the formation of atp in the presence of dbmib would be the contribution of the previously mentioned remaining  <dig> % electron transfer in photosynthesis. because the maximum rate of photosynthetic electron transfer is generally  <dig> times higher than that of respiratory electron transfer in cyanobacteria , the  <dig> % electron transfer in photosynthesis would correspond to  <dig> % of the electron transfer in respiration. this  <dig> % activity may be sufficient for the maintenance of the cellular atp level.

these observations seem to contradict the hypothesis that shortage of atp induces a dark-triggered dynamic shift in transcription. although a transient reduction in the atp content could be involved in triggering some transcriptional shift upon light-to-dark transition, we suggest this effect is not essential. it is primarily because the dark-stimulated transcriptional shift is evident even after rapid recovery of the atp concentration . moreover addition of dcmu induced at least in part of dark-mimicking genome-wide transcriptional change , while it barely affected atp content in the light . doolittle predicted that dcmu in the light would reduce the energy source and limit energy available for mrna synthesis  <cit> , but this is not consistent with our findings.

generally, in our experimental conditions under illumination, dbmib showed strong effects mimicking dark-induced transcriptional control. adding the two photosynthesis inhibitors to synechococcus is assumed to inhibit electron transport to ps i, with dbmib having a stronger effect than dcmu  <cit> . to explore the redox state of the components on the acceptor side of ps i under our experimental conditions, we examined oxidation levels and re-reduction kinetics of p <dig>  the reaction centre of ps i, by absorbance changes . just after starting the irradiation, the absorbance level increased to plateau at moderate levels. addition of either dcmu or dbmib increased the absorbance level constitutively at higher levels. these results indicate that addition of these two inhibitors oxidises the components downstream of ps i in a manner similar to that during dark incubation. the rates of electron input to ps i were quantified from the half-decay-time of re-reduction of p <dig> upon post-illumination. treatment with dcmu or dbmib resulted in slower reduction kinetics, more so with dbmib than with dcmu. thus, it is plausible that the redox state downstream of ps i is important for triggering the dark-induced transcriptional depression.

requirement of atp accumulation for dark-induced transcriptional depression
we further investigated how forced reduction of atp levels affects the genome-wide transcriptional profile in the dark. we attempted to block the respiratory electron flow, which is shared with photosynthetic electron flow in cyanobacteria , with dbmib in the dark. as is mentioned above, treatment with dbmib inhibited the recovery of atp levels in the dark, as did that with kcn . surprisingly, dark-induced transcriptional suppression and activation were both significantly attenuated by the addition of dbmib . in the presence of dbmib, for example, dark-induced transcriptional suppression of petj, kaibc, and rbp <dig> was largely attenuated  while dark-induced up-regulation of gifa, hspa, and syc1260_d was arrested . we also confirmed that the dark-induced repression and activation of the six representative genes were similarly attenuated in the presence of kcn in the dark, as they were in the presence of dbmib .

figure 3a–c shows consistent attenuation of the dark-dependent expression profile of the entire genome. mrna abundance was reduced to about  <dig> % upon the dark transition, while in the presence of dbmib about  <dig> % of mrna remained . therefore, dbmib treatment inhibited about  <dig> % of dark-dependent mrna suppression. figure 3c shows pca expression profiles, in which pc <dig> and pc <dig> account for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the variance of expression data, respectively. as is shown in fig. 1d, the difference between the illuminated and dark-acclimated samples is represented largely in pc <dig>  and the contribution of pc <dig> is much higher than the second principal component. the samples incubated in the dark in the presence of dbmib lay in a position between the illuminated samples and the dark-incubated samples. scatter plots shown in additional file 5: figure s4b show a similar tendency for samples incubated in the dark in the presence of dbmib, which show a relatively high correlation with the illuminated samples, while the sample incubated in the dark without the inhibitor and the illuminated samples shows a lower correlation . we conducted a mulcom test on the samples, which led us to a similar conclusion. dbmib significantly attenuated the dark-dependency of  <dig>  among  <dig>  dark-regulated genes . interestingly, therefore, dbmib inhibited about  <dig> % of both reduction in the total mrna amount and dark-regulated genes. the similar effects of the treatment with dbmib or kcn under dark conditions suggest that the dbmib-derived de-repression of the dark-induced transcriptional profiles is primarily because of atp shortage  in the dark. in other words, the dramatic transcriptional shift upon light-to-dark transition seems to require a certain level of atp, and the maintenance of atp availability in the dark appears essential for nocturnal transcription profiles.fig.  <dig> genome-widely attenuated dark repression and induction by inhibition of atp synthesis. a organisation of expression profiles in the light, in the dark without inhibitor, or in the dark treated with dbmib alone or both dbmib and rifampicin. data representation is consistent with that in fig. 1b. b total mrna accumulation levels at each condition. data representation is consistent with that in fig. 1c. c plot of pca scores. data representation is consistent with that in fig. 1d. we obtained the data for panels a to c from independent duplicate experiments dbmib  <dig> -dibromo-3-methyl-6-isopropylbenzoquinone, pca principal component analysis



while de novo dark-induced transcription in a small subset of genes must require sufficient atp, it remains unclear whether de novo transcription is necessary for maintenance of relatively high total transcript levels under conditions of low atp. to address this question, we used a transcriptional inhibitor, rifampicin, to test the expression profile in the presence of dbmib. previously, we had demonstrated that rifampicin treatment in the dark  rapidly reduced almost any microarray signals to background levels within four hours, indicating that up-regulation of dark-induced genes and maintenance of residual transcript levels in the dark requires de novo transcription, and also revealed short half-lives of most transcripts in the dark  <cit> . as shown in fig. 2b, within  <dig> minutes of light-to-dark transition, three representative dark-repressed transcripts were down-regulated in the dark regardless of the presence or absence of rifampicin, while dark-induced genes failed to be up-regulated in the dark in the presence of rifampicin. by contrast, in the presence of dbmib, our microarray analysis revealed that addition of rifampicin to dark-acclimated samples did not show such substantial reductions in total mrna levels . the expression profile of the six representative genes in dark-acclimated, dbmib-treated cells was also essentially similar in the presence or absence of rifampicin .

based on these observations, we suggest that dbmib treatment in the dark generally attenuated dark-specific expression profiles for both dark-repressed and -activated genes because of atp shortage. in other words, these results strongly suggest that not only dark-induced transcription , but also global transcriptional repression  in the dark, are atp-requiring active responses to environmental changes. note that some prokaryotic mrna degradation processes, such as the unwinding of stable 3′ stem-loops in mrna, have been reported to require atp  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results have shown that synechococcus actively stops transcription and enhances mrna degradation in the dark via respiration, which requires both the inhibition of photosynthetic electron flow and the maintenance of atp synthesis via respiration. considering that atp content is gradually lowered after longer dark acclimation during the night  <cit> , we assume that dark acclimation triggers the genome-wide transcriptional depression, which is most likely advantageous for suppression of atp-consuming reactions, such as transcription and translation, in anticipation of the subsequent loss of energy availability during the night. this is a typical feed-forward regulation, which would be important for synechococcus to survive during nocturnal ‘starvation’ time in a relatively inactive fashion, as if they were in a dormant state .fig.  <dig> 
synechococcus actively initiates a nocturnal dormancy-like state. a model of nocturnal dormancy-like state initiation. initiating nocturnal depression of transcription requires maintenance of atp content and possibly oxidation of the acceptor side of ps i. ps ii, photosystem ii; ndh, nadh dehydrogenase complex; sdh, succinate dehydrogenase; pq, plastoquinone pool; b/f, cytochrome b6/f complex; ps i, photosystem i; fnr, ferredoxin; fd, ferredoxin; ox, cytochrome-c oxidase. b
synechococcus colonies grown in the light after incubation under different conditions: in the light or the dark in the presence or absence of rifampicin  for the indicated time. cells survived in the dark even without de novo transcription. c the time course of cell survival under each condition quantified from visible colony numbers from independent triplicate experiments. in each experiment, colony numbers were normalized to the average number of control samples at time  <dig>  corresponding to  <dig> hours in the light. bars indicate the standard deviation



nevertheless, some residual transcription is active in the dark for dark-induced genes, which could also be important for survival in darkness. to address this question, we compared the survival of cells in the dark with or without rifampicin by measuring the number of colony-forming cells. as expected, treatment with the inhibitor dramatically reduces their survival under illuminated conditions . surprisingly, however, dark acclimation for at least  <dig> hours did not affect the survival rates, even in the presence of rifampicin. thus, dark-acclimated synechococcus cells are resistant to the complete loss of transcription for over  <dig> hours  <cit> , which supports the view that nocturnal cells are in a dormant-like state. note that even under such a condition the post-translational oscillation in kaic phosphorylation is sustained  <cit> , which enables cells to maintain circadian timing at night without de novo clock gene expression. although the circadian regulation is not essential for genome-wide transcriptional depression in the dark, it is able to modulate the magnitude of dark-induced expression of some genes in a time-of-day-dependent manner  <cit> . thus, further analysis of the relationship between the possible feed-forward transcriptional depression mechanism and its circadian modulation should be addressed for a more comprehensive understanding of the nocturnal dormant-like strategy in obligate autotrophic organisms.

