BACKGROUND
honey bees  are an important agricultural commodity providing honey, other bee products, and pollination services  <cit> . domesticated honey bees in the united states and elsewhere have been in decline in recent years, despite an increasing need for honey bee pollination services  <cit> . this fact is often blamed on increasing challenges from pests and pathogens, as well as episodes of severe decline such as the enigmatic 'colony collapse disorder'   <cit> .

among the most detrimental of honey bee pests is the ectoparasitic mite varroa destructor  <cit> . v. destructor and its closely related congener, v. jacobsoni, are native to asia where they parasitize the eastern honey bee, a. cerana. v. destructor was only identified as a morphologically and genetically distinct species from v. jacobsoni relatively recently  <cit> . v. destructor began to appear in asian colonies of a. mellifera during the last century and is now widely distributed, inadvertently aided by trade in bees and bee products.

mite-infested bee colonies suffer directly from parasitism of pupae and adults, and indirectly from viral and microbial pathogens that the mites vector  <cit> . feeding by mites induces an immunosupression in bees that leads to increased titres of pre-existing infections  <cit> , further compounding their impact. the economic toll of v. destructor on apiculture is estimated to be millions of u.s. dollars per year, and chemical control agents are worrisome both for their collateral effects on bee health and the potential for honey contamination  <cit> .

varroa-honey bee interactions are mediated to a large extent via chemical cues, and bees have numerous mechanisms to control varroa populations . varroa mites reproduce on honey bee pupae, using chemical signals produced by the developing honey bee larvae to target appropriately aged hosts. the mature female offspring of reproductive varroa emerge with the adult honey bee, and subsequently move to nurse bees , thereby allowing them to remain in close proximity to the brood  <cit> . honey bees resist 'varroatosis', the infestation of colonies by varroa mites, via grooming of adult infested bees, removal of infested pupae , and physiological resistance mechanisms  <cit> . recent successes in breeding varroa-resistant bees, including the selection of 'russian' bees with longstanding exposure to mites  <cit> , indicate that a better understanding of how bees and mites interact with each other can lead to novel management strategies.

comparative studies of the fragility of the a. mellifera - v. destructor interaction, which has apparently prevented most asian lineages of v. destructor as well as other varroa species from colonizing a. mellifera  <cit> , supports the hypothesis that mite olfaction or other requirements for mite reproduction may be suitable control targets. a molecular-genetic approach to develop such innovative controls would clearly benefit from further insights into varroa genomics, which could be exploited in conjunction with tools already extant for honey bee. prior to this study, genes for only two non-mitochondrial v. destructor proteins had been deposited in genbank, a sodium channel gene  and a glycoprotein . genome sequencing will greatly expand this gene catalog, and may also uncover unforeseen targets for novel and specific acaricides, such as divergence in metabolic pathways between mites and bees or the discovery of important microbial interactions.

high-throughput, shotgun sequencing of whole genomes allows the rapid identification of thousands of genic sequences, greatly facilitating molecular and population-genetic studies that would otherwise proceed in piecemeal and laborious fashion. here we report an initial sequence survey of the v. destructor genome in conjunction with a flow-cytometric estimate of genome size. our annotations and analysis should aid investigators seeking molecular approaches to mite control. they will also provide a guide for a planned full genome project for this species  <cit> , one of several genomics initiatives that are unfolding the molecular interactions between honey bees and a constellation of potentially interacting pathogens  <cit> .

of the eight genetically distinct lineages of v. destructor that parasitize a. cerana in asia, two have been identified on a. mellifera  <cit> . anderson  <cit>  designated these lineages the japan  and korea  'haplotypes' in reference to mitochondrial dna makers, but they are concordantly distinct at nuclear markers as well  <cit> . genetic differentiation within lineages is low  <cit> , likely reflecting the population-genetic impact of life-history traits  <cit>  such as full-sib mating and male haploidy  <cit> , as well as potential population bottlenecks tied to host-shift events and subsequent range expansion  <cit> . in this study, we have analyzed the k haplotype of v. destructor from a. mellifera, the predominant haplotype presently found in north america  <cit> . we have identified over  <dig>  contigs with sequences homologous to other species; many of these have recognized domains and/or functional annotations transferred from other arthropods. interestingly, v. destructor appears to have experienced a higher rate of protein evolution than ixodes scapularis since their divergence from the most recent common ancestor over  <dig> million years ago. sequences attributable to a range of microbes were identified, including a large number of sequences from one or more novel actinomycete bacteria, the presence of which was confirmed by pcr in individual mites but not in adult honey bees. we also identified a novel virus related to the baculoviridae that was abundant in the genomic survey. finally, we found a low level of nucleotide polymorphism in the sequenced sample of ~ <dig>  mites, consistent with expectation  <cit> . this bodes well for future efforts to sequence and assemble a reference genome for this species and to identify genetic variation that correlates with host-interaction traits among varroa strains and species.

RESULTS
genome size
flow cytometry of v. destructor nuclei  yielded a haploid genome size estimate of  <dig> ±  <dig> mbp . this genome size is larger than that of many insects but substantially smaller than that of numerous mites and ticks for which genome projects are underway or have been proposed , has an estimated genome size of only  <dig> mbp. it is not yet clear to what extent these large differences in genome size are driven by variation in gene content, repetitive fraction, and/or ploidy. while the contributions of the latter two factors have been frequently noted, the potential contribution of gene expansion has been highlighted by recent analyses of waterflea  <cit>  and pea aphid  <cit> that reveal a roughly two-fold increase in gene content relative to other arthropods.

sequencing, assembly, and filtering
six pyrosequencing runs on a genome sequencer flx instrument  produced  <dig>  gbp of unpaired sequencing reads. after trimming low quality sequence, the average read length was  <dig> bp, generating an expected genome coverage of  <dig> ×. the reads were then assembled into contigs with the cabog package of celera assembler version  <dig>   <cit> . the resulting assembly had a realized median contig coverage of  <dig> ×, but was highly fragmented and summed to only  <dig> mbp of sequence, substantially less than the estimated genome size of  <dig> mbp. table  <dig> provides statistics for this assembly before and after removing problematic or undesired sequences . the modest contig lengths are primarily a consequence of low coverage, as over 97% of contigs greater than  <dig> kbp terminate due to coverage gaps rather than ambiguity from repetitive sequences. in fact, contig lengths were comparable to that expected  for an idealized assembly of equivalent coverage and read length, following the method of  <cit> .

as detailed in the methods, the small physical size of v. destructor required the collection of large numbers of mites from multiple honey bee colonies in order to obtain sufficient dna for this survey. while mites were carefully cleaned and examined under a dissection microscope to remove any non-target organisms that might have been collected inadvertently, whole-organism extractions necessarily entail the possible inclusion of associated microbes, particularly gut microbes. the gut flora may include symbiotic, commensal, and pathogenic prokaryotes and eukaryotes, which are often important components of the ecology of arthropod species. we therefore filtered the assembled contigs based on g+c content, coverage, and sequence homology, in order to minimize the mis-annotation of microbial sequences as v. destructor, as well as to identify novel microbes of interest. comparable strategies have been successfully applied to the classification of metagenomic samples .

we first examined the distribution of contig-mean coverage versus length , which revealed relatively few outliers, and these were found to be enriched in mitochondrial and ribosomal sequences. thus, the vast majority of the assembled contigs do not appear to contain many collapsed nuclear repeats. based on the observed median and variance of coverage , we excluded contigs with less than 2× coverage and greater than 10× coverage, as well as contigs less than  <dig> bp in length, from the analyzed v. destructor assembly.

we then examined g+c content of contigs , which suggested that varroa nuclear dna falls largely between 32-58% g+c content . contigs with lower g+c content and higher coverage showed strong homology to mitochondrial and ribosomal dna sequences previously reported for v. destructor, as would be expected. contigs with higher g+c consistently showed higher sequence similarity to bacterial sequences than to arthropod sequences. for example, figure  <dig> illustrates the distribution of contigs with blastx matches to the high g+c bacterial order actinomycetales at an expectation of 10- <dig>  plotted as a function of length and g+c content of contigs. of these contigs, only those above approximately 58% g+c content were better matches  to actinomycetales than to arthropods, or lacked an arthropod match entirely. based on these considerations, we removed contigs outside the range of 32-58% g+c from the analyzed v. destructor assembly unless they contained a superior match to a eukaryotic sequence in genbank at an expectation of 10- <dig>  additional filtering was performed as described in the methods to specifically remove sequences from organisms that were considered potential contaminants a priori, such as known microbial pathogens of honey bees that are dispersed as spores.

actinomycete discovery
the strong secondary mode of high g+c contigs in figure  <dig> and taxonomically coherent blast hits  suggests that one or more actinomycete species were particularly abundant in the sequenced sample. together these contigs totaled ~ <dig> kbp of sequence, which were further analyzed with the blast2go annotation tool  <cit> . additional file  <dig> includes blast2go output that summarizes the distribution of blastx hits among these contigs with respect to matched species, expectation, and sequence similarity. all of the most frequently matched organisms are members of actinomycetales. ribosomal sequences were also found that had strong similarity to this clade, the closest match  being to the genus segniliparus.

to further investigate the distribution of this bacterium in varroa mites, we designed primers specific to a homolog of translation initiation factor tif- <dig>  these primers amplified the target sequence from dna of individual mites, as confirmed by sequencing of the amplicon. the rate of infection in a sample of mites  is shown in table  <dig>  rates of infection varied significantly  by age and sex. mature females were infected more often than males . we did not detect the infection in a small sample of eggs and it was rare in nymphs . these data suggest that horizontal transmission of the bacteria occurs within capped cells . we were not able to amplify the target from a. mellifera dna extracted from adult bee abdomens, either with these primers or another pair targeting an abc transporter gene . given the intimacy of varroa mites with their hosts, this result suggests that the bacterium has some specificity to varroa. while additional surveys at broader geographical scales are needed to confirm and extend these conclusions, the amount of sequence classified as actinomycete is remarkable given that common microbial components of the arthropod gut flora  <cit>   were not strongly evident in the initial assembly . however, as the mites were not surface sterilized prior to extraction of genomic dna, it is unclear whether the infection is topical or internal.

presence or absence of the bacterium is based on a pcr assay .

baculovirus discovery
curiously, the longest contig in the initial assembly was among those filtered due to high coverage across its entire length . in fact, this contig is part of a distinct group visible in figure  <dig> that have mean coverage around 50×, sloping down to ~30× as contig length decreases . we therefore investigated whether contigs ≥  <dig> kbp in length and with 30-60× coverage were of a consistent type, such as microbial dna or a class of repetitive sequence . blastx and pfam  <cit>  searches indicated that these high coverage contigs derive from a novel baculovirus. baculoviruses are large dna viruses that are common in certain arthropod taxa and often have strong impacts on host survival . known baculoviruses range from  <dig> to  <dig> kb in length and typically encode more than  <dig> orfs, some of which are putatively specific to baculoviridae. indeed, several baculovirus-specific domains were detected among the  <dig> methionine-initiated orfs greater than  <dig> amino-acids in length that were found on these high-coverage contigs . domains related to viral genome replication as well as other domains previously reported in baculoviridae were also found. the baculovirus spodoptera litura npv appears to be the most similar viral species overall in genbank, as there were strong matches to ribonucleotide reductase subunits rr <dig> and rr <dig> and weaker matches to a number of other peptides of this viral species. a number of orfs encoding low-complexity proteins were identified from these high-coverage contigs, but it remains unclear which of these, if any, are viral in nature . pcr primers specific to two separate loci  confirmed the presence of these sequences in the original sample pool, but we were able to amplify these loci from only two of fifty individual mites collected at different times from the same colonies as the sequenced sample. thus, the putative baculovirus-like sequences do not appear to be common in v. destructor, although we can infer from their high coverage in the initial assembly that high titres are sometimes achieved. this result also demonstrates that these sequences are not integrated into the v. destructor genome. because baculoviruses are important tools for arthropod transgenics and biocontrol  <cit> , efforts to clarify the nature of this virus and its hosts are underway.

pfam matches are shown for methionine-initiated orfs of  <dig> amino acids or more that were encoded by contigs at least  <dig> kb in length and with 30×-60× coverage. collectively the matches are consistent with a viral origin and include several domains characteristic of baculoviridae. only matches with an expectation of  <dig>  or less are shown. *domain reported from at least one virus in pfam  <cit>  and interpro  <cit>  databases. **present in one baculovirus accession  due to a retrotransposon insertion.

v. destructor annotation and evolutionary comparison with other arthropods
we used blastx  and blastp  to identify genic sequences in the assembly. sequences were initially searched against a database of five arthropod peptide predictions , with a minimum expectation of 10- <dig>  and then secondarily against the eukaryotic refseq database at the same expectation. in total,  <dig>  contigs were identified with blast-detected similarity to database sequences . these contigs had a median length of  <dig>  bp and summed to  <dig>  mbp, and represent roughly 10% of the total assembled sequence . orfs with significant pfam domains are listed in additional file  <dig> and the sequences are provided in additional file  <dig> 

these annotated gene fragments are necessarily an incomplete accounting of the number and type of genes in v. destructor, given the limitations of the assembly and lack of transcriptome data. additional genomic resources are needed for robust gene models and are in development  <cit> . however, we used two approaches to infer how well represented varroa protein-coding genes are in this survey. we first identified orfs that were putatively homologous to enzymes of the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway, using kegg-annotated pathway components  <cit>  from the mosquito, anopheles gambiae, and the tick, i. scapularis, as blast queries. i. scapularis is the most closely related organism to v. destructor for which an extensively annotated genome sequence exists  <cit> . we identified  <dig> putative pathway components in our search , whereas there are  <dig> members in i. scapularis and  <dig> in a. gambiae. a second, similar approach to assessing how well v. destructor genes were represented in the assembly was to query all predicted orfs against the cegma set of hidden markov models of evolutionarily conserved proteins  <cit> . a hmmer  <cit>  search found matches for  <dig> of the  <dig> protein models available, at an e-value threshold of  <dig>  . the same search performed on i. scapularis predicted proteins found matches for  <dig> models. given that orfs are proxies for single coding exons, both approaches used here are likely to under-sample v. destructor coding sequences. these comparisons nonetheless suggest that a majority of the coding potential of v. destructor was captured in this survey, if in fragmented form. however, they also indicate that comparisons of gene-family or protein-domain abundance in v. destructor relative to other arthropods may be premature.

putative pathway components listed below were identified by blastx, using kegg-annotated components  <cit>  from anopheles gambiae and ixodes scapularis as search queries.

we used repeatmasker  <cit>  to characterize the distribution of protein-coding transposable element classes in v. destructor, which are summarized in table  <dig>  the mariner class of dna transposon was by far the most abundant transposable element identified. some retrotransposons were also common, particularly gypsy-type long-terminal-repeat  retrotransposons and lines . helitrons, which replicate by a rolling-circle method, were also numerous. given the quasi-clonal nature of the k and j haplotypes of v. destructor <cit> , comparative re-sequencing of these two groups could uncover recently active transposable elements. active elements are of interest because they are important contributors to genome evolution, including the creation of novel host genes  <cit> , and have utility for functional genomics  <cit> .

transposable elements identified with the protein-level repeat masking mode of repeatmasker  <cit> . class abbreviations are dna, type ii dna transposon; line, long interspersed nuclear element; ltr, long-terminal repeat retrotransposon. family designations are those of repbase  <cit> .

although the i. scapularis genome should be a valuable guide for homology-based gene prediction in v. destructor, these lineages are estimated to have diverged  <dig> ±  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . it is therefore of interest to assess the level of sequence divergence between these two taxa, as well as the divergence of these acari from other model arthropods. we identified  <dig> peptide blocks, averaging  <dig> residues in length, that were conserved between putative orthologs in these two species and among their closest homologs in da. pulex, dr. melanogaster, and p. humanus. we then calculated the average genetic distance among species for each block, using the jtt substitution matrix  <cit>  and weighted by block length . the unrooted dendrogram derived from a total of  <dig>  aligned positions is shown in figure  <dig>  the v. destructor branch  is substantially longer than the i. scapularis branch  from their shared common ancestor, implying a high rate of amino-acid evolution in the varroa lineage and/or a low rate of amino-acid evolution in the ixodes lineage. note that this distance-based approach does not require specifying a nucleotide substitution model or correcting for multiple substitutions; the branch lengths are approximately proportional to the product of the time since divergence and the branch-specific rate of molecular evolution . furthermore, the branching order of these taxa are well-supported by independent data  <cit> . of course, this result is averaged across many loci and does not necessarily represent the pattern of sequence divergence at any given gene. it remains to be seen whether other gene features, such as exon structure, have also evolved at a comparably divergent rates.

nucleotide polymorphism in v. destructor
life-history traits of v. destructor  <cit>  that act to reduce genetic polymorphism within family lineages include male haploidy  <cit>  and a predominance of full-sib mating. genetic variation within a population can nonetheless be high in principle if populations are admixtures of distinct lineages. high-frequency polymorphisms, whether due to admixture or heterozygosity, can cause difficulties for shotgun assembly algorithms because they weaken the computational discrimination of allelic and non-allelic sequences. on the other hand, polymorphisms may be useful as genetic markers for population-genetic studies. it is therefore of interest to estimate levels of genetic polymorphism in the sequenced sample . we used the program swap <dig>  <cit>  to estimate the occurrence of moderate- to high-frequency snps, i.e. those present in reads at a minimum ratio of  <dig>  to the assembly reference base. snp calls also required a minimum of two reads with the alternative base, but did not require reads in both directions. polymorphisms meeting these parameters occurred at a rate of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> per base pair. given a median per-contig coverage of  <dig> × in the final assembly , our ability to detect low frequency polymorphisms is of course limited, but such polymorphisms contribute much less ambiguity to genome assembly.

to further investigate the potential for sequence polymorphism within a v. destructor population, we identified trinucleotide microsatellite loci in the genomic sequence and obtained amplification products for ten of these . consistent with our estimate of snp frequency, we found no polymorphism at these loci in  <dig> individual mites collected from research apiaries at the usda-ars facility in beltsville, maryland, the source of the genome survey pool.

discussion
v. destructor is considered the most damaging honey-bee pest and has become widespread since its host shift from a. cerana less than a century ago. resistance to common acaricides has already appeared  <cit> , and the development of new control strategies are hampered by our limited knowledge of the v. destructor - a. mellifera interaction, particularly at the genetic level. the present genome survey makes available a large number of genic sequences for analysis and manipulation by the community of researchers. the contigs we obtained from low-coverage shotgun sequencing were short, as expected, such that few complete gene models are likely to be annotated from this data set. nonetheless, our assembly enables the identification of genes of interest and the cloning of complete transcripts as they are needed. the assembly will also greatly assist the validation and annotation of transcriptome surveys and can support proteomic initiatives. we hope the resources provided here will aid investigators already tackling the problem of mite control with molecular methods as well as encourage the involvement of others.

genetic approaches to the study of mite control are promising for a number of reasons. successful reproduction of varroa mites requires precise coordination with the care of honey bee brood and a sophisticated evasion of honey bee defences. chemosensory genes are among those likely to play crucial roles in this process. at the phenotypic level, there is known variation among varroa haplotype groups and species in their ability to successfully parasitize a. mellifera  <cit> , as well as known variation in the resistance of honey bee strains  <cit> . while varroa mites are not tractable to controlled crosses, associative mapping of traits such as reproductive success on different hosts remains an attractive possibility, as is the mapping of resistance traits in honey bee. resequencing efforts are needed to uncover genetic variation that can be exploited for these purposes. those efforts would also contribute to a better understanding of the demographic history of v. destructor and to species relationships within the genus. polymorphic markers within haplotype groups would aid investigations of the population biology of the species, particularly in light of the difficulty of observing or manipulating varroa mites in their habitat. for example, estimates of outcrossing and migration might be relevant to the design of new mitigation strategies, particularly if the evolution of resistance traits is expected. while consistent with previous work  <cit>  that found low genetic polymorphism within the predominant v. destructor lineage, our analysis nonetheless enables genome-scale mining of markers for population-genetic studies.

our analysis of conserved peptide blocks showed a higher rate of protein evolution within the varroa lineage relative to ixodes. it remains to be clarified whether this level of sequence divergence is characteristic of mites or peculiar to the varroa lineage. similarly, whether this result correlates with divergence in other aspects of genome evolution, such as exon structure and regulatory features, will be an important question to pursue as annotations improve for both species. as genomic resources for v. destructor continue to improve, opportunities for evolutionary comparisons with other arthropods will be enriched. such comparisons are of tremendous value because they can expose conserved elements that might otherwise elude detection by direct experiment, and they reveal the relative rates at which various classes of homologous sequence diverge. varroa mites and others in the parasitiformes comprise a lineage that diverged from ixodid ticks over  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , while the chelicerates as a whole branched from the insects and crustacea  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . consequently, as a representative of the parasitiformes, varroa provides a key evolutionary landmark for comparative studies across arthropods currently targeted for genomic analyses.

an accessory goal of genome projects targeting arthropod pests is the identification of novel microbes and viruses that may be relevant to the epidemiology of vectored diseases, or that lend themselves to biocontrol programs. a significant finding of this study was the discovery of an actinomycete bacterium that infects v. destructor at intermediate frequencies  but apparently does not infect a. mellifera at appreciable levels. however, these findings are preliminary and await a more systematic survey of infection among mites and bees. future research should also be directed toward isolating this bacterium and assessing the fitness consequences of infection. further characterization of the putative baculovirus identified in this survey is similarly a priority.

this work contributes to the relatively small body of genomic studies to date that have applied next-generation sequencing to a complex eukaryotic genome phylogenetically distant from other reference genomes. as the costs and technical requirements for genome sequencing continue to decline, such studies will undoubtedly become commonplace. in many cases, the sequencing of a single genotype or inbred group will not be feasible, and there may also be a significant metagenomic contribution from associated microbes. while these factors introduce new challenges, our results underscore the utility of these methods for rapidly advancing the study of non-model organisms.

CONCLUSIONS
our results have provided general tools for the research community and novel directions for investigating the biology and control of varroa mites. ongoing development of varroa genomic resources will be a boon for comparative genomics of under-represented arthropods, and will further enhance the honey bee and its associated pathogens as a model system for studying host-pathogen interactions.

