BACKGROUND
genetic variation is the material for evolutionary processes. its maintenance may to a large part be driven by the exceptional dynamics of host-parasite co-evolution  <cit> . the major histocompatibility complex  represents a crucial part of the host side in these co-evolutionary processes and is one of the most polymorphic systems in the vertebrate genome. it has been studied extensively in model species under laboratory conditions  <cit> , but also became the focus of an increasing number of studies on natural populations because of its functional importance for the immune system and mate choice  <cit> . its genes code for cell surface molecules that present self and non-self antigens to t-cells  <cit> . this function makes them a key factor of the adaptive immune system as it triggers a respective targeted response upon recognition of non-self antigens and therefore plays a vital role in the recognition of pathogens invading the body. the high polymorphism in this system, which is composed of a high total number of alleles as well as allelic divergence on the sequence level, is thought to facilitate populations to persist in and adapt to natural habitats  <cit> .

a number of hypotheses have been proposed to explain the forces that counteract the effects of random genetic drift and fixation . the 'negative frequency-dependent selection' hypothesis  <cit>  grounds on the effects of host parasite co-evolution , stating that frequencies of alleles constantly change with the frequency of adapted and non-adapted pathogens. rare alleles are being preserved within a population through such fluctuations or the emergence of new pathogens. the prerequisite for this co-evolution in terms of reciprocal adaptation is the direct interaction of individual alleles and distinct pathogenic morphotypes. growing evidence comes from a variety of taxa that such an interaction exists  <cit> . another hypothesis, the 'heterozygote advantage' has been proposed as a general mechanism to maintain high allele numbers in populations by an advantage for individuals carrying more than one allele, enabling them to present a broader range of antigens  <cit> . there is experimental evidence that this is valid for animals exposed to multiple pathogens  but not to single pathogens  <cit> . this seems plausible, as the advantage would most likely result from a combined resistance of individual alleles each presenting a certain range of parasites  <cit> . nevertheless, the exact mechanisms are still a matter of debate  <cit> . de boer et al.  <cit>  used mathematical models to study the degree of mhc polymorphism arising when 'heterozygote advantage' is the only selection pressure. the simulations revealed that the advantage for an individual that simply carries two alleles instead of one is not sufficient to explain the high population diversity of the mhc. wakeland et al.  <cit>  proposed a special case of the heterozygote advantage, the 'divergent allele advantage', which refers to the genetic distance between alleles and expects an advantage for more divergent allele combinations, enabling the respective carrier to present more different antigens to its adaptive immune system. this mechanism may potentially explain a directional selection for both, a large number of alleles at the population level and a high divergence of alleles at the individual level.

tropical rainforests are known for their exceptional species diversity  <cit>  and this may also be true for the diversity of parasites an inhabitant has to face. therefore studying a species from such diverse environment could provide a great opportunity to better understand the ongoing evolution of the mhc, as selection mechanisms should be pronounced. in this study we examine the variability in the exon  <dig> of mhc class iib genes and its effect on parasite infection of the long-tailed giant rat  to unravel the mechanisms of selection in a wild ranging species. this large nocturnal murid species lives semi-arboreal in tropical forested habitats and reaches an average body mass of  <dig> g  <cit> , feeding on plant material and arthropods  <cit> . this rodent was chosen, because it is a wide-spread species living in the diverse and dynamic environment of dipterocarp rainforests across southeast asia  <cit> , presumably conferring the need to constantly adapt to environmental changes such as the encounter of new parasites, but also to persist against ancient pathogen lines. the presumably high parasite pressure in these habitats could lead to pronounced and therefore detectable signs of elsewhere more subtle mechanisms of selection.

RESULTS
mhc ii gene variability
in total we determined the mhc class iib genotype of  <dig> individuals from the two different subpopulations. overall  <dig> different sequence variants  could be distinguished via sscp and confirmed by sequencing. the genomic origin of the alleles was investigated through a protein blast search on the ncbi database  <cit> . ten of the detected alleles showed unique drb origin, blasting to different murid species, ten other alleles produced hits with drb as well as dqb alleles from different murid species and the last eight alleles produced mainly dqb hits from several murid taxa. the same latter eight alleles showed a deletion of two amino acids, leading to a shortened amino acid sequence, but not to a frame shift in codon translation. one of the two deleted amino acid sites  is thought to be involved in antigen binding  <cit> . the same deletion can also be found in some  published dqb alleles of the brown rat  and house mouse .

due to the ambiguous information from other species, we did not assign locus origin to any of the alleles. instead we labelled them in the order of discovery with the prefix lesa-mhciib and submitted them to genbank . although several of the alleles show ambiguities concerning their origin, we did not find traces of gene conversion events between the potential two loci using geneconv . we produced a neighbour-joining tree of all alleles, including published drb and dqb alleles from rat, mouse and human . in contrast to the included human drb and dqb alleles, which showed strong locus divergence, the murid alleles did not cluster in a significant pattern , suggesting that the drb and dqb lineages in murids are not as differentiated as they are in primates. the same holds true when including the deleted sites in a pair wise comparison . due to these results and because both potentially amplified loci code for classical mhc class ii molecules which present extracellularly derived antigens, we combined all detected alleles for analysing possible relationships of mhciib diversity with parasite loads and body condition.

the frequency of alleles differed strongly . while most  of the alleles were rare and occurred only in one or two individuals, the most common allele lesa-mhciib* <dig> was found in one third of all screened animals. the two alleles lesa-mhciib* <dig> and lesa-mhciib* <dig> equalled the alleles lesa-mhciib* <dig> and lesa-mhciib* <dig> respectively after translation into amino acid sequence, due to only synonymous substitutions, leaving  <dig> different alleles on the amino acid level. synonymous alleles were pooled for subsequent analyses, however, none of them occurred together in the same individual.

the two populations shared 82% of those alleles, which were present in more than two individuals  and none of the private alleles, i.e. unique to one of the study sites, occurred in more than  <dig> individuals . genotypes ranged from one to four alleles per individual. we calculated the divergence of alleles for each individual, which ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  and correlated strongly with the number of alleles .

evidence for selection
within the alleles, 70% of the amino acid positions appeared variable and non-synonymous substitutions occurred in a significant higher magnitude than synonymous ones , especially in the regions that code for the antigen binding sites . the same increased dn/ds ratio at the abs was also found in a separate analysis of only the eight alleles with a deletion . such elevated dn/ds-ratios are a widely accepted sign for balancing selection in polymorphic genes  <cit> . these results were confirmed by the maximum likelihood approach in codeml, showing a significantly higher likelihood estimate for the model m <dig> which allows for positive selection compared to the model m <dig> which assumes no positive selection . the site class under positive selection showed an ω  of  <dig>  and contained  <dig>  of the amino acid positions,  <dig> of which overlap with the antigen binding sites defined by brown et al.  <cit> .

all alleles
alleles with deletion
rates of non-synonymous  versus synonymous  substitutions for the amplified part of exon  <dig> as well as for residues of the antigen binding site only. data is shown for all alleles and separately for the eight alleles with the deletion. abs - antigen binding site. aa - amino acid. significant values are marked bold.

effects of mhc diversity on body condition and parasite load
out of the  <dig> analysed individuals,  <dig> were categorized as adults, while the rest was classified as subadults. only  <dig> of the  <dig> individuals were mature enough for sexing. body condition was positively associated with individuals' allele divergence, i.e. average amino acid distance between alleles , whereas study site, cohort or age class did not have any effect on body condition. abs divergence, i.e. allele divergence at antigen binding sites only, showed the same effect , while allele number showed only a slight positive trend in this respect . however, the strongest effect originated potentially from the difference between individuals with a single allele and those with more than one . sex did not influence body condition in the subsample .

in total  <dig> different helminth morphotypes were identified  with zero to four morphotypes per individual. the number of helminth morphotypes per individual did not differ between study sites, age or sex . the overall prevalence of nematodes was high with  <dig> %, whereas cestodes were found in only  <dig> % of the screened individuals and trematodes could not be detected at all. cestodes were significantly more prevalent in the unlogged site with 44%  than in the logged site with  <dig> % , whereas neither nematode prevalence  nor intensity  differed between the locations. we pooled the individuals for further analysis of those parameters that did not show any differences between study sites.

we found a significant negative influence of allele divergence on the number of helminth morphotypes  within an individual . abs divergence showed a similar trend , while neither the number of alleles  nor body condition  had an effect on the number of helminth morphotypes. again, a part of the association between allele divergence and parasite species richness was potentially due to the difference between individuals with one and those with more than one allele, since the latter showed a lower parasite species richness . the models showed also that the number of helminth morphotypes differed significantly between the cohorts . the residuals of all four models were well normally distributed .

when testing, whether the intensity of nematode infection  was influenced by the presence of individual mhc-alleles, the parameters body condition, allele divergence and allele number were removed from the respective models according to aic and therefore had no significant influence. in contrast, intensity of nematode infection differed between age classes, being higher in adult individuals, and was higher in poring . for statistical reasons we only tested the effect of those alleles that occurred at least in six individuals . individuals with the second most common allele lesa-mhciib* <dig> tended to show a decreased intensity of nematode infection . the intensity of nematode infection was independent of the sex .

discussion
in this study, the variability of the mhc class iib genes in the long-tailed giant rat  was investigated and its effect on the parasite infection analysed. the aim was to further unravel the evolutionary mechanisms that lead to the observed high polymorphism in mhc genes by investigating a natural population in the diverse and dynamic environment of a tropical rainforest. as expected from studies on other small mammals, the mhc of the long-tailed giant rat was highly polymorphic. this was shown in the diverse allele pool of the two subpopulations  as well as in the high percentage  of polymorphic amino acid sites within the exon  <dig>  the domain that is responsible for antigen binding  <cit> .

the inconsistent blast results might indicate that mhc iib locus differentiation is less consolidated than sometimes assumed. mammals are the only order where the differentiation between drb and dqb loci is actually being made, while in other vertebrate orders the different mhciib loci are usually indistinguishable. most studies use the ncbi blast search for identification of locus origin and this might be sometimes misleading, as locus identification is commonly referred from distantly related taxa if no species specific sequence data is available. the so identified sequences then function again for later studies as reference and artificially reinforce locus determination. blasting for instance a published drb <dig> allele of canis familiaris  to the dog genome  <cit>  brings as first hit the dla dqb <dig> locus. additionally there is support for the occurrence of interlocus exchange of sequence motifs  <cit> , which could also lead to misleading blast results.

the range of one to four alleles per individual suggests that the number of mhciib loci differs between haplotypes, albeit it is theoretically possible that the same allele occurs on several loci. the variation in mhciib loci number has already been resolved for several vertebrate species, including mammals  <cit>  and seems to occur in the long-tailed giant rat as well. another explanation would be the presence of null alleles, meaning that we did not amplify all present alleles. however, the used primers are rather conservative, have been established before in several mammalian species and produced more than two alleles in some of them, indicating duplicated mhciib loci as well  <cit> . the puzzling deletion in some of the alleles is not species specific and can be found in some  dqb alleles of the brown rat  <cit>  and the house mouse . however this sequence characteristic alone is not enough to refer locus origin, as it is not deterministic for one of the loci. the neighbour-joining tree does not solve the question of locus origin either, as none of the lesa allele groups gets significant bootstrap support. these results suggest that the divergence between the two detected mhc class ii loci is either hindered by frequent inter-locus recombination or by the fact that both loci evolve under the same selective forces. under these circumstances the apparent lack of traces of inter- and intra-locus recombination events therefore suggests that both loci code for molecules that provide the same function and are shaped by the same selective forces. as done in most studies that analyse mhc diversity in natural populations, we amplified only the exon  <dig> of mhc iib genes, since this codes for the antigen binding region of the mhc molecule. despite high functional and structural similarity of the molecules and presumable paralogous origin, the different mhc iib loci might have diverged more strongly in other exons. restricting the comparison to the exon  <dig> sequence only might therefore contribute to the dissatisfying locus resolution. however, a recent meta-analysis on mhc in several rodent taxa, some of them with duplicated loci, confirmed that the overall combined number of alleles from several class ii loci is shaped by local parasite species richness  <cit> .

the observed high ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous substitutions is a strong sign for balancing selection and strengthens the assumption that both loci are functional and currently involved in antigen presentation, which is not always the case as seen in a recent study on mhc genes in bank voles  <cit> . this is supported by codeml, which showed that the positive selection model m <dig> explained the obtained sequence data better than the model for neutrality m <dig>  overall, our results do not show any sign for non-functionality or pseudogenes and indicate that the analysed genes in this tropical rodent behave like classical mhc genes. we consequently assume that they are actively involved in antigen presentation, providing resistance against pathogens and confer a crucial adaptive trait for the long-tailed giant rat. therefore we analysed possible adaptive effects of the individual mhc-constitution on overall body condition as well as helminth parasite infestation to shed more light onto the selection mechanisms that lead to such high polymorphism.

interestingly, the allele divergence  was correlated with a lower individual number of parasite morphotypes and a better overall body condition. this is in line with the 'divergent allele advantage' hypothesis  <cit> , which assumes that individuals with more divergent alleles have an advantage, because their immune system can counteract against more different pathogens and therefore leads to 'overdominant selection'  <cit> . other studies have found an unexpected high divergence of mhc alleles in natural populations  <cit>  and also signs for 'divergent allele advantage' in the context of mate choice  <cit> . consuegra & garcia de leaniz  <cit>  also found a positive effect of mhc dissimilarity on the prevalence of a single parasite. however, the current data set does not provide enough statistical power to disentangle the effects of allele divergence and pure heterozygote advantage.

the question remains whether the sequence divergence between alleles is a better functional predictor for immunocompetence than the plain number of alleles. it makes intuitively sense to give more importance to allele pairs that differ by  <dig> amino acids than to those that differ by only one amino acid. studies that experimentally support the idea of overdominance in allele numbers , may in fact show indirectly the effect of allele divergence, which is supported by our observation that the genetic divergence within an individual correlates strongly with the number of alleles.

the genetic divergence increases strongest with the step from one allele to two alleles. every additional allele thereafter only adds a fraction of its antigen binding potential, since alleles are known to overlap in their antigen repertoire  <cit>  and each new allele only adds the fraction of antigens that are not yet bound by the already present alleles. the observed correlation between mhc allele divergence and parasite species richness might to a significant part be due to the observed difference between individuals with one allele and those with more alleles. this is, however, not the only reason for the correlation, since we would then also expect a stronger correlation of parasite species richness and mere allele number, which was not detected.

our finding of a potential association between intensity of nematode infection and a certain allele, which looses significance after bonferroni-correction, would support the 'negative frequency-dependent selection' hypothesis, which has already been shown in several other host parasite systems  <cit> . the fact that the potentially 'resistant' allele lesa-mhciib* <dig> is the second most common in our population, although a rather rare allele would be expected by this hypothesis, could be due to the sampling time point. the cycling pattern of frequencies of both alleles and parasites due to host-parasite coevolution can lead to a spread of an advantageous and formerly rare allele until the parasite evolves to avoid it  <cit> . the 'negative frequency-dependent selection' hypothesis could also explain the maintenance of the observed high number of alleles that were found in one or two individuals only. it expects a potential advantage for individuals carrying rare alleles, which enable them to better resist new pathogen threats and therefore keeps those rare alleles in the gene pool instead of purging them.

CONCLUSIONS
the negative correlation of mean genetic distance between mhc iib alleles and the number of parasite morphotypes could be interpreted in support of the 'divergent allele advantage', which has to our knowledge not yet been fully proven by empirical studies. however, the main effect originates likely from the difference between individuals with one and those with more alleles. in addition we found a substantial number of rare alleles and hints for an interaction between a specific allele and nematode infection intensity. we therefore conclude that both hypotheses, the heterozygosity advantage  as well as the 'negative frequency-dependent selection', work non-exclusively on the maintenance of a high variability in the mhc allele pool, as it has already been proposed in theory by apanius et al.  <cit> . more work has to be done on the molecular level to discover and unravel the interrelations of individual alleles and individual parasite genotypes to finally resolve the mystery of balancing selection on the mhc loci. a special focus should be put on the importance of individual allele divergence, e.g. by looking at a broader parasite range.

