BACKGROUND
acoustic signals are a vital component of intrasexual and intersexual interactions between conspecifics  <cit> . quality cues in signals are typically the result of physical and physiological constraints on sound production  <cit> . signals of quality provide information about the sender’s phenotype and genotype  <cit> . acoustic signals may encode a variety of quality indicators, including body size, dominance and fatigue . the evolution of vocalisations involves a feedback loop between production mechanisms, the acoustic structure of signals and the behaviour of receivers in response  <cit> . thus, the behavioural responses of receivers, based on the acoustic information in vocalisations, drives selection at the level of signal production  <cit> . understanding the perception and response to acoustic signals is therefore critical to the understanding of the evolution of acoustic communication systems.

among mammals, vocal signals serve in both mate attraction and intrasexual competition. in humans, the fundamental frequency or pitch  of male voices negatively correlates with levels of circulating testosterone , while taller men typically speak with lower formant dispersion . playback studies have shown that women perceive male voices with lower fo and formant dispersion as being more masculine . the relationship between perceived masculinity and circulating testosterone is largely mediated by fo, while the relationship between speaker height and perceived masculinity is partially mediated by both formant dispersion and fo  <cit> . similarly, males perceive other men with voices characterised by lower fo as being more physically and socially dominant  <cit> . males modulate their fo when speaking to a competitor, lowering their fo when they perceive themselves as more dominant and raising it when they perceive themselves as less dominant  <cit> . indexical cues of fitness-related parameters have also been observed in the vocal variation of non-human mammals, suggesting that they play a role in mate attraction and/or intrasexual competition. correlations between formant frequencies , with age, body size, dominance and/or reproductive success are found in a number of groups, including ungulates  <cit> , carnivores , marsupials  <cit>  and primates  <cit> . fo may be a reliable cue to age, decreasing with age in baboons   <cit>  and red deer   <cit> , while increasing with age in fallow deer   <cit> . furthermore, fo is a good indicator of dominance in fallow bucks  <cit>  and crested macaques   <cit> . however, despite this correlational evidence, to our knowledge, no study has successfully demonstrated the importance of fo in male intrasexual competition in a non-human mammal using playback experiments.

fallow deer are a highly polygynous and size-dimorphic species  <cit> . males  remain silent for most of the year, but vocalise  intensely during the breeding season   <cit> . the groan comprises a series of glottal pulses, which give rise to a very low fo   <cit> . the broadband energy of these pulses is filtered by the vocal tract, resulting in spectral peaks called formants  <cit> . the larynx is mobile and is retracted during vocalisations, increasing the vocal tract length by an average of  <dig> %  <cit> . this significantly lowers formant frequencies and dispersion, and potentially exaggerates the perceived body size of callers  <cit> . fo is not correlated with body size in fallow deer  <cit>  and furthermore, when compared to other species, the fo of fallow buck groans is well below what would be expected for an animal of that size  <cit> .

analyses of the vocal behaviour and acoustic parameters of fallow buck vocalisations show that these vocal signals are sexually selected and play a crucial role in reproductive contexts  <cit> . more dominant fallow bucks have greater mating success, and higher rank is correlated to lower fo in groans and, to a lesser extent, to lower formant frequencies  <cit> . higher ranked males commence groaning several weeks before mating starts, and long-term investment in groaning throughout the rut is related to their mating success  <cit> . additionally, fallow buck groans are dynamic signals. bucks modulate their groaning rate in relation to the presence and composition of surrounding conspecifics  <cit> , and treat higher groaning rates as more threatening  <cit> . further, variation in groan quality throughout the rut appears to provide salient information about the condition of callers  <cit> . the fo of groans is typically lowest around the peak of mating activity in the middle of the rut and increases towards the end of the rut. similarly, the number of pulses and duration of groans decreases towards the end of the rut. this decline in groan quality is likely to be indicative of the broader decline in body condition of bucks as the rut progresses  <cit>  and is perceptible to other bucks, which treat late-rut groans as less threatening than early-rut groans  <cit> . while groans are likely to signal information to both male and female conspecifics  <cit> , the specific parameters  attended to by males and females, and hence the selection pressures driving the evolution of this vocal signal remain unknown.

because fallow buck groans appear to be the product of strong sexual selection for low fo, low formant dispersion, long duration and high groaning rate  <cit> , we experimentally investigated whether bucks use acoustic cues to dominance, size and condition to assess competitors. using playback experiments, we previously showed that bucks attend to changes in conspecific call rate and overall call structure, thus gaining information on the motivation and condition  of competitors  <cit> . here, we tested if bucks also attend to changes in fo, formants and duration. we hypothesized that males would perceive conspecific groans with lower fo, lower formants, or longer duration, which are indicative of more dominant, larger and/or better condition animals as more threatening, compared to groans indicating less dominant, smaller and/or poorer condition bucks  <cit> . accordingly, we expected bucks to display greater attention and be more likely to retreat when presented with groans that they perceive as more threatening. we predicted that bucks would be responsive to changes in fo, formant dispersion and groan duration, and therefore that the responses of receivers to the acoustic information are driving selection for the production of signals that effectively transmit information about caller quality and condition.

RESULTS
playbacks of fallow buck groans were presented to  <dig> bucks during the rut. each buck was presented with a unique set of  <dig> playback stimuli consisting of the following: 1) natural groans ; 2) same groans with fundamental frequency shifted down; 3) formant frequencies shifted up; 4) formant frequencies shifted down; 5) and shortened duration. the responses measured were the latency from the beginning of the playback presentation until the subject looked towards the speaker, the duration of looking during the presentation period, and the time taken for the subject to start moving after the beginning of the playback. for each buck, the response to modified groans was compared to the response to natural groans.

response to playbacks of groans with lowered fundamental frequency 
in response to playbacks of groans with a lower fo, bucks were quicker to look towards the speaker  and looked for longer , compared to natural groans. however, there was no difference between these two stimuli in the latency to move or the distance moved .fig.  <dig> the responses of fallow bucks to natural groans and modified groans with lowered f
o. pairs of points joined by lines represent the response of an individual buck. bucks responded to by looking toward the speaker faster  and for longer  in response to f
o lowered groans than to natural groans. there was no consistent difference in response in either the latency to move , or the distance moved  between groan types 



response to playback of groans with modified formant frequencies
bucks responded to playbacks of groans with lowered formant frequencies by looking towards the speaker sooner than in response to natural groans . there was no difference in the duration of looking towards the speaker, or in the latency to move and the distance moved between lowered formants groans and natural groans . by contrast, bucks spent significantly less time looking towards the speaker , and were more likely to approach the speaker , in response to playbacks of groans with raised formants than to natural groans. there was no difference in latencies to look or move between natural and raised formant groans .fig.  <dig> the responses of fallow bucks to natural groans and modified groans with lowered formant frequencies. pairs of points joined by lines represent the response of an individual buck. bucks responded to by looking toward the speaker faster  in response to lowered formant frequency groans than to natural groans. there was no consistent difference in response in the latency to move , or the distance moved  between groan types. the difference in response to the duration of looking towards the speaker  was not significant 

fig.  <dig> the responses of fallow bucks to natural groans and modified groans with raised formant frequencies. pairs of points joined by lines represent the response of an individual buck. bucks looked toward the speaker for less time  and were more likely to approach the speaker  in response to groans with raised formant frequencies than natural groans. there was no consistent difference in response in either the latency to look towards the speaker , or the latency to begin moving  between groan types 



response to playback of groans with shortened duration
when presented with groans of shortened duration compared to natural groans, fallow bucks took longer to look towards the speaker  and looked for a shorter time . while there was no difference between the two stimuli in the latency to move , bucks were more likely to approach the speaker during playbacks of shortened duration groans than natural groans .fig.  <dig> the responses of fallow bucks to natural groans and modified groans with shortened durations. pairs of points joined by lines represent the response of an individual buck. bucks were slower to look towards the speaker , looked for less time  and were more likely to approach the speaker  in response to groans with shortened durations than to natural groans. there was no consistent difference in response in the latency to begin moving  



in summary, fallow bucks looked more rapidly and for longer when the fundamental frequency or formant frequencies had been lowered, compared to natural groans. by contrast, bucks looked for less time and were more likely to approach the speaker during playbacks of groans with raised formant frequencies and shorter durations, when compared to natural groans.

discussion
using playback presentations, we examined fallow buck perception of information about caller dominance, size and condition, contained in conspecific groans. we hypothesised that bucks would show greater attention and would not approach, or would retreat, when hearing groans indicative of more competitive callers, suggesting that they perceive these callers as more threatening. by contrast, we expected bucks to approach the speaker more when hearing groans indicative of less competitive callers. we presented bucks with groans that had been manipulated to alter vocal cues to these male characteristics compared to the same, non-modified  groans. our results show that bucks perceive changes in groan fundamental frequency, formant frequencies and duration. bucks treated groans with lowered fundamental frequencies  as more threatening than natural groans . groans with lowered formant frequencies , were also treated as more threatening than natural groans , while groans with raised formant frequencies  were treated as less threatening . finally, groans with shorter durations  were treated as less threatening . we suggest that fallow bucks are able perceive information from these multiple parameters of conspecific vocalisations, in order to assess the level of competition posed by other bucks. it is likely that these functional responses of receivers have driven evolution at the level of vocal production to shape the vocal signals of fallow bucks  <cit> . furthermore, our results demonstrate the similarities between humans and fallow deer in the perception and use of both formants and fo in vocal signalling  <cit> , highlighting potential common evolutionary pressures across mammals.

in fallow buck groans, fo is negatively correlated with dominance rank  <cit> , and may provide cues to the hormonal state of callers  <cit> . we found that fallow bucks responded to groans with lowered fo more rapidly and remained attentive for longer when compared to natural groans. fallow bucks thus perceived information in the fundamental frequency of groans, and the behavioural response was consistent with fo providing cues to the dominance rank of individuals; bucks were more attentive to groans with lower fundamental frequencies, which are typically associated with more dominant individuals. the very low fo of fallow buck groans suggests that these vocal signals have evolved to broadcast information about the competitive ability of individuals  <cit> . to our knowledge, this is the first experimental demonstration of the importance of fo in male competition in a non-human mammal and contrasts with the findings for closely related deer species  <cit> .

in stark contrast to fallow bucks, closely related red deer stags do not attend to fo in conspecific roars  <cit> . fallow buck vocalisations have a disproportionately lower fo than female vocalisations  <cit> , whereas in red deer, there is no sexual dimorphism in fo and females prefer males with higher than average fo  <cit> . in red deer, fo typically decreases as males age  <cit> , in contrast to fallow bucks, where fo increases with age  <cit> . while the preference of female fallow deer for fo has not been experimentally tested, more dominant males tend to have lower fo and higher mating success  <cit> . it is therefore likely that intersexual selection has driven the evolution of higher fo in red deer stags, while intra- and potentially intersexual selection have led to the extremely low fo of fallow buck groans.

the lower fundamental frequency of fallow buck groans may facilitate the assessment of body size through improving the resolution of formants  <cit> . in humans, as in many mammals including fallow bucks, fo and body size tend to be quite independent of one another within members of the same age and sex  <cit> , and fo has been suggested to reduce the accuracy of voice-based size assessment, particularly when fo information is discordant with formant information   <cit> . however, pisanski et al.  <cit>  found that humans more accurately assessed speaker size when pitch cues were present, in contrast to when they were absent, e.g. whispered speech, despite the absence of a relationship between pitch and speaker height. further, listeners performed better at assessing speaker size when pitch was lower and harmonics were denser than when pitch was higher and harmonics more sparse. therefore it is likely that greater harmonic density generated by lower fo allows better formant resolution and aids formant-based size assessment  <cit> . indeed, ‘pulsatile’ vocalisations such as fallow deer groans and koala  bellows may further emphasise formant frequencies  <cit> . in these vocalisations, glottal pulses contain broadband energy and are heard as individual events, such that pitch is not perceived  <cit> . thus it is possible that very low fo evolved in these species to increase the perception of formant-related information that indicates body size.

the fo of groans may be selected to directly signal attributes such as hormonal levels. in human males, pitch is negatively correlated with testosterone levels , and low pitched voices are perceived as more dominant  <cit>  and more masculine  <cit> . testosterone causes immunosuppression, and thus is a good indicator of quality as only high quality males can express this costly trait  <cit> . among mammals, there is increasing evidence for salient indicators of hormone levels in vocal signals . while further study on the effect of hormonal levels on vocal parameters is needed, it is possible that  the low fo of fallow buck vocalisations signals the hormonal levels of callers and thus their quality.

formants correspond to resonance frequencies of the vocal tract and hence are strongly linked to its length  <cit> . the mobile descended larynx of fallow deer allows bucks to elongate their vocal tract by an average of  <dig> % during each groan, potentially giving receivers an exaggerated impression of the caller’s body size  <cit> . despite this mobile larynx, the minimum formant frequencies and minimum formant dispersion that an individual can produce when the larynx is fully retracted toward the sternum are an accurate cue to body size  <cit> . larger males are typically higher ranked and have greater mating success, indicating that they are better competitors  <cit> . formant frequencies may also provide information about the age of callers  <cit> . prime-aged bucks aged  <dig> and  <dig> years old tend to produce groans with lower minimum formant dispersion, than when they are aged  <dig> or  <dig> years  <cit> . this change in formant dispersion probably reflects their maturation and subsequent senescence  <cit> . our results demonstrate that fallow bucks are attentive to formant information in groans; males responded to groans with lower formant frequencies  more rapidly than natural groans. by contrast, they responded to groans with higher formant frequencies  by looking for shorter periods, but were more likely to approach towards the speaker during playbacks. thus, it seems that bucks perceived groans with lower formants as coming from larger, more threatening individuals, whereas groans with higher formant frequencies were perceived as originating from smaller, less threatening males.

the stability of vocal signals through the breeding season is likely to provide important information about the changing condition of callers  <cit> . fallow bucks lose on average  <dig> % of their body weight during the rut  <cit> , and as a result of declining body condition, groans become shorter and have higher fo  <cit> . fallow bucks can perceive these changes and respond less to fatigued groans than to groans from bucks in good condition  <cit> . our results reveal that groan duration is one of the parameters that bucks are likely to be using to assess the condition of conspecific callers; bucks were slower to respond, were attentive for less time and were more likely to approach towards the speaker during a playback of groans with shorter duration , compared to a playback of natural groans. this suggests that fallow bucks detect changes in groan length and can use this to assess the state of callers, potentially gaining information about caller fatigue. therefore, groan duration could be a product of intrasexual selection.

despite being closely related  <cit> , it appears that selection has acted differently on vocal production in fallow deer and red deer. both species possess a mobile descended larynx that is retracted during vocalisations  <cit> , and both use formant information when assessing conspecifics  <cit> . however, during roaring, red deer typically retract the larynx down to its maximum extent for each roar  <cit> , whereas fallow bucks only retract the larynx by approximately  <dig> % of the distance between the snout and sternum during each groan  <cit> . further, in contrast to fallow bucks, the roaring rate of red deer is much lower, typically a maximum of approximately  <dig> roars per minute  <cit> , compared to approximately  <dig> groans per minute produced by fallow bucks during the rut  <cit> . groaning rate is a very important signal for fallow bucks. bucks modulate the rate of their vocal displays depending on the audience as a possible intrasexual threat signal  <cit> , and they perceive higher vocal rates as more threatening than lower rates  <cit> . groaning rate and groan duration are inversely related, and because fallow bucks retract the larynx during each groan  <cit> , the larynx cannot be retracted as far during shorter-duration but higher-rate groaning, for example during “harsh” groans  <cit> . our results have demonstrated that in fallow deer, the duration, fo and formant frequencies, as well as groaning rate, provide salient information during intersexual competition and appear to be under strong sexual selection. by contrast, in red deer, although calling rate is an important cue  <cit> , formant frequencies appear to be the dominant cue during intrasexual competition  <cit> , as stags do not attend to fo  <cit> .

while the results of this study are based on a limited sample size of ten individuals, they nevertheless provide important evidence for the selection pressures driving the evolution of the fallow buck vocal system. fallow bucks display fo that are far lower than predicted by their body size  <cit>  and modulate their formant frequencies during every groan by retracting the larynx  <cit> . furthermore, the quality of a buck’s groan declines over the course of the rut  <cit> , allowing competitors to assess the condition of other males  <cit> . the results support our hypothesis that lower fo and formant frequencies are indicators of higher-quality bucks, while lower formant frequencies and shorter durations indicate lower-quality individuals. it is unlikely that bucks were simply responding to the novelty of the stimulus. bucks responded as predicted to groan modifications, either treating modified groans as more or less threatening than natural calls. if bucks were simply responding to novelty we would expect the direction of responses to be similar for all novel stimuli.

CONCLUSIONS
to conclude, this study demonstrates that, as a result of intrasexual competition, selection can act upon multiple parameters of vocalisations to simultaneously signal caller dominance, body size and condition. further, to our knowledge, our results represent the first experimental demonstration of the importance of fo in male competition in non-human mammals. although to the human ear, the groans of fallow deer sound relatively simplistic and repetitive, we show that bucks have advanced perception abilities that allow them to extract information based on relatively small changes in some very salient parameters.

