BACKGROUND
the availability of genomic data from an ever increasing number of species, arising from the completion of multiple genome projects and the metagenomic analysis of natural samples, has uncovered a potential treasure trove of proteins with as-yet undiscovered properties that could be exploited to solve both existing and future biotechnology challenges. the huge amount of sequence data currently being generated calls not only for bioinformatic prediction of open-reading frames  and their putative functions  <cit> , but also for novel screening techniques  that will help identifying gene products with potential technological interest  <cit> . metagenomics is already revealing a wealth of new protein families with unknown functions, as well as distant relatives of other proteins with well-characterised functions, which will be very valuable for evolutionary and structural studies  <cit> . these studies will likely require the expression of newly-described orfs in heterologous hosts for their initial characterisation, and expressing them as protein fusions with standard tags might be advantageous. one of the main hurdles in metagenomic screening derives from the existence of profound differences in the way that different taxonomic groups of organisms translate orfs   <cit> . these differential features demand for the creation of flexible cloning and expression systems allowing protein expression in multiple hosts  <cit> . furthermore, the prediction of the whole orf complement of an organism  based on the analysis of genomic data has facilitated the creation of representative clone collections that contain a large proportion of such orfs  <cit> . the functional characterization of putative ortholog genes identified among orfeome clone collections might involve monitoring their intracellular behaviour, a task facilitated by the generation of fusions with genetically-encoded fluorescent proteins  <cit> . controlling for possible artefacts caused by steric interference of the fluorescent module with important functional domains in the protein of interest should ideally involve comparing the intracellular behaviour when the fluorescent module is attached to either the n- or the c-termini, as well as with that of the protein over-expressed on its own  <cit> , as it may explain unexpected behaviours. it might also be necessary to exchange the fluorescent module so to find the one with the spectral properties best suited to a particular experiment  <cit> . meeting those demands may lead to time-consuming subcloning strategies, which would be further complicated by the intrinsically limited availability of in frame-, pre-inserted functional modules in expression vector backbones. the simplification of subcloning strategies, at least allowing the simultaneous insertion of the orfs of interest into a panel of different expression vectors, would be advantageous  <cit> . one crucial step in this direction has been the implementation of recombination-based cloning systems such as the gateway kits commercialized by invitrogen . gateway cloning, which has been adopted for the creation of many orfeome clone collections  <cit> , bypasses the constraints imposed by restriction and ligation strategies and, in its basic configuration, is based on the recombinase-mediated shuttling of a dna fragment  from an entry clone into a destination vector. dna fragments are transferred between vectors regardless of their sequence thanks to flanking recognition signals  targeted by recombinases that have been borrowed from the λ phage’s lysogeny cycle machinery  <cit> . the creation of an entry clone typically  involves the pcr-mediated attachment of flanking attb sites to the dna of interest, and its recombination-mediated cloning into an attp-containing plasmid. recombination of this entry clone with an appropriate destination vector containing compatible att sequences will lead to an expression vector encoding an orf, provided that the destination vector is furnished with a suitable promoter. the expression of an orf of interest as a fusion with a fluorescent protein can be achieved with the help of a limited number of commercially-available destination vectors that contain an in-frame pre-inserted module.

our aim was to develop a system that could meet the above requirements while avoiding complex subcloning strategies. owing to the advantages of gateway cloning, we generated a customizable gateway-based plasmid toolkit for constructing fusion proteins from any orf available as a standard entry clone. orfs can be optionally expressed on their own or as in-frame fusions with a collection of standardized functional modules, in a combinatorial way, and from any gateway destination expression vector. we describe the design and components of the toolkit, and we demonstrate its feasibility by presenting proof-of-principle expression data obtained in transient transfection experiments with prototype vectors encoding fluorescent fusion proteins.

RESULTS
conceptual design of the cloning toolkit
the construction of a vector for the expression of fusion proteins requires the subcloning of the cdna of interest into a vector’s backbone, at a site next to one or more pre-existing in-frame modules that provide the functions to be monitored. hence, the design of the preassembled backbone vector conditions the nature of the fusion and the relative position of its constituent modules. this limits the possibilities for screening the best modular arrangement and performance. subcloning of fusion proteins could be streamlined by releasing the functional modules from a fixed position in the backbone vector and regarding them as exchangeable modules to be cloned at the n- and c-termini simultaneously with the orf of interest . ideally, such an approach would be based on recombination-mediated cloning since this should allow standardisation of the procedures and of the peptides linking the modules, facilitating the adoption of high-throughput technology, as described in earlier reports  <cit> . expressing a protein optionally on its own or as a fusion with two flanking modules from a single vector backbone would be an additional asset . thus, when expressed under uniform conditions, comparing a protein’s behaviour in either circumstance would facilitate the identification of potential artefacts occurring as a consequence of the fusion with functional modules  <cit> . it would also allow a large number of fusions based on a given orf to be cloned simultaneously into an array of model-specific expression vectors in combination with a collection of functional modules . a cloning toolkit with such features would represent an advance over previous systems constructed according to similar design principles  <cit> . furthermore, our toolkit would ideally tap into the wealth of orfeome resources produced by the efforts of different laboratories leading the mass-production of parts for systems biology  <cit> , a feature shared with previous designs  <cit> . we chose a cloning toolkit developed with the multisite gateway three-fragment vector construction kit from invitrogen  as it would make it meet the requirements above. a recombination reaction involving three separate entry clones based on the pdonr vectors from the kit  and containing dna fragments flanked by specific variants of the att sites, results in their ordered subcloning into the kit’s promoterless destination vector pdest-r4-r <dig> . interestingly, the dna fragment that occupies the central position is flanked by attl <dig> and attl <dig> sites in its entry vector , just as in the entry vectors available from public or commercial cdna resources . furthermore, new entry clones constructed by pcr-amplification of cdnas and their bp clonase-mediated recombination into vectors containing attp1/attp <dig> sites used for standard gateway cloning are also compatible with the multisite gateway kit  . the preservation of the translation frame of the three fragments that are pieced together was built into the original multisite cloning system’s design  <cit> . therefore, by cloning the n-term- and c-term-functional modules proposed in the toolkit’s design into pdonr-p4-p1r and pdonr-p2r-p <dig>  respectively, they could join an entry vector holding the orf for a protein of interest in a multisite cloning reaction that would create a fusion protein’s chimeric orf . however, pdest-r4-r <dig> is a promoterless destination vector, meaning that further engineering of this vector would be required in order to insert a promoter upstream of the chimeric orf. instead, replacing the original single-fragment gateway cassette in any destination expression vector furnished with a heterologous promoter, with the r4-r <dig> cassette from pdest-r4-r <dig> seemed a more powerful strategy . this would allow taking advantage of numerous existing gateway destination vectors that would become in this way available for multisite gateway cloning , increasing the functional flexibility of the toolkit. this way, the protein of interest could be expressed on its own or as a fusion protein in the context of the same vector backbone, by choosing for the lr-recombination between the unmodified vector and that with the engineered gateway cassette, used in combination with the clones encoding functional modules. furthermore, all of the elements in the proposed collections of flanking n-terminal and c-terminal functional modules would partake of the same construction principles. thus, they could be used in a combinatorial fashion in multisite gateway lr clonase-mediated recombination reactions with any existing gateway entry clone containing an attl1/attl2-flanked orf, where the components of the fusion proteins would be linked by the translated remaining attb <dig> and attb <dig> sequences acting as universal connectors . the open architecture of such toolkit would allow for easily updating any successful fusion arrangement to the latest versions of the functional modules in use . this would be achieved by simply incorporating such versions as new modules in the collection, so they could be used instead of the superseded modules in a replay of the recombination reaction that led to the fusion in question.

engineering of a destination expression vector to enable three-fragment cloning
the substitution of the single site- by the multisite attr4-attr <dig> gateway cassette in an existing destination expression vector was achieved by modifying a method first reported by magnani and colleagues  <cit> . this consists of an lr-recombination reaction between a vector that contains the attr4-attr <dig> gateway cassette from pdest-r4-r <dig>  flanked by attl1/attl <dig> sites , and the destination expression vector in its standard form, furnished with attr1/attr <dig> sites  <cit> . in this way, a successful recombination reaction would place the r4-r <dig> gateway cassette between attb <dig> and attb <dig> sites . however, such a procedure raised a technical issue, common to all reactions where standard gateway cassettes are replaced with versions containing different flanking recombination sites, i.e. how to easily distinguish, after bacterial transformation, between e. coli colonies that contain the original destination vector from those containing the vector with the recombined r4-r <dig> gateway cassette, since they would be identical in terms of their selection markers. to solve this issue, we took advantage of the fact that gateway vectors typically possess two antibiotic resistance genes, one of them being the chloramphenicol-acetyl transferase  gene that lies inside the gateway cassette, and another one that lies elsewhere in the vector. the ccdb-resistant e. coli bacteria transformed with such vectors acquire resistance to both chloramphenicol and the antibiotic  specified by the other resistance gene. our strategy consisted in engineering the vector before the recombination reaction, so that an inactivating mutation was introduced by site-directed mutagenesis into the cat gene in the existing gateway cassette, while the rest of the vector’s functionality was preserved. e. coli cells transformed with this vector were sensitive to the presence of chloramphenicol in the culture medium . on the other hand, the pcr-amplified multisite gateway cassette, which was to replace the original one after recombination, had a functional cat gene. thus, successful recombination would restore the resistance to chloramphenicol in the engineered vector and allow the growth of colonies of bacteria in the presence of chloramphenicol and ampicillin, while negatively selecting bacteria transformed with the non-recombined destination vector. since all gateway vectors contain the same sequence in the cat gene that is targeted by our mutagenesis reaction, this strategy could potentially be used for tailoring the gateway cassette in any vector. we initially tested it by assembling the pdonr221-r4-r <dig> vector . this involved a bp-recombination reaction between a pcr-amplified r4-r <dig> gateway cassette furnished with a wild-type cat gene, and a cat-mutant version of the pdonr <dig> vector . the screening strategy proved to be successful, and we were able to isolate bacterial clones containing recombined pdonr221-r4-r <dig>  as confirmed by sequencing, which were again resistant to chloramphenicol and kanamycin. we subsequently used the same strategy in the adaptation of a destination expression vector for multisite gateway cloning, as required by the design of our cloning toolkit. thus, an lr-recombination reaction was set up between pdonr221-r4-r <dig> and the cat-mutant version of pef5/frt/v5-dest . after transformation of the reaction and plating on lb medium supplemented with ampicillin and chloramphenicol, several colonies resistant to both antibiotics were isolated. sequencing of the plasmid prepared from these colonies evidenced the presence of an r4-r <dig> gateway cassette flanked by attb1/attb <dig> sites in the context of pef5/frt/v5-dest, showing the successful substitution of the single site- by the multisite gateway cassette. thus, we designated this plasmid pef5/frt/v5-dest-r4-r <dig> and used it in the construction of the fusion protein prototypes discussed below. importantly, the mutation of the destination vectors’ cat gene required by our method will not only be useful for enabling multisite recombination cloning, but could also be used subsequently for other adaptation reactions involving different gateway cassettes flanked by other types of recombination sites , which could be screened with the same procedure.

creation of a collection of functional modules
we cloned a collection of functional dna modules into vectors pdonr-p4-p1r and pdonr-p2r-p <dig> so they could be fused to the n- or c-termini of the protein of interest, respectively. this was carried out by bp-recombination between the attb-flanked pcr products encompassing the functional modules and either of the pdonr vectors. pcr products that were to be cloned into pdonr-p4-p1r were flanked by attb4/attb <dig> sites, while those to be cloned into pdonrp2r-p <dig> were flanked by attb2/attb <dig> sites . a current list of the components in our collection of modules is provided as table  <dig>  at the moment, they mostly consist of clones containing the cdna for a series of fluorescent proteins, which can be fused either at the n-terminal or c-terminal end of the orf of interest. the fluorescent proteins available are ecfp , egfp , eyfp  and mkate <dig> . there is also a 3′-module that allows expressing ecfp from an internal ribosome entry site  in the context of a bicistronic mrna shared with a two-module fusion protein encoded at the 5′-half of the mrna. we will introduce modules encoding the a206k egfp and eyfp variants, with reduced oligomer formation  <cit> , to be used in fusions whose behaviour could be affected by fluorescent protein oligomerization. this will not be necessary for ecfp-encoding modules since this protein carries a constitutive mutation that prevents its dimerization  <cit> . since the three entry vectors from the multisite gateway cloning kit must be present for successful recombination, we included a non peptide-encoding 3′-module with a stop codon and a sv <dig> early polyadenylation signal cassette to allow translational termination of chimeric orfs when fusion of a module at the c-terminus is not necessary or convenient. please note that the parental pef5/frt/v5-dest vector contains the bgh polyadenylation signal downstream of the gateway cassette and this is preserved in pef5/frt/v5-dest-r4-r <dig>  thus, when a 3′ peptide-encoding module is typically used, the bgh polya signal will allow proper processing of the chimeric transcript, with the 3′ module providing the stop codon at the end of the encoded peptide. because an n-terminal tag might interfere with functionally important modifications of the protein , we will also obtain a neutral 5′-module containing an intronic sequence that can serve a similar function at the n-terminus. we have also constructed modules containing the well-characterised v <dig> and 6xhis epitope tags. other possible modules would be those encoding for protein domains that target proteins to an organelle , an application previously demonstrated  <cit> . the attb-flanked pcr products were generated in two sequential pcrs, with two sets of partially overlapping primers . the sequence of primers used for creating the current collection of functional modules is provided as additional file 3: table s <dig>  since all modules in each category  were cloned the same way into pdonr-p4-p1r or pdonr-p2r-p <dig>  they were fully exchangeable and conferred the desired combinatorial character to the toolkit.

plasmids based on the pdonr p4-p1r vector contain inserts that will be placed at the 5′ flank of the cdna and will encode the n-terminal module of the fusion protein. on the other hand, those based on pdonr p2r-p <dig> will transfer their insert to a position flanking the 3′-end of the cdna, and will add a c-terminal module to the fusion protein in case they encode a peptide.

construction and expression of the fusion protein prototypes
we constructed a panel of vectors for expressing fusion proteins in order to test the feasibility of our cloning toolkit. these vectors were obtained through multisite gateway recombination reactions between plasmids encoding the n-terminal modules, the orfs of interest, the c-terminal modules, and the pef5/frt/v5/dest-r4-r <dig> destination expression vector described above. lr clonase-mediated recombination between compatible att sites on the participating plasmids produced a chimeric orf that substituted the engineered gateway cassette on plasmid pef5/frt/v5/dest-r4-r <dig>  the attb1/attb <dig> sites flanking the attr4/attr <dig> gateway cassette were not targeted by the lr-recombinase  <cit> . expression of the orfs produced fusion proteins where the three component parts were separated by peptide linker arms resulting from the translation of the attb <dig> and attb <dig> sites flanking the protein of interest . since the upstream attb <dig> and attb <dig> recombination sites are located between the ef1α promoter and the translation initiation codon of the n-terminal module, and the attb <dig> and downstream attb <dig> sites lay beyond the stop codon in the c-terminal module, none of them would participate in the translated product . even though there seems to have been no systematic analysis of the possible functional interference of the residual attb1/attb <dig> sites in the expression of fusion proteins  <cit> , individual studies found those sites to be either neutral  <cit>  or detrimental  <cit>  for protein expression, hence the need to assess their convenience for the intended applications. the fusion proteins obtained with this approach are listed on table  <dig> and are grouped in sets that illustrate some of the possibilities of the cloning toolkit. the first set highlights the combinatorial aspect of the collection of functional modules, since it is composed by two fusion proteins that share the n-terminal and central  modules but that are fused to different fluorescent proteins at the c-terminus. this would be helpful for optimising fluorescent fusion proteins since different combinations can be produced up front and tested for the existence of steric hindrance, poor fusion stability and functional interference by oligomerization of the fluorescent module  <cit> . furthermore, it would also provide some flexibility for designing coexpression experiments, because fusion proteins with different emission spectra would be available to suit each case . this set comprises two fusion proteins containing the proteinase-activated receptor par <dig> . the second set represents the possibility of generating mutations in the orf of interest while still in the entry clone. in this way, the construction of one mutational library would be sufficient for preparing a range of expression vector libraries to be screened on different model systems  or with different reporters. this would avoid the need to go through independent mutagenesis reactions for creating libraries based on different expression vectors , and should be helpful for studying the effects of point mutations or deletions on the function of the protein of interest . this set comprises the wild type  form as well as an n-terminal deletion of the mouse sirtuin sirt <dig> , both n-terminally fused to mkate <dig>  this deletion affects the first nuclear location signal  and may produce alterations on the intracellular distribution of the protein  <cit> . finally, the third set represents the two possible arrangements of a fusion protein with functional modules flanking the orf of interest . the ability to generate the two proteins up front would facilitate the identification of the order that causes the least interference on the protein’s function. our example consists of two fusion proteins where the far-red fluorescent protein mkate <dig>  <cit>  and a v5-6xhis epitope tag cassette were placed either n-terminal or c-terminal relative to the human p65/rela subunit of nfkb .

multisite gateway recombination reactions were carried out between the adapted destination expression vector pef5/frt-dest-r4-r <dig>  and plasmids encoding 5′-module, the orf of interest  and the 3′-module as described. the resulting expression plasmids are listed on the table, with an indication of the functional modules used for making each fusion protein, and are organised in sets, according to the toolkit properties intended to illustrate . the central module encoding wt sirt <dig> is an entry clone obtained from an orfeome library, used in the multisite cloning reaction with no prior modifications. the sv <dig> polya module  does not encode for a peptide but contains a polya signal that precedes the bgh polya signal provided by the pef5/frt-dest-r4-r <dig> vector.

athe “Δ” symbol stands for “deleted”.

the constructs described above were transiently transfected into cells in order to test the feasibility of our approach . in hela cells, c-terminal fusions of par- <dig> with mkate <dig>  or with egfp  were expressed separately in transient transfection experiments. cells under control conditions showed localisation of par- <dig> fluorescent fusions mostly at a perinuclear compartment  <cit> , with a weaker signal located near the plasma membrane . treatment of the cells with the par-2-specific agonist ac <dig> caused a slight redistribution of the fluorescent signal from either fusion protein that concentrated on a smaller area around the nucleus . also in hela cells, expression of wt sirt <dig> fused to mkate <dig> showed nuclear localisation , but the loss of an n-terminal fragment of msirt <dig> encompassing n <dig>  caused the fusion protein to be localised in the cytoplasm , in agreement with previous data  <cit> . in raw <dig>  monocytes, both the mkate2: p65:v5-6xhis and v5-6xhis:p65:mkate <dig> fusions  demonstrated cytoplasmic localisation under control conditions , as expected  <cit> . lps treatment of the cells induced nuclear translocation of both fusion proteins . the existence of slight differences in the intracellular distribution of fluorescence between different fusions of the same orf  suggest there might be effects related to the fusion arrangements that would deserve further investigation. if confirmed, they would illustrate the usefulness of our cloning strategy. as we pointed out in the background section, the study of the intracellular behaviour of a newly-described protein may help delineate its possible functions. our cloning toolkit would be useful for the generation of fusions to be specifically used in such studies. this is exemplified by additional file 5: movie s <dig>  where the fusion of the monomeric fluorescent protein mkate <dig> to the c-terminus of par- <dig> was expressed in a raw <dig>  monocyte by transient transfection of the pef5/frt-dest-r4-r3_v5-6xhis: par2:mkate <dig> expression vector, and observed under a confocal microscope in a time-lapse experiment aimed at tracking the protein’s behaviour following treatment with the par- <dig> specific agonist ac <dig>  figure 4c provides a series of still frames extracted from the time-lapse recording at the indicated times after adding the agonist. these show the agonist-induced clustering and internalization of the plasma membrane-associated par-2:mkate <dig> fusion, as well as the presence of intracellular vesicles containing the fluorescent protein , as previously described  <cit> . active perinuclear trafficking of the vesicles can be appreciated in the complete time-lapse movie . additional file  <dig> movie s <dig> corresponds to a shorter time-lapse sequence of the same cell recorded under control conditions, just before adding the agonist, and shows expression of the fusion protein in continuous association with the plasma membrane, as well as in some intracellular vesicles that display a more modest trafficking behaviour.

all the fusion proteins described above were expressed from pef5/frt/v5/dest-r4-r <dig>  a plasmid derived from pef5/frt/v5/dest . this is a vector compatible with the flp-in system , which allows the generation of isogenic clones with stable plasmid integration by using a selection of cell lines that contain a single frt recombination sequence in their genome . thus, our system should facilitate the assembly of expression vector libraries consisting of fusions between selected functional modules and a library of randomized mutations of a cdna, so they could be stably-transfected into an flp-in cell line and screened for a mutation conferring the properties sought after, in the absence of clonal variegation caused by genome-positional effects. furthermore, this would not be restricted to randomized mutation libraries, but could also be applied to libraries consisting of collections of cdnas /broad institute   <cit> ). our system would also be useful for the generation of chimeric proteins. thus, a protein coding sequence could be divided into three fragments at appropriate sites that did not compromise the main structure or function of the protein, with each fragment cloned into one of the three pdonr vectors in the toolkit. different isoforms in a family of proteins could be cloned in this way so that homologous domains cloned in the same type of pdonr vector could be shuffled between the isoforms in order to analyse the impact on the proteins’ function. similarly, a collection of mutants from a single domain could be cloned with the remainder of the wild type orf in order to screen for residues involved in a specific function. although we have not addressed these specific applications, pioneering work on the yeast ste <dig> receptor by cheo and colleagues with an analogous set up  <cit>  suggests that our design could be used in such studies.

interestingly, some of the clones encoding functional modules in our toolkit could be exchanged with those from similar platforms built with the same multisite gateway cloning kit as ours, expanding the number of possible fusion protein combinations. one example is the platform known as tol2kit  <cit> . it consists of a series of 5′-, middle- and 3′-clones arranged in the context of several destination vectors specific for zebra fish transgenesis, and was created to facilitate the obtention of strains expressing a variety of minigene constructs consisting of promoter_coding sequence_3′tag arrangements  <cit> . another example is the ptransgenesis system  <cit> , which consists of collections of entry vectors initially developed to facilitate the construction of minigenes to be expressed in transgenic xenopus strains, but are also compatible with transgenesis in other model organisms such as drosophila, zebrafish and mammalian cell models, thus facilitating the study of the evolutionarily conserved properties of biological systems  <cit> . finally, nagels-durand and colleagues have recently reported a novel set of destination vectors specific for expression in saccharomyces cerevisae that allow multisite recombination cloning of promoters, orfs and epitope tags in combination with a choice of auxotrophy markers and replication mechanisms in this model organism  <cit> . some of the functional modules described in our work overlap with those from these other platforms , and have been successfully used for the applications described therein. fluorescent protein-encoding modules from our toolkit as well as from the other platforms mentioned above could also be used as reporters in new projects aimed at characterizing orfeome-inspired promoteromes, such as in the pioneering work of denis dupuy and collaborators  <cit> , who constructed a library of intergenic regions comprising proximal transcriptional regulatory elements plus the 5′utrs cloned in the pdonr p4-p1r vector, and used it in combination with orfs derived from the nematode’s orfeome in multisite gateway cloning reactions that generated vectors with a promoter:orf:reporter arrangement. these were used subsequently in studies of the regulatory mechanisms controlling gene transcription and protein localization at genome-level  <cit> .

despite the availability of a more recent version of the multisite gateway cloning kit  that allows using any single-fragment destination vector in two-, three-, or four-fragment recombination reactions without further modification  <cit> , we chose the earlier version of the kit because this would allow the use of entry vectors containing the attl1/attl2-flanked orf of interest as obtained from public sources, without further subcloning. this is precluded in the pro version of the kit, since those att sites ought to lie on separate entry vectors because of the kit’s configuration. thus, with a multisite gateway pro-based cloning platform, any attl1/attl <dig> flanked-orf of interest obtained from a public repository would still have to be pcr-amplified and subcloned into at least one pdonr vector appropriate for the pro version of the kit prior to the multisite recombination reaction, blunting the advantage conferred by the ready availability of the entry clone. in our approach, engineering is instead restricted to the destination vector of choice, which once adapted for multisite gateway recombination can be used to generate multiple fusion proteins with the unmodified entry clones from the library. nevertheless, cloning platforms that use the multisite gateway pro kit are perfectly possible and one such has been developed  <cit> , which allows the versatile creation of minigenes to be used in drosophila transgenesis for the tissue-specific expression of proteins, including fluorescent reporters. platforms reported in earlier publications, such as the drosophila gateway vector collection devised by the murphy lab at the carnegie institution  <cit> , and the saccharomyces cerevisae collection of gateway destination vectors constructed at the lindquist lab  <cit>  also allow directly producing fusion proteins with both custom made-, or orfeome-derived entry clones, since their input consists of plasmids containing orfs flanked by attl1/attl <dig> sites, which are used in single-fragment lr recombinations to generate the expression vectors. in these platforms, though, variability lies with the destination vectors, which contain functional modules preinserted at 5′ or 3′ relative to the standard gateway cassette, which will be expressed in-frame with the gateway-shuttled orf of interest. since the functional modules lie beyond the att sites, construction of these platforms required complex cloning of gateway cassette-derivatives into a large number of expression vectors in order to achieve the desired number of module combinations.

although toolkits for fusion protein construction based on sequence-directed cloning methods provide versatility and ease of use, the possible functional impact of peptide “scars” linking the modules , needs to be taken into account  <cit> . in view of this, other more economical, non-sequence-directed, “seamless” recombinational cloning methods for joining two or more dna fragments without the operation of extraneous sequences would represent an attractive alternative  <cit> . nevertheless, in the most widely used seamless methods, dna fragments to be assembled ought to be amplified by pcr with primers that provide some sequence overlap at their ends. the distribution of these sequence overlaps among the fragments ensures they are stitched together in the required order. in other instances, “stitching” oligonucleotides can be used that act as a bridge encompassing the ends of the unrelated sequences to be joined  <cit> . in either case, the generation of a combinatorial cloning platform based on such methods would involve prior knowledge of the fusions that would be of interest in order to provide necessary tools in advance. this would somewhat curtail the implementation of high-throughput strategies based on the use of orfeome-derived clones, as it would require a case-based design, which is not necessary when universal external connectors  are used. furthermore, pcr-amplification of modules for constructing specific fusions would require checking every resulting chimeric cdnas for the presence of unwanted mutations, while such controls are only required at the time of subcloning if the same modules are perpetuated as inserts of a plasmid in the context of a gateway-based platform. in the absence of a perfect recombination-based solution, one ought to consider what is best for a given application, whether lowering the risk of encountering scar-derived functional effects, or using high throughput applications. nevertheless, this is no obstacle to using both approaches in a complementary way since, for instance, the assembly of composite modules derived from the sequence of two or more proteins could be achieved by using seamless recombinational cloning, and the new modules could then be incorporated into gateway-based cloning platforms for their fusion to other peptides. interestingly, non-recombination-based cloning platforms such as golden gate, golden braid, and moclo  <cit> , which have shown great potential for scalability in the construction of multipartite expression vectors, could also be adapted for the seamless cloning of fusion proteins with the possibility of using peptide-encoding modules in high-throughput applications. careful design of the module-cloning strategy may allow the construction of fusion proteins with a minimal contribution of scar sequence between the modules  <cit> . the downsides are that these systems require that cloned dna fragments are free from the infrequent target sites for the type iis restriction enzymes they are based upon , and that the orfs of interest cannot be used straight from gateway-based orf collections but would require pcr-amplification with primers providing the appropriate restriction enzyme sites. all in all, the above considerations should be a guide for the future development of cloning strategies with the potential to use peptide-encoding modules across different platforms.

CONCLUSIONS
we describe the blueprint for a system that streamlines the cloning of fusion proteins from gateway-based, orf-containing entry clones. it is based on sets of plasmids that encode customized functional modules to be fused to an orf of interest, plus an adaptor plasmid that allows existing destination expression vectors to participate in multisite cloning reactions leading to the cloning of fusion proteins. multiple fusions can thus be potentially assembled from a single orf in a combinatorial way, and expressed in diverse cellular models. expression vectors are easy to construct and update, since cloning is based on gateway technology. we believe this approach will be widely useful for the scientific community as it should extend the range of possible studies based on fusion proteins beyond those currently afforded by cloning vectors with preinserted modules. plasmids will be made available through addgene.

