BACKGROUND
numerous event-related potential  studies demonstrated that arithmetic mismatch in addition/multiplication verification tasks and number matching tasks elicits a negative-going potential  <cit> . here we call this phenomenon arithmetic mismatch negativity . some properties of the amn remained unresolved in previous studies. first, it is unclear whether the amn is elicited by the incongruity in numerical information per se, or rather, by the violation of strategic expectations in a certain experimental paradigm. second, it has been shown that the erp amplitude in the time window of the amn is sensitive to semantic manipulations  <cit> . however, it is unknown whether these semantic amplitude effects are inherent to the amn itself, or rather, they only coincide with it. this study set out to respond to the above two questions.

typically, the amn is demonstrated in arithmetic verification tasks and number matching tasks. in arithmetic verification tasks, participants see equations consisting of operands and operators  followed by correct or incorrect arithmetic outcomes  <cit> . the amn appears as incorrect arithmetic outcomes elicit more negative-going erps than correct arithmetic outcomes. in number matching tasks, participants see pairs of numbers presented serially which are either matching or non-matching to each other  <cit> . the amn appears as non-matching numbers elicit more negative-going erps than matching numbers. in previous studies, the amn as a negativity emerging between 250- <dig> ms was referred to by various names, e.g. n <dig>  n <dig>  and n <dig>  <cit> . however, here we use the neutral term "amn" considering that the functional nature of this effect has not yet been determined.

one question is whether the amn is sensitive to the incongruity in numerical information per se, or rather, to the violation of strategic expectations when participants encounter unexpected stimuli within the context of arithmetic tasks. the former possibility would suggest that the amn is a specific signal in number processing. the latter possibility would suggest that the amn is an erp effect reflecting general mismatch detection, similar to the negative-going erps reported in non-arithmetic tasks, such as colour matching task  <cit> , shape matching task  <cit> , and category matching task  <cit> .

another issue is that the semantic content of stimuli seems to influence the erp amplitude in the time window of the amn. for example, niedeggen and rösler  <cit>  documented that the amplitude of the amn is modulated as a function of numerical distance between presumed and perceived arithmetic outcomes. however, it is an open question whether semantic relations influenced the amn per se. in fact, some studies focusing on semantic relations in arithmetic found the numerical distance effect in the absence of the amn  <cit> . this suggests that the numerical distance effect might only temporally coincide with the amn.

the dissociation of arithmetic incongruence, general mismatch detection, and semantic effects potentially overlapping with the amn in simple numerical tasks is not straightforward. this is so because incorrect arithmetic outcomes are probably associated with strong and subjective "mismatch" even when they are frequent. for example, the amn appears in response to incorrect arithmetic outcomes even when they are presented in 80% of the trials  <cit> . one way around this problem is to use a number matching task which not only elicits the amn but also elicits the semantic analysis of numerical magnitude  <cit> . in such a task participants decide whether pairs of numbers are matching or non-matching to each other in terms of physical similarity. this allows for independent manipulation of arithmetic incongruence and general mismatch detection. specifically, arithmetic incongruence and general mismatch detection can be separated by making physically non-matching numbers appear frequently and physically matching numbers appear infrequently. if the amn is sensitive to the incongruity in numerical information per se, it should be found in frequent non-matching trials. in contrast, if the amn is sensitive to the violation of strategic expectations, it should be found in infrequent matching trials. the second question concerns whether the amplitude modulations as a function of numerical distance are inherent to the amn, or rather, they reflect a process which temporally coincides with the amn. with regard to this question, we expected on the basis of previous studies  <cit>  that the amplitude modulations of numerical distance may be seen in erps even in the absence of the amn.

methods
participants
 <dig> adults  were recruited from the university of cambridge and surrounding community. all participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and were neurologically healthy as indicated by a self-report. participants gave written informed consent and were paid for participation. procedures were approved by the cambridge psychology research ethics committee of the university of cambridge.

each participant's general ability was assessed using two subtests  of the wechsler abbreviated scales of intelligence . their mathematics achievement was measured using the math computation subtest of the wide range achievement test  <dig> . participants' scores in tests of general ability and mathematics achievement were within normal range. standardised scores in the vocabulary and block design subtest of the wasi were within the range of 52- <dig> and 55- <dig>  respectively. standardised scores in the math computation subtest of the wrat <dig> were within the range of 100- <dig> 

stimuli and procedures
 <dig> digits  were paired to create  <dig> stimuli . the digits assigned to each condition were completely balanced. each stimulus was presented  <dig> times so that one-third of the trials  contained physically matching digits and two-thirds of the trials  contained physically non-matching digits. in the non-matching trials, half of the trials contained digits that differed by a numerical distance of  <dig>  and half of the trials contained digits that differed by a numerical distance of  <dig> . stimuli were presented on a 17-inch computer screen, white on a black background in times new roman  font. the presentation software package  was used to control the presentation of the stimuli.

the experiment consisted of  <dig> blocks. each block contained  <dig> trials . a trial started with a fixation sign  presented for  <dig> ms. the screen then remained blank for  <dig> ms. this was followed by the presentation of the stimulus for  <dig> ms. participants were required to press one button if the digits were matching and another button if the digits were non-matching. the assignment of response hands was counterbalanced across participants. the next trial started after a random intertrial interval of 300- <dig> ms after the response or the offset of the stimulus. stimuli were presented in pseudo-random order with the constraint that the same stimuli did not appear in consecutive trials. the experiment was preceded by  <dig> practice trials.

data analysis
repeated-measures anova were conducted on behavioural data in matching trials, non-matching trials of small numerical distance, and non-matching trials of large numerical distance. planned comparisons between non-matching trials of small numerical distance and non-matching trials of large numerical distance were made with 2-tailed paired-samples t tests.

eeg was recorded with 65-channel sensor nets . the sampling rate was  <dig> hz and an online bandpass filter of  <dig> - <dig> hz was used. the data was bandpass filtered between  <dig> - <dig> hz offline and was recomputed to average reference. epochs extended from - <dig> ms to  <dig> ms relative to the presentation of stimulus, using a  <dig> ms pre-stimulus baseline. epochs containing voltage deviations exceeding +/- <dig> μv relative to baseline at any of the recording electrodes were rejected.

for the examination of the amn, repeated-measures anova were conducted on the amplitude of the erps averaged across the time window of the amn  in matching trials, non-matching trials of small numerical distance, and non-matching trials of large numerical distance. the amn was considered significant when both the main effect reached significance  and the bonferroni-corrected pairwise comparisons between matching trials and non-matching trials of small/large numerical distance reached significance  on at least  <dig> electrodes. for the examination of the numerical distance effect, point-by-point t-tests were conducted comparing the amplitude of the erps in non-matching trials of small numerical distance and non-matching trials of large numerical distance. the numerical distance effect was considered significant when the main effect reached significance  on at least  <dig> electrodes across at least  <dig> consecutive samples.

RESULTS
matching vs
matching vs
discussion
we used the number matching task to address two questions. first, we examined whether the amn was sensitive to the incongruity in numerical information per se, or rather, to the violation of strategic expectations. second, we examined whether the numerical distance effect formed an inherent property of the amn, or rather, they reflected a process which temporally coincided with the amn.

in response to our first question, we found that the amn appeared in infrequent matching trials relative to frequent non-matching trials over posterior sites. the presence of the amn in infrequent trials irrespective of their numerical matching property suggests that it is not the incongruity in numerical information per se, but rather, the mismatch within the context of arithmetic tasks that elicits the amn. therefore, we suggest that the amn is an erp effect reflecting the detection of mismatch in relation to the violation of strategic expectations  <cit> . in other words, the amn can probably be triggered whenever a mismatch is encountered as proposed by the theory of wang and colleagues  <cit> . our results are in coherence with the only study that systematically investigated the effect of stimulus probability on the amn in the arithmetic verification task  <cit> . in that study, the amplitude of the amn became smaller on parietal electrodes with increasing probability of incorrect arithmetic outcomes. however, the amn to incorrect arithmetic outcomes remained conspicuous even when their probability reached 80%. this can be explained by the influence of strategic expectations in the arithmetic verification task: participants tend to expect correct arithmetic outcomes even when their probability is very low. in contrast, in the number matching task used here, the influence of strategic expectations inherent to the task could be more successfully dissociated.

in response to our second question, the numerical distance effect demonstrated in the behavioural data suggests that semantic analysis of numerical magnitude occurred in this task as expected on the basis of previous studies  <cit> . in line with our hypothesis, the numerical distance effect appeared independently of the amn in frequently presented non-matching trials. furthermore, the numerical distance effect temporally coincided with the amn. this finding suggests that the numerical distance effect is not necessarily linked to the amn, but rather, it might reflect a numerical magnitude evaluation process which temporally coincides with the amn. the data is in good agreement with previous studies. first, the pattern of the numerical distance effect is similar to previous studies in that the small numerical distance condition, relative to the large numerical distance condition, triggered enhanced negativity in the erps  <cit> . second, the results are in accordance with previous studies reporting semantic effects on the erps even in the absence of the amn  <cit> . it is important to note that we used exactly the same stimuli in both small numerical distance condition and large numerical distance condition. therefore, the difference in the erps between different numerical distance conditions cannot be attributed to perceptual factors. the numerical distance effect in the time window of the amn is probably the electrophysiological correlate of the behavioural numerical distance effect related to the automatic processing of symbolic numerical magnitude  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this erp study, we found that the amn is an erp effect reflecting general mismatch detection, that is, the violation of strategic expectations. furthermore, the numerical distance effect was not necessarily linked to the amn. instead, it might reflect a numerical magnitude evaluation process which temporally coincides with the amn.

authors' contributions
both authors designed the study, contributed to the preparation of the manuscript, and approved the final draft.

acknowledgements and funding
this work was funded by a taiwan ministry of education phd scholarship awarded to yfh and a medical research council grant  to ds.
