BACKGROUND
theoretically, elimination of recent slightly deleterious mutations must be more effective in species with high population size  <cit> , since low stochastic sampling variance decreases the power of random genetic drift. also, according to the theory, meiotic segregation and recombination allow for independent mixing of alleles, thus leading to more effective elimination of slightly deleterious mutations  <cit>  and halting of the muller's ratchet  <cit> . thus both the population size and the recombination level determine the effectiveness of the purifying selection.

although the influences of population size and recombination level on the effectiveness of the purifying selection are interconnected and often mutually reinforcing, it is possible to distinguish between them by comparing species with different population sizes, levels of recombination, or both. for example, the influence of the population size on probability of fixation of slightly deleterious mutations was observed in comparison of primates and rodents  <cit> , mammals, birds, and drosophilids  <cit> , island- versus continent-inhabiting populations of same species  <cit> , and large- versus small-bodied mammals <cit> . the role of the recombination level was demonstrated in asexual versus sexual daphnia  <cit> . the influence of both population size and recombination level, most likely, leads to the differences in the molecular evolution patterns of endosymbiotic and free-living bacteria  <cit>  and to degeneration of the neo-y chromosome of drosophila miranda  <cit> .

the strength of the purifying selection, acting on different genes, is mainly determined by structural or functional constraints on the encoded protein. since orthologous proteins in closely related species most likely operate under similar constraints, it is possible to investigate more intimate relationships between the rates of molecular evolution, the population sizes of the analyzed species and the level of recombination in their genomes. here we perform a comprehensive analysis of purifying selection in various groups of proteobacteria and mammalian mitochondria.

the relative effectiveness of the purifying selection was estimated as the rate of fixation of nonsynonymous substitutions  and radical amino acid substitutions  in seven orthologous genes, encoding subunits of a respiratory chain enzyme  from bacterial and mitochondrial genomes. these genes encode components of one multi-subunit complex and represent a large fraction of all mitochondrial protein-coding genes. orthologous genes, encoding subunits of complex i, exist in all aerobic bacteria.

since the respiratory chain proteins are highly conserved, we assume that the role of the positive selection is negligible, and thus these genes are appropriate for the analysis of the purifying selection. throughout the work we empirically corroborate this assumption.

firstly, we compare mammalian mitochondria with bacteria. since mitochondria are descendants of ancient endosymbiotic proteobacteria, it is interesting to compare the purifying selection in orthologous mitochondrial and proteobacterial genes with regards to the differences of their ecology. mitochondrial genes of vertebrates are strictly maternally inherited, and thus asexual, and have low population size  <cit> . conversely, the bacteria  are characterized by nonzero recombination levels and high population sizes. therefore, we can expect that mitochondria are subject to less effective purifying selection than bacteria.

secondly, we consider the purifying selection in various groups of proteobacteria, taking into account their ecology. from the ecological point of view, the analyzed sample of bacterial species consists of two main groups: obligate intracellular species  and free-living species able to exist outside of the host cell. the free-living protebacteria are characterized by higher population size and higher recombination level, and thus one may expect that they are subject to more effective purifying selection as compared to obligate intracellular species  <cit> .

thirdly, we compare the purifying selection in obligate intracellular symbionts  and obligate intracellular parasites . it is generally assumed that among obligate intracellular bacteria, symbionts with strictly vertical inheritance  possess lower level of recombination as compared with parasites  which are able to switch from one host to another and thus contact and recombine with a novel gene pool  <cit> . thus we test the hypothesis that the transmission differences among obligate intracellular species, determined by the differences in their ecology, might influence the effectiveness of purifying selection through recombination frequency.

fourthly, we analyze the correlation of the strength of purifying selection with the mobile elements density in bacterial genomes. we expect that the mobile element density in bacteria should positively correlate with the recombination level, as it seems likely that these are two reciprocally reinforcing factors. the inter-genomic recombination level in bacteria is mainly determined by the activity of the mobile elements which able to perform conjugative transfer  or transduction   <cit> . number of other mobile elements, without ability to induce recombination, is evolutionary maintained in concordance with the recombination level in bacterial genomes  <cit>  as it is in eukaryotes  <cit> . thus we use the density of all mobile elements as a proxy measure of the recombination activity in bacterial genomes.

unexpectedly, the level of purifying selection in mitochondria is significantly higher as compared with obligate intracellular bacteria and even marginally significantly higher as compared with free-living bacteria. this observation contradicts the widely accepted opinion about degradation of mitochondrial genomes and we discuss some factors, which can increase selection constraints of mitochondrial genes. the comparison of bacteria demonstrates a more effective elimination of mutations in free-living species as compared to obligate intracellular ones with low effective population size and level of recombination. the purifying selection in parasitic obligate intracellular bacteria is more effective as compared to symbiotic ones, possibly due to the higher recombination level in the former. to elucidate the purifying effect of recombination, we demonstrate that the effectiveness of purifying selection  positively correlates with the density of mobile genes, i.e. with the frequency of recombination.

RESULTS
 evolutionary models
the phylogenetic tree, used in our analysis, is shown on fig.  <dig>  to estimate the kn/ks values several models were implemented for the mammalian and bacterial trees: model  <dig> with a single kn/ks value for all branches of the tree; model 2a with two kn/ks values estimated separately for all external and all internal branches; and model 2b with kn/ks values estimated separately for groups of external branches and a single kn/ks value for all internal branches. in model 2b, bacterial external branches were grouped by ecology or by taxonomy and ecology, mammalian external branches were grouped only by taxonomy.

further the bacterial tree was divided into  <dig> monophyletic sub-trees , and the mammalian tree was divided into glires and primates sub-trees, and each sub-tree was analyzed separately. for each sub-tree three models were implemented: models  <dig> and 2a defined as above, and model 2c with kn/ks estimated separately for each external branch and a single kn/ks for all internal branches.

among any two compared nested models, the one with more degrees of freedom had a significantly higher maximum likelihood  value , thus providing a better fit to the analyzed data. for the complete bacterial and mammalian trees: ml  > ml  > ml ; for sub-trees: ml  > ml  > ml .

since in model 2c the external branches of seven species had no nonsynonymous substitutions , these species were not considered further. therefore, our final dataset for this model consisted of  <dig> species, including  <dig> alpha-proteobacteria ,  <dig> free-living beta-proteobacteria,  <dig> gamma-proteobacteria ,  <dig> glires and  <dig> primates.

all results obtained from models 2a and 2b  were consistent with the results of model 2c , which we will discuss in detail below.

 lack of positive selection
for all phylogenetic groups  model  <dig> ) had significantly lower maximum likelihood  value than model  <dig> . however, the kn/ks values of the extra class sites were less then one in all mammals  and in all proteobacteria , as well as in each group separately:  <dig>  in primates,  <dig>  in glires,  <dig>  in α-,  <dig>  in β- and  <dig>  in γ-proteobacteria. thus we did not observe positive selection in the analyzed genes.

 comparison of mitochondria with bacteria
the kn/ks values of mitochondrial genes are significantly lower than those for all proteobacteria , as well as for all obligate proteobacteria  and obligate alpha-proteobacteria , but only marginally significantly lower than those for all free-living proteobacteria . the primate kn/ks values are larger than the glires ones  and lower than kn/ks for obligate alpha-proteobacteria . average values of kn and ks estimated separately for each group are given in table in additional file  <dig> 

 bacterial ecology
in the analysis of all proteobacteria, the obligate intracellular proteobacteria have higher kn/ks, as compared with the free-living ones . for gamma-proteobacteria, the obligate intracellular ones have higher kn/ks than the free-living ones , while for alpha-proteobacteria the obligate intracellular have kn/ks similar to that of free-living ones .

the kn/ks values of obligate intracellular alpha-proteobacteria  are smaller than those of obligate intracellular gamma-proteobacteria   at a marginally significant level . the free-living alpha-proteobacteria have higher kn/ks values as compared to free-living beta-proteobacteria , and similar to those of free-living gamma-proteobacteria . the kn/ks values for free-living gamma-proteobacteria are marginally higher than for beta-proteobacteria . averages values of kn and ks estimated separately for each group are given in additional file  <dig> 

 fixation of radical nonsynonymous substitutions 
two of the four kr/kc ratios  demonstrate significantly higher values in all bacteria compared with all mitochondria . none of the kr/kc ratios demonstrate significant difference between free-living and obligate intracellular bacteria.

 influence of branch lengths
biased estimations of kn/ks values could be due to the saturation of synonymous sites on long branches  <cit> , or to the stochastic errors on short branches  <cit> . since one substitution per codon  is the optimal divergence level for the estimation of kn/ks  <cit>  we repeated all analyses using species with the length of the external branch from the interval . despite the decreased sample size, the majority of all previously obtained significant results still remained significant. however, some of marginally significant results disappeared .

 density of mobile genes
the kn/ks values were negatively correlated with the mobile elements density  . after exclusion of two species with no mobile elements , we performed linear regression of ln on ln that corroborated the observed trend  = - <dig>  -  <dig> ×ln, r <dig> =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). additionally, we took into account nonindependence of data using linear mixed-effects model and still observed significant negative regression  = - <dig>  -  <dig> ×ln, p =  <dig> ).

the densities of plasmid, prophage and transposable element genes separately, also demonstrated significant rank correlations with kn/ks . the mobile elements density determined as the number of mobile genes divided by the number of all genes in the genome also demonstrated negative relationships with kn/ks  = - <dig>  -  <dig> ×ln, p =  <dig> , n = 44).

discussion
unexpectedly, mitochondrial genes, despite low effective population sizes and no recombination, seem to eliminate slightly deleterious mutations more effectively than orthologous genes in obligate intracellular and even free-living bacteria which have huge population sizes and nonzero recombination level.

moreover, we demonstrated that this result cannot be explained by the positive selection events in bacteria. the kn/ks values were <  <dig> in all branch-specific models , where the kn/ks values were estimated separately for some branches or sub-trees . further, the kn/ks values were <  <dig> for all classes of sites analyzed under site-specific models  which account for heterogeneous selective pressure on codons . however as the adaptive evolution could affect only few sites at several time points, both approaches of averaging rates over sites or over time  could fail to detect positive selection. here we argue that the design of our experiment, especially  analysis of conserved genes on  external branches of the tree , allows us to disregard the effect of possible positive selection. indeed, since we analyzed only external branches of the tree, possible events of positive selection in the deep-branch phylogeny did not influence our results. on the other hand it is unlikely that events of positive selection on external branches  could be so numerous and so universal as to fully determine the observed trend.

our result is unlikely to be biased due to the saturation of synonymous substitutions on long branches or to stochastic errors on too short branches, the since analysis of species with optimal branch length demonstrated similar trends in majority of analyses. besides, the kr/kc analysis that is less sensitive to the saturation effect, demonstrated similar trends.

although we used the models that incorporate the possibility of different codon usage between the compared groups of species ), it is still could be possible, that the codon bias effect was not fully accounted for. we can suppose that free-living bacteria with high ne possess higher kn/ks values  due to elimination of some synonymous substitutions through selection for more preferable codons. such selection would lead to underestimation of ks. to test this possibility we estimated the codon usage as a kullback-leibler distance or relative entropy  <cit> k=∑i=1mfi⋅ln⁡
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwglbwscqggoaakcqwgmbgzcqgg8bafcqgg8bafcuwgmbgzgaqbaiabcmcapiabg2da9maaqahabagaemozaymaemyaakmaeyyxictagiibawmaeioba4maeiikagyaasaaaeaacqwgmbgzcqwgpbqaaeaacqwgmbgzcuwgpbqagaqbaaaacqggpaqkasqaaiabdmgapjabg2da9iabigdaxaqaaiabd2gatbqdcqghris5aaaa@4c1d@, where f is the observed probability distribution of m codons in an analyzed genome  and f' is the codon frequency under the assumption of uniform synonymous codon usage. if the compared distributions are similar, the relative entropy value should be small. we obtained that the average relative entropy is maximal for genomes of free-living bacteria , intermediate for genomes of obligate bacteria  and minimal for mitochondrial genes . however the comparison of averages did not reveal any significant differences between the groups  and therefore we concluded that the codon bias should not strongly influence our results.

as we look at only a single sequence from each species and ignore polymorphism within the species, some polymorphic mutations may contribute to kn/ks estimated in our work. for a synonymous substitutions , the expected polymorphism at mutation-drift equilibrium is proportional to the effective population size  <cit> . at the same time polymorphic slightly-deleterious nonsynonymous substitutions should segregate at a higher frequency in populations with low ne as compared to populations with high ne  <cit> . thus the both effects should lead to underestimation of kn/ks values of bacterial genes and overestimation of kn/ks values of mitochondrial genes. since bacterial kn/ks values, obtained in our work are higher than mitochondrial ones, elimination of the influence of polymorphic substitutions  should only strengthen our results.

thus positive selection, codon usage, stochastic errors or saturation effects and influence of polymorphic substitutions can not provide alternative explanations to the conjecture that purifying selection is more efficient in mammalian mitochondria compared to obligate bacterial species and is at least the same compared to free-living bacterial species.

most likely, although the mitochondrial genes have the same functions as their bacterial orthologs, they experience stronger evolutionary constraints. there may be several possible causes for that. firstly, the increased number of subunits in mammalian complex i  can lead to a larger number of protein-protein interactions and consequently to a slower rate of the protein evolution  <cit> . secondly, it has been suggested that effective elimination of deleterious mutations from mtdna during the female germ-cell atresia is caused by the preferential apoptosis of egg cells with defect mtdna  <cit> . thirdly, additional factors such as the protein essentiality or the expression level could increase evolutionary constraints on the mitochondrial genes  <cit> . although it seems likely that both protein essentiality as well as the expression level of the mitochondrial genes should be higher compared to their bacterial counterparts, we are not aware of any experimental studies corroborating these suggestions. thus future experiments in this area may help to identify the main cause of the increased evolutionary stability of the mitochondrial protein-coding genes as compared to their bacterial orthologs.

the widely accepted opinion about degradation of mitochondrial genome is based on theoretical  <cit>  and empirical backgrounds  <cit> . since mitochondria possess low effective population size and no recombination, the molecular evolution of mtdna genes should be associated with a high rate of accumulation of slightly deleterious mutations. a number of studies compared mitochondrial and nuclear genes and corroborated these predictions  <cit> . however, because the genes in nucleus and in mitochondria are not orthologous, this approach is not fully adequate. here, we compared orthologous genes between mitochondria and various proteobacteria, and observed no degradation of mitochondrial genes. therefore, we suggest that some other above-mentioned factors have to influence on molecular evolution of mtdna and maintain highly-effective purifying selection in mitochondria despite their low effective population size and absence of recombination.

although this study does not refute completely the irreversible accumulation of slightly deleterious mutations in nonrecombining mitochondrial genes, we argue that the rate of the muller ratchet in modern mammalian mitochondrial genes is at least slower than that in the ecological equivalents of mitochondria, obligate intracellular endosymbionts.

the rate of the muller ratchet depends on the number of optimal individuals no with fewest mutations. if no is small, there is a chance that all no individuals would die without offspring and the ratchet will click round one notch, i.e. the new optimal class of individuals will became slightly worse since it will contain more mutations. haigh demonstrated that under the additive fitness effect of deleterious mutations, the number of individuals in the optimal class is no = ne−u/s
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwgobgtdaqhaawcbagaemyzaugabagaeyoei0iaemyvaulaei4la8iaem4camhaaaaa@33c6@, where ne is the effective population size, u is the mutational rate per genome per generation, and s is the selection coefficient of deleterious mutations  <cit> . we argue that no in mitochondria is significantly higher than in obligate intracellular symbionts due to higher s  and lower or similar u , but higher mutational rate per nucleotide per generation). thus, assuming all other parameters equal , the rate of the muller ratchet is expected to be lower in mitochondria.

although two of four kr/kc values demonstrate more effective purifying selection in mammalian mitochondria as compared to bacteria, it seems likely, that the kr/kc values in general are less sensitive to the variations in the purifying selection between species.

higher kn/ks values in obligate intracellular versus free-living bacteria are consistent with the theory as well as with previous observations. this difference is most likely due to low ne and/or recombination level in the obligate intracellular bacteria.

we observed increased effectiveness of purifying selection in obligate intracellular alpha-proteobacterial parasites as compared to obligate intracellular gamma-proteobacterial symbionts. since both groups pass through the bottlenecks due to their obligate intracellular lifestyle, differences in effective population sizes are unlikely to cause the observed differences in effectiveness of selection. it has been suggested that, since obligate intracellular parasitic microbes change their hosts more frequently than strictly vertically transmitted symbiotic microbes, parasites enjoy recombination among different colonies during horizontal transmissions  <cit> . therefore, the most likely explanation for the observed difference in the effectiveness of selection is the higher recombination level in the obligate intracellular parasitic alpha-proteobacteria.

one recently described genome-level difference between obligate intracellular parasites and endosymbionts is the higher number of mobile elements in the former  <cit> . the negative regression between the mobile element density and the kn/ks values provides empirical evidence that high level of recombination leads to more effective elimination of slightly deleterious mutations. however, causal relationships of various types of mobile elements and purifying selection seem to be different.  the negative regression of transposon density on kn/ks is most likely an effect of recombination on both these values, since recombination increases both transposon density and effectiveness of purifying selection . that would mean that there may be no direct causal links between transposon density and purifying selection.  however, other mobile elements, such as plasmids and temperate phages, determine recombination events  <cit> , and therefore their high density causes the increase in the effectiveness of purifying selection. therefore, recombination induced by mobile elements has an additional role, increasing effectiveness of the purifying selection in bacterial genomes, which is beneficial for the host genome evolution  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that the comparison of patterns of molecular evolution between ecologically different groups elucidates the genetic consequences of various ecological lifestyles. comparing the strength of the purifying selection among proteobacteria with different lifestyles we obtained results, which are in concordance with theoretical expectations: low effective population size and level of recombination in obligate intracellular proteobacteria lead to less effective elimination of mutations compared to free-living relatives; rare horizontal transmission, i.e. effectively zero recombination level in symbiotic obligate intracellular bacteria leads to less effective purifying selection than in parasitic obligate intracellular bacteria; the high frequency of recombination in bacterial genomes with high mobile element density lead to a more effective elimination of deleterious mutations. at the same time, more effective purifying selection in relatively small populations of asexual mitochondria as compared to large populations of sexual proteobacteria was unexpected since it contradicts the common theory. it seems that additional features such as the high number of protein-protein interactions or female germ-cell atresia maintain the effective purifying selection in mitochondria.

