BACKGROUND
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies  are fatal neurodegenerative disorders characterized by formation and accumulation of partially protease resistant prion protein  mainly in tissues of the central nervous system. tses  include  familial, sporadic and variant creutzfeldt-jacob disease in humans, bovine spongiform encephalopathy  in cattle, and scrapie in sheep. formation of prpsc is a posttranslational process and involves refolding  of the host-encoded prion protein  into partially protease resistant forms   <cit> . since no other proteins are known to be involved in this conversion, the existence of a specific and probably efficient self interaction between prp molecules must be considered.

the molecular mechanism involved in prp conversion is not well understood, but polymorphisms in prp have been shown to be of importance in both interspecies and intraspecies transmissibilities  <cit>  and cell-free conversion of prpc provides an excellent in vitro model in which relative amounts of produced proteinase k  resistant prp reflect important biological aspects of tses at the molecular level  <cit> . whereas differences in susceptibility of- and transmissibility in sheep can largely be explained at the molecular level by the effects of single polymorphisms in prpc or prpsc on prp conversion  <cit> , the exact molecular mechanism of disease development modulation by polymorphisms is still unknown, however we previously showed that disease associated polymorphisms do not affect the initial binding of prpc to prpsc  <cit> . hölscher et al showed by deletion of residues 114– <dig>  the necessity of the highly amyloidogenic agaaaaga motif in conversion of prpc to prpsc  <cit> . many other studies have revealed the importance of the prp regions encompassing amino acid sequence  90– <dig>   <cit>  and 132– <dig>  <cit> . however, to our knowledge no attempts have been made to systematically map all possible aa involved in prp interaction . in order to elucidate which aa of prp capable of interaction are involved in the primary interaction of prpc to prpsc, a peptide-array based on linear prp sequences comprising the complete prp sequence was utilized to determine which residues of prp are capable of interacting with prpc.

RESULTS
mbp-prp expression and analysis
expression of maltose binding protein n-terminally fused to prp  revealed a mainly soluble recombinant mbp-prp of approximately  <dig> kda  and is readily detected in western blot using a prp-specific antibody  or a mbp specific antibody . the mbp-prp fusion-protein could be purified using the amylase-resin column and the naked prp protein could be obtained by digestion with protease factor xa, indicating accessible folding . after  <dig> hours approximately 45% of mbp-prp was digested by factor xa, however when aided by addition of  <dig> % sds factor xa completely digested mbp-prp within  <dig> hours . monoclonal  and polyclonal  prp-specific antibodies  with specificity for epitopes dispersed throughout the prp-protein detected mbp-prp in western blot. mbp expressed without additional fusion protein , which frequently served as negative control in this study, was also of homogeneous quality  and of expected size  which is somewhat larger  than mbp cleaved from the fusion protein after factor xa digestion . though we did not study its physical state, the soluble mbp-prp product used is most likely in a monomeric or low oligomeric state representative for prpc, with a secondary structure that is high in alpha helix and random coil and low in beta-sheet  <cit> .

a amino acid sequence of the reported antibody epitope using peptide mapping techniques

b position of the antibody epitope in the ovine protein sequence

c concentration at which the antibody completely blocked binding on the peptide-array

d publication in which the epitope mapping results are reported

e epitope of octarepeat ; occurs as  <dig> respectively  <dig> successive sequences in ovine and bovine prp

binding domains of ovine prp
using solid-phase arrays of 15-mer overlapping peptides systematically covering the whole mature part of prpc, mbp-prp was allowed to bind with the peptide-array, with the prospect that this would yield information on interaction sites between its prp moiety and the linear peptides. indeed interaction between the individual prp sequences  and mbp-prp was sufficient for immunodetection, resulting in a reproducible binding pattern . this binding pattern, expressed in relative density values , was characterized by two distinct high binding areas  as well as some lower binding areas. analysis of the correlating peptide sequences revealed that these areas usually were characterized by consensus sequences which suggested the existence of the following interaction domains for the mature part of prpc . two consecutive binding peaks with peptides 22– <dig> + 29– <dig>  have   as their consensus domain, followed by two consecutive minor binding peaks with peptides 35– <dig> + 39– <dig>  with  as the common domain. the first high binding area is comprised of peptides 43– <dig>  and encloses only two likely consensus domains: on the one hand peaks 43– <dig> , 53– <dig> , 61– <dig> , 69– <dig>  and 78– <dig>  each recognized an octarepeat with  as the consensus domain and on the other hand peaks 90– <dig>  94– <dig>  98– <dig>  with  as a common domain. the second high binding area is comprised of peptides 134– <dig> and encloses three likely consensus sequences. the shared sequence for peptides 134– <dig>  137– <dig>  is , for peptides 141– <dig>  and 153– <dig>  156– <dig>  59– <dig>  is  and for peptides 165– <dig>  170– <dig>  174– <dig>  is  respectively. the remaining lower binding areas also enclose three likely binding domain consensuses;  for peptides 179– <dig> ,  for peptides 188– <dig>  and  for peptides 214– <dig>  219– <dig>  222– <dig> .

ovine versus bovine peptide-array
to further assess the extent of the specificity of the binding pattern found, mbp-prp was also tested against a bovine prp peptide-array. this yielded a rather similar binding pattern compared to the results with ovine prp peptide array but with some differences. the binding pattern on the bovine peptide-array  was compared to that on the ovine peptide-array . as expected an extra octarepeat was found , and of the six amino acid differences between the ovine – and bovine peptide arrays only two resulted in a difference in binding. binding with the peptides containing the ovine to bovine substitutions s98a , s146a  and y158h  were comparable on both the ovine and bovine peptide-array, whereas the s100g  and q189e  did result in altered binding patterns. no binding was found with peptides containing the i208m substitution . some differences in binding without a direct apparent reason were observed. differences in the relative level of binding was observed with peptides 165– <dig> , 187– <dig>  and 220– <dig> , but these differences did not translate in differences in the determined consensus domains. however, binding with the array of bovine peptides 35– <dig>  remained below the cutoff value , whereas low binding with peptides 103– <dig>  was observed with the bovine peptide-array but not with the ovine peptide-array.

peptide-array controls
several control tests were carried out to determine the viability of the peptide-array to obtain prp-specific binding patterns. only minor non-significant differences in binding pattern were seen as a result of varying concentration of mbp-prp , storage buffers for mbp-prp, peptide synthesis methods, or peptide-array batches . also, no significant binding was observed with each separate antibody or in the combination used for detection . furthermore no binding of mbp with the prp peptide-array was observed. interestingly the o.d.v. decreased after prolonged storage of mbp-prp in pbs +  <dig> % sb3– <dig>  further examination of the isolate showed that mbp-prp had precipitated, indicating that interaction between the peptides and mbp-prp only occurs when the latter is soluble. furthermore, mbp-prp was tested on an unrelated peptide-array containing overlapping peptides covering the sequence of vp <dig> of canine parvovirus yielding not any significant binding domains. all these controls confirm that binding of mbp-prp to the prp-peptides was as a result of the prp moiety of mbp-prp, and that this binding was prp-specific.

antibody blocking of peptide-array binding pattern
to find a correlation with structural properties, the relative binding pattern of mbp-prp on the peptide array was compared to the kyte-doolittle hydrophilicity plot of mature prpc revealing a high correlation between hydrophilic  regions of prpc and binding pattern regions . even though the correlation was not absolute, it was necessary to determine if the binding pattern could be blocked with prp-specific antibodies. therefore several monoclonal antibodies with epitopes at different sites throughout prpc  were tested. pre-incubation  of mbp-prp with all the tested prp-specific monoclonal antibodies resulted in a concentration-dependant blocking of mbp-prp binding over the whole set of prp-peptides, albeit at different antibody concentrations . no blocking of the mbp-prp binding pattern occurred after pre-incubation with the unrelated mycobacterium specific antibody m <dig>  to ensure that blocking of the binding pattern is a result of immune-complex formation between antibody and mbp-prp and not of incidental aspecific aggregation of mbp-prp, a mab-aggregation test for each prp-specific antibody was carried out. comparative amounts of mbp-prp and antibody  were incubated. the soluble and insoluble fraction were separated by centrifugation at  <dig>  × g and analyzed on sds-page, resulting in  <dig> ± 16% of mbp-prp and  <dig> ± 7% of antibody detected in the supernatant fraction , indicating that if an immune-complex is formed this complex remains soluble. therefore formation of a soluble immune-complex must be responsible for loss of binding in the peptide-array instead of diminished binding as a result of aspecific aggregation. in addition preliminary results indicate that some selected peptides are also capable of blocking mbp-prp binding to the peptide-array, confirming that binding of mbp-prp to the prp-peptides was as a result of the prp moiety of mbp-prp and prp-specific.

mbp-prp mediated detection  of prp in western blot
to further confirm the specificity of the observed prp-prp interaction, mbp-prp was used as a detector in western blot to further study its affinity towards intact prpc in a brain homogenate. mbp-prp could be used to detect recombinant his-tagged prp  and intact prp in both scrapie positive and negative brain homogenates , albeit with a lower sensitivity under the standard western blot conditions using monoclonal antibody 9a <dig> . mbp-prp seems to preferably detect the un-glycosylated prp in the scrapie negative brain homogenate . correspondingly pngase f treatment of the brain homogenates did not alter the capability of mbp-prp to detect prp in brain homogenates  even though detection with 9a <dig> showed decreased levels of glycosylated prp . mbp-prp detection of prp in the pngase f treated scrapie positive homogenate still shows some detection of the different glycosylation forms . comparison of mbp-prp detection of prp in the pngase f treated – and non-treated scrapie positive brain homogenate samples shows that after pngase f treatment the amount of di-glycosylated prp has decreased while mono-glycosylated prp has increased. therefore the detection of prp glycoforms after pngase treatment is not due to aspecific binding of mbp-prp, but rather a result of incomplete de-glycosylation of prp in this particular sample. in contrast, pk treatment of the brain homogenate abrogated mbp-prp detection  whereas immunodetection using monoclonal antibody 9a <dig> clearly shows the presence of pk-resistant prpsc  in the scrapie positive brain homogenate. as a control the same samples were tested in western blot using free mbp, resulting in no detectable signal with either his-prp or any of the brain homogenate samples . only mbp-prp  was detected , thus proving that the detection with mbp-prp was prp-specific.

discussion
binding domains of ovine prpc
probing for possible prp interaction domains using mbp-prp and a solid-phase prp peptide-array resulted in prp specific interaction between specific prp-sequences  and mbp-prp. this probing revealed several likely interaction domains encompassed in two distinct high binding areas and some lower binding areas which will be discussed below in relation to structural features of prpc. suggested properties in conversion, the species barrier and self-interaction sites as hypothesized in structural models will be discussed.

the first distinct high binding area contains two different interaction domain consensuses. the domain  is repeated five times in the ovine peptide-array and six times in the bovine peptide-array  and is part of the octarepeat sequence phgggwgq, except for the first octarepeat  where h is replaced with a q. this substitution is considered neutral  <cit> , confirmed by the lack of effect on the binding pattern found, even though q is a polar residue and the weak positive charge of h is neutralized. the octarepeats are an epitope for antibodies inhibiting prpsc propagation in cell culture  <cit> . this study further reveals domain   as a domain involved in prp-prp interaction. these three aas are part of the epitope of the motif-grafted antibody containing mouse aa 89– <dig>  which is capable of selective immuno-precipitation of infectivity  <cit> .

the second high binding area contains  <dig> different interaction domain consensuses. this area also includes most of the polymorphisms found in sheep prpc. the domain   is situated between the first β-sheet  and first α-helix  in prpc and is part of the epitope of the motif-grafted antibody containing mouse aa 136– <dig> , capable of selective immuno-precipitation of prion infectivity  <cit> . this domain encompasses the two amino acid positions which appear to fully control species-specific kinetics of prp23– <dig>  <cit>  by affecting amyloid fibril conformation, thus limiting which prpc molecule can adapt to the conversion seed. therefore this domain is most likely involved in the species barrier and/or indirectly determines the susceptibility of sheep prp to scrapie, maybe by influencing the accessibility of this domain and thus the adaptability of prpc to the conversion seed. involvement of this region in adaptability between species was also concluded for human, mouse and hamster prions  <cit> . the  sequence occurs twice in the prp sequence. aa   is situated within the first α-helix  and aa   is situated within the second β-sheet  of prpc. the charged residues in the first α-helix, especially at residues  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  have also been shown to be a determinant of conversion  <cit> ; substitutions of neutral amino acids or oppositely charged residues impaired conversion. furthermore,   is part of the of the epitope of the motif-grafted antibody containing mouse aa 136– <dig>  capable of selective immuno-precipitation of prion infectivity  <cit> . the  domain has also been described as the epitope of an antibody that selectively recognizes prpsc  <cit> , and is part of several antibody  epitopes that prevent scrapie infection in tissue culture  <cit>  or in a mouse model  <cit> . the putative domain  is the common aa sequence of three consecutive peaks of which the fist two peaks encompass amino acids of a peptide  that inhibits in vitro conversion  <cit> . however, because of the third peak it is more likely that this domain is involved in self-interaction.

the remaining lower binding areas are more difficult to interpret. the domain consensus for the peptides 22– <dig>  seems to be , but may be a result of a cross-interaction with wn, instead of binding to domain  within the first high binding area. binding with domain consensus   is relatively low and may likely be due to cross-interaction with the proline  and two consecutive glycines  of these peptides, instead of binding to the consensus octarepeat domain . binding with the domains   and   is also  low and these domains comprise the second helix in prpc  which in turn may explain the relative low binding due to the structured nature of this part of the protein. it is not clear what the importance is of these domains, but part of the latter domain is contained within a peptide  that inhibits in vitro conversion  <cit>  as well. the last low binding domain found is , which  is part of the non-linear epitope of the prpsc specific monoclonal antibody 15b <dig>  <cit> .

several studies identified antibodies  <cit>  or peptides  <cit>  able to inhibit prion propagation. the binding domains found with the peptide-array containing aa corresponding with these antibody epitopes or peptides may also be directly involved in conversion. however, the inhibitory effects of antibodies seems simply due to steric hindrance preventing any prp interaction at all , making the binding domains corresponding to the conversion inhibiting peptides  the more likely candidate domains influencing conversion.

our data are in line with a theoretical two rung β-helical model described by langedijk et al.  <cit> , which tries to explain how aa sequence and secondary structure could explain strain properties and the species barrier. the binding domains found by peptide-array are all exposed in the periphery of the proposed fibril. the first distinct high binding domain makes up the incoming protein chain, whereas the second distinct high binding area forms the loop connecting the two-rung β-helical core with the α-helices . furthermore, no binding is observed between the two distinct high binding areas and the aa sequence of these peptides correlate with the predicted two rung β-helical core.

our data provide insight in the possible interaction domains of prpc with itself or prpsc, and most of the domains identified are likely to be involved in prpc self-interaction. this may involve dimerisation of prpc and/or formation of a trimer of three prpc molecules as suggested in the theoretical two-rung β-helical model for prp stacking during prpsc induced fibrillization  <cit> . if one of the identified high binding domains is of influence on conversion, this possibly is exerted during pre-oligomerisation, which is an inefficient process. on the other hand, a direct effect on prpc-prpsc binding can not be excluded.

ovine versus bovine peptide-array
in addition to the ovine peptide-array, a similar array of overlapping 15-mer peptides bovine peptides was used. since there are several sequential differences between bovine and ovine prp this may be of influence on the overall binding pattern found with mbp-prp . generally it seems that binding of mbp-prp is somewhat less efficient  with the bovine peptide-array compared to binding with the ovine peptide-array. however, this had no significant effects on the relative binding pattern. in the amino acid sequence of bovine prp there is an extra octarepeat as well as six amino-acid substitutions. only the largest differences will be discussed here. the non-discussed differences may well be the result of minor methodological variations when producing the peptide-arrays.

as expected, an extra octarepeat  was evident that confirmed the octarepeats consensus binding domain . only two out of six amino acid substitutions were of influence on the binding pattern. at first glance the amino acid substitutions at aa  <dig> and  <dig>  are seemingly both of influence on binding with peptides 93– <dig> , allowing detection of the consensus binding domain  only when these aa were no longer present in the peptides. the supposedly neutral substitution of glycine for serine at aa  <dig> is most likely responsible for the observed differences in binding and may be attributed to the greater conformational flexibility of g, affecting availability of other aa's for interaction with mbp-prp. taking this in account, binding with peptides 90– <dig> should be a result of cross-binding with two consecutive glycines present in these peptides in stead of binding with the consensus octarepeat domain. glutamatic acid only contains an oxygen in place of the amido group in glutamine and therefore these aa's are considered readily interchangeable  <cit> . however we observed that the substitution of glutamatic acid for glutamine at aa  <dig> did affect binding  on the bovine peptide-array with peptides 179–183; both aa's are polar, but where glutamine interacts with other polar or charged atoms with its polar side chains, glutamatic acid is negatively charged and is frequently involved in salt-bridges and/or glutamatic acid interacts with positive charged aa's to form hydrogen bonds. these differences in aa reactivity are most probably responsible for the observed difference in binding between ovine and bovine prp peptide sequences.

analysis and comparison of the relative  ovine – and bovine peptide-array revealed that the detection of potential prp-prp interaction domains using this method is robust as well as sensitive to differences in structural flexibility and/or amino acid differences. therefore, this peptide-array approach provides a possibly valuable tool to assess the influence of disease associated polymorphisms on available interaction domains and to test for prp-prp binding inhibitors potentially useful in therapy .

antibody blocking of peptide-array binding pattern
all monoclonal antibodies  recognizing prp  are capable of blocking the complete binding pattern. differences in the antibody concentration necessary for complete blocking are likely due to epitope availability and/or affinity for prp. complete blocking of the binding pattern can best be explained by steric hindrance of the antibodies preventing any interaction. it has been described that binding of a monoclonal antibody at the n-terminus of human prp influences epitope availability at the c-terminus  <cit>  and similar events may also attribute to completely abolishing the binding pattern. furthermore, structural studies of prpsc that resulted in prion propagation/fibrillization models  <cit> , suggest that prp-prp interaction depends on the structure of the whole protein . these findings corroborate the notion that antibodies inhibiting prion propagation probably do so by preventing the interaction between prpc and prpsc or between prpc molecules themselves in the pre-oligomerisation phase.

mbp-prp mediated detection  of prp in western blot
by using mbp-prp as the detecting agent in western blot we showed that binding of mbp-prp to the peptide-arrays is prp specific and indicative of a prp-prp interaction. mbp-prp seems to preferably detect un-glycosylated prpc in the scrapie negative brain homogenate. the exact reason for this preference is unclear, but does not seem to be due to the lack of glycosylated isoforms in the brain homogenate  as shown by immuno-detection with 9a <dig>  it may be possible that the determined interaction domains do not  interact with the same amino acid motif , but that an intramolecular cross-interaction between different domains can also occur. the peptide-array data has revealed two high binding areas, one of which contains the n-terminal octarepeats and the other contains the first α-helix, second β-sheet up to the second α-helix directly adjacent to the glycosylation sites . when prpc in the homogenate is glycosylated this may sterically hinder binding of mbp-prp to prpc. glycosylation is suggested to have a role in prion strain maintenance and the species barrier  <cit>  by modulating the fidelity of interaction, which may explain the favorable binding of un-glycosylated prp by mbp-prp  in the scrapie negative homogenate. however, in the scrapie positive brain homogenate detection of prp by mbp-prp is more diffuse and might suggest that mbp-prp detection of prp in western blot is due to interaction with both full-length prpc as well as full length denatured prpsc, which is comparable to prpc. alternatively, prpsc might be partly endogenously truncated resulting in more heterogeneous binding of mbp-prp to all glycosylation forms. in contrast, mbp-prp detects un-glycosylated prp as well as both mono – and di-glycosylated prp in the scrapie positive homogenate, even though un-glycosylated prp usually is the lesser component in the prp-triplet of scrapie sheep brain samples, which may be indicative for preferable binding of un-glycosylated prp in the scrapie positive homogenate. however interpretation of these results is difficult and in order to elucidate the precise effects of glycosylation on binding between prp molecules, interaction should be studied under more native conditions. when proteinase k treatment was applied mbp-prp did not detect pk-resistant prpsc. this indicates that in order for mbp-prp to detect prp in brain homogenates  full length  prp molecules are required. it may be hypothesized that the first high binding area containing the octarepeats aids in stabilization of prp self-interaction, perhaps by intramolecular interaction with other mapped interaction domains. this extra stabilization in turn allows further immunodetection in western blot . these results combined with the results obtained by peptide-array analysis support the concept of self-interactive domains of prpc.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, probing for possible interaction domains in prp using a solid phase prp peptide-array revealed that specific interactions take place between individual prp molecules. ten possible consensus binding domains were found, which includes one domain that likely is due to a cross-reaction with the octarepeat domain consensus – and for two domains it remains unclear what their importance is. the remaining seven domains are most likely involved in prpc self-interaction. furthermore, mbp-prp was also capable to specifically bind to full length prpc and prpsc bound prpc in western blot confirming prp-prp specific interaction. together these results indicate that in addition to direct prpc-prpsc interactions several other molecular interactions between prpc molecules/sequences themselves may also be possible, facilitating initial steps in the oligomerisation process.

the prp peptide-array may additionally facilitate in gaining insight into effects of disease associated polymorphisms in prp on prp-prp binding, and the subsequent molecular conversion of prpc into prpsc. the interaction domains described here may ultimately prove useful in the design of therapeutics interfering in the prp-prp binding process.

