BACKGROUND
to holometabolous insects, molting is a common physiological process, whose life cycles are characterized by a series of molts. during their larval molts, the larvae progress from one instar to the next. thereafter, pupation and eclosion ensue during their metamorphic molts. increasing evidence indicates that some hormones and receptors may contribute to the complex developmental pathways associated with molting and metamorphosis. many genes have been shown to be involved in molting or metamorphosis, such as the transcription factors ecdysteroid receptor , ultraspiracle protein , hormone receptor  <dig>  and broad complex  <cit> , and the programmed cell death pathway genes  <cit> . some key regulatory genes have also been identified, such as e74b and e <dig>  <cit> . however, very few genes downstream of broad complex, e74b and e <dig> have been identified. consequently, there is a dearth of available knowledge on the molecular mechanisms that lead to larval molt and metamorphosis. by conducting a research of the molting related genes, we may further understand the molecular mechanism of development and ecdysone regulation, and find the novel molecular targets to effectively control the pest.

suppression subtractive hybridization  is a useful method for identifying differentially expressed genes during larval molting. using the metamorphically committed larvae  as the tester and the feeding 5th instar larvae  as the driver, we obtained an est, which was similar to basic leucine zipper by blastx analysis  <cit> . we designed primers based on this fragment to obtain the full-length cdna and identified it as translation initiation factor 5c .

the regulation of translation plays an important role in the control of gene expression. in eukaryotes, translation regulation occurs primarily during the initial step, which is rate limiting under most circumstances  <cit> . more and more evidence suggests that translation initiation factors  are not only essential in the initiation of protein translation but also important in other life processes. some eifs are regulators of signaling pathways, such as eif4a of drosophila melanogaster, which functions as a negative regulator of dpp/bmp  signaling that mediates smad  degradation  <cit> . eukaryotic initiation factor  <dig> selectively regulates wnt signaling and β-catenin protein synthesis  <cit> .

eif5c is a phylogenetically conserved protein, which is said to contain an n-terminal leucine zipper motif and a c-terminal eif5c domain. our blastx results showed that homologs of eif5c exist in various organisms, from cryptococcus neoformans to homo sapiens. bzap <dig>  the ortholog of eif5c in humans, contributes to transcriptional control at the g1/s phase transition  <cit> . in rattus norvegicus, brain development-related molecule  <dig>  is a developmentally regulated gene, which is highly expressed in fetal rat brain  <cit> . wang et al.  <cit>  showed that eif5c was associated with the ribosome through an interaction with d. melanogaster ribosomal protein l <dig> , suggesting its possible role during protein synthesis in fruit flies. given that there are no related functional reports to date, the information of eif5c from other insects have been obtained from gene sequencing.

in this study, we cloned and characterized the eif5c from the metamorphic larvae of h. armigera and designated it as ha-eif5c, which contains an n-terminal leucine zipper motif and a c-terminal eif5c domain. the expression, distribution and characterization of ha-eif5c were studied by employing quantitative real-time pcr , recombinant expression and immunoblotting analysis. likewise, we also investigated the gene's hormonal regulation and its position in the 20e signal transduction pathway.

RESULTS
gene cloning and sequence analysis of ha-eif5c
based on the fragment of ha-eif5c obtained from suppression subtractive hybridization , the 5' end fragment was obtained using specific reverse primer eif5cr and the t <dig> primer. the 3' end fragment was amplified with the specific primer eif5cf and the t <dig> primer. the full-length eif5c of h. armegera  was obtained through an assemblage of overlapping nucleic acids. this included a  <dig> bp 5' untranslated region , a  <dig> bp open reading frame and a  <dig> bp untranslated region in the 3' utr, with a  <dig> bp poly a tail. the orf encoded a  <dig> amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of  <dig> kda and a predicated isoelectric point of  <dig> . moreover, there were some putative post-translational modification sites including seven protein kinase c phosphorylation sites, two tyrosine kinase phosphorylation sites, three n-myristoylation sites, five casein kinase ii phosphorylation sites and one n-glycosylation site .

identification of ha-eif5c
the result of the blastx analysis suggests that ha-eif5c has certain similarities to various genes, including eif5c from bombyx mori , eif5c from apis mellifera , eif5c from aedes aegypti  and eif5c from d. melanogaster  . smart predicted that ha-eif5c protein contains a c-terminal eif5c domain  and an n-terminal leucine zipper motif .

recombinant expression and purification of ha-eif5c
after iptg induction, the recombinant gst-eif5c was expressed in supernatant and purified by glutathione sepharose 4b. the deduced molecular weight of the recombinant expressed protein was  <dig> kda as shown in fig.  <dig>  to prepare the antiserum, a gel extraction of recombinant eif5c after cleavage of gst-eif5c with thrombin was used.

tissue distribution and expression patterns of ha-eif5c
to study the tissue distribution of ha-eif5c, the total rna of the head-thorax, integument, midgut, fatbody and haemocyte were extracted from 5th  <dig> h , 5th-hcs  and 6th  <dig> h  stage. as shown in fig.  <dig>  ha-eif5c transcript was detected at a high level in the head-thorax, integument, midgut and fat body but not in haemocytes in metamorphosis stage. qrt-pcr was utilized to analyze the expression of ha-eif5c in developmental midgut and fat body. the results showed that there was an obvious increase in the level of ha-eif5c transcript during metamorphosis. the immunoblotting revealed that the expression of ha-eif5c protein agreed with the mrna transcription .

hormonal regulations on ha-eif5c
to examine the effect of ecdysone on ha-eif5c expression, 6th instar  <dig> h larvae  were injected with 20-hydroxyecdysone . compared with the control, a 5–6-fold increase in ha-eif5c expression was observed at  <dig> h and  <dig> h after the challenge. however, the expression level of ha-eif5c started to decline at  <dig> h and returned to the basal level at  <dig> h .

in order to study whether ha-eif5c was upregulated downstream of the 20e-induced transcription cascade, we knocked down ecr and usp in the haepi cell line by rnai. after either ecr or usp was knocked down via rnai, the transcription of ha-eif5c was down regulated compared with the control and it could not be upregulated anymore by treatment with 20e .

immunohistochemistry
to verify the expression and localization of ha-eif5c, we performed an immunohistochemical analysis of the midgut , fat body and integument  from feeding 5th larvae , molting 5th larvae  and wandering 6th- <dig> h larvae . in the 5th-hcs stage, the midgut epithelium consisted of larval polyploid cells  and intestinal stem cells  . larval iscs are the progenitors of the adult midgut epithelium. the larval polyploid cells moving into the lumen from the basement membrane were replaced by proliferating and differentiating iscs at 6th- <dig> h . at this point, groups of imaginal cells began to form cell layers. our immunohistochemical analysis shows that ha-eif5c was distributed into both the cytoplasm and nucleus in the midgut during the feeding 5th, molting 5th and wandering 6th- <dig> h stages. relatively strong fluorescent signals were detected on the outer peripheries of the midgut epithelium from worms during 5th instar feeding and molting stage, as well as the larval polyploid cells and the imaginal cells from larvae at wandering stage. likewise, iscs, muscle cells and basement membrane were localized in this area.

at the same time, the localization of ha-eif5c in the integument and fat body was detected by immunohistochemistry. during the molting 5th and wandering 6th- <dig> h , a cascade of physiological processes occurred. these included the separation of the old cuticle from the underlying epidermis, followed by the secretion of a new cuticle beneath the old. finally, a shedding of the old exoskeleton occurred . it was obvious that ha-eif5c appears localized in both cytoplasm and nucleus in the epidermis and lipocyte.

discussion
in this work, we identify a  <dig> bp full-length elf5c from h. armegera. this includes a  <dig> bp open reading frame encoding a  <dig> amino-acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of  <dig> kda. protein alignments showed that ha-eif5c and eif5c from a. aegypti, a. mellifera, d. melanogaster and b. mori are very similar.

ha-eif5c is a phylogenetically conserved protein predicted to contain an n-terminal leucine zipper motif  and a c-terminal eif5c domain . this eif5c domain was first detected at the very c-termini of the yeast protein gcd <dig>  eif-2b epsilon and two other eukaryotic translation initiation factors, eif- <dig> gamma and eif- <dig>  and may likewise be involved in the interaction of eif-2b, eif- <dig> gamma and eif- <dig> with eif- <dig>  <cit> . therefore, this eif5c domain in ha-eif5c implies that ha-eif5c might also function as a novel translation initiation factor.

leucine zipper motifs are protein-protein dimerization motifs consisting of heptad repeats of leucine residues that form a coiled-coil structure  <cit> . these motifs have been well described in the context of transcription factors such as c-fos and c-jun, where they mediate homo- and hetero-dimerization critical for the dna binding properties of these transcription factors  <cit> . proteins containing leucine zipper motif have been reported to be related with larval growth, molting and metamorphosis in d. melanogaster  <cit> . our work provides evidence that the expression of ha-eif5c, which contains a leucine zipper motif, is upregulated during metamorphosis. we speculate that through its leucine zipper domain, ha-eif5c may be involved in transcriptional regulation during insect development.

the expression profile of ha-eif5c was correlated with the metamorphic process of h. armigera. in our study, ha-eif5c was upregulated during metamorphosis in the head-thorax, integument, midgut and fat body. thummel  <cit>  reported that apoptotic and autophagic programmed cell death pathways are involved in tissue histolysis and remodeling during metamorphosis. gorski et al.  <cit>  confirmed that programmed cell death in the salivary glands of d. melanogaster requires active protein synthesis, even though cell death is a degradative cellular process. gorski et al.  <cit>  also found significant upregulation of several translation-initiation factors.

molting and metamorphosis of larvae are very important physiological behaviors in insects, and are governed by two hormones, namely, 20e and juvenile hormone   <cit> . wang et al.  <cit>  showed that h. armigera had a similar developmental schedule as compared with manduca sexta. 20e levels increase during the late stages of the final  instar in m. sexta larvae, before pupal ecdysis, and then decrease at the pupal ecdysis  <cit> . the expression of the ha-eif5c transcript went with the titer of 20e and was enhanced after being injected with 20e, which suggested that it was regulated by 20e in vivo. moreover, the fact that the expression level of ha-eif5c in haepi cell line decreased after ecr or usp was knocked down demonstrated that ha-eif5c was upregulated by 20e via ecr or usp transcription factor.

ha-eif5c appears localized in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus in the midgut, integument and fat body. however, it was identified as a cytoplasmic protein in d. melanogaster  <cit> . in light of its function in the initiation phase of protein synthesis, eifs were often targeted in the cytoplasm. however, some eifs such as eif4e are distributed in the cytoplasm and the nucleus. in the cytoplasm, eif4e acts in the rate-limiting step of translation initiation. in the nucleus, eif4e facilitates the nuclear export of a subset of mrnas. both of these functions contribute to eif4e's ability to oncogenically transform cells  <cit> . neither eif5c nor eif4e contain classical nuclear localization signals  predicted by the bioinformatics method . they might act in consonance with some assistant factors that are imported into the nucleus. dostie et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that eif4e-transporter  is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein that contains an eif4e-binding site, one bipartite nls and two leucine-rich nuclear export signals, which mediate the nuclear import of eif4e via the importin αβ pathway by a piggy-back mechanism.

CONCLUSIONS
ha-eif5c possibly functions as a novel translation initiation factor in protein synthesis just like eif5c of d. melanogaster. however, it was interesting to find that ha-eif5c was upregulated during metamorphosis. likewise, it was equally interesting to discover that the expression of ha-eif5c transcript was enhanced by 20e through ecr and usp. thus, we hypothesize that ha-eif5c possibly functions as a regulator of cotton bollworm development, in addition to its role as a translation initiation factor.

