BACKGROUND
non-biological experimental variation is commonly observed in microarray data processed in different batches. a batch is defined as a set of microarrays that are processed together within a single experiment. in this report we define an experiment as an individual study conducted at one site at one time. an experiment often has many samples processed in multiple batches. different batches are processed at different times or by different operators. batch effects are caused by many factors such as the methods for rna isolation, amplification and target labeling, and array processing and scanning. several methods have been proposed that can adjust for batch effects provided a large number of samples  are included in each batch  <cit> . more recently, an empirical bayes method has been described  <cit>  that adjusts for batch effects even when the number of samples in each batch is small .

the aforementioned methods can adjust for batch effects provided that samples from each biological group are represented in every batch. the left panel of figure  <dig> shows such an experimental design. all three batches contain samples from each of the two biological groups . in contrast, the experiment in the right panel of figure  <dig> is an example where it is not possible to distinguish differences in gene expression that are due to batch effects from those that are due to the underlying biology. confounding batch effects are even more of a problem when comparing array data from experiments conducted in different laboratories. hence, researchers need to generate a new set of control samples for each separate experiment. if it were possible to correct for cross-experimental batch effects, however, a single set of patient control samples could be compared to sets of disease samples from multiple independent experiments, saving significant resources.

in this report we present an experimental design that allows one to compare different biological groups drawn from independent experiments. the feature of our experimental design that allows samples to be compared even when control and experimental samples are in completely separate experiments is that identical replicate reference samples of pooled rna are processed in each batch in every experiment. these reference samples are pooled rna from the same tissue as are the disease and control experimental samples. in our study the experimental samples and reference samples are from human blood. only a single reference sample is necessary to be included in each batch. our experimental design is illustrated in figure  <dig>  we demonstrate models for estimating batch effects using the empirical bayes approach of johnson et al  <cit> . we focus on single-channel microarrays, though our methods could easily be extended to two-channel arrays.

RESULTS
simulations and data analyses are used to study the properties of the proposed methods. these methods are an extension of the empirical bayes batch effect adjustment proposed by johnson et al  <cit> .

empirical bayes method adjusts gene expression in the proper direction
we first show that the empirical bayes method can correctly adjust for batch effects using two simulated data sets . for the first simulation, we select batch effect parameter values that lower the expression levels of patients relative to controls . we show that batch adjustment restores the fold change, leading to better power to detect truly differentially expressed genes. in the second simulation, we study the opposite scenario where batch effects elevate expression levels of patients relative to controls . here, batch effects lead to false positives in the unadjusted data. batch adjustment correctly  lowers the fold change values. in both cases, batch adjustment leads to more accurate conclusions.

for the first simulation, analysis of unadjusted data identifies only  <dig>  of truly differential expressed genes as being differentially expressed with fdr adjusted p-value ≤  <dig>  and fold change >  <dig> . because the batch effects lowered the fold change values, all of the remaining simulated genes had fold change values of less than  <dig>  . however, after batch adjustment, the vast majority of truly differentially expressed genes  were identified as differentially expressed, with only  <dig>  false positives. the ability of the method to correctly adjust for batch effects is further illustrated in figure  <dig>  this scatter plot of fold change values before and after batch adjustment shows that the majority of simulated expressed genes  are above the diagonal line, indicating that the batch adjustment method is adjusting the gene expression values in the proper direction. the red points in the upper left section of the plot separated by the two vertical purple lines correspond to the simulated expressed genes that were recovered as differentially expressed after batch adjustment.

in the second simulation, batch effects amplify the expression level differences between the two groups . not surprisingly, all  <dig> simulated differentially expressed genes were declared as differentially expressed in the unadjusted data set. an additional  <dig> of the remaining genes were also identified as differentially expressed. after batch adjustment,  <dig> out of the  <dig> true positives were correctly identified, with only  <dig> false positives. this indicates that while the empirical bayes method may be a bit stringent, it is very effective at removing false positives. the ability of the method to correctly adjust for batch effects is shown in figure  <dig>  fold change values are lower in the adjusted data set relative to the unadjusted data set for all but seven of the  <dig> expressed genes, again indicating that the method adjusts the fold changes in the correct direction. the blue points in the lower right section of the plot separated by the two vertical purple lines are gene expression values for the simulated unexpressed genes that were correctly removed by the batch adjustment method .

empirical bayes method removes cross-experiment batch effects
we next demonstrate on our experimental data set that the empirical bayes method removes batch effects that occur between experiments. in this data there are two experiments, one that includes microarray data for four batches of control samples processed at the university of cincinnati and a second that includes microarray data for patients with muscular dystrophy processed in five batches at uc davis. we illustrate the successful removal of batch effects by comparing expression of differentially expressed genes before and after adjustment for batch effects.

for the unadjusted gcrma-summarized expression values, a total of  <dig> genes are differentially expressed in patients compared to controls. using the expression values for these genes only, we applied agglomerative hierarchical clustering with pearson correlation to the  <dig> samples . the color-coded dendrogram and the upper color bar beneath the heat map show a clear separation of the muscular dystrophy patients  from healthy control patients . however, the uc davis reference arrays  and the cincinnati reference arrays  also form separate groups. this is indicative that for this gene list there is a substantial amount of gene expression due to cross-experimental non-biological artifacts. identical reference samples otherwise should have similar expression values and so should instead be randomly intermixed.

using the empirical bayes method to correct for both within and between experiment batch effects , we identified  <dig> differentially expressed genes. figure  <dig> is a clustered heat map based on these  <dig> genes. in the corresponding dendrogram the reference arrays  are mixed, suggesting that the cross-experimental batch effects have been removed. the numbers of differentially expressed genes between the sets of reference samples also points to the successful removal of cross-experimental effects. while  <dig> genes were differentially expressed between the two groups of reference samples before the data was adjusted, there were no genes differentially expressed between uc davis and cincinnati reference samples after cross-experiment batch adjustment.

empirical bayes method removes within-experiment batch effects
in this section we show that the empirical bayes method successfully adjusts for within-experiment batch effects and that these can be of even greater magnitude than the between-experiment batch effects.

numbers are out of  <dig>  probe sets unless otherwise specified. eb = empirical bayes.

there is one batch processed at uc davis that clearly has the most pronounced effects. out of the  <dig> genes that were differentially expressed in at least one batch for the unadjusted data set, nearly all  were differentially expressed in the same batch. for the remaining four batches, the numbers of differentially expressed genes were many fewer – ranging between  <dig> and  <dig> for the four batches processed at uc davis and between  <dig> and  <dig> for those processed at cincinnati. the lower color bar beneath the heat map in figure  <dig>  also points to the pronounced effects in this one batch. the samples are interspersed for all batches except this one . these results clearly point to the need for a method that is capable of removing both within and between experimental batch effects.

the numbers of differentially expressed genes are shown in table  <dig> for the data sets adjusted for both types of batch effects  and for within-experiment batch effects only . for the data set adjusted only for within-experiment batch effects, there are only four genes that were differentially expressed in at least one batch for the uc davis data set and no genes for the cincinnati data set. these numbers show that the empirical bayes method is very effective at removing within-experiment batch effects. when the data was adjusted for both types of batch effects, there were no differentially expressed genes across batches. similarly, no genes were differentially expressed between uc davis and cincinnati reference samples after batch adjustment with model  <dig> 

comparison of the empirical bayes method to the t-test filter
in this section we illustrate the advantages that the empirical bayes method offers by comparing it to a more naïve approach which uses a t-test to filter out genes with significant differences in expression between reference arrays in the two experiments. applying the t-test to the  <dig> genes identified as differentially expressed between patients and controls in the unadjusted data results in the removal of  <dig> genes with significant between-experiment batch effects. out of the remaining  <dig> genes, while none show differential expression in at least one of the four batches processed in cincinnati,  <dig> show differential gene expression in at least one of the five batches processed at uc davis . this is not surprising because the t-test removes genes with between-experiment batch effects but does not adjust for batch effects within an experiment. moreover, the t-test filter has the additional limitation that it does not recover false negatives. the empirical bayes approach identifies many more genes because it adjusts the values in the gene expression matrix instead of simply removing genes from a list.

adjusting for non-biological variation significantly alters lists of differentially expressed genes
discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in this report we have shown that with an appropriate experimental design and statistical methods it is possible to adjust for both within and between experiment batch effects and hence compare gene expression values between biological groups drawn from independent experiments. the unique feature of our experimental design that enables us to compare data from separate experiments is that identical replicate reference samples of pooled rna  are included in each batch within each experiment. the inclusion of the identical reference samples from the same tissue in every batch in every experiment allows us to adjust for non-biological variation and hence be able to distinguish differences in gene expression due to the underlying disease biology from those due to confounding batch effects. this approach enables us to compare the gene expression of samples from the two groups that would otherwise be incomparable due to confounding batch effects. the importance and uniqueness of this method are best understood when viewed in the context of the other methods described below.

several computational methods have been developed to correct for non-biological variation. alter et al.  <cit>  used singular value decomposition  to adjust for non-biological variation in yeast cell cycle data while others  <cit>  applied this same method to correct for batch effects in a tumor data set. alter et al. were able to adjust for non-biological variation by inferring that the combinations of genes and arrays that contributed the most to the variance correspond to non-biological artifacts. by filtering out these combinations of genes and arrays they were able to normalize the data and compare gene expression across arrays from different experiments. because svd finds the directions of greatest variation, this approach succeeded because in this case, the non-biological variation was the greatest source of variation. however, if the amount of biological variation happened to be greater than the non-biological variation, this approach would have likely failed to adjust non-biological variation. this motivated benito et al. to apply a different approach, distance weighted discrimination , to correct for systematic batch effects. in dwd, instead of adjusting the data based on the direction of maximal variation , data is adjusted according to the direction that maximizes the separation between two batches. while dwd can be applied to only two batches at a time, benito et al. propose adjusting for three or more batches in a stepwise manner, adjusting the two most similar first, and then next most similar against the previously adjusted batches. it is unclear how successful their method is in removing batch effects when there are more than three batches.

the bayesian approach developed by johnson et al  <cit>  is based on a location and scale  model that allows a different mean and variance for each gene and batch . it offers the advantage of circumventing the requirements for large sample sizes while providing robust batch adjustments for each gene by pooling information across genes in each batch when estimating the model parameters. given our limited sample size in each batch as well as the limited number of replicate identical reference samples in each batch, this bayesian approach is an appropriate choice. since many experimental designs share these features, we expect the approach could be widely applicable. to fully validate the current methods, it will be important to compare the bayesian approach developed by johnson et al {3} to the current approach on a data set where both approaches could be used.

this bayesian approach is particularly advantageous for the analysis of our data set which had a particularly limited number of reference samples – the minimum number of one reference sample per batch. because in the first step of the parameter estimation procedure, the pooled variance for each gene is calculated across all samples, the multiplicative batch effect  can still be estimated even when there is only a single reference sample in each batch. however, an experimental design would ideally include more than one reference sample per batch as a preventative measure in case one of the reference samples was of poor quality. in this study we are able to justify the use of a single reference sample based on the results of an anova analysis of the batch adjusted data. the bottom row of table  <dig>  shows that after batch effects have been adjusted for, there are no differentially expressed genes between batches for the disease samples, or between batches for the healthy control samples. this suggests that if the reference sample itself deviated from the other reference samples, the disease samples in this batch also deviated from the other disease samples in the other batch in a similar manner. by adjusting using the reference sample, the biases were correctly compensated. in subsequent studies we are addressing the optimal number of reference samples to include in each batch.

a related concern is that the estimate of the variance for many genes might be unusually large relative to the differences in the batch means because there was only one reference sample used. in this scenario the adjustment method would often times only add noise and reduce sensitivity. it is important to note that for the observed estimated parameter values in our data set, it is infrequent for the batch variances to be large relative to the differences in the batch means. again, even though there is only one reference sample per batch, the variance estimate is likely stabilized by the pooling of samples.

the methods described above have been applied in the context of adjusting batch effects within a single experiment. existing methods for comparing microarray data across independent experiments include meta-analysis where sets of genes that are consistently differentially expressed across multiple experiments are identified. in this approach, statistical measures of differential expression generated from data sets derived from independent experiments are compared instead of the gene expression data matrices from different data sets. rhodes et al.  <cit>  developed a statistical approach to compare multiple independent microarray data sets and applied it to identify sets of consistently differentially expressed genes across four independent prostate cancer gene data sets. in a subsequent study  <cit> , they applied a similar method to identify cancer "meta-signatures" – sets of genes that are enriched in gene lists from many cancer studies.

the meta-analysis approaches described above have been very useful in comparing independent microarray data sets-especially when the data sets were generated across different platforms. however, in these methods the gene expression data matrices for test samples from one experiment are not compared to the control samples from another experiment. in contrast, our experimental design enables such comparisons to be made between experiments using the same microarray platform and hence offers an enormous increase in the number of different gene expression comparisons that can be made between data sets drawn from independent microarray studies. this makes it possible to test many more hypotheses for differences in gene expression. for example, suppose two independent studies were performed, each comparing a different disease group to healthy controls. if identical reference samples were included in each of these experiments, it would be possible to directly compare gene expression values between the two disease groups and identify genomic signatures that distinguish one disease group from the other in addition to the genomic signatures that distinguish each disease group from the healthy individuals.

the proposed experimental design has substantial impact for the use of microarrays in clinical studies. because it is possible to compare gene expression values for disease and control samples drawn from separate experiments, it is possible to recycle expression data for one set of controls, comparing it to disease gene expression data sets for follow-up experiments. this would eliminate the burden and expense of reprocessing control samples each time an experiment is repeated. furthermore with the ability to re-use a single control gene expression data set, it becomes possible to define a single standard control population for a disease study and establish a universal reference data set of gene expression values. this would dramatically increase the utility of microarrays in clinical diagnostics.

