BACKGROUND
clinical dyslipidaemia is defined as an abnormal concentration of lipids in the blood circulation caused by cholesterol-rich diet or exposure to elevated insulin levels. it is long known that elevated high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol  levels are associated with reduction of the risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases
 <cit> . this effect is mechanistically related to reverse cholesterol transport , a process that mediates excretion of excess hdl cholesterol from peripheral tissues to the liver ending ultimately in the faeces
 <cit> . cholesteryl ester transfer protein  plays a central role in this process and it was recognized that pharmacological inhibition of cetp mediated cholesterol transport would raise hdl-c levels resulting in protection from coronary heart disease. the syrian hamster mesocricetus auratus has become an important animal model for pre-clinical dyslipidaemia research because hdl-c levels are raised in response to drugs designed for human target proteins
 <cit> . in contrast to mice and rats, cetp is expressed in hamster liver which explains raise of serum hdl levels in response to the cetp inhibitor anacetrabip
 <cit> .

the illumina human body map  <dig>  project provides high-quality rnaseq based gene expression data for major human organs using pooled samples from healthy donors including liver . this database allows a comparative analysis of liver gene expression between humans and model organisms such as the primate macaca fascicularis where a microarray based expression database of  <dig> liver samples became recently available as a part of a genome sequencing project
 <cit> .

currently, lack of a fully annotated genome for m. auratus prevents development of reliable genome-based tools for transcript imaging such as microarrays or qpcr panels. recently, the genome of the chinese hamster cricetulus griseus derived cell line -k <dig> was published because it is the preferred host cell line for industrial production of recombinant proteins such as therapeutic antibodies
 <cit> . for this reason, genome analysis and annotation was focused on the analysis of protein modifying systems such as fucosylation or glycosylation pathways. a partial transcriptome analysis of an antibody producing cho line by rna sequencing had been performed earlier
 <cit> . the rna source, the low transcript annotation coverage of approximately 40% combined with the absence of data in the public domain limits utility of this study for our project. furthermore, a recent mitochondrial genome based study of rodent phylogeny shows that evolutionary relationship between m. auratus and c. griseus is comparable to that between r. norvegicus and m.musculus <cit> . these circumstances suggested use of well annotated genomes such as rat, mouse or human as template for mapping and reliable annotation of syrian hamster liver transcripts.

we show here, that simultaneous application of two independent deep sequencing technologies combined with searches across multiple database allows indeed unambiguous annotation and quantification of transcripts expressed in liver of the syrian hamster. triple match sequencing  can be applied for transcript profiling of any organism provided that annotated genomes of related species are available.

RESULTS
experimental strategy
the underlying principle and the workflow of tms are summarized in figure 
 <dig> . from total rna, two libraries are constructed for ngs using a long-read  and a short-read  technology. for the  <dig> library construction, we used polyt-primed cdna because the 3′ sequence upstream of the poly-a tail is required for quantification of short-read tags. this approach allows identification of genes belonging to homologous families because the untranslated region has in general higher sequence diversity than the coding region. to achieve broad representation of transcripts independent of their expression levels it was crucial to normalize rna abundance in the cdna samples by competitive hybridization.  <dig>  million  <dig> reads with an average length of  <dig> bases were assembled into contigs. unique contigs together with unassembled reads were subsequently used as query for homology searches across well annotated transcriptome databases such as mouse, rat and human . this approach led to unambiguous annotation of 10’ <dig> transcripts corresponding to  <dig>  per cent of the contigs assembled from the normalized  <dig> long-read library. probing of human, mouse and rat refseq databases with unique query contigs typically produced matches to the same transcript in each library thereby improving annotation fidelity of hamster transcripts.

our primary objective is to quantify hamster liver mrna abundance for interspecies comparisons . using total liver rna from the same samples sequenced by  <dig> technology, we generated sage short read libraries for processing on an abi-solid instrument. we relied on sage based bead libraries because the frequency of unique tags is directly proportional to transcript abundance
 <cit> . we performed four solid runs yielding altogether  <dig> million usable reads. 93% of this pool mapped to the 454-contig assembly and the remainder mapped either to human, mouse, rat, or dog refseq databases . the high mapping efficiency supports the tms approach and highlights the requirement of a long-read library for reliable mapping and annotation.

quantitative comparison of transcripts involved in lipid metabolism in liver of h.sapiens, m.fascicularis, s.scrofa, m.auratus and r.norwegicus
the primary motivation for our study was to compare liver gene gene expression in hamster with humans and model organisms used in metabolic disease research. for this study we constructed sage-based liver rna libraries from h. sapiens, the minipig s. scrufa and the rat r. norwegicus. human and rat sequence-tags were annotated and quantified by mapping to public domain genomes or to a minipig draft genome assembly . m. fascicularis liver expression data came from a previous study
 <cit> . the general concordance of the normalized datasets for each species is illustrated by the comparable expression levels of housekeeping genes across all species included in this deep sequencing based analysis . to compare expression of genes involved in lipid digestion, mobilization and transport we selected a set of  <dig> genes from the reactome database , because their functional interactions are well documented. hierarchical clustering generated six distinct clusters of genes with similar gene expression patterns across all species . cluster  <dig> contains apolipoprotein isoforms that are abundantly expressed in all species included here. apoa <dig> was assigned to cluster five which contains transcripts involved in hdl-biosynthesis with very low expression in the rat. the cholesteryl-ester- transfer-protein  is the target of hdl-modifying drugs explaining lack of pharmacological responses in the rat model
 <cit> . cluster  <dig> contains highly expressed transcripts in all species adjacent to the most abundant liver specific transcript albumin. clusters  <dig> and  <dig> are compiled of genes in the intermediate expression range, with notable interspecies variability. finally, the mrna expression levels in cluster  <dig> are in general low because these genes mostly belong to a network operating in the intestinal lumen. the protein kinase prkacg as a testis-specific enzyme was properly assigned to cluster 6
 <cit> . altogether we failed to identify transcripts for five genes . the apoa <dig> gene of m. fascicularis lacks a catg motif required for sage-based sequencing using solid technology. three s. scrofa genes  are missing in the draft genomes of the pig
 <cit>  or the minipig . the m.auratus amn receptor gene  was not present in our long read library.

discussion
we show that triple match sequencing  allows robust deep sequencing based transcript imaging in absence of an annotated genome. using a sage based comparison of liver gene expression across five species we show that tms derived data are comparable to mrna quantification data using conventional genome based mapping. similar to other vertebrates about 10’ <dig> genes are expressed in hamster liver at comparable levels .

the value of transcript identification in absence of an annotated genome has been recognized by others. fletcher et al. have generated a partial transcriptome of the woodchuck  an animal model for experimental hepatitis b infection and hepatocellular carcinoma
 <cit> . randomly primed cdna libraries were sequenced using 454-long read technology followed by contig assembly and annotation. this yielded a pool of 13’ <dig> unique transcripts which was used to build a custom microarray to analyze the transcriptional responses to virus infection and cure. compared to tms this process is more time consuming due to the need of microarray production and validation. a method termed trinity relies on graphics based assembly of high coverage short read or paired end cdna libraries without reference genome
 <cit> . in contrast to the woodchuck approach, the three software modules constituting trinity can detect novel splice variants as demonstrated for fission yeast, mouse, and whitefly whose genomes were not available at the time of release. this approach is particularly suited for the analysis of tumor samples where gene re-arrangements and structural deviations can lead to novel variants of any gene
 <cit> . although trinity has powerful transcript assembly capabilities for short and long read data the current version of the program cannot perform transcript quantification. in our approach contig assembly of long-reads is solely performed for annotation followed by quantification using frequencies of short-read sage tags . therefore, tms is inherently unable to quantify or discover splice variants of the same gene. this requires construction of tissue specific cdna libraries by random priming which was used to build the human “bodymap” gene expression database . tms does not attempt to annotate species-specific transcripts because the approach relies on mapping to known mrnas in other species. we note that any unmapped long reads are candidates for species specific transcripts of hamster. normally, unique 454- reads or contigs matched the same refseq transcript from more than one species  resulting in a significant improvement of annotation confidence.

as it turned out, the genome sequence or the partial transcriptome analysis of the c. griseus derived cell line cho had only limited value for our project
 <cit> , because the annotation efforts in c. griseus focused mainly on pathways relevant for protein production and modification. furthermore, the evolutionary distance between c. griseus and m.auratus is comparable to that between mouse and rat
 <cit> . finally, the partial transcriptome of cho is derived from an ovary cell line which expresses probably different genes than liver tissue from another species.

CONCLUSIONS
triple match sequencing is a robust and rapid method for annotation and quantification of transcripts in the absence of a reference genome. the method is especially useful in projects where reliable mrna quantification rather than primary sequence information is important. tms does not require implementation of specialized hard- or software which makes it fast, affordable and user friendly. it might even contribute to the identification and selection of novel animal models prior to a genome sequencing effort.

