BACKGROUND
gram-negative bacteria use a variety of self-produced autoinducers such as acylated homoserine lactones as a language for quorum sensing  within and between bacterial species. several bacterial species synthesize specific acylated homoserine lactones  by means of a luxi-type enzyme, and respond to cognate acyl-hsl by using a luxr-type intracellular receptor  <cit> . it is considered that the selection of bacterial languages is necessary to regulate gene expression and thus it leads to a growth advantage in several environments.

the opportunistic bacterium p. aeruginosa is widespread in various environments and utilizes two acyl-hsl signaling molecules, n--l-homoserine lactone , and n-butanoyl-l-homoserine lactone , and two receptor proteins, lasr and rhlr, respectively  <cit> . 3-oxo-c12-hsl binds to lasr and activates lasr function. the 3-oxo-c12-hsl-lasr complex regulates many genes, including the rhl system  <cit> . furthermore, p. aeruginosa uses a third signal, pseudomonas quinolone signal  and the pqsr receptor protein  <cit> . expression of many virulence factors is regulated by qs in p. aeruginosa <cit> . accordingly, a specific response to an autoinducer is important to determine the virulence of p. aeruginosa.

analysis of the crystal structures of the n-terminal half of the p. aeruginosa full-length lasr or the crystal structure of a. tumefaciences full-length trar, which is a homolog of p. aeruginosa lasr, in a complex with its cognate autoinducer has been performed  <cit> . these structural analyses indicated that the n-terminal half of the full length luxr-type protein includes the dimerization domain and the acyl-hsl binding domain  <cit> . these reports indicated that the ligand binds to the n-terminal half of the full-length luxr-type protein at an enclosed cavity far from the n-terminal dimerization region. it has been suggested that the acyl side-chain length of acyl-hsls is not the main factor that determines the specificity of receptor protein binding  <cit> . it is considered that the binding model for the acyl-hsl-luxr transcriptional protein family is common among gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . however, it was shown that the responses to acyl-hsls in p. aeruginosa are specific  <cit> . we hypothesize that there is an unidentified signal selection mechanism for the selection of acyl-hsls according to the binding affinity of lasr in p. aeruginosa.

resistance-nodulation-division -type efflux pumps are one type of antibiotic efflux system. rnd-type efflux pumps are commonly found in gram-negative bacteria. rnd family transporters catalyze the active efflux of many antibiotics and chemotherapeutic agents. they consist of an inner-membrane component belonging to the rnd superfamily of secondary transporters, a channel-forming outer membrane factor , and a periplasmic membrane fusion protein  to achieve the direct extrusion of substrates across the two membranes of gram-negative bacteria  <cit> .

the major p. aeruginosa rnd-type efflux pump, mexab-oprm provides the bacterium natural resistance to a broad spectrum of antibiotics and is not just for antimicrobial resistance  <cit> . on the other hand, it was reported that mexab-oprm participates in the efflux of acyl-hsls from p. aeruginosa <cit> . these reports indicated that p. aeruginosa cells are not freely permeable to 3-oxo-c12-hsl in contrast to c4-hsl. instead, it was shown that mexab-oprm is involved in the active efflux of 3-oxo-c12-hsl  <cit> . furthermore, a mexab-oprm deletion mutant has a decreased capacity to invade or transmigrate across mdck cells  <cit> . it was considered that qs-regulated virulence factors are affected by the mexab-oprm efflux pump activity.

in this study, we hypothesized that mexab-oprm of p. aeruginosa might function in the selection of acyl-hsls, and we provide evidence to support this hypothesis. to examine the qs responses to several exogenous acyl-hsls in p. aeruginosa, herein we focused on the las system because this system controls the rhl system and the pqs system hierarchically in p. aeruginosa <cit> . these studies indicate that mexab-oprm prevents the access of exogenous 3-oxo-acyl-hsls to lasr, and thus lasr binds specifically to 3-oxo-c12-hsl. the results demonstrate a new qs regulation mechanism via the efflux system mexab-oprm in p. aeruginosa.

RESULTS
mexab-oprm selects acyl-hsls and regulates quorum sensing
to determine whether or not the expression of the qs regulatory pathway in p. aeruginosa is influenced by exogenous acyl-hsls substituted with 3-oxo-acyl groups with carbon numbers of  <dig> to  <dig>  lasb transcription was measured by using a lasb promoter-gfp reporter system. as a result, lasb transcription was most strongly induced by 3-oxo-c12-hsl, which is a cognate acyl-hsl in p. aeruginosa kg <dig>  . moreover, transcription of lasb resulted in a response to exogenous acyl-hsls substituted with 3-oxo-acyl-groups with 8– <dig> carbons. on the other hand, we analyzed the effect of c4-hsl on lasb expression. the results indicated that c4-hsl was not involved in lasb expression . it was previously shown that c4-hsl did not affect lasr activation  <cit> . our data agree with results in this report. these results indicate that regulation of qs in p. aeruginosa is affected by 3-oxo-cn-hsls besides 3-oxo-c12-hsl.

to determine whether or not the qs system in p. aeruginosa is regulated by mexab-oprm, lasb transcription was measured by using kg <dig> . lasb transcription was induced to different levels by 3-oxo-cn-hsls with acyl chain lengths of c <dig> to  <dig> in kg <dig>  and compared to the results for the qs-negative mutant . in this case, 3-oxo-c9-hsl  and 3-oxo-c10-hsl  in particular were found to induce lasb expression. lasb elastase activity was measured by using a fret-agla-based elastase assay, similar to the lasb-gfp reporter assay . the results showed that lasb activity agreed with the lasb transcription results .

the results indicate that the responses to 3-oxo-cn-hsls were affected by deletion of the mexab-oprm efflux pump, and mexab-oprm played a role in the efflux of 3-oxo-cn-hsls with acyl chain lengths of c <dig> to  <dig> including 3-oxo-c12-hsl. however, the qs response was more strongly induced by 3-oxo-c9-hsl or 3-oxo-c10-hsl than by 3-oxo-c12-hsl in the mexab-oprm deletion mutant. these results suggest that the rates of 3-oxo-c9-hsl and 3-oxo-c10-hsl uptake were higher than that of 3-oxo-c12-hsl uptake, or that 3-oxo-c9-hsl and 3-oxo-c10-hsl clearance rates may be lower than that of 3-oxo-c12-hsl. alternatively, the binding affinities of 3-oxo-c9-hsl and 3-oxo-c10-hsl to lasr were stronger than that of 3-oxo-c12-hsl.

mexab-oprm plays a role in the efflux of 3-oxo-cn-hsls in p. aeruginosa
it is known that mexab-oprm is expressed constitutively in wild-type p. aeruginosa, and mexab-oprm exports a variety of substrates  <cit> . p. aeruginosa mexb has high sequence similarity  with e. coli acrb. the crystal structure of acrb has been solved  <cit> . the efficiency of substrate binding most likely depends on the volume and the side-chain arrangements of the binding pocket  <cit> . we attempted to model the mexb three-dimensional structure using the crystal structure of acrb from e. coli by s. murakami et al.  <cit> . phenylalanine residues in the pore domain and hydrophobic amino acid residues in the vestibule domain were assumed to play important roles in the transport of substrates. to analyze whether a mutation in the pore domain  and a mutation in the vestibule domain  of mexb are important for extrusion of substrates, the plasmid-borne mexb gene was mutagenized to obtain these single-amino-acid substitutions . western immunoblotting subsequently confirmed that expression of wild-type and mutant mexbs was equivalent . lasb transcription was more strongly induced by acyl-hsls in the strain carrying the mexb phe136ala mutation compared to the strain carrying wild-type mexb. on the other hand, lasb expression in response to acyl-hsls in the mexb asp681ala mutant was similar to the lasb expression pattern in the mexb deletion mutant . lasb expression was affected by the mutation of these residues at positions  <dig> and  <dig> in mexb. these results indicate that mexb is necessary to extrude acyl-hsls.

furthermore, the responses to acyl-hsls were analyzed in the presence of the mexab-oprm specific inhibitor abi . this analysis was carried out by using a lasb promoter-gfp reporter system with the p. aeruginosa cognate signal, 3-oxo-c12-hsl, and signals that strongly induce lasb expression, 3-oxo-c9-hsl and 3-oxo-c10-hsl. the results showed that the response to 3-oxo-c9-hsl or 3-oxo-c10-hsl was increased by abi in a concentration-dependent manner in the mexab-oprm activated strain . however, the response to 3-oxo-c12-hsl was affected only by the addition of  <dig>  μm abi . the analysis of mexab-oprm inhibition by abi showed that the effect of abi concentration on the response of 3-oxo-c12-hsl was lower than that of 3-oxo-c9-hsl or 3-oxo-c10-hsl . in contrast, the response was unaffected at a range of experimental concentrations of abi in the qs-negative mexb deletion strain . these results indicate that mexab-oprm extrudes 3-oxo-cn-hsls from inside the cell, and that there are differences in the rates of efflux of 3-oxo-acyl-hsls via mexab-oprm.

the transcript levels of the mexb genes in the presence or absence of 3-oxo-c12-hsl were measured by semi-quantitative real-time reverse transcription-pcr . 3-oxo-c12-hsl had no effect on the mexb expression level in the qs-negative strain , so mexab-oprm is regulated through a qs-independent mechanism.

lasr is activated by accumulated intracellular noncognate acyl-hsls
it is known that the overexpressed qs regulator trar responds to a variety of autoinducers in agrobacterium tumefaciens <cit> . thus it appears that overexpressed regulatory proteins mis-respond to acyl-hsl signals. in the mexaboprm mutant, accumulated acyl-hsls may be bound to lasr. to verify whether or not lasr responds to 3-oxo-cn-hsls  in the mexab-oprm deletion mutant, transcription of lasb in response to 3-oxo-c9-hsl, 3-oxo-c10-hsl or 3-oxo-c12-hsl was analyzed by using the lasr inhibitor, patulin . lasb induction by 3-oxo-c9-hsl, 3-oxo-c10-hsl or 3-oxo-c12-hsl decreased with or without mexab-oprm in a patulin-concentration-dependent manner . these results indicate that 3-oxo-cn-hsls were able to bind to lasr and modulate its activity. furthermore, the lasb induction by 3-oxo-c9-hsl with the addition of 10 μm patulin decreased to 10% of the level in the absence of patulin . the addition of 3-oxo-c10-hsl or 3-oxo-c12-hsl with patulin decreased the lasb expression levels to 50% and 60%, respectively . these data indicate that the order of lasr-binding affinity for 3-oxo-cn-hsls is: 3-oxo-c12-hsl > 3-oxo-c10-hsl > 3-oxo-c9-hsl. these results suggest that acyl-hsl entry into the cell is likely to be passive and acyl-hsls were extruded by mexab-oprm. as a result of the accumulation of these acyl-hsls in the mexab-oprm mutant, a non-natural response was induced.

selection of a bacterial language by mexab-oprm in bacterial communication
as we have shown here, p. aeruginosa responds to several 3-oxo-cn-hsls in vitro. however, it was not known whether this in vitro response to 3-oxo-cn-hsls was equivalent to a response to 3-oxo-cn-hsls in a natural environment. when grown in close proximity to the p. aeruginosa wild-type strain on lb plates, kg <dig>  carrying pmqg <dig>  exhibited bright-green fluorescence, but the p. aeruginosa reporter strain near the qs-negative strain, kg <dig> , did not show gfp fluorescence . these results clearly demonstrated that physiological concentrations of ahls derived from pao <dig> were detectable as gfp fluorescence in kg <dig>  carrying pmqg <dig>  . to examine the effect of mexab-oprm on heterogeneous bacterial communication, p. aeruginosa was co-cultivated with c. violaceump. chlororaphisp. agglomeransp. fluorescens or v. anguillarum . these bacteria are known to produce cognate acyl-hsls  <cit> . it was shown that lasb expression by p. aeruginosaΔmexb was only strongly induced during co-cultivation with v. anguillarum . 3-oxo-c10-hsl production by v. anguillarum was confirmed by tlc assays using chromobacterium violaceum vir <dig>  in agreement with a previous report   <cit> .

these results indicated cross-talk via 3-oxo-c10-hsl between p. aeruginosa and v. anguillarum with the p. aeruginosa mexab-oprm deletion strain. the transport of acyl-hsls by mexab-oprm plays a role in regulation of cell-cell communication.

discussion
the bacterial communication qs system plays many roles in the regulation of growth, biofilms, virulence and pathogenesis. gram-negative bacteria produce specific acyl-hsls, and then respond to specific signals. in p. aeruginosa, qs regulates many genes in response to the cognate 3-oxo-c12-hsl. the selection of cognate acyl-hsls from among several autoinducers is a bacterial adaptation to environmental conditions. we showed that p. aeruginosa qs responds to exogenous acyl-hsls substituted with 3-oxo-acyl-groups with between  <dig> and  <dig> carbons . p. aeruginosa lasr responds to a variety of ahls with varying acyl chain lengths and activated lasr regulates the expression of many genes. an a. tumefaciens or c. violaceum qs reporter strain, which recognizes a broad range of acyl-hsls, has been utilized to detect acyl-hsls in many studies  <cit> . based on these reports, it was suggested that trar family proteins including lasr respond to several acyl-hsls in un-natural conditions, in which the trar family proteins are overexpressed.

the response to and specificity of the cognate bacterial language were analyzed in p. aeruginosa and b. cepacia <cit> . these results suggest that bacteria have a selection mechanism for acyl-hsls besides recognition of acyl-hsls by the trar family. in fact, lasr was activated by 3-oxo-c9-hsl or 3-oxo-c10-hsl in the same way as 3-oxo-c12-hsl in the p. aeruginosa mexb deletion mutant . furthermore, the responses to acyl-hsls were analyzed using a site-directed mexb mutant . these data indicated that lasb expression was affected by the substitutions phe136ala or asp681ala in mexb . in particular, the mexb phe136ala mutation affected the response to acyl-hsls similar to that of the mexb deletion mutant . this result suggested that phe <dig> in mexb played an important role in substrate extrusion by mexb. on the other hand, lasb expression increased in the mexb asp681ala mutant compared with wild-type mexb. this result suggested that the mexbasp681ala mutation induced the extrusion activity of mexb. recently, the crystal structure of mexb from p. aeruginosa was resolved and suggests a mechanism for substrate transport by mexb  <cit> . the residues at positions  <dig> in mexb are located in between the pn <dig> subdomain and the pn <dig> subdomain  <cit> . the residues at positions  <dig> in mexb are located in the pc <dig> subdomain  <cit> . the pc <dig> domain plays an important role in the formation of the entrance channel  <cit> . these data support the suggestion that phe <dig> in mexb plays an important role in substrate extrusion by mexb.

mexab-oprm inhibition by abi showed that the lasr activation by 3-oxo-c9-hsl or 3-oxo-c10-hsl was similar to that in the mexb deletion mutant . the effect of abi concentration on the response to 3-oxo-c12-hsl was lower than that of 3-oxo-c9-hsl or 3-oxo-c10-hsl . these data suggest that the difference in the efflux ratio of 3-oxo-acyl-hsls via mexab-oprm may be due to differences in the acyl-side chain lengths; these differences in the efflux ratio were important in the response to the cognate 3-oxo-c12-hsl in p. aeruginosa. however, we have to consider the degradation of acyl-hsls by qs quenching lactonases or acylases, as well as lasr acyl-hsl binding activity in the acyl-hsls response in p. aeruginosa. previous studies showed that the substrate specificity of qs quenching enzymes was broad  <cit> . in addition, we showed the lasr responds to several acyl-hsls by using the patulin competition assay . these results support the hypothesis that p. aeruginosa needs to use the acyl-hsls selection system of mexab-oprm in order to respond to cognate acyl-hsls in mixed bacterial culture conditions. furthermore, it is known that the concentrations of acyl-hsls are high at high cell densities and lasr binds its specific acyl-hsl to activate the lasr regulon  <cit> . it was also suggested that mexab-oprm regulates the concentration of acyl-hsls in the cell via acyl-hsls extrusion. the regulation of acyl-hsls concentration via mexab-oprm may therefore be important in the p. aeruginosa qs response.

the p. aeruginosa mexaboprm deletion mutant responded to 3-oxo-c10-hsl produced by v. anguillarum during p. aeruginosav. anguillarum co-cultivation . these results indicate that intracellular acyl-hsls exported by mexab-oprm regulated qs in p. aeruginosa. it has also been reported that the rnd-type efflux pump bpeab-oprb in b. pseudomallei is closely involved in bacterial communication  <cit> . these findings suggest that rnd-type efflux pumps have a common ability for several acyl-hsl efflux systems. this selection mechanism may result in improved survival in mixed culture conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
this work demonstrates that mexab-oprm does not control the binding of lasr to 3-oxo-cn-hsls but rather the accessibility of non-cognate acyl-hsls to lasr in p. aeruginosa . furthermore, the results indicate that qs is regulated by mexab-oprm . mexab-oprm not only influences multidrug resistance, but also selects acyl-hsls and regulates qs in p. aeruginosa. the results demonstrate a new qs regulation mechanism via the efflux system mexab-oprm in p. aeruginosa.

