BACKGROUND
neogastropoda  <cit> , also known as stenoglossa  <cit> , comprises a highly diverse group of predatory marine shelled gastropods with more than  <dig>  living species  <cit>  including e.g., cone snails , balers , purple dye murex snails , augers , and whelks   <cit> . neogastropoda are dominant in many benthic environments, and attain their maximum diversity in the tropical seas  <cit> . the most prominent feature of neogastropoda is their active predatory behavior , which was achieved after important morphological changes including e.g., the elongation of the siphonal canal, a shift in the mouth opening to a terminal position on the head, and the formation of a well-developed proboscis  <cit> .

ever since thiele  <cit> , neogastropoda have been considered a natural group, clearly differentiated from other caenogastropoda. the monophyly of the group is widely accepted among morphologists  <cit> , and it is based on several synapomorphies mostly related with the anatomy of the digestive system  <cit> . current classifications of neogastropoda generally recognize up to six superfamilies: buccinoidea, muricoidea, olivoidea, pseudolivoidea, conoidea, and cancellarioidea  <cit>  . phylogenetic relationships among neogastropod superfamilies based on morphological characters are rather unstable, and for instance, cancellarioidea  <cit>  or buccinoidea  <cit>  have been alternatively proposed as the sister group of the remaining neogastropoda.

thus far, molecular phylogenetic analyses based on relatively short fragments of both nuclear and mitochondrial  dna recovered rather unresolved topologies, which contradicted morphological evidence, and failed to support the monophyly of neogastropoda  <cit> . for instance, the most complete molecular phylogenetic study thus far performed on this subject  <cit>  was based on a multigene data set that included both nuclear  and mt  sequences of  <dig> caenogastropoda. the reconstructed tree failed to recover the monophyly of neogastropoda, and two littorinimorpha lineages  were recovered as the closest sister groups of two neogastropoda lineages , although with low statistical support. in contrast, more recently, a phylogenetic analysis combining both morphological, and molecular data  recovered neogastropoda as monophyletic  <cit>  stimulating the debate.

the available fossil record of neogastropoda is quite thorough, and supports a widely accepted evolutionary scenario of an early cretaceous origin of the group followed by two rapid diversification rounds in the late cretaceous and the paleocene, respectively  <cit> . the successive bursts of cladogenesis in the evolutionary history of the group could be hampering successful recovery of phylogenetic relationships within the group. given the relatively short internodes connecting main superfamilies of neogastropoda and related caenogastropod lineages, it seems worthwhile gathering and analyzing larger sequence data sets in order to obtain more phylogenetic informative sites for trying to resolve the question at hand.

phylogenetic analyses based on complete mt sequence data have proved to enhance resolution, and statistical confidence of inferred phylogenetic trees in vertebrates when compared with analyses based only on partial mt genes  <cit> . within gastropods, mitogenomic data have demonstrated to be useful in recovering phylogenetic relationships within opisthobranchs , and in demonstrating the non-monophyly of pulmonates   <cit> . moreover, gastropod mitochondrial genomes show a wide variety of gene arrangements, which, if shared-derived, could be used to infer phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . hence, sequencing and analyzing mt genome data seems to be a promising tool for further addressing the controversy on neogastropod monophyly and phylogenetic relationships. nevertheless, it is important to note that phylogenetic analyses based on mt genomes show limitations , and can render odd results that are incongruent with other evidences  <cit> . unorthodox phylogenetic relationships based on mt genome data can be explained as artefacts due to e.g. incorrect rooting  <cit>  or low signal-to-noise ratio  <cit> , but are difficult to correct. hence, it is widely accepted that phylogenetic results derived from mt genome data need to be confirmed with evidence based on nuclear genes, which have a slower evolutionary rate, and may show in some cases better phylogenetic performance . thus far, however, only few nuclear markers such as e.g. 18s rrna, 28s rrna, ef1-α, and histone h <dig> have been developed for phylogenetic studies in gastropods with limited success  <cit> .

to date, only five entire mt genomes of neogastropoda have been determined: conus textile nc_ <dig>   <cit> ; lophiotoma cerithiformis nc_ <dig>   <cit> ; ilyanassa obsoleta nc_ <dig>   <cit> , thais clavigera nc_ <dig> <cit>  and rapana venosa nc_ <dig> <cit> . these mt genomes represent only two  out of the six currently recognized superfamilies of neogastropoda. moreover, no mt genomes are available for any of the putative caenogastropod sister group lineages of neogastropoda.

in this study, we sequenced the entire mt genome of another seven neogastropod species that represent four out of the six currently recognized superfamilies , as well as a representative of tonnoidea , one of the proposed sister groups to the neogastropoda  <cit> . in addition, we sequenced a fragment of approximately  <dig>  base pairs of the mt genome of a representative of calyptraeoidea , another potentially closely related taxon of neogastropoda  <cit> . the new sequence data were used  to reconstruct the phylogeny of neogastropoda, and test its monophyly. the phylogenetic performance of individual mt genes was also investigated, and compared with that of whole mt genomes. in addition, evolution of mitochondrial gene arrangements within gastropoda was revisited in the light of the new mt genomic data.

RESULTS
mitochondrial genome organization
the complete mt genomes of seven neogastropods  and of cymatium parthenopeum  were sequenced. the total lengths of the new sequences ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  bp . all newly sequenced complete mt genomes encoded for  <dig> protein-coding,  <dig> transfer rna , and two ribosomal rna  genes. all neogastropod mt genomes shared the same gene order with only two exceptions :  the trns  gene from fusiturris similis was positioned between nad <dig> and cob genes, whereas in the other neogastropod mt genomes is found between cob and trnt;  the position of the trnv in terebra dimidiata was located between trns  and trnt, whereas in the other neogastropod mt genomes is found between both rrna genes. the mt genome of the tonnoidean cymatium parthenopeum presented the neogastropod mt genome consensus gene order . the partial sequence of the mt genome of calyptraea chinensis  was  <dig>  bp in length, and comprised  <dig> out of the  <dig> mt genes. the deduced gene order of this partial mt genome was consistent with the neogastropod mt genome consensus gene order ) . moreover, the gene order of the partial sequence of littorina saxatilis  mt genome, which is available in genbank  .

for each, total size of the mitochondrial genome, overall base composition, % of a-t-rich sequences, size of the potential origin of replication, and size range of gene overlapping are presented. sizes are expressed as bp.

all genes of the newly sequenced complete mt genomes used atg as start codon except nad <dig>  which used other start codons . in these mt genomes, only eigth out of  <dig> genes ended with incomplete stop codons . two noncoding regions were found in all analyzed mitochondrial genomes between trnf and cox <dig> , and between atp <dig> and trnm . another two noncoding regions were found in all analyzed mt genomes except cancellaria cancellata between cox <dig> and cox <dig> , and between cox <dig> and trnk . in addition, a large noncoding region located between nad <dig> and trnp  was found in cancellaria cancellata. the potential origin of replication was located between trnf and cox <dig>  by comparison with other gastropod mt genomes. instances of overlapping between adjacent genes occurred in all newly sequenced mt genomes . the cox <dig> and trnd genes overlap in every genome except that of calyptraea chinensis whereas trnw and trnq overlap in every genome except that of cymbium olla. overall base compositions of the newly sequenced mt genomes are shown in table  <dig> 

phylogenetic relationships of neogastropoda based on complete mt genome sequences
phylogenetic relationships among gastropod main lineages were inferred based on complete mt genome data both at the amino acid  and nucleotide  level using lottia digitalis , and haliotis rubra  as outgroups, respectively. both data sets were analyzed under maximum likelihood  and bayesian inference .

both, the ml  and the bi  trees that were reconstructed based on the 13-protein data set failed to recover the monophyly of neogastropoda  due to the inclusion of cymatium parthenopeum  within the group with strong support , and 100% bayesian posterior probability , respectively). the monophyly of the superfamily conoidea was only recovered in the bi analysis . both, ml and bi analyses failed to recover the monophyly of the superfamily muricoidea . the status of other neogastropod superfamilies could not be tested in the present study since only one family represented them. internal branches connecting neogastropod families were rather short, and phylogenetic relationships among superfamilies were rather unresolved. only the relative most basal position of cancellarioidea with respect to other superfamilies was strongly supported by both, ml and bi analyses . at a lower taxonomic level, the monophyly of all analyzed neogastropod families was strongly supported by the 13-protein data set with the exception of turridae, which was strongly rejected  due to the inclusion of terebridae .

phylogenetic relationships within caenogastropoda were also analyzed based on complete mt genome nucleotide sequence data . neogastropoda were not recovered as a monophyletic group due to the inclusion of the tonnoidean cymatium parthenopeum, which was placed as sister group of cancellariidae in both, ml  and bi  analyses . however, this result was only strongly supported by bi when third codon positions of all protein coding genes were removed from the analysis . both, ml and bi analyses based on the allnuc data set recovered connoidea as a monophyletic group but without strong statistical support. in contrast, both ml and bi analyses rejected the monophyly of muricoidea because volutidae failed to group together with muricidae . this result only received strong bootstrap support when third codon positions of all protein coding genes were removed from the analysis . phylogenetic relationships among superfamilies were largely unresolved in the reconstructed tree based on the allnuc data set .

phylogenetic relationships of neogastropoda based on partial mt genome sequences
to further test the monophyly of neogastropoda, we analyzed a 4-protein data set that included two extra littorinimorpha species , using lottia digitalis as outgroup . both, the ml  and bi  reconstructed trees could not recover the monophyly neither of neogastropoda nor of littorinimorpha, albeit these results lacked statistical support . as in the phylogenetic analyses based on the 13-protein and allnuc data sets, the monophyly of each analyzed family was recovered with strong support with the exception of that of turridae . phylogenetic relationships among families were largely unresolved, and monophyly at the superfamily level could not be recovered.

phylogenetic relationships of neogastropoda based on combined mt and nuclear sequences
phylogenetic relationships within caenogastropoda were further evaluated based on a data set  that concatenated the complete nucleotide sequences of all mt genes with partial ones of four nuclear genes . the reconstructed ml  and bi  trees based on the all combined data set  were congruent with those based on the 13-protein and all nuc data sets . they only differed in the relative phylogenetic position of conidae, . the nucleotide sequences of the genes of the four mt protein data set were also combined with partial sequences of four nuclear genes  <cit>  into a single data set . the reconstructed ml  and bi  trees were rather unresolved. among analyzed littorinimorpha lineages, littorinidae and calyptraeidae were recovered in a relative basal position, and only ranellidae  was placed within neogastropoda, as sister group of cancellariidae . conoidea was recovered as a monophyletic group, although without statistical support.

testing alternative phylogenetic hypotheses
given that phylogenetic analyses based on the most resolving  data set failed to recover consistently the monophyly of several traditional morphological groups including neogastropoda, conoidea, muricoidea, and turridae, we further tested their validity evaluating different alternative topologies . we also tested several alternative phylogenetic hypotheses on neogastropod relationships previously reported in the literature . alternative topologies were built imposing constraints on the ml topology . for instance, the monophyly of neogastropoda was imposed by forcing the tonnoidean to be positioned in a basal position with respect to the remaining neogastropoda, and by keeping identical all remaining phylogenetic relationships as recovered in the ml tree.

the sh, au and kh tests rejected the following alternative topologies:  the ml hypothesis of colgan ;  the morphology-based phylogeny of kantor  <cit> , and  monophyly of neogastropoda, and all analyzed superfamilies/families within the group. in contrast, several alternative topologies were found to be not significantly different from the ml tree:  the monophyly of conoidea;  the morphology-based phylogeny adapted from ponder and lindberg  <cit> ;  the monophyly of turridae, and  the monophyly of muricoidea . finally, it is noteworthy that the monophyly of neogastropoda was rejected under the au and kh tests but not by the sh test .

phylogenetic performance of mitochondrial genes
ml phylogenies were reconstructed at the nucleotide level based on each of the mt protein-coding , each the two rrna genes, and a combined data set including all mt trna genes. the number of congruent internal branches  between the individual phylogenies, and the whole-mt genome topology  was used as a measure of the phylogenetic performance of mt genes . none of the individual gene analysis recovered the  <dig> nodes  of the reference topology . individual genes typically recovered between 2– <dig>  and 0– <dig> congruent nodes to the reference topology with bootstrap supports above/equal or below 50%, respectively. the three nodes  were consistently recovered by most genes whereas others  were recovered only by 1– <dig> genes. the cox <dig>  atp <dig>  and nad <dig> genes recovered the highest number of congruent nodes, whereas the combined trna genes cox <dig>  and atp <dig> showed the lowest phylogenetic performance.

** branches with ml bootstrap proportions  ≥ <dig> in a total of  <dig> of the reference topology  complete mitochondrial genome)

* branches with ml bp ≤ <dig> in a total of  <dig> correspondent to the reference topology

 genes are ranked by the number of congruent branches with the reference topology

 number of branches with bp≥ <dig> congruent with the reference topology

 number of branches with bp≤ <dig> congruent with the reference topology

a-l branches in the reference topology 

discussion
monophyly of neogastropoda
recent molecular phylogenetic analyses  are challenging our view of gastropod systematics and many traditional groups , widely accepted as monophyletic, are now seriously questioned  <cit> . as a result, a general perception is emerging that many morphological characters previously used to infer phylogenetic relationships among gastropod main lineages may be homoplasious  <cit> , and that gastropod phylogeny needs to be revisited. for instance, our phylogenetic analyses recover vetigastropoda as the closest living sister group to caenogastropoda with strong quantitative support. this result challenges the traditional hypothesis that proposes heterobranchia  as the sister group to caenogastropoda  <cit> . the addition of nuclear data is needed to further confirm these new phylogenetic hypotheses.

despite their remarkable present diversity, neogastropods have been traditionally recognized as a natural group because they share several key morphological features  <cit> . for instance, a recent phylogeny of caenogastropoda based on  <dig> taxa and  <dig> morphological characters  recovered neogastropods as a monophyletic group with maximal support  <cit> . in contrast, molecular phylogenetic studies have generally rendered rather unresolved caenogastropod phylogenies that challenged, albeit weakly, the widely accepted monophyly of neogastropoda .

the molecular phylogenetic analyses performed in this study recovered different littorinimorpha species  within neogastropoda, thus questioning the monophyly of both main caenogastropod lineages. however, among these results, only the inclusion of the tonnoidean species cymatium parthenopeum within neogastropoda in the phylogeny based on the 13-protein data set received strong quantitative support . depending on the data set, tonnoidea has been placed as closely related to neogastropoda , or within neogastropoda in a relatively basal position either alone , as sister group of volutidae , or as sister group of cancellariidae .

the unresolved conflict on the monophyly of neogastropoda between morphological and molecular phylogenies suggests either that shared morphological characters of neogastropoda are homoplasious  or that, thus far, the analyzed molecular data sets were not informative enough for resolving the phylogenetic question at hand. regarding the possibility that morphological homoplasy is commonplace in gastropods, recent studies on the embryonic development of the valve of leiblein  in buccinidae  <cit>  and muricidae  <cit>  demonstrated different origins of this organ in both neogastropod families. these findings indicated that this synapomorphy of neogastropoda could be uncertain  <cit> , and prompt for the re-evaluation of other synapomorphies defining neogastropoda.

regarding the possibility that molecular data sets need to be improved, the phylogenetic analyses performed here show that the effort in increasing the number of analyzed positions with respect to previous studies was not enough to achieve conclusive results regarding phylogenetic relationships within neogastropoda. internal branches connecting main caenogastropod/neogastropod lineages were relatively short. such phylogenetic pattern is in agreement with the fossil record, which supports a rapid radiation at the origin of neogastropoda  <cit> . therefore, it would be expected low resolution at this part of the caenogastropod tree regardless of the amount of sampled characters . it is also noteworthy that internal branches in the phylogenetic tree based on the 13-protein data set  presented higher bootstrap support than the ones in the phylogenetic tree based on the allnuc data set . this result is in agreement with the preferential use of amino acids to reconstruct deep phylogenies because they  have a larger character-state space compare to nucleotides,  show a slower rate of evolution compare to silent substitutions, and  are less influenced by compositional bias  <cit> ;  <cit> ;  <cit> . our phylogenetic analyses show that addressing the question on the monophyly of neogastropoda is tightly connected with resolving phylogenetic relationships among caenogastropoda main lineages, and hence that future phylogenetic studies based on complete mitochondrial genome sequence data will require a thorough representation of all caenogastropoda main lineages.

phylogenetic relationships within neogastropoda
all phylogenetic analyses agreed on the monophyly of the different analyzed neogastropod families except turridae . a recent molecular study  <cit>  based on partial mitochondrial and nuclear genes, and a rather thorough sampling of both families also supported this view. at higher taxonomic levels, the phylogenetic analysis of the different data sets rendered  rather unresolved topologies;  showed markedly different phylogenetic relationships based on each data set, and  failed to recover the monophyly of neogastropod superfamilies. only the phylogeny based on the 13-protein data achieved some degree of resolution regarding superfamily phylogenetic relationships. according to this phylogeny, cancellarioidea occupies a basal position with respect to remaining neogastropods. this basal position was already suggested in some previous morphological studies  <cit> . in particular, it has been shown that the gland of leiblein is separated from the oesophagus in all neogastropods but cancellarioidea, which retains the primitive condition  <cit> . other phylogenetic studies recovered buccinoidea or nassariidae+mitridae as the most basal neogastropod superfamily based on morphology or combined morphological + molecular data sets, respectively  <cit> . a phylogeny based on partial mt and nuclear genes  <cit>  recovered a basal politomy at this level of the caenogastropod tree, and leaved the controversy unsettled since either volutidae  or cancellariidae  could be the most basal neogastropod lineages.

both, ml and bi trees based on the 13-protein data set suggest that the monophyly of the superfamily muricoidea is doubtful because muricidae and volutidae are not recovered together. all performed phylogenetic analyses based on other data sets also failed to recover muricoidea as a monophyletic group. this result was already suggested in several previous studies  <cit> . the status of the superfamily conoidea remains uncertain. the bi tree based on the 13-protein data set , as well as ml and bi trees based on the allnuc data set recovered the families turridae, terebridae and conidae together, albeit with no strong statistical support. ml based on the 13-protein data set fail to recover the monophyly of conoidea but this hypothesis could not be confidently rejected by statistical tests. overall, our results indicate that neogastropod relationships are far from being settled .

phylogenetic performance of mitochondrial genes
the relative merit of the different genes in recovering a phylogeny is associated with their respective substitution rates, and thus the taxonomic level at which higher resolution is achieved. several studies evaluated the phylogenetic performance of mt genes in recovering vertebrate phylogeny  <cit> . according to these studies, nad <dig> and nad <dig> were ranked generally as the best performing mt genes, whereas atp <dig>  nad <dig>  and nad4l genes revealed the lowest phylogenetic performance. in this study, we evaluated the phylogenetic performance of individual mt genes in recovering caenogastropod phylogeny, and found some remarkable differences when compared with results from the above-mentioned studies in vertebrates. the gene cox <dig> showed the largest number of congruent branches with the whole-genome reference topology, whereas it was never recovered as having the best phylogenetic performance in vertebrates  <cit> . in our study, the mt trna genes showed the lowest performance, whereas in mueller  <cit>  these genes demonstrated a medium ability to recover the reference topology. the mt gene cox <dig> also showed a very low performance in recovering caenogastropod phylogeny, whereas it was ranked as a good gene for recovering the expected vertebrate tree. all studies agreed in pointing mt atp <dig> as having low phylogenetic performance. in any case, combining all mt genes into a single data set always rendered the most resolved trees, supporting the use of complete mt genome data for addressing caenogatropod phylogeny.

evolution of mitochondrial gene order of neogastropoda
shared mt gene orders may be useful for phylogenetic inference particularly at higher taxonomic levels  <cit> . gastropods exhibit an important degree of variation in mt gene organization compared with other animals  <cit> . main events of gene rearrangement occurred at the origin of patellogastropoda and heterobranchia, whereas fewer changes occurred between cephalopods  and the ancestors of vetigastropoda  and caenogastropoda . within heterobranchia, gene order seems to be relatively conserved and gene rearrangements are mostly related with transposition of trna genes  <cit> . all eight genomes sequenced in this study exhibit an unusually conserved gene order only contradicted by two unrelated trna translocations found in fusiturris similis and terebra dimidiata . given the high rates of gene rearrangement among gastropod main lineages, the conserved gene order found between all neogastropod and littorinimorpha mt genomes suggests a shared evolutionary history between the analyzed lineages.

CONCLUSIONS
as more molecular data are analyzed, the monophyly and phylogenetic relationships of neogastropoda are emerging as rather elusive evolutionary questions to be resolved. this is likely due to a rapid origin of neogastropoda lineages back into the early cretaceous. our phylogenetic analyses based on mt genome sequence data confirm previous molecular studies that contradicted the monophyly of neogastropoda. this group used to be considered well-supported based on several morphological synapomorphies  <cit> . however, recent studies question the validity of some of these synapomorphies suggesting that neogastropoda could be an assembly of taxa erroneously grouped on the basis of convergent morphological characters  <cit> . if confirmed, molecular data may become particularly useful for determining the caenogastropoda phylogeny. in this regard, future studies testing the monophyly of neogastropoda based on mt genome sequence data will need to include a thorough sampling of main caenogastropod lineages. our ml and bi analyses based on the 13-protein data set, produced topologies better resolved than previous studies using fragments of nuclear and mt sequence data. moreover, results of phylogenetic performance indicated that none of the individual mt genes recovered the whole-genome reference ml tree, which may indicate that larger data sets may provide more informative sites for this particular phylogenetic question. however, in parallel to the steady accumulation of new mt genome data, new nuclear data  need also to be gathered, and only the combination of both types of sequence data might render better results.

