BACKGROUND
plants undergo continuous exposure to various biotic and abiotic stresses in their natural environment. to survive under such conditions, plants activate signaling cascades that lead to the accumulation of endogenous hormones which, in turn, trigger the induction of defense responses. abscisic acid  is a small, lipophilic phytohormone that regulates many important aspects of plant growth and development and plays a crucial role in cellular responses to environmental stresses such as drought, cold, salt, wounding, uv radiation, and pathogen attack  <cit> . it is ubiquitous in lower and higher plants and has also been found in algae  <cit> , fungi  <cit> , and even mammalian brain tissue  <cit> .

many studies have been carried out that characterize aba signaling pathways and physiological responses to aba in higher plants. mutational analyses in arabidopsis have led to the identification of several genes that are involved in aba signaling pathways. the proteins involved in aba signaling pathways include g proteins, protein phosphatases, and protein kinases  <cit> . target proteins that respond to aba can be directly involved in cellular protection or can act as transcriptional factors that link extracellular signaling to the regulation of transcription in eukaryotic cells an important part of the physiological response to aba is achieved through gene expression and protein synthesis. transcriptome analyses have shown that aba dramatically alters gene expression. more than  <dig> aba-regulated genes were identified by random mass sequencing of arabidopsis transcripts  <cit> . proteome research has also indicated that exogenous aba can induce the synthesis of many proteins in rice seedlings. these proteins are involved in signaling pathways, transcription, cell growth and division, photosynthesis, protein synthesis and trafficking, and defense/stress-response, among others  <cit> . to date however, relatively little is known regarding aba signaling pathways in bryophytes.

bryophytes were the first land plants and they have been a powerful experimental tool and model for the elucidation of complex biological processes  <cit> . evolutionary studies have indicated that bryophytes may form a sister clade with tracheophytes . analysis of organisms from these ancient clades can make significant contributions to understanding the development  <cit> , physiology  <cit> , phylogenetics  <cit>  and stress-induced cellular responses among plants  <cit> . recently, comparison of the draft genome sequence of p. patens with the genomes of flowering plants revealed evolutionary insights into the conquest of land by plants. furthermore, bryophyte physiology is regulated by many of the same phytohormones used by higher plants  and uses similar mechanisms of intracellular messaging  found in higher plants  <cit> .

in recent years, the moss p. patens become a new model for studying the phytohormone aba. aba is involved in abiotic stress adaptation of p. patens, since exogenously applied aba increases freezing tolerance  <cit>  and increased endogenous aba levels are detected upon osmotic stress treatment  <cit> . moreover, plants like p. patens comprising both protonemata and gametophores will tolerate complete desiccation following slow drying, if first pretreated with aba, a process that is associated with a substantial increase in intracellular levels of sucrose  <cit>  as is cold acclimation leading to freezing tolerance  <cit> . aba-induced stress tolerance in p. patens is also accompanied by increased expression of stress-related genes  <cit> . however, the role of aba or the signaling pathways in response to environmental stresses in the moss p. patens has yet to be elucidated.

here, proteomics has been used to increase understanding of aba signaling pathways and defense responses in p. patens. we have examined the global changes of proteins in p. patens following aba treatment using two dimensional gel electrophoresis  coupled with lc-ms/ms. sixty-five proteins have been identified as being up- or down-regulated in response to aba treatment. these proteins are involved in metabolism and energy, defense responses, protein trafficking and storage, transcription, and signaling pathways, as well as others. our study reveals the complex signaling pathways and defense responses by which aba functions in p. patens. it also suggests that molecular responses to aba may be highly conserved between higher plant species and bryophytes.

RESULTS
proteome profile changes in p. patens under aba treatment
changes in the proteome profile between control and aba treated plants suggested that exogenous aba could trigger one or more responses in p. patens. in order to ensure statistically results, the experiments were carried out in triplicate. after cbb r- <dig> staining, more than  <dig>  protein spots could be detected for each sample. representative gels from control and aba-treated plants and proteins showing altered abundance are presented in figure  <dig>  two-dimensional images were analyzed using imagemaster™ 2d platinum software. the volume percentage of each spot was estimated and compared across the gels. in the samples following aba treatment, we repeatedly analyzed  <dig> protein spots, whose relative abundance was at least  <dig> -fold different from the control. the proteins associated with  <dig> of these protein spots were subsequently identified using lc-ms/ms. among them,  <dig> protein spots  were down-regulated,  <dig> protein spots  were up-regulated by aba treatment including four protein spots  which were only present in the aba-treated samples . quantitative analysis indicated that the abundance of these proteins changed  in response to aba treatment  suggesting that different physiological and biochemical processes are modified following aba treatment.

protein identification by lc-ms/ms
the protein spots of interest were excised from preparative 2-d gels. after trypsin autolysis, the digested spots were analyzed by lc-ms/ms. the resulting amino acid sequences were searched against databases using seqest software. as the p. patens sequence information is limited, there were some samples that did not yield significant matches. for analysis of these samples, the arabidopsis database was used. previous transcriptome research has shown that the gene set in p. patens is very similar to that of a. thaliana  <cit> . the results of the database search are listed in table  <dig> and supplemental table s <dig> .

spot
d1-d <dig> are down-regulated proteins; u1-u <dig> are up-regulated, including induced proteins u <dig>  u <dig>  u <dig> u43; nmp, number of matched peptides; sc, sequence coverage

functional categorization of aba-responsive proteins
the aba-responsive proteins could be sorted into eight categories  according to their biological function as described by the eu a. thaliana genome project  <cit> . these categories include material and energy metabolism , defense , protein synthesis and degradation , transcription , signal transduction , cell growth/division , transport , and cytoskeleton .

a the downward arrow represents the down-regulated protein spot on the 2-d gel;

b the upward arrow represents the up-regulated protein spot on the 2-d gel;

c the * represents the newly induced protein spot on the 2-d gel.

within the material and energy metabolism category, atp synthase beta subunit , putative protein  <dig> photosystem ii oxygen-evolving complex , rubisco small subunit  and photosystem assembly protein ycf <dig>  were down-regulated, and another nine proteins were up-regulated. all proteins within the defense category were up-regulated. these proteins include putative proline-rich protein , putative expansin , extensin-like protein , intracellular pathogenesis-related protein-like protein , disease resistance protein rpm <dig> , lipoxygenase , thylakoid-bound ascorbate peroxidase , 2-cys peroxiredoxin , physcomitrin , n-hydroxycinnamoyl/benzoyltransferase-like protein , putative ascorbate peroxidase  and peroxiredoxin . proteins involved in protein synthesis, degradation and folding include different family members of the hsp <dig> family , chloroplast ftsh protease  and cullin 3a . the up-regulated proteins probable myb-family transcription factor , fibrillarin-like protein , probable wrky transcription factor  <dig> , bzip transcription factor-like protein  and mrna binding protein precursor-like  are all related to transcription. some signal pathway proteins were also up-regulated, including calcium-dependent protein kinase-like protein , ser/thr specific protein kinase-like protein  and putative receptor-like protein kinase .

discussion
in seed plants, the phytohormone aba controls many developmental and physiological processes via complicated signaling networks that are composed of receptors, secondary messengers, protein kinase, and transcription factors. transcription factors can meditate protein synthesis in responses to aba, which is crucial in plant growth and development as well as in plant responses to various stresses. in this study, a broad spectrum of proteins is synthesized following aba treatment. detailed analysis of these proteins indicates that the molecular responses to the plant hormone aba appears to be conserved among higher plant species and bryophytes, as discussed below.

aba induced signaling proteins in p. patens
receptor protein kinases  are plasma membrane-bound and play an important role in the perception and transmittance of external signals such as aba, dehydration, high salt and cold treatments  <cit> . calcium-dependent protein kinases   are implicated as important sensors of ca2+ flux in plants in response to a variety of environmental stimuli and hormone signals. depending upon the calcium signature, the extent and duration of cdpk enzyme activation will vary, but will have a direct effect on the phosphorylation status of its downstream targets  <cit> . ser/thr specific protein kinase  catalyzes atp-dependent phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues on target proteins  <cit> . phosphorylation by protein kinases is one of the most common and important regulatory mechanisms in signal transduction among all organisms  <cit> . these results suggested that these same proteins are involved in the aba signal transduction pathways of p. patens, as reported in higher plants  <cit> .

aba activates the expression of transcriptional regulators
transcriptional control is a major mechanism whereby cells regulate gene expression. sequence-specific dna-binding transcriptional regulators, one class of transcription factors, play an essential role in modulating the rate of transcription of specific target genes  <cit> . the bzip transcription factors  have been shown to regulate diverse biological processes such as pathogen defense, light and stress signaling, seed maturation and flower development  <cit> . a group of bzip proteins have been identified as abre-binding factors that activate transcription through this cis element  <cit> . members of another large family of plant transcription factors, the myb proteins , have also been linked to plant stress responses, including responses to uv light, wounding, anaerobic stress and pathogens  <cit> . wrky proteins  are a novel family of transcription factors that are unique to plants  <cit> . the wrky family contains one or two highly conserved wrky domains characterized by the hallmark heptapeptide wrkygok and a zinc-finger structure distinct from other known zinc-finger motifs. specific wrky family members show enhanced expression and/or dna-binding activity following induction by a range of pathogens, defense signals and wounding. these transcriptional regulators have been shown to induce stress-responsive gene expression and protein synthesis and increase plant tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses in higher plants  <cit> . our results suggested that bryophytes, among the earliest land plants, possessed mechanisms of aba sensing and signal transduction required for stress responses, similar to higher plants.

aba induces molecular chaperone synthesis
it is well known that hsps are induced by aba in higher plants. hsps/chaperones can play a crucial role in protecting plants against stress by reestablishing normal protein conformation and thus cellular homeostasis. five major families of hsps are conservatively recognized: the hsp <dig>  family; the chaperonins ; the hsp <dig> family; the hsp <dig>  family; and the small hsp  family  <cit> . the hsp <dig> family  represents the most highly conserved of the hsps, with functional counterparts found in the most primitive of bacteria and the most sophisticated of higher organisms  <cit> . hsp <dig> s are involved in almost every step of protein biogenesis  <cit> . they play essential roles as molecular chaperones assisting the correct folding of nascent polypeptide chains as they emerge from the ribosome, participating in transmembrane protein transport, and limiting cellular damage following stress by their ability to prevent protein aggregation and to restore the function of denatured proteins  <cit> . luminal binding protein   is a member of the hsp <dig> family that is localized to the endoplasmic reticulum  of eukaryotic cells, where it functions as a chaperone and is believed to support proper protein folding and protein translocation into the er lumen  <cit> . hsp is a large protein family that includes hsp <dig> and hsp <dig>  among others. in our study, different members of hsp <dig> subfamily were the major hsps that were up-regulated by aba treatment in p. patens.

aba triggers stress and defense responses
as in higher plants, many defense proteins were up-regulated by aba signal. in this study, we identified twelve proteins related to defense and cellular protection. intracellular pathogenesis-related proteins  are defined as proteins that are induced by pathogens attack as well as abiotic stimuli. they are powerful defense agents that are currently being use to genetically enhance cereals susceptible to endemic disease and insect pests  <cit> . in order to combat pathogen infection, plants also produce disease resistance protein  that specifically detects the appearance of avirulence products. if they lack corresponding disease resistance proteins, avirulence products can function as virulence factors, subverting host cellular functions through interactions with plant-encoded pathogenicity targets  <cit> . lipoxygenases   catalyze the formation of fatty acid hydroperoxides involved in response to stresses such as pathogen attack, wounding, water deficit, and anoxia  <cit> . n-hydroxycinnamoyl/benzoyl transferase   catalyses a reaction in the phytoalexin biosynthetic pathway in carnation  <cit> . extensin  is a hydroxyproline-rich glycoprotein  found in the cell walls of higher plants  <cit> . it is induced by many stimuli such as jasmonic acid, wounding and pathogen attack and appears to play an important part in the plant defense response  <cit> . proline-rich proteins  are also cell wall proteins that actively contribute to the plant defense response  <cit> . enzymes involved in antioxidation include ascorbate peroxidase , which catalyses the first reaction between h2o <dig> and ascorbate in the ascorbate-glutathione cycle, giving rise to monohydroascorbate and h2o  <cit> ; and peroxiredoxin , which reduces h2o <dig> and detoxifies alkyl hydroperoxides and peroxinitrite  <cit> . physcomitrin  is a novel plant cytolysin but its biological function is not clear. it is significantly induced by aba treatment, nacl, and desiccation  <cit> . and is required further study is required to determine whether physcomitrin makes a significant contribution in response to extreme environmental conditions in p. patens. the identification of a large number of defense proteins implies that aba could increase the resistance of p. patens towards pathogens and abiotic stresses, protecting the plant from oxidative damage.

aba inhibits photosynthesis in p. patens
proteins involved in photosynthesis and carbon assimilation that responded to aba treatment are represented by the small subunit of rubisco ; photosystem ii oxygen-evolving complex proteins , that catalyze acid-base reactions or that are involved in proton uptake and release  <cit> ; photosystem assembly protein ycf <dig> , which regulates the assembly of photosystem complex proteins. down-regulation of these proteins suggests that photosynthesis may be inhibited by aba in p. patens. these results were in accord with previous data which showed aba inhibits photosynthesis in higher plant  <cit> . together, our results indicated that aba-responsive bryophytes underwent physiological changes that had features similar to those of higher plants.

CONCLUSIONS
mosses were one of the earliest land plants in evolutionary terms, and have many characteristics in common with seed plants. therefore, a process common to land plants, such as responding to the plant phytohormone aba, can be worthwhile to study in the moss species, p. patens. in order to investigate global protein changes after treatment with aba, we have performed a comparative proteome analysis of p. patens and revealed a complex regulatory network. upon the application of aba, p. patens cells can sense aba and transmit a signal, which, in turn, activates transcriptional factor-mediated metabolic and defensive genes expression. in higher plants, a broad spectrum of genes is also induced by the aba treatment, and these genes encode not only proteins involved in the protection of cellular structures or in the biosynthesis of protective metabolites but also key regulatory proteins that induce stress-responsive gene expression and protein synthesis and increase plant tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses. these responses are similar to those seen in the moss p. patens in response to aba. figure  <dig> illustrates the aba response process of angiosperm  and bryophyte . based on these results, it seems likely that p. patens and higher plants share common receptor protein, protein kinases, transcription factors and physiological and biochemical reactions.

