BACKGROUND
increasing amounts of gene sequence data are being held in databases around the world and methods continue to be developed that allow us to access these data in a convenient and informative manner. at the same time, large amounts of non-sequence gene data are also being collected, and efforts are being made to develop methods to store, access and retrieve these secondary data. examples of this type of data would be in situ expression patterns, mutant phenotypes, scientific literature and 'gene pages' in model organism databases.

we were interested in finding a way to improve access to the large numbers  of in situ mrna localisation and other images that members of the xenopus community had generated. the goal was to be able to retrieve images according to gene of interest in a straightforward and useful manner. a survey of image data retrieval methods in existing public databases  showed that the mechanisms for retrieving image data by gene were almost invariably based on gene names or symbols, or parts of gene names. we felt that these name based databases probably required a significant annotation or curation effort to set up, and that, in general, name based methods suffer from the following drawbacks. first, such methods rely on the underlying gene annotation , and its quality, completeness and stability. this will be quite problematic for model organisms, like xenopus, where gene annotation is not finished. and second, they probably require one to go through a process of associating an application's data-set with the correct gene name and ensuring that this is kept up to date. the problem is that gene annotation is a work in progress, both conceptually and for specific organisms, and although significant effort has been put into this over recent years , it is clear that gene names  are potentially unstable,  can be inconsistent between organisms and  are not available for the many as yet unknown or novel genes, and that this is likely to remain so for some time to come. even for known genes, extensive lists of aliases can be required to cope with the naming history of that gene and the variety of names for the orthologous genes in different species. in short, it is a relatively labour intensive approach, and will usually require ongoing maintenance. given this, and the incomplete state of gene annotation for xenopus, we decided to investigate other approaches.

summary of search methods used by available public image databases for accessing images, found at the time of writing. data gathered by visiting each database and reading associated publications.

making the observation that in situ images are intrinsically associated with a sequence , we hypothesised that a method based on sequence similarity searching might provide the power and accuracy needed, without the overhead of the annotation that would be required to create a gene name based application. if such an approach was successful, it would also generalise to other collections of data where the data are gene based and an identifiable sequence is associated with each piece of data. for example, sequence accession numbers are widely embedded in scientific literature, and to be able directly to access literature on the basis of sequence similarity would appear to be useful.

the general model of the method would be for the point of entry into the search process to be the sequence of the user's gene of interest. this sequence would be used to run a sequence similarity search , in the background, against a specifically prepared database of sequences associated with the target search data . the ids of the matching sequences are linked to the target data, enabling the target data that matches the query sequence to be returned to the user. this effectively uses the query sequence as 'bait' to retrieve the non-sequence data. the signature of the method is the direct return of useful target data in response to the query sequence.

the sequence based search would retrieve data associated with sequences similar to, as well as identical to, the query sequence, and thus would enable data retrieval for related genes as well as the specific user's gene. this would have useful application in  cross-species searches. equally, there is no requirement for these to be gene sequences, and the method could be used for any type of biological data with a sequence.

a search for applications of the proposed method where it might already be in use drew a blank. specifically we failed to find any instances of a sequence similarity search being used as the entry point for direct retrieval of image or other non-sequence gene data.

what we did find were  enhancement of the output of standard blast sequence searches with clickable links to other data where available,  blast searches leading to lists of sequences  which acted as links to other data, and  pre-computed sequence similarity search results being used to link items within databases. the following are examples of these mechanisms. probably the most familiar are the 'linkouts' in the results pages for ncbi blast  <cit> . these linkouts take the user to various other of the ncbi family of databases, such as the pubmed literature databases  <cit>  and the entrez gene database  <cit> . they are undoubtedly useful, but the links must be followed separately to investigate the secondary data, and not all reported sequence matches have linkouts. one of a number of gene expression databases, 4dxpress  <cit>  has an emphasis on cross-species comparison. primary access to the data is through gene names, plasmid ids, and temporal and spatial expression descriptors  via ontologies. a blast search can be performed, taking the user to lists of either systematic gene ids or probe sequences from which further links lead to expression data. access to data for orthologous genes in other species is provided by pre-computed relationships , and also for paralogous genes within species. the zebrafish model organism database, zfin  <cit> , provides a facility much like the ncbi blast search, where the target database is the set of gene sequences which have expression data available, and image data for each gene is accessed via linkouts. while these examples demonstrate the usefulness of using sequence similarity searches and search results to link resources, they fall short of the type of search mechanism proposed here by not proceeding directly from the query sequence to the retrieved target data.

a number of other search methods of obvious utility were implemented in the databases we looked at, including development stage and anatomy based searches, and pattern matching methods. image retrieval was also often provided based on plasmid id or accession number, which is, at one level, a good proxy for the gene. however, it requires a very specialised knowledge to be familiar with enough ids for this to be really useful, and we discount this as an effective method for gene based searches.

it seems clear that building a system that is based on the gene sequence, and independent of gene annotation, should confer a number of advantages:

• no additional annotation or curation effort would be required, making applications easier to build and maintain

• the mechanism would work just as well with genes of unknown function, or genes which are un-annotated for any other reason

• data retrieval is not limited to the gene of interest but is extended to similar genes in a controlled fashion

• data retrieval would be straightforwardly cross-species, with no concerns about how gene names varied between organisms

• data retrieval would also operate across related genes with different names in the same organism

• retrieved data for multiple genes would be intrinsically self-organising on a basis familiar to molecular biologists, i.e. evolution

data management, search and retrieval methods have been widely investigated, and are well discussed in the literature . the topic of gene specific data retrieval has also received much attention, particularly in the context of literature searches, and the recent review by kersey and apweiler  <cit>  provides a general insight into the problem. possibly the most widely used literature search engine in biology, pubmed  <cit> , is based on a text search; use of logical operators and a limits mechanism allow users to perform complex queries which can include gene and species names. methods focused more specifically on genes, developed for literature retrieval, generally use data mining techniques to identify and disambiguate gene names and symbols in free text , in order to use the text itself more effectively. ihop  <cit>  is another interesting example using natural language processing to much the same ends.

to test our hypothesis that the use of an indirect sequence similarity search method to retrieve gene based image data would prove effective and also generalise to other types of data, we set out to implement the method in image, literature and gene name searches.

RESULTS
as anticipated, building applications to use an indirect sequence similarity search was straightforward, and required minimal data preparation. the applications performed as intended, and, with a common methodology, they shared many of the same software components.

we built three applications: quickimage, an image search engine, to fulfill our original goal for this project, quicklit, to retrieve gene-specific literature, and quickgene, a tool to explore gene names. all applications work cross-species, and are available as publicly accessible resources:

quickimage 

quicklit 

quickgene 

discussion with colleagues in the ascidian research community provided early evidence of the attractiveness of the method for accessing large collections of image data, and we were able to combine a large number of ciona intestinalis images with those from xenopus laevis and xenopus tropicalis.

the individual applications are described below, but first we describe the method generically, to avoid repetition and to make the underlying processes clear.

generic method for indirect sequence similarity search
 data preparation
the first step is to identify the data sources for the project, download the relevant data files, and extract the required data into a local managing database. the core part of this is the pairwise association of each piece of data with the sequence identifier it is intrinsically related to, plus whatever other information is available to describe the data. generally each source of data requires its own parser to be written, but these use simple computing tools and may be written in a few hours by a competent bioinformatician. the second step is to use the sequence identifiers to download the actual sequences from whichever database they are most conveniently available, and build a blastable database from these sequences, indexed on the sequence identifiers that have been stored in the managing database. to minimise blast search times care should be taken to ensure that this database only contains sequences leading to useful target data.

 application logic
once built, the application then functions in the following way. first the user submits the sequence of their gene of interest to the search engine via a web page. the search engine then uses this as the query sequence to search the blastable database. identifiers for the matching sequences are returned to the search engine from the blast search, and these are used to identify the correct pieces of associated data in the managing database. these data are then returned to the user in a results web page, with whatever other information is available to make the data most useful. this is illustrated schematically in figure  <dig> 

the search engine applications were built from our standard programming toolkit, but could easily be written in any suitable computer programming language. the primary requirements for such an application are that it can run a system level command , that it can interact with an sql database on the local network, and manage internet connectivity.

sensitivity can be adjusted, as in any blast search, by setting the maximum e-value for reported results, and this is provided as a control for users.

quickimage
this application uses the query sequence to search for biological image data where the images originated from sequences the same as or similar to the query sequence.

we identified five major collections of xenopus image data  which included all of the large groups of xenopus images known to the community. a key person for each collection agreed to facilitate the transfer and interpretation of data associated with the images, and to ensure that the images were available on a local web server. for the ciona images, all the relevant data were transferred from a single source, aniseed  <cit> , which made the data collection and preparation steps simpler than for the xenopus images.

the images collections and the key individual responsible for coordinating transfer of data to the image search database. a url is given where the images are available as an existing public resource.

each image collection provided a set of image file names and related data, and the url of the web folder containing the images, or the images themselves. the image collections had mostly adopted internally consistent and straightforward naming convention for the image files based on plasmid or sequence ids, and the links between images and their source sequences were straightforwardly parsed into the managing database. the harland image collection, which had grown over a period of time with a gene based naming convention and manually edited file names, was more of a challenge, and gave us an opportunity to develop guidelines for image file naming which will help with future submissions to this project. the harland image file names were edited to include an accession number before being added to the current version of the search engine.

the file naming guidelines can be summarised as follows. file names should be built consistently, but most consistent schemes will work; names should not include spaces or other problem characters ; sequence information should be included in the form of the plasmid name, accession number or local id; experimental information  may be embedded by means of short codes or integer values; embedded information within the name should be divided by hyphens, or other characters  so long as the character used does not otherwise appear in any of the parts of the name; names should be unique within a collection. development stages should be expressed as precisely as possible. an example of a conforming name would be bc063191-is-12-lat.gif .

in this application the sequences identifiers are a mix of sequence accession numbers and plasmid ids, although this did not affect our ability to download the corresponding sequences from the appropriate databases to build the blastable database. to assist the user in identifying imperfect matches to their query sequence, we provide best blast hit descriptions for the originating sequences from the ncbi protein database, for human, mouse and xenopus. these data are made available as part of the results.

images already on a public web server are accessed in their original locations; otherwise they are placed in a folder on our local web server. whichever method is used, the search engine returns html placeholders for the images, containing the url of the actual image location, from which the browser then loads the image itself. this helps to reduce the load on our web server and can decrease download time for users.

in practice the search engine works well, and the user is rewarded in a few seconds with sets of images for their gene, and/or genes with similar sequences. in general there is sufficient additional information to organise the images according to the collection, the type of experiment, and the temporal progression of development stages. the user can scroll through the sets of images, and also click on any image to view it full size. the user can also search for images from any combination of the available species.

we included the ability to perform key-word searches of the blast identification data, and this combines in a simple boolean and/or fashion with the sequence based search . thus demonstrating that the sequence based method can easily be combined with more traditional text based methods, and logical operators.

blast performance was very good for this application: generally <  <dig> second at current sequence numbers. this is primarily because the number of sequences  is small for a blast database.

an example of the output of the image search engine is shown in figure  <dig>  the figure shows the first three sets of images retrieved by a search using x. tropicalis myf <dig> as the query sequence, and searching only xenopus images. we observe reassuringly similar expression patterns for this gene at stage  <dig> in the two model frog species . the third set of images in the figure are for the related x. tropicalis gene myod/myf <dig>  and interestingly we see a strikingly similar expression pattern at the slightly later development stage  <dig> .

at the time of writing quickimage provides access to  <dig>  images associated with  <dig>  source gene sequences from three species. we invite expressions of interest from holders of other model organism image collections who feel this approach might suit their data.

quicklit
this application uses the query sequence to search for published literature containing references to sequences the same as or similar to the query sequence. the output is lists of articles with titles, authors, etc. and links to pubmed. application data were downloaded in various formats from ncbi genbank  <cit> , flybase  <cit> , wormbase  <cit>  and sgd  <cit> , which contained links between accession numbers or other sequence identifiers and data describing published articles and their related pubmed ids. we found a general lack of gene specific literature references for some non-vertebrate organisms in the genbank sequence entries , hence the inclusion of the model organism databases. in general from genbank we used the refseq  <cit>  data, except for xenopus  where we used the nr database which has better coverage. we have not attempted to ensure complete coverage of all possible publications from all possible sources.

initial analysis of the downloaded data showed that most of the sequence identifiers were only associated with genomics papers, which would be uninformative for the intended use. these were easily identified from the data by counting sequence identifiers per pubmed id. a paper with  <dig> or more sequences referenced to it was designated a genomics paper, and such papers were removed from the database, as were the sequences which were only referenced by genomics papers. this made the blast searches proportionally, and significantly, quicker. after these operations the managing database contained  <dig>  sequence identifiers, and  <dig>  titles or pubmed ids.

there was clearly an imbalance in the number of citations per sequence between the model organisms  incorporated into the search engine from their own databases, and the other organisms sourced from genbank alone . the greater numbers of references from the model organisms' databases are presumably a reflection on the model organisms' specific literature curation activities, while the literature associated accession numbers from genbank are for " ublications by the authors of the sequence that discuss the data reported in the record" .

blast performance was somewhat slower than for the image search application, but with approximately 20× more sequences, this was to be expected. by comparison, it was still much faster than searching one of the complete protein databases  because of the exclusion of sequences without references or those only referenced by genomics papers.

sample output for a typical cross-species search using the xenopus laevis gene brachyury is shown in figure  <dig>  illustrating the high degree of relevance of the retrieved references across several common species.

the disparity in numbers of references between the model organisms' databases and genbank suggests that there are many more accession numbers embedded in papers than currently available in downloadable databases. a project to systematically mine all biological literature for accession numbers could generate a very powerful, gene based literature search tool. this emphasises the importance of including sequence accession numbers, as well as gene names, in journal submissions.

quickgene
ncbi's entrez gene  <cit>  is a key resource for gene based data, but occasionally, when searching for named genes, we feel it would be useful to know if the lists of gene entries returned were actually related to each other. the quickgene application was designed to address this. the application uses the query sequence to search ncbi's entrez gene data for entries with sequences the same as or similar to the query sequence. the output is lists of genes and links to entrez gene. application data were downloaded from entrez gene. to reduce the blast search times and concentrate the search on the most likely interesting results, we used only the subset of data corresponding to the better known model organisms. to further speed up the search we retained only one protein sequence per gene entry. after loading, the managing database contained ~ <dig>  sequence identifiers and entrez gene ids.

blast performance was again commensurate with the numbers of sequences to be searched, and was still less than  <dig> seconds for a ~ <dig> residue protein. this was a little slower than for the other two applications because of the larger numbers of sequences.

gene names can be searched across all major model organisms, or more deeply within a single species. sample output for a typical cross-species search using the xenopus laevis gene brachyury is shown in figure  <dig>  and illustrates well some of the problems of gene name based systems discussed above, with four different gene names being used  in the first twelve matches.

application performance and validation
to show that our method performs as intended we needed to demonstrate that, for a given gene of interest, an application would retrieve all the data for that gene that were available. we chose to do this with the image data, implementing a text search mechanism in quickimage to perform an internal comparison between the sequences based method and a text based method. we selected a test set of arbitrary, but developmentally interesting, xenopus genes, and investigated the performance of each one individually, comparing the images returned by the two methods. this approach was necessary because, although some of the images in the database were already annotated, most of them were not, and so the 'correct' total number of image sets for each gene was not known in advance.

it was not feasible to make meaningful, large-scale, systematic comparisons with other databases providing access to similar collections of data. other expression image databases generally had quite different collections of images from ours, although there was overlap in some cases. for the literature and gene name applications the relationship between our data sets and the databases we downloaded the data from were much clearer, but there was no practical way of generating and assessing large-scale test data in the other databases.

images in quickimage are grouped into image sets according to which image associated sequence they were derived from, and our comparison between the two retrieval methods was based on image sets. text data to search against was provided by the blast hit descriptions from the best match between the image associated sequences and ncbi protein sequences for mouse, human, xenopus laevis and xenopus tropicalis. data to search with, for each test gene, was collected from the ncbi entrez gene database  <cit> , and consisted of the current gene symbol and the full gene name , and, retrieved via the indicated link, the longest reference mrna sequence.

comparison between the two retrieval methods was made as follows. first the mrna was used to retrieve images by the sequence method, and the number of image sets retrieved for each gene was noted. then an exhaustive text search was performed for each gene, variously using the current gene symbol, the whole and parts of the full gene name, older aliases and other commonly used names. for many of these searches, whether sequence or text based, images for other genes were retrieved along with the target gene images, and care was taken to disambiguate search results by inspection. in no cases did the text searches turn up any additional images for the target gene that the sequence based search had missed.

the results are summarised in table  <dig>  and several things are clear from this comparison. first, for all genes tested, the sequenced based retrieval using the full-length mrna found all the images in our database that could be found by trial and error combinations of text search terms. for bmp <dig> the reference mrna from genbank  was truncated, and the full-length sequence was sourced from our own  xenopus est database  <cit> . second, the current gene symbol failed in the majority of cases  to retrieve images for our test set with the text search, although using older aliases tended to give better results . third, the text search could eventually be made to work for most genes  if sufficient alternatives were tried. this sometimes required the complete exact text of the full gene name . fourth, the text search  would clearly fail for genes where the image associated sequence was not in the coding region of the gene , as there would be no text in the database to search against for those image sets.

image sets are defined by their associated sequence and source collection. each associated sequence has been blasted against the ncbi protein databases, retaining the best match for human, mouse and the two frog species. text based retrieval used simple text matching  against the protein description returned by blast. sequence based retrieval used blastn against a database of the image associated sequences. for each gene the number of images sets retrieved by the sequence method, using the full-length mrna, was noted. text searches with various combinations of the gene symbol, exact full name, and more commonly used names, confirmed that the sequence method appeared to have retrieved all image sets for the target gene in each case. care was taken to disambiguate search results on percent identity or protein description  by inspection, where images for other genes were retrieved along with the target gene images.

the relatively poor performance of the gene symbol in the text based search is attributable to the use of the blast hit descriptions as the text data to search against. these are generally close to the full name for the gene/protein, and may only contain the gene symbol by chance. whilst this does mean that the full name may often work with text based retrieval, the full name for many genes may be difficult to recall exactly -box 2" for xenopus tropicalis sox2), and even small differences may make the search fail.

our test showed that the sequence based retrieval method works very well, and, although this is a relatively small number of genes, we have no reason to believe that the results are not broadly representative. the method is clearly not infallible. searches will fail if there is no  sequence overlap between the user's query sequence and the data-associated sequence for a given gene. chances of this can be minimised by use of the longest appropriate sequences, both by the user as the query sequence, and by the application builder in the blast database of data associated sequences.

one of the great strengths of the method is the ability to search across different species for data from orthologous genes, without being affected by inconsistent gene naming schemes. this is also true for related genes within a species . furthermore, the retrieved data can be usefully ordered according to the approximate evolutionary relationship of the genes involved. the choice of mrna or protein sequences to search with will affect the depth of detectable homology, as expected in a blast search, and may affect the range of genes that data is returned for. the retrieval and organisation of data for related genes can be seen quite clearly in figures  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> 

unknown or novel genes with typically uninformative database descriptions like 'hypothetical protein loc23277' or 'novel zinc finger protein' are unlikely to be found usefully with a text search, unless these highly specific terms are known or very broad definitions needed. by contrast, the sequence based retrieval method works equally well with novel genes as with known genes. of the  <dig>  sequences underlying the xenopus image data,  <dig>  had only uninformative identifying best hit blast descriptions , and are likely novel genes.

limitations of this approach
the main limitations of this approach are the requirement for the user to acquire a sequence for the gene of interest before they can do the search, the need to interpret the results sufficiently to distinguish between the gene of interest and related genes , and the inability to search with standard gene symbols.

in addition, something that would need careful consideration for any implementation of our method is the impact on the overall search time of the blast search. blast search times are dependent on the size of the blast database, and for larger databases may eventually go beyond that which most users will cheerfully wait for. depending on the importance of the data being sought, and the application strategies adopted to mitigate search times, this may become an issue. application developers will need to evaluate typical blast search times for proposed databases, and ensure that the anticipated number of concurrent users does not overload the available hardware and create unacceptable delays in running searches.

CONCLUSIONS
motivated by the need to provide access to large numbers of images accumulated by the xenopus community, we have developed a novel approach to the problem of biological image data management. in the process we discovered that applying the same methodology to other sets of data can lead to effective search applications in different fields, particularly in literature searches where retrieved references show a high degree of relevance and are intrinsically well organised. we believe the method will have application to almost any collection of sequence based data, and will usefully extend the available repertoire of search tools and methods.

the advantages of this method of indirect sequence based retrieval are its independence of gene annotation, the ease of making cross-species comparisons, the elimination of the trial and error associated with gene name based systems, the accessibility of novel or otherwise un-annotated genes, the organisation of retrieved data in an intuitively obvious way, and the ability to build applications simply and quickly, with low maintenance overheads.

we suggest some other potential applications of the method. firstly, it may be useful as an alternative way to access gene lists in  model organism databases, especially for researchers unfamiliar with a species and its gene naming conventions. second, accession numbers provide the link between the gene data and the sequence, and many of these have associated gene ontology  terms  <cit>  available in public databases. this presents an opportunity to combine the power of ontology based queries with the simplicity of the sequence retrieval method. third, the relatively future-proof mechanism of sequence based searching may appeal to community based projects like the proposed gene wiki  <cit>  that rely on "small contributions from a large population of contributors" and may not have the resources to establish an ongoing maintenance programme. in a more general sense there are no obvious technical obstacles to incorporating the method into existing search interfaces for use where gene data is being sought.

