BACKGROUND
real-time pcr is widely used for the quantification of nucleic acids in a wide range of clinical and research applications including the measurement of gene dosage, detection of residual disease in haematological malignancies and detection of bacterial and viral infection.

real-time pcr typically employs fluorescent probes which generate a signal that accumulates during pcr cycling in a manner proportional to the concentration of amplification products. absolute quantification of a nucleic acid target can be achieved using a standard curve, which is generated by amplifying known amounts of the target dna. the standard curve is typically generated using a series of 10-fold dilutions of a control template. for each dilution, replicated determinations of the cycle threshold  are performed and a straight line is fitted to the data by plotting the ct averages as a function of the logarithm of the starting concentration of the standards. by applying a technique known as "inverse regression," the straight line is used as a "calibrator" to estimate the unknown starting dna concentration in the sample under examination.

as in any titration, evaluating the uncertainty in the estimated concentration of the unknown sample is critical for interpreting the data and optimizing experimental procedures. in addition to the point estimate it is important to calculate the confidence interval of the "true" value of the unknown concentration.

commercial software specifically designed for generating standard curves and estimating nucleic acid concentrations is now available, however, there are currently no freeware tools available for calculating the uncertainty associated with the concentration estimates.

several approaches have been proposed for constructing confidence intervals in inverse regression  <cit> , but the most frequently used method is due to fieller  <cit> . fieller's theorem provides a general procedure for the construction of confidence limits for certain ratios of parameters, most often applied to ratios of linear combinations of parameters . in this note we propose a statistical tool, fci , to estimate the confidence interval  of the "true" value of each unknown concentration according to fieller's theorem.

implementation
fci code has been tested on the windows platform with the r software version  <dig> . <dig>  <cit> , an open-source statistical programming language. fci implementation involves data import, fci running and fci output.

data must be imported into fci as comma separated values  file  using microsoft excel ' <dig> or a more recent version. figure  <dig> shows a screenshot of real-time pcr data suitable for analysis by fci.

before running the fci code it is necessary to save the file in the new directory c:\data and install the 'car' package from the packages menu of r.

the fci algorithm works as follows. first, the data are fitted to a linear regression model as reported in equation  <dig> and the corresponding analysis of variance table  is displayed in the output. next, using the regression coefficient  estimates, the fci code provides the unknown concentration estimate  both in  logarithmic scale and also in its original scale as copy number. finally lower and upper limits of the 100% fieller's ci of the unknown concentration in both logarithmic and original scale are estimated as shown in  <cit> . by default fci provides a two-tailed 95% confidence interval , however users can modify the confidence level  by replacing  <dig>  in the command line for calling the code with the chosen level.

analysis of variance for the linear regression model underlying the standard curve. in the absence of repeated measurements of ct for all standard dilutions the error sum of squares  can not be broken up into lack of fit  and pure error  sum of squares. df, degrees of freedom; ss, sum of square; ms, mean square; y^i, predicted value corresponding to xi; y¯i, mean of the replicated values of ct measured for the i-th standard; y¯¯=∑i=1i∑j=1ji/∑i=1iji

the code performs a "lack of fit" test on the fitted calibration model, the computation of 95% confidence interval for regression coefficients and, where appropriate, provides messages to assist in the interpretation of the results. in addition it generates a diagnostic plot enabling both an assessment of pcr assay quality and also a visual representation of the fieller's ci graphical derivation  <cit> .

RESULTS
in order to illustrate the functionality of fci, we considered the data provided by four participants  in an international external quality assessment program  for quantitative assays based on real-time pcr  <cit> . in this program laboratories received primers, labelled probe master mixture, plasmid standards , and three samples of unknown concentration . participants were required to measure the target copy number in all test samples and provide all ct values in triplicate. for the purposes of this illustration we consider only performance in the analysis of the test sample corresponding to the lowest target copy number .

for laboratory a the linear model underlying the standard curve was inadequate. in this case the warning message "lack of fit" appears in the output  as the p-value associated to the lack of fit test is less than  <dig>  . although fci code will provide the fieller's confidence interval, caution should be taken when interpreting results and attempts should be made to discover where and how the inadequacy occurred. in fact, as we see from figure  <dig>  panel a, the replicates related to standards  <dig> and  <dig> appear inadequate to the linear fit.

for laboratory b the ct mean of the unknown sample  lies outside the range of the standard dilutions used to fit the standard curve. in this situation  we cannot assume that the linear model on which the calibration is based will hold true outside the range of the standard dilutions. in this case the fci code will not provide the fieller's ci in the output , and the warning message "out of standards range" appears in the legend of the corresponding figure .

for laboratory c the 95% ci of the true value of the slope includes the theoretical expected slope value  corresponding to 100% amplification efficiency. in such a situation the message "optimal efficiency" appears in the output . this message appears only when no warning messages have been displayed. figure  <dig>  panel c reports the pertinent graph.

laboratory d illustrates the situation in which no messages, either in the output or in the figure, are displayed .

when the 95% confidence interval of the true value of the slope includes zero  the warning message "not real confidence interval" appears in the fci output. in this situation, not observed in our real data, the resulting fieller's confidence interval is infinite in extent and the data have to be considered as valueless for estimating the unknown concentration.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described an algorithm for the computation of cis based on fieller's theorem in the context of real-time pcr quantification. while the algorithm is designed in this case for real-time pcr experiments, it is easily adapted to other assays based on inverse estimation from a straight line model . fci estimates the standard curve, the unknown sample concentration and its uncertainty. furthermore it provides an insightful diagnostic figure.

