BACKGROUND
wheat is an important staple food because of its characteristics of high nutritional value, technical properties and the long shelf life of the kernels. the wheat endosperm contains 8–15% protein, of which 80% is gliadins and glutenins. hexaploid triticum aestivum or bread wheat originated around  <dig>  years ago from a hybridization of a tetraploid triticum species with the diploid donor of the d genome t. tauschii  <cit> . the a and b genomes were most likely provided by t. turgidum, itself presumably formed from the wild diploid t. monococcum  and the donor of the b genome, a species which has so far defied conclusive identification  <cit> . morphological, geographical and cytological evidence suggests t. speltoides  or a closely related species as the b genome ancestor. cytogenetic research showed that the b genome is actually an altered s genome arisen by an exchange of chromosomal segments with other diploids and amphiploids, such as aegilops bicornis  or t. longissima   <cit> . according to isidore et al.  <cit>  polyploidization had a strong effect on intergenic sequences but the gene space was conserved.

the α-type gliadins of hexaploid triticum aestivum are encoded by the gli- <dig> locus on the short arm of the three different group  <dig> chromosomes  <cit> . estimates for α-gliadin copy number range from 25– <dig> copies  <cit>  to  <dig>  <cit>  or even  <dig> copies  <cit>  per haploid genome. anderson and greene  <cit>  compared the sequence of  <dig> known cdna and genomic clones of α-type gliadins and concluded that about half of the latter contained "in frame" stop codons and were presumably pseudogenes. the detailed constitution of the multi-gene locus is not known.

gluten specific t cell responses in the small intestine play an important role in producing the inflammatory response in celiac disease . specific native gluten peptides can bind to hla-dq2/ <dig> and induce lamina propria cd <dig> t cell responses causing damage of the small intestine mucosa  <cit> . tissue damage initiates secretion of the enzyme tissue transglutaminase  for wound healing. however, this enzyme also deamidates gluten peptides, resulting in high affinity hla-dq2/ <dig> binding peptides that can further increase t cell responses. multiple t cell epitope motifs have been identified in α- and γ-gliadins as well as in glutenins  <cit> , the majority of which show enhanced t cell recognition after deamidation. it also became clear that patients are generally sensitive to more than one gluten peptide. although the dq2/ <dig> interaction represents the most significant association with cd so far defined, it is becoming clear that non-immunogenic gluten peptides also have an impact on the innate immunity system  <cit> . clearly, the gluten peptide repertoire involved in cd is not yet complete.

molberg et al.  <cit>  and spaenij-dekking et al.  <cit>  used t cell and antibody-based assays to demonstrate that a large variation exists in the amount of cd <dig> t cell stimulatory peptides present in α- and γ-gliadins and glutenins among diploid, tetraploid, and hexaploid wheat accessions. if this is the result of genetic differences in gluten proteins with toxic epitopes, then this would allow to design strategies for selection and breeding of wheat varieties suitable for consumption by cd patients.

in this study we first determine whether the α-gliadin genes present in the a-, b- and d-genome ancestral species are sufficiently different to attribute the ancestral genomic origin of the α-gliadin genes in hexaploid bread wheat. secondly, we aim at understanding the diversity of cd epitopes in the α-gliadin gene family in diploid and hexaploid wheat.

RESULTS
analysis of the genomic α-gliadin genes from diploid species that represent the ancestral genomes of bread wheat
the typical structure of the α-gliadin is depicted in figure  <dig>  the fact that the sequences at the 5' end  and 3' end of the genes are highly conserved within the α-gliadin gene family enables to obtain different members of the gene family by a pcr-based method on genomic dna of various wheat species . accessions used were triticum monococcum, which represents the a genome; t. speltoides  and t. longissima that represent relatives to the b genome, and t. tauschii as representative of the d genome of wheat. we included these two species to represent the b genome, since these are thought to be related to the as yet unknown ancestor. this yielded  <dig> unique dna clones with high similarity to known α-gliadin genes  that were not present in the public databases. only  <dig> of these sequences contained a non-interrupted full open reading frame  α-gliadin gene. the great majority of the obtained sequences contained one or more internal stop codons or  a frameshift mutation . we refer to the latter sequences as pseudogenes. remarkably, no full-orf genes but only pseudogenes from t. longissima were found.

a phylogenetic analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence of the full-orf α-gliadin genes demonstrated a clear clustering of the sequences according to their genome of origin . the sequences derived from the a genome  as well as the sequences from the d genome  each formed a separate cluster of relatively closely related genes in the phylogenetic tree. the sequences originated from the two t. speltoides accessions  formed a relatively diverse cluster. all five sequences derived from the two different accessions of t. speltoides differed from each other. accordingly, the fact that the b genome sequences were more diverse is not an artifact from the use of more than one representative accession.

to investigate whether the observed clustering of the sequences can be related to specific domains of the α-gliadin gene , the first repetitive domain , the first  and the second non-repetitive domain  were used separately in a phylogenetic analysis . in all cases the sequences clustered according to their genome of origin and again the a  and d genome  sequences clustered separately in two groups with closely related sequences whereas the sequences originating from the b genome  formed a more diverse group with nodes of high bootstrap values. only when using domain nr <dig> no significant bootstrap values were attached to the nodes within this group.

the two polyglutamine repeat domains were analyzed for differences in the average number of glutamine residues. figure  <dig> shows large and also significant differences between the average lengths of the polyglutamine repeats depending on the genome of origin. the a genome  coded for a significantly larger average number of glutamine residues in the first polyglutamine repeat than the b and d genomes. in the second polyglutamine repeat, the b genome showed a significantly larger number of glutamine residues than those of the other two genomes . the analysis of the repeat domains indicates that nearly all α-gliadin sequences can be assigned to one of the three genomes using only the combination of both repeat lengths.

analysis of the pseudogenes
the great majority of the α-gliadin genes contained one or more internal stop codons. we refer to them as pseudogenes, although we cannot predict from the genomic data whether a subset is being expressed. a question is how and when these pseudogenes did evolve. therefore, we determined their position in the clustering of the three genomes, and the relationship with intact orfs in the same loci. these pseudogenes are structurally similar to the full-orf genes. the stop codons were nearly always located at positions where the full-orf genes contained a glutamine residue codon. a stop codon was the result of a c to t change in  <dig> % of the cases when compared with the full-orf genes, altering a cag or caa codon for glutamine into a tag or taa stop codon. in addition, we observed that  <dig> % of the stop codons were caused by t to a change, altering the codon for leucine  into a stop codon . beside these major occurring substitutions we observed some c to a, c to g, g to t, and g to a changes. twenty of the  <dig> pseudogenes contained a frameshift mutation , two from t. tauschii  and  <dig> from t. longissima and the two t. speltoides accessions ). the changes into stop codons were not distributed randomly across the amino acid residue positions in the sequences, and they were not distributed evenly across the various diploid species. a high percentage of stop codons occurred jointly in one pseudogene, and many pseudogenes from one species contained the same set of stop codons, suggesting that they have been duplicated after the mutations created the stop codons . a dendrogram of the deduced amino acid sequence of the great majority of non-frameshift pseudogenes, including the deduced amino acids downstream of the internal stop codon, closely resembled that of the full-orf sequences. only eleven percent of all pseudogene sequences clustered separately from the rest of the sequences of the same genome of origin.

to study the selection pressure on the obtained sequences the number of synonymous  and non-synonymous  substitutions per site were calculated from pair wise comparisons among the obtained full-orf gene sequences and the pseudogene sequences . the trendlines indicated a relative excess of synonymous substitutions compared to non-synonymous substitutions and showed a stronger excess for the full-orf genes. consequently, the mean ka/ks ratio for the genes was significantly lower than that of the pseudogenes , indicating the occurrence of selection.

since the first stop codons occur in various positions in the pseudogenes, it was not feasible to select a large number of sequences of sufficient and similar length to compare the selection pressure of the sequences up to the first stop codon with that of the sequences beyond it.

analysis of sequences from hexaploid bread wheat
if the features described above that distinguish the α-gliadin genes from different diploid genomes, are present in hexaploid wheat in the same way, this would make it possible to assign the sequences as well as the known t cell stimulatory epitopes of α-gliadins from hexaploid wheat to one of the three loci, on chromosome 6a, 6b, or 6d. since many hexapoid sequences are present in the public database of embl/genbank/ddbj, we tested this using the deduced amino acid sequence of these  <dig> full-orf genes to build a phylogenetic tree . the sequences of hexaploid wheat clustered into three different groups , as did the obtained sequences from this study, separated by a very high bootstrap value . joint analysis together with our full-orf sequences from diploid species showed that the three groups coincide, and this allowed us to assign each of the genes of database sequences to one of the three gli- <dig> loci .

analysis of cd-toxic epitopes
our phylogenetic analyses show that the α-gliadin genes are distinct in their sequence conservation depending on the genomic origin. are these patterns also being reflected in the occurrence of t cell stimulatory epitopes in the genes depending on their genomic origin? table  <dig> shows the number of perfect matches in the obtained full-orf genes and in the pseudogenes to the four epitopes studied. the results demonstrate that the set of epitopes is indeed distinct for each genome. firstly, in the a genome  sequences, the epitopes glia-α <dig> and glia-α <dig> were present in all  <dig> different full-orf genes and in  <dig>  and in  <dig>  of the  <dig> pseudogenes. however, the epitopes glia-α and glia-α <dig> were absent. also among the database sequences from hexaploid t. aestivum the sequences assigned to chromosome 6a showed the same trend in epitope occurrence . secondly, in the five obtained full-orf sequences from the b genome species epitopes were completely absent except for two genes which contained the epitope glia-α only. correspondingly, only four out of the  <dig> hexaploid wheat database sequences that were assigned to chromosome 6b contained epitope glia-α, whereas all others were without epitopes. of the pseudogenes we obtained from the b genome species, 17% contained the glia-α epitope and only 3% the glia-α <dig> epitope, but these pseudogenes did contain the epitopes glia-α <dig> and glia-α <dig> at frequencies of 53% and 55%, respectively. finally, in the  <dig> full-orf sequences and the  <dig> pseudogenes obtained from the d genome, a frequent occurrence of all four different epitopes was found. this also applied to the five hexaploid wheat database sequences assigned to chromosome 6d.

each epitope had its own position in the α-gliadin protein. glia-α was in all cases present in the second non-repetitive domain , whereas glia-α <dig>  glia-α <dig> and glia-α <dig> were all found in the first repetitive domain . a closer look at these sequences revealed that a single nucleotide polymorphism , which resulted in an amino acid change in a particular epitope, was present in most or all genes originating from one of the three genome. for example, figure  <dig> shows that the glia-α epitope in all of the full-orf genes derived from the a genome were disrupted at the fifth amino acid of the epitope by the presence of an arginine  instead of a glutamine . in three b genome sequences the glia-α epitope was disrupted at the second amino acid of the epitope by the presence of valine  instead of a glycine . a detailed overview of presence of the epitopes glia-α <dig>  glia-α <dig> and glia-α <dig> in the obtained full-orf sequences are shown in figure  <dig> 

here we show for the first time that large differences exist in the content of predicted t cell epitopes  in full-orf genes and pseudogenes from the diploid species. this phenomenon was also in hexaploid wheat. none of the diploid a genome sequences and none of the sequences from chromosome 6a in the hexaploid bread wheat contained glia-α and glia-α <dig> epitopes . in contrast, the sequences from the d genome contained all four epitopes at high frequencies, both in the diploid species and in the hexaploid bread wheat. for the b genome, the five diploid and  <dig> hexaploid full-orf sequences rarely contained the epitope glia-α and did not contain one of the other three epitopes. based on this analysis, we predict that among the α-gliadin proteinss, those coded by the b genome are the least likely to stimulate cd <dig> t cells. remarkably, the pseudogenes revealed the presence of all the epitopes. in these analyses we have assumed that a single amino acid substitution is sufficient to prevent such peptides from stimulating the t cells, especially since the substitutions often concern a glutamine residue. glutamine residues can be deamidated to glutamic acid by ttg in the human gut providing the negative charges necessary to enhance binding in the dq <dig> groove  <cit> .

discussion
gene copy number and complexity
the diploid wheat species used in this study contain a large number of α-gliadin copies in their genome. the sequences we obtained show that the fraction of genes with in-frame stop codons is very high, ranging from 72% in the a genome species to 95% in the b genome species . our in silico comparison shows a similar situation in hexaploid wheat. the fraction of these pseudogenes appears to be higher than previously found by anderson and greene  <cit> . analysis of the synonymous  and non-synonymous  substitutions in the obtained full-orf genes and pseudogenes revealed that the pseudogenes contain more non-synonymous substitutions than the full-orf genes. this is consistent with a reduced selection pressure on the pseudogenes. these results suggest that the majority of these sequences are not expressed .

evolution
the obtained full-orf genes cluster together according to their genome of origin in a phylogenetic analysis. the sequence differences in the various domains of the α-gliadin genes all contribute to this clustering. the differences consisted of point mutations leading to amino acid changes at specific positions. these amino acid changes are often genome specific, suggesting that most of the duplications of this gene family have taken place after the different diploid species separated from a common ancestor. from our data, the length differences in the two glutamine repeats of the gliadin genes, which were as observed by anderson and greene  <cit> , turned out to be related to the genomic origin of the genes as well. this may have occurred through the same mechanism as was found in the evolution of microsatellite repeats, where large-range mutations  occur infrequently, while small-step mutations  are frequent  <cit> . this would produce groups of similarly-sized repeats in the sequences from each genome, but the average length of each glutamine repeat could be quite different between different genomes. in addition, the large differences in the average lengths of the two repeats in the same gene indicate that unequal crossing-over between the two repeats does not take place.

interestingly, our results clearly indicate that at least 70% of the stop codons in the pseudogenes are position and genome specific. the occurrence of stop codons at identical positions in different sequences demonstrates that pseudogene duplication has occurred. the observation that three of the stop codon positions are shared between the a and the b genome implies that some pseudogene duplications must have taken place in the common ancestor.

based on the structural similarities to other gliadin storage proteins like the γ- and ω-gliadins  <cit> , the α-gliadin genes on chromosome  <dig> are suggested to have originated from a gliadin gene on chromosome  <dig> through a duplication and/or translocation event  <cit>  after the separation of wheat from rye and barley  <cit> . we observed that the α-gliadin genes of t. speltoides, and of the corresponding b genome in hexaploid bread wheat as well, are more diverse than the α-gliadin genes on the a and d genome. one explanation for this phenomenon is chromosome exchange with other species during the formation of the ancestral b genome, which is also suggested by other authors  <cit> . the diversity of the pseudogenes obtained from t. speltoides and t. longissima also supports this assumption. in addition, the outbreeding character of these species may have further facilitated this recombination and maintenance of diversity.

t cell stimulatory epitopes in α-gliadin sequences
our results indicate that, with respect to t cell toxicity as far as caused by α-gliadins, and based on currently known α-gliadin epitopes, the gli- <dig> locus on the d genome should be considered as the most relevant.. this is in agreement with the results of spaenij-dekking and colleagues  <cit>  who found the highest presence of t cell-stimulatory epitopes  in d genome species compared to a and b genome species. in addition molberg et al.  <cit>  found that fragments identical or equivalent to a αg- <dig> mer protein fragment appear to be encoded by α-gliadin genes on the wheat chromosome 6d and are absent from gluten of diploid einkorn wheat  and even certain cultivars of the tetraploid pasta wheat . if these predictions are confirmed in in vivo studies it may follow that breeding of bread wheat for low toxicity should focus, as one of the targets, on lowering the α-gliadin proteins from the d genome. the d genome has contributed significantly to many characteristics of hexaploid wheat, including baking quality, through hmw glutenins on chromosome 1d, but there is no evidence for a specific contribution of the gli- <dig> locus on chromosome 6d to baking quality.

our study focused on α-gliadin genes present in the genome, and did not consider possible differences in expression among the multiple copies of α-gliadin genes. spaenij-dekking and colleagues  <cit>  found large differences in t cell stimulatory epitopes in protein from different hexaploid and tetraploid accessions. combined with our results, this may imply large differences in expression of toxic d-genome α-gliadin genes, possibly through interaction with the homologous loci on other chromosomes, as was found for ω-gliadins  <cit> . in that case, the mrna pool of α-gliadins would not perfectly match the genomic composition. alternatively, genetic differences do exist in α-gliadin sequences among hexaploid wheat cultivars.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown for the first time that α-gliadins from diploid triticum species form distinct groups. this is reflected in large differences in the content of four t cell stimulatory epitopes  in full-orf α-gliadin genes and pseudogenes from these diploid species. similar differences were shown to exist between the three genomes of hexaploid bread wheat. the sequence information we obtained forms a useful prerequisite for study of expressed α-gliadin mrna and determination of both their genome of origin and their epitope content. besides, the genetic composition of the α-gliadin loci needs to be compared across a large series of hexaploid bread wheat cultivars. as there may be more, still unknown, t cell stimulatory epitopes in all types of gluten proteins, and given that the role of the innate immune system is only beginning to be understood, it may be premature to start breeding of non-toxic wheat varieties. however, our results indicate that construction of hexaploid wheat using a non-toxic d genome donor would reduce the overall t cell stimulation in cd patients.

