BACKGROUND
relapsing-remitting oscillatory behavior is a hallmark of autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis   <cit> . at the clinical level, the presence of relapses defines the subtypes of ms. the clinical relapse rate is about  <dig> - <dig> per year, with around a month of duration and self-resolution. at the pathological level, a relapse is the result of an acute inflammatory process within the central nervous system , which produces demyelination and axonal damage and impairs neural conduction, leading to clinical symptoms. acute inflammatory lesions are revealed by magnetic resonance imaging  as contrast-enhancing lesions. the number of clinically defined relapses represents only one in every 5– <dig> contrast-enhancing lesions, as has been shown by mri studies  <cit> , because many brain regions are silent and brain plasticity copes tissue damage. it is not known what triggers relapse onset, although one third of the relapses are preceded by common infections or stressful events  <cit> . understanding the biological basis of relapses in ms may have implications for immunotherapy.

in autoimmune diseases, the balance between the pro-inflammatory response and regulatory factors seems to be disrupted. as such, antigen specific effector t cells  are over-activated  <cit> , whereas the function of regulatory lymphocytes  is altered  <cit> , indicating impairment of peripheral tolerance. it could be expected that this impaired immune response would produce a chronic inflammatory process leading a progressive clinical course. however, in ms and other autoimmune diseases the predominant behavior is fluctuating, with periods of t-cell activation and tissue damage followed by deactivation and repair. although this behavior could be partially accounted for by external triggers , its robustness among pathologies, resilience in front of immunotherapies and the lack of closely related triggers suggest that this may not be the only explanation. we have postulated that the oscillatory behavior of the autoimmune response arises from an underlying periodic dynamics that is intrinsic to the design of the immune system, with several control mechanisms providing negative feedbacks that tightly control t-cell activation  <cit> . mathematical models predict that cross-regulation of teff and treg cells generates a stable oscillatory dynamic of both populations that maintains homeostasis in health, but which also promotes relapsing-remitting flares under autoimmune conditions  <cit> . the generation of an autoimmune response seems to be based in the presence of susceptibility factors such as genetic polymorphisms, levels of modulators of the immune response such as vitamin d, or previous infections that would change the thresholds of t-cell activation and differentiation, defining the autoimmune regime. however, the presence of environmental factors  or genetic polymorphism have not been convincingly associated with this oscillatory behavior, supporting the concept that such oscillations are inherent to the organization of the adaptive immune system.

b-cell depletion has recently emerged as a powerful immunotherapy for treating autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis , lupus or ms  <cit> . although originally conceived for targeting the role of antibodies in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, the quick and profound response observed in clinical trials in patients with ms and ra suggest that instead of decreasing antibody production, b-cell depletion may work by modulating the pro-inflammatory environment created by b-cells, the antigen presentation function they provide to t-cells, or the function of regulatory b-cells  <cit> . moreover, anti-cd <dig> therapy ameliorates the condition of the animal model of ms, experimental autoimmune encephalitis , preventing the pro-inflammatory environment  promoted by b-cells  <cit> . however, in the eae model in which b cells do not play an encepalithogenic role, b-cell depletion decreases treg and regulatory b-cells, worsening the disease course  <cit> . understanding the effects of b-cell depletion in t-cell activation would improve our understanding of the mechanisms governing peripheral tolerance and its role in autoimmune diseases.

here we validate at the experimental level the hypothesis that the relapsing-remitting behavior of autoimmune diseases is highly dependent on the cross-regulation of the lymphocyte populations, demonstrating that the underlying oscillatory behavior is intrinsic to the design of the immune system. we have analyzed the dynamics of myelin oligodrendrocyte -specific teff and treg cells in secondary lymphoid organs  and in the target tissue , as well as the activation of microglia in the animal model of ms, the experimental autoimmune encephalitis . moreover, we used our experimental and mathematical model to obtain insights into the role of anti-cd <dig> therapy in the regulation of t-cell dynamics and the generation of autoimmune response.

RESULTS
antigen specific t cell subpopulations and microglia display coupled and interlinked oscillatory dynamics during the autoimmune attack in the brain
in order to assess the presence of oscillation in t cell populations, their relationship and their behavior during the autoimmune response, we measured the frequency of both total and active mog-specific teff and treg cell populations  using mog-specific mhc class ii tetramers during the course of eae in the c57bl/ <dig> mice immunized with mog . t cells were measured in the spleen and cns daily in series of animals  immunized at the same time. as predicted by the cross-regulation model of t cell dynamics  <cit> , we observed that the activation of mog-specific teff and treg cells in peripheral lymphoid organs  follows an oscillatory behavior . during the  <dig> days after immunization, we observed a consistent average time between peaks  at around 4– <dig> days , with coordinated dynamics between the two t-cell populations. also, the oscillation amplitude  of mog-specific teff cells was always significantly larger in average  than the one for mog-specific treg cells . additionally, the amplitude was always larger for the first two peaks, coinciding with the onset of clinical disease, and was attenuated along the course of the disease. we observed that both t cell populations were phase-locked, with differences between the time peaks being always smaller than  <dig> day, which indicates that the oscillations of teff and treg are tightly controlled by common mechanisms. in summary, after immunization, antigen-specific teff and treg populations display an oscillatory behavior. the robustness of the period observed also suggests the presence of a common regulatory mechanism, supporting the cross-regulation model.

period and amplitude of the peaks of active mog-teff , mog-treg and activated microglia in secondary lymphoid organs  and the cns in animals developing eae , in model simulations  and animals with eae and treated with anti-cd <dig> therapy . amplitudes of mog-specific t cells and activated microglia are shown as percentages to the cd4+ population and total microglia population, respectively; amplitudes in model simulations are expressed as cell number values. data is shown as the mean ± sem, statistical significance are between eae versus eae anti-cd <dig> therapy; sig.  p <  <dig> ,  p <  <dig>  .

we also measured the frequency of mog-specific teff and treg cells in the cns of animals suffering eae from the time at which cells migrate to the brain . because activated t-cells migrate to the target tissue after t-cell activation, we predicted a similar oscillatory behavior in the cns by infiltrating t cells unless the blood–brain barrier  was buffering these oscillations. accordingly, we observed the presence of mog-specific teff and treg cells in the cns at various times, again showing a coupled oscillatory dynamics. amplitudes of t-cell incursions were around 3% and 4% of the total population of non-specific t-cells for teff and treg, respectively  and always significantly larger than the one observed in the spleen, indicating the accumulation of antigen-specific cells in the target tissue. this is in agreement with previous observations in the same animal model showing that t-cell invasion of the cns starts 2– <dig> days after t-cell activation in the periphery  and extends along the course of the disease   <cit> .

considering that microglia are activated in response to cns damage or by immunological mediators, we predicted a similar oscillatory behavior of activated microglia  population following cns invasion by mog-t-cells. accordingly, we observed the presence of oscillations in microglia activation after eae induction . activated microglia shows two peaks of activation with a period of  <dig> days and a maximum amplitude of 60% . microglia remains activated for  <dig> days in both activation events, indicating an intrinsic activation period for microglia as well, and different for the one observed for t cells . however, microglia activation started at day  <dig>  preceding the peak of mog-specific t cells within the cns, and exhibits a first maximum at day  <dig>  one day before the following peak of mog- teff into the cns. at same time, the maximum of clinical relapse was registered on day  <dig> to  <dig>  the clinical score dropped from day  <dig> to day  <dig> , coinciding with the microglia deactivation to baseline levels. the second microglia activation peak spans from days  <dig> to  <dig>  again preceding the following peak of activated mog- teff cells in the cns . overall, our data indicates activation of microglia preceding or concomitant with the invasion of cns by mog specific t-cells. in order to quantify the dependence of microglia activation on cns infiltration by mog-specific t-cells, we plotted the distribution of phases within a microglia cycle for which the average of mog-specific t-cell incursion is observed in the cns, observing again that peaks of microglia activation precede the infiltration of mog-specific t cell to the cns . together, these findings indicate that microglia activation also oscillates during brain autoimmunity, following mog-specific t-cell activation in the periphery but preceding the incursion of those cells into the cns. this result suggests the need for additional signals for microglia activation preceding antigen-specific t cell infiltration of the cns and/or a role for microglia in the recruitment of mog-specific t-cell within the cns.

mathematical modeling identifies treg activation as a major element governing autoimmune susceptibility
in order to interpret the experimental data described above, we make use of a cross-regulation model of t-cell activation previously described   <cit>  after adapting it to reproduce mice data . the model is based on the hypothesis of the strong influence of a negative feedback between teff  and treg  cells in the adaptive immune response, using a predator–prey system . active teff would produce signals to evoke expansion of treg population; meanwhile, the increase of treg activity would mean a suppressive effect on the levels of active teff. the model also includes thymic resting/naïve t cells  arising from a discrete stochastic input of cells in the immune system, mimicking the apparently random nature of the pulse trains of resting cells . we identified two key characteristics of the cross-regulation model that clearly account for the difference between the healthy and eae behavior, namely the average amplitude of the peaks and the average periodicity. using those features, we established that the rate of treg activation  and the number of teff cells required for half-maximal activation of treg cells  were found to be critical for reproducing the oscillatory autoimmune behavior data versus the healthy configuration parameters. in particular, using the same value for the rate of antigen presentation in both sub-populations , we observed oscillatory behavior after a decrease of αreg  and an increase of keff  . thus our data and model sensitivity support the concept that the observed oscillatory autoimmune response could be explained by a decrease in the strength of the teff-treg cross-regulation, a combination of increasing the teff threshold for activating treg cells and reducing the number of activated treg cells.

in agreement with our experimental data, the mathematical simulations showed that the coordinated oscillations of the active populations of teff and treg cells have amplitudes for teff at least  <dig> times larger in average than treg . also, in order to compare the adapted model to mice conditions with our experimental data, we tested the average distribution of standard deviations against the means of the oscillation amplitudes for three simulations  for  <dig> days. means of relative deviations measured in the experimental data was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for teff cells and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for treg cells, while in model simulations it was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for teff and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for treg cells. these results fit qualitatively with the experimental observations in the eae dataset.

the model proposes a predator–prey system in which treg and teff play the active-subsets of predator and prey populations, respectively. we performed a phase-space representation of the mathematical model trajectories in the plane for teff-treg after fitting to experimental eae data , showing that the healthy-state dynamics are controlled by treg , while the autoimmune-state dynamics are mainly governed by teff . in summary, the combination of experimental data with theoretical modeling supports the importance of cross-regulation of t-cell populations in the control of the immune response, and points to treg cells as a critical population in order to understand dynamics of autoimmune diseases.

b cell depletion modulates t-cell subpopulation dynamics differentially, influencing the outcome of eae
recently, it has been shown that b-cell depletion by anti-cd <dig> antibodies has a strong effect in suppressing the relapsing-remitting course of autoimmune diseases such as ra and ms  <cit> , modulating the frequency of t-cell subpopulations  <cit> . in order to analyze the influence of b-cells on t-cell dynamics, we analyzed the frequency of antigen-specific teff and treg subpopulations in mice during the course of eae after b-cell depletion. we made use of c57bl/ <dig> mice immunized with mog peptide, given that in this model b-cells are not encephalitogenic, but rather have been shown to play a role in t cell activation  <cit> . as expected, we observed that anti-cd <dig> therapy induced a rapid, almost complete depletion of b-cells in the peripheral lymphoid organs . regarding the dynamics of t-cells, we observed that after b-cell depletion, mog-specific teff and treg subpopulations maintained their oscillatory presence in secondary lymphoid organs, although in this case the large activation peaks of teff that appeared in non-treated animals suffering eae were significantly decreased in amplitude and appeared at earlier times . however, similarly to untreated animals suffering eae, the peaks of teff and treg were phase-locked. interestingly, in the cns teff and treg incursions were present as well, but with a significant decrease in the amplitude of treg cells compared to teff cells . surprisingly, even if the frequency of both mog t-cell subpopulations were decreased, microglia were activated to a similar extent as in untreated animals with eae , followed by oscillations without a clear period or phase, and did not fall to baseline levels , suggesting a transition to chronic activation and contributing to the worsening of the disease. at the same time, the maximum clinical score was delayed compared with untreated animals with eae  and disease was more severe, as previously described in this model  <cit> . both groups showed statistically significant differences by paired-t test , specifically at days  <dig> ,  <dig> , at  <dig> .

the presence of an imbalance in the cns of the peaks of antigen-specific teff compared to treg and the persistence of microglia activation may account for the impairment of eae in this model despite anti-cd <dig> therapy. therefore, our results suggest that b-cell depletion modulates t-cell activation in peripheral immune organs with more profound effects in treg activation . downregulation of treg was mainly revealed in the cns tissue , and was associated with persistent microglia activation and  with the higher clinical severity in the pre-treated eae group. however, the fact that the oscillatory dynamics of mog-specific t-cells remain suggests that b-cell depletion works by tuning t-cell activation thresholds, rather than reverting the autoimmune process itself.

sensitivity analysis of the cross-regulation model support the critical role of b-cell depletion on treg activity
in order to analyze the influence of b-cell depletion on the dynamics of t-cell subpopulations, we performed a sensitivity analysis of our mathematical cross-regulation model with the aim of identifying the model parameters governing the dynamics induced by this therapy in t cells. although our model does not include b- cells, by fitting the model with the experimental data we were able to analyze the resulting dynamics of both t-cell populations after anti-cd <dig> therapy and obtain insights into a possible mechanism for explaining how b-cells influence t-cell dynamics. we found that the dynamics of the antigen-specific t-cell subpopulation after anti-cd <dig> therapy was reproduced by reducing the keff threshold below the healthy standard , independently of the αreg parameter . in other words, our mathematical model suggests that b-cell depletion therapy may influence the autoimmune process by preventing uncontrolled activation of teff without strengthening treg activation. experimental trajectories through the phase-space were dominated by the teff cells  in eae  and in anti-cd <dig> therapy . however, in the anti-cd <dig> treated group, we did not observe the high excursions characteristic of eae. this behavior can be easily modeled by performing simulations for  <dig> days, which highlights the fact that b cell depletion, although suppressed the teff excursions, did not recover the treg excursions observed in the healthy cohort .

we performed simulations of the changes in the survival/death rate of t cell populations in order to predict its effects in the oscillatory dynamics of t cells. we observed that a 2-fold decrease or increase in the cell death rate of teff or treg decreases the period by at least one day for active teff cells and two days for treg. although peak period  is not a well-known characteristic of t cell activation, it would be a good marker to confirm the oscillatory nature of this process. in summary, our simulations suggest that b-cell depletion modulates autoimmune diseases mainly by affecting the interaction between treg and teff, and in particular strengthening the teff-treg cross-regulation by lowering the treg activation threshold.

discussion
in this study we have assessed the dynamics of antigen-specific t-cell subpopulations after immunization and related them to the outcome of brain autoimmune disease. we observed that, after immunization, antigen-specific effector and regulatory t-cells are activated and oscillate in a coupled manner with an intrinsic period. the combination of experimental and computational analysis supports the concept that relapses in autoimmune diseases are an intrinsic property of the regulation of the immune system, that can be modulated by environmental factors  <cit> . the fact that oscillations of both populations were matched day-to-day , indicates the importance of the synchronous activation of effector and regulatory adaptive immune response for the outcome of the immune response  <cit> . previous models of t-cell activation suggest that regulatory t-cell activation follows effector t-cell activation with some delay  <cit> . however, the fact that our experimental data shows that both regulatory and effector t-cells become activated the same day after immunization points the importance of triggering the regulatory t-cell response at the same time and in parallel than the effector response. after activation, the negative feedback between both populations could maintain their oscillation for long period of time, although removal of the antigens and other suppressive factors cancels the oscillations in the long term. the analysis of the t cell cross-regulation model after fitting with the experimental data supports a key role of regulatory t-cell dynamics in defining the outcome of the autoimmune response  <cit> . our model could be further validated by future experimental studies testing, for example, different scenarios of t-cell viability assays .

during the course of eae, activated cd4+ and cd8+ cells enter the brain, which is associated with microglia activation that mediates demyelination and axonal loss  <cit> . in the eae model, regulatory t-cells have a critical role in controlling the activation of encephalitogenic t-cells, but their mechanism of action is complex. regulatory t cells are dependent on the local  conditions that regulate their activation and suppressive activity  <cit> . however, the functional outcome seems to be dependent on balancing the suppression of the activity and proliferation of effector t-cells with the promotion of the survival and activity of encephalitogenic t-cells, causing their accumulation and distorting the regulatory and effector t-cell balance  <cit> .

another interesting observation from our results is that the activation of the innate immune system, namely microglia activation, also follows the oscillatory dynamics of the adaptive immune response with a well-defined phase. interestingly, we observed that microglia become activated closely after activation of t-cells in the periphery, but before the infiltration of antigen-specific t-cells into the cns. this results points to a model in which the autoimmune response organized in secondary lymphoid organs or in the circumventricular organs of the brain delivers signals  to the brain parenchyma, activating microglia. time series analysis of gene expression changes along the course of eae have shown activation of genes related with the innate immune response before the presence of inflammatory infiltrates, supporting the role of microglia activation in the early stages of the disease, even preceding an antigen-specific t-cell invasion of the cns  <cit> . recent pathological studies in the brain of patients with ms as well in eae models suggest that activated effector t-cells accumulate in subaracnoid space where they can be restimulated, releasing pro-inflammatory signals that activates microglia and contributes to the opening of the blood–brain barrier and subsequent infiltration into the brain by t-cells of the cns parenchyma  <cit> .

amplitudes of mog t-cell activation peaks were clearly larger in the early stages of the disease following immunization and then decreased. this could be explained by several factors. after immunization, the availability of antigens at site of immunization to be presented to t-cells by antigen presenting cells is significantly higher compared with the antigen concentration within the cns in consecutive restimulations. also, immunization exerts a synchronization effect that makes it easier to detect the activation of t-cells right after the animal is immunized, in comparison with later times at which individual clones become increasingly desynchronized, complicating the detection of t-cell expansion. another factor may be the effect of epitope spreading, which involves the recruitment of other antigen specificities that were not measured here. also, anti-inflammatory signals from the tissue, such as il- <dig> would contribute to shutdown the immune response and therefore dampening of the peaks of activated t-cells.

b-cells seem to have a complex role in brain autoimmunity. in addition to their role as antigen producing cells, b-cells have been shown to contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease via the production of a pro-inflammatory factors such as il- <dig>  the activation of pro-inflammatory th <dig> and th <dig> cells and monocytes, and the inhibition of t-cell activation by regulatory b  cells  <cit> . the role of b-cell depletion in the activation of antigen specific t-cells in eae is complex as b-cells do not directly impair t-cell function, but rather alter the balance between effector and regulatory function of these cells  <cit> . our results indicate that in a model in which anti-cd <dig> therapy induces a more severe disease course, even if b-cell depletion decreases the activation of both effector and regulatory t cells, the disease outcome seems to be dependent, at least in part, on the balance of these two populations. we show that the activation of mog-specific t-cells happens earlier and faster in anti-cd <dig> treated animals than in non- b-cell depleted animals. this is agreement with the view that effector b-cells modulate antigen presentation to t cells and regulatory b-cells modulate t cell expansion  <cit> . in the cns of b-cell depleted animals, we observed a more significant effect on regulatory than effector response and a subsequent enhancement of microglia activation, which correlates with more severe cns tissue damage.

our results have several implications for immunotherapy. first, immunomodulatory therapies, such as anti-cd <dig> therapy, do not revert the pathogenic response in autoimmune diseases, but rather maintain them in a dynamic state that is less deleterious. for this reason, cessation of the therapy would allow to the immune system to come back to its original autoimmune dynamics and in some cases, even worsen the disease due to a rebound effect. this has been well documented in cessation of natalizumab therapy in humans, in which a significant proportion of patients develop a rebound relapse a few months after the last natalizumab infusion. second, although regulatory t-cells are an ideal target for immunotherapy – e.g. increasing their function for treating autoimmune disease or decreasing their function for cancer immunotherapy - the outcome of the disease will be dependent on the dynamics of all populations implicated and the timing in which the therapy is started. for this reason, the ideal therapy at this level would involve fine-tuning the long-term dynamics of antigen-specific t-cells to maintain them at a level closer to the healthy state.

our study has several limitations. first, we have quantified antigen-specific t-cells using mhc class ii tetramers by flow cytometry, which has a resolution for identifying  <dig> in every  <dig> target cells in the tissue from a standard acquisition of 2– <dig> x  <dig> leukocytes  <cit> . moreover, because we attempted to quantify mog specific t cells within the context of the natural repertoire of a rodent, instead of using transgenic animals with single tcr specific for mog , quantification was done in different animals and individual dynamics were extrapolated from the population analysis. for this reason, we analyzed results as proportions to the reference cd4+ cell population instead using absolute numbers. while the presence of noise created by technical limitations might have prevented from observing more cycles due to desynchronization of the t-cell activation between animals, the oscillations reported here were robust enough to be captured with this technique. also, we focused in the immune response specific to the single antigen used for immunization , but did not assess the role of epitope spreading in the dynamics of autoimmune t cells nor in the dynamics of other lymphocyte subpopulations  with other specificities, which may have a role in the outcome of the autoimmune response. finally, anti-cd <dig> produces profound but not complete b-cell depletion, and does not target only mog-specific b-cells. for this reason, residual b-cells may have played a role in the worsening of eae. alternatively, anti-cd <dig> therapy may preferentially target some b-cell subpopulations such as il-10- or il-6-producing b cells, or cells at different stage of differentiation that may have a specific effect on t-cell dynamics. however, the results from our study support previous models of the regulation of t- cell populations and their role in the immune response.

CONCLUSIONS
our study supports the importance of the cross-regulation between lymphocyte populations and their contribution to the outcome of the immune response. moreover, highlights the role of regulatory t-cells in driving the dynamics of the immune response. even if these cells are a smaller population compared with naive and effector cells, their critical role in the regulation of immune response makes them central in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, and thus attractive targets for immunotherapy against these diseases, even in an indirect way such as is the case in anti-cd <dig> therapy.

