BACKGROUND
the indonesian island of sulawesi has a complex geological history. the current ‘k’ shaped landmass consists of four peninsulas and a central core  <cit> . geologists have estimated the movement and extent for each fragment of the island complex  <cit> , and determined that the present conformation is relatively recent . the four major peninsulas correspond to landmasses from at least three tectonic provinces, and two smaller continental fragments  <cit> . throughout geologic history, sulawesi has dramatically changed in configuration, area, and elevation  <cit> . the first appearance of what we presently consider sulawesi was the western peninsula, or west sulawesi, during eocene sea level changes   <cit> . in the mid oligocene  west sulawesi was surrounded by ocean, but terrestrial habitats were present. at this time, east java and south sulawesi were still submerged in shallow marine environments   <cit> . rapid geologic changes ~ <dig> mya  resulted in the collision of the australian plate  and the sunda shelf, which led to some degree of mountain formation in sulawesi and modified the elevation of eastern sulawesi. the southern peninsula continued to be at least partially submerged at this time, and west sulawesi was relatively flat. the nature of the connection between eastern and western sulawesi is unknown. the geological record is scarce for this period of time, but the few poorly dated marine sediments available indicate that the area may have been largely subaerial  <cit> .

during the mid miocene a process known as ‘rollback’ was likely ongoing near the subduction zone around the north peninsula of sulawesi  <cit> . essentially this process involves the expansion of terrestrial environments surrounding a subduction zone when the inflow of heated mantle pushes to the surface, elevates, and expands the terrestrial environment in the opposite direction of the plate movement . this rollback process likely caused a long-lived terrestrial environment in sulawesi  <cit> . additional evidence for extended terrestrial habitat comes from central and southeastern sulawesi, where a significant amount of erosion and prolonged weathering has been documented. much of sulawesi was exposed land during the miocene, but few additional details are available regarding the extent of land and elevation through time  <cit> .

the present topography of sulawesi dates to the late miocene, approximately  <dig> mya, when tectonic movements affected the amount of exposed land and extent of mountains across sulawesi  <cit> . although sea level changes during the pleistocene had an extreme effect on the exposed land area and therefore mobility of species across the sunda shelf, the effect on sulawesi was minor . the combined isolation and steep edges of tectonic shelves on sulawesi likely prevented a terrestrial connection between islands in wallacea  <cit> . the complex geology of this biodiverse island has confounded many studies trying to determine the age of endemic lineages, which is where phylogenetic reconstruction can aid in understanding  <cit> .

mammals on sulawesi are primarily of asian descent, except for the phalangerid marsupials and pteropodine bats, which have australian or pacific origin  <cit> . the earliest estimated mammalian colonization of sulawesi was by phalangerid marsupials approximately 21– <dig> mya  <cit> . squirrels are estimated as the second oldest arrivals, around  <dig> mya  <cit> . subsequent mammalian colonization events  occurred during the pliocene  and include the first colonization events for both macaques and shrews . interestingly, macaques and shrews both colonized sulawesi a second time in the pleistocene . other mammalian colonization events occurred primarily during the pleistocene, including bovids and suids , although recent re-dating recovered vastly different estimates with a trend towards much older colonization events  <cit> . the estimated date of arrival of the squirrels, however, remained largely unchanged.

with the exception of a recent morphological and ecological analysis that detailed the distribution and characterization of each species  <cit> , squirrels are some of the least studied taxa on sulawesi. three genera of endemic squirrels  occur on sulawesi: hyosciurus, the long-nosed squirrels; rubrisciurus, the giant ground squirrels; and prosciurillus, the relatively small-bodied tree squirrels. the genus hyosciurus contains two named species, h. ileile and h. heinrichi. these terrestrial species have extremely elongate rostra, possibly for a specialized invertebrate diet  <cit> . both species of hyosciurus have fairly restricted ranges, and h. ileile has two disjunct recorded populations, one in the northern peninsula and the second in the central core, although the species is probably more widespread  <cit> . hyosciurus heinrichi is distributed through the highlands of the central core. the genus rubrisciurus contains a single species, r. rubriventer, which is distributed across the entire island. finally, prosciurillus is the most diverse genus, containing seven recognized species , all of which  have restricted ranges . several prosciurillus species are found in specific habitat types, for example, p. weberi occurs in mangrove forests, and p. topapuensis and p. abstrusus in montane forests  <cit> . the three genera are easily distinguished morphologically. hyosciurus has a very long rostrum, rubrisciurus is very large and bright red, while the species of prosciurillus, the most diverse and variable genus, are brownish or olivaceous in general coloration. members of this latter genus usually have ear tufts of various colors and banding along the tail, and some have either patches of coloration along the nape  or dorsal stripes   <cit> . the smallest and most plain squirrel, prosciurillus murinus, lacks ear tufts and tail banding.fig.  <dig> map of sulawesi with biogeographic barriers shown, as well as the approximate distribution of each species plotted within the inlaid maps. species distributions estimated from  <cit> . individual samples are placed in the same color, and on the representative map of each sampled species. species not included are in grey text in the center inlaid map, and p. rosenbergii is distributed on the islands north of the northern peninsula . base maps modified from wikimedia commons



to date, only one sciurid-wide phylogeny has included three of these species, one representative per genus   <cit> . mercer and roth  <cit>  analyzed two mitochondrial genes  and one nuclear gene , based on which they suggested that a single squirrel lineage crossed wallace’s line to give rise to these three genera of squirrels on sulawesi. here we estimated the phylogeny of endemic sulawesi squirrels using relatively dense taxonomic sampling across sulawesi and several sundaland outgroup taxa in order to test the hypothesis that there was a single colonization event for sulawesi squirrels. we compared divergence time estimates to what is known of the geological history of sulawesi in order to determine which geological events may have been important in the history of the group. we sequenced whole mitochondrial genomes , which provide much greater resolution than single mitochondrial genes for evaluating phylogenetic relationships, especially over short time scales  <cit> . here we analyze all non-saturated coding genes of the sequenced mitogenomes. given that mitochondrial dna is inherited as a single unit, species tree estimates require additional independently inherited markers  <cit> . therefore, we enriched for a panel of nuclear markers, ultraconserved elements , to derive sequences from the variable flanking regions  <cit> , which have proven useful for resolving rapid radiations in a variety of taxa  <cit> . fresh tissue samples for most of the species are not available; therefore, we obtained our molecular data from historic museum skins, mostly collected approximately a century ago. since rates of nucleotide substitution are greater in flanking regions of uces and degradation has an effect on dna fragment length, this study provides empirical evidence for the utility of uces in degraded dna studies. we also report the enrichment success and the assembled length for the recovered uces to build our phylogenies.

RESULTS
mitogenomes
whole mitochondrial genomes were successfully constructed from  <dig> individuals from seven of the  <dig> recognized species . average mitogenome coverage was  <dig> × and ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> × .table  <dig> all samples included in this study, with museum catalog #, geographic location, genbank # , whether mtdna or uces were extracted for each sample, and the number of uces enriched

 <dig> hyosciurus heinrichi
 <dig> hyosciurus ileile
 <dig> prosciurillus abstrusus
 <dig> prosciurillus leucomus occidentalis 1
 <dig> prosciurillus leucomus leucomus 2
 <dig> prosciurillus leucomus leucomus 3
 <dig> prosciurillus murinus 1
 <dig> prosciurillus murinus 2
 <dig> prosciurillus weberi 1
 <dig> prosciurillus weberi 2
 <dig> prosciurillus weberi 3
 <dig> rubrisciurus rubriventer 1
 <dig> rubrisciurus rubriventer 2
 <dig> rubrisciurus rubriventer 3
 <dig> exilisciurus exilis
 <dig> callosciurus adamsi
 <dig> nannosciurus melanotis
 <dig> lariscus insignis
 <dig> sundasciurus everetti
 <dig> callosciurus erythraeus
museum abbreviations: mzb; museum zoologicum bogoriense, bogor, java, indonesia; amnh; american museum of natural history, new york, new york, usa; usnm; national museum of natural history, smithsonian institution, washington d.c, usa; nzp; national zoological park, washington d.c., usa; mtrb; m.hawkins field samples, see hawkins et al.  <cit>  for details

hyosciurus heinrichi
hyosciurus ileile
prosciurillus abstrusus
prosciurillus leucomus occidentalis 1
prosciurillus leucomus leucomus 3
prosciurillus leucomus leucomus 2
prosciurillus murinus 2
prosciurillus murinus 1
prosciurillus weberi 2
prosciurillus weberi 3
prosciurillus weberi 1
rubrisciurus rubriventer 3
rubrisciurus rubriventer 2
rubrisciurus rubriventer 1


evidence of contamination was detected in two prosciurillus murinus samples , and one sample of prosciurillus weberi  had low coverage ; these were therefore excluded from phylogenomic analysis. contamination was deduced based on damage which occurred during transport of samples , which was later combined with the recovery of a large number of herterozygosities within these two specimens. in order to assure that submitted sequences were of the species intended; these samples were removed from further analysis. all samples were checked for contamination by repeating library preparation, replicate sequencing, translation of coding genes, and by evaluating heterozygous sites in the mitochondrion. nuclear copies of mitochondrial sequences have been shown to be an issue when using historic material as a genetic source  <cit> . in order to ensure that our sequences represented mitochondrial sequences as opposed to nuclear copies, we followed the standard protocols for high throughput sequencing  generated mitogenomes and determined the mitochondrial sequence by consensus of high coverage fragments .

several mitochondrial genes were found to have near-saturated third codon positions; therefore, only non-saturated genes  coding genes were included in phylogenetic inference. phylogenetic trees generated from the whole mitochondrial genome, without including gene or codon partitioning, were used for comparison to the topology when data partitions were applied . both maximum likelihood  and bayesian inference  estimates supported the monophyly of sulawesi squirrels . ingroup nodes were well-supported  and the topology was consistent with mercer and roth  <cit> , indicating that the genus hyosciurus was the earliest diverging lineage of sulawesi squirrels. interestingly, prosciurillus was found to be paraphyletic, with prosciurillus murinus falling out sister to rubrisciurus + prosciurillus . divergence dating replicates implemented in beast  <cit>  were found to converge and had high ess values . the empty alignment was significantly different from the mitogenome alignment and recovered poor ess values, indicating the priors did not strongly influence the results. coalescent modeling recovered a slightly different topology than the bi and ml analyses, with prosciurillus murinus the most divergent species within the radiation of sulawesi squirrels, followed by the hyosciurus, rubrisciurus, and finally the remaining prosciurillus species . all sulawesi squirrels shared a common ancestor almost  <dig> mya . intraspecific divergence times varied between taxa . interestingly, the two hyosciurus species were deeply divergent, sharing a common ancestor ~ <dig>  mya .fig.  <dig> whole mitochondrial genome phylogenetic tree. support values are provided for both maximum likelihood and bayesian inference . colors correspond to range maps in fig.  <dig>  species with multiple individuals are detailed in table 1


fig.  <dig> divergence dated whole mitochondrial genome phylogeny. bayesian inference support values are shown and dates are provided in millions of years. blue bars indicate the 95 % hpd for each dated node. the split from sundaland to sulawesi taxa is the node dated to  <dig>  mya



uces
uce loci were successfully sequenced  for all but one sulawesi species ; therefore, this sample was excluded from subsequent analyses. outgroup specimens from high quality tissues samples yielded more loci  than degraded dna samples. twenty-eight loci were successfully characterized in all taxa . the incomplete matrix contained  <dig> loci , in which  <dig> loci contained at least one parsimony informative site per locus. the average length of loci in the full dataset was 434 bps, ranging from  <dig>  to 2863 bps. this dataset was reduced to include only loci with at least three informative sites  and then for alignments that contained at least  <dig> of the  <dig> included taxa . this partition of the dataset averaged 435 bps, and ranged from 192–918 bps. this resulted in a concatenated alignment of  <dig>  bps. in order to see if the length and compositions of various loci had an effect on topology, an incomplete matrix containing uces with at least  <dig> of  <dig> taxa was generated, consisting of  <dig> loci . to mirror the complete dataset of  <dig> loci, another subset of the  <dig> ‘most informative’ loci was constructed, which contained the  <dig> loci with the highest number of parsimony informative sites . a comparison of the complete dataset with the ‘most informative’ loci recovered overall mean genetic distance of  <dig>  % in the complete dataset, and from  <dig>  % in the ‘most informative’ dataset .

prosciurillus murinus  had the fewest number of enriched uce loci within prosciurillus , with data missing for a large percentage of loci in the incomplete dataset analyses. the placement of prosciurillus abstrusus varied depending on the amount of information per included locus. to provide better resolution for the placement of these two species, and to reduce the effects of missing data on topology and branch lengths, another analysis was done including  <dig> loci  in which p. murinus and p. abstrusus were always included. in order to evaluate these various data partitions, phyml  <cit>  runs were performed  on each of the above data partitions, as well as a species tree inference via astral  <cit>   and njst  <cit>  .fig.  <dig> comparative analysis of uces, with several trees provided based on various partitioning schemes. all trees were generated with maximum likelihood via phyml except f. a the complete matrix of  <dig> loci,  a tree of the  <dig> ‘most informative’ loci, including loci with the highest number of informative sites per locus. c a tree of  <dig> loci where prosciurillus murinus and p. abstrusus were always present,  the tree containing  <dig> loci, which included at least  <dig> of the  <dig> taxa, and at least three informative sites per locus. e a tree of  <dig> loci containing at least  <dig> of  <dig> taxa and at least a single informative site per locus. f astral species tree estimation, generated from the  <dig> loci dataset. additional details about partitioning are found in the methods




the topological relationships for ingroup taxa remained the same regardless of how the data were parsed. length, number of informative sites, and number of differences per uce locus were plotted to visualize the effects of reducing the dataset . relationships between outgroup taxa varied, but in five of the six trees  the genus sundasciurus  was recovered as the sister lineage to the radiation of sulawesi squirrels. similar to the mitochondrial results, within the sulawesi radiation hyosciurus was the earliest diverging lineage with rubrisciurus and prosciurillus recovered as sister genera. within prosciurillus, p. murinus was the most divergent lineage. branch lengths were variable, especially for prosciurillus leucomus  <dig> , which was due to missing data.

both the concatenated  and the species tree inference methods , which consider the loci independently, yielded the same topology . the  <dig> loci dataset was dated with various partitioning schemes and substitution models. each of the four replicates for the beast analysis converged and had robust ess values . estimated divergence times were relatively consistent across datasets, with an estimated most recent common ancestor at  <dig>  mya for the  <dig> loci analysis , and  <dig>  mya , and  <dig>  mya for the partitioned analysis .fig.  <dig> divergence dated uce dataset with two independent analyses  shaded  in different colors . the inlaid maps are geological reconstructions from  <cit> , reprinted with permission, highlighting the approximate conformation and extent of subaerial land at  <dig> and  <dig> mya. the green indicates land, yellow indicates highland habitat, red triangles represent volcanoes, and the shades of blue represent shallow-deep sea 



discussion
uce characterization in mammals
as the number of reported cases of incongruence between gene trees and species trees increases, it is imperative to consider species level phylogenetic analyses based on evidence from multiple, independently inherited markers  <cit> . in early reports of incongruence it was unclear which of the small number of gene trees best reflected the species tree  <cit> . however, now that a large number of independent nuclear loci can be analyzed, highly accurate species trees can be constructed and the vagaries of lineage sorting in individual genes ceases to be an issue  <cit> . uces are a large panel of nuclear markers developed across vertebrates that can be used to overcome the limitations imposed by small numbers of genes and have been shown to be useful in reconstructing species trees at various evolutionary scales  <cit> . here we used the same loci to demonstrate their power for resolving intergeneric relationships among sulawesi squirrels. our data suggest that these loci may be useful in a wide variety of animals at a similar evolutionary scale   <cit> .

in this study, a large portion of our results was generated from degraded dna extracted from museum specimens. amplifying the entire mitochondrial genome and minimally  <dig> nuclear loci in small overlapping fragments followed by sanger sequencing would have been technically challenging and cost prohibitive. we have demonstrated the effectiveness of enrichment protocols, such as for the uces and mitogenomes, in degraded samples. our lower quality museum samples enriched fewer loci than the high quality frozen tissue samples, but despite this, over  <dig> uce loci per sample  were recovered in all but one case. we observed high variability in the number of recovered uce loci from the museum specimens, from  <dig>  loci to  <dig> , with an average of  <dig> loci per museum specimen .

since most uce loci represent dna fragments of unknown function, here we implemented the k-means algorithm shown to produce better partitioning schemes than traditional methods   <cit> . robust phylogenies were generated from both coalescent and non-coalescent approaches, yet individual loci recovered a variety of topologies, dependent on the included taxa, number of informative sites per locus, amount of missing data and of course, lineage sorting.

evolutionary history of the sulawesi squirrels
sulawesi was never connected by land to borneo, so an overwater ‘sweepstakes’ crossing is the most likely mechanism by which squirrels arrived on sulawesi. our estimated time of divergence between sulawesi and sundaland squirrels ranged from ~ <dig> – <dig>  mya on average including both the mitogenome and uce datasets respectively, compared to divergence estimates of  <dig> – <dig>  mya reported by mercer and roth  <cit> . all of our divergence time estimates from uces  resulted in 95 % hpd outside of, and older than the estimates from mercer and roth  <cit>  , whereas our mitogenome dataset yielded a younger estimate of  <dig>  mya . the difference is likely due to the use of a relaxed molecular clock with the mitogenome dataset. our results suggest that squirrels colonized sulawesi during the miocene, likely to west sulawesi, which was located further south and west of its present location. the east and central peninsulas may have been partially connected at this time, but the other peninsulas were not  <cit> . based on the observed topology and monophyly, our results also support a single colonization event, as proposed by mercer and roth  <cit> .

the deep divergence times between the three genera predate the modern configuration of sulawesi by several million years. the three extant sulawesi genera diverged from the outgroup taxa about ~ <dig> – <dig>  mya—a divergence that may potentially be linked to sea level changes during this timeframe  <cit> . low sea level may have facilitated a scenario of initial rafting to sulawesi, followed by allopatric diversification with squirrel lineages diversifying on different islands/areas that subsequently came together to form sulawesi.

a few million years after the original crossing to sulawesi, mountain uplift created the first highlands in the region  <cit> , and potentially allowed for additional niche specialization in sulawesi squirrel species. hall  <cit>  suggests the inclusion of biological and molecular evidence to deduce the precise timing of evolution in sulawesi, as the geologic record is incomplete. the endemic squirrels represent a group of completely terrestrial, forest-dependent mammals, which are known as poor over-water dispersers. we propose that the divergence dates observed in endemic squirrels are likely closely tied to the geologic events − as originally described by merecer and roth  <cit>  − because several species are restricted to specialized habitats .

specifically, our divergence estimates based on mtdna for hyosciurus heinrichi and h. ileile are dated at approximately  <dig>  mya, coinciding approximately with the timing of uplift in the central core of sulawesi. within prosciurillus, p. abstrusus  was dated as splitting from other prosciurillus species between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mya , which is also likely tied to the uplifting and/or isolation of this species in the mountains of the south peninsula  <cit> . prosciurillus leucomus was estimated to have diverged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mya , which is likely near the time when the northern peninsula connected to the central core of sulawesi  <cit> . finally, prosciurillus weberi, a species currently restricted to mangrove forests in the southernmost extent of the central core of sulawesi, was estimated to have diverged  <dig>  mya, with over two million years of history within the species, and may provide an indication of the formation or expansion of mangroves in sulawesi around this time.

we note that our dating estimates should be taken with caution because they were recovered from fossil calibration points far outside of the sulawesi taxa, and we did not use geological data to constrain divergence dates. by combining the known geological record with carefully dated phylogenetic trees, we can begin to reveal finer scale patterns of speciation and movement across this biodiversity hotspot. the inclusion of additional species and large datasets can provide an independent source of information regarding the estimated convergence of all land fragments in sulawesi, and provide further evidence for a better resolution of the evolutionary history of this endemic radiation within sulawesi.

discordance between mitochondrial and nuclear datasets
the well-supported monophyletic groups resulting from the species tree analysis are consistent with previous generic level designations based on morphology. discordance between mitochondrial and nuclear datasets has been well-documented in animals  <cit> . since mitochondrial dna is inherited as a single unit, it reflects only the genealogical history of a single locus and hence phylogenies derived from mtdna result in gene trees, which may or may not be congruent with the species tree. however, examination of this marker  can provide insight into evolutionary processes  that have influenced phylogenetic patterns.

considering the estimated age of this group, the paraphyletic relationships in prosciurillus observed in the mitochondrial dataset are likely the result of an ancient mitochondrial introgression event. mitochondrial introgression has been reported in a variety of animals and occurs more frequently in mtdna compared to ndna . mitochondrial introgression into the prosciurillus murinus lineage is best explained by ancient introgression when a population of ancestral p. murinus expanded its range into the range of another lineage not sampled here. some of the oldest events of ancient introgression of mtdna have been reported in squirrels . simulations suggest that introgression almost exclusively occurs in the direction from the native to the invading species  <cit> , as also empirically illustrated by some late quaternary expansions  <cit> . that implies that when a proto- prosciurillus murinus lineage colonized a new island/region up to  <dig> mya , it encountered and reproduced with squirrels already present there. the other lineage of squirrels was not sampled in this study, possibly because it went extinct after the arrival of prosciurillus, but their mitochondrial lineage became fixed in the expanding species. the review of mito-nuclear discordance presented by toews and brelsford  <cit>  found that 97 % of surveyed studies detailed situations where isolation had occurred, followed by secondary contact leading to the introgression events, which may be the most likely scenario for the patterns observed in prosciurillus.

relatively short internodes in the deeper parts of the phylogeny can be problematic for species tree construction . studies of adaptive radiations that occurred over short evolutionary time scales  have reported difficulty in resolving nodes deep at the base of the radiation  <cit> . as demonstrated here and elsewhere, large genomic datasets provide enough power to resolve these difficult nodes. however; these results need to be taken with caution as large datasets can also potentially inflate support values when gene sequences are concatenated, leading to higher confidence in incorrect phylogenetic trees . the initial rapid diversification rates  of adaptive radiations likely make the deep nodes very difficult to resolve, and by increasing data with hts, branch support could be misleading  <cit> . in this system, the different topologies observed between coalescent and non-coalescent analyses of our mitogenome dataset  may be linked to the short internodes between genera with fewer informative sites to properly place these lineages or violations of model assumptions. our results provide further justification for using many unlinked loci for resolving phylogenies. in this study, the results based on mitochondrial data alone would have questioned the monophyly of the genus prosciurillus.

while contamination is a major concern when working with degraded dna from historical specimens , the observed discordance between mitochondrial and nuclear datasets in this study is clearly due to evolutionary processes rather than to problems with contamination. if the result were due to contamination, we would expect to see issues with both the mitochondrial and nuclear datasets because dna samples for both marker analyses were conducted on the same extraction aliquots. second, we replicated library preparation and in-solution hybridization protocols, which resulted in confirmation of the results presented here. we also followed steps to identify and ensure removal of nuclear copies of mitochondrial dna in our samples  <cit> . finally, cross-contamination would have resulted in heterozygosities in the mitochondrial dataset, and either admixed placement of the samples in the uce analyses, or poor support for these nodes. the only cases where we detected evidence of contamination involved samples from two museum specimens from tubes that were damaged during transport. these samples were excluded from all analyses.

conservation implications
the data presented here unveil deep divergences within species, from  <dig>  million years within rubrisciurus rubriventer, to  <dig>  million years between subspecies of prosciurillus leucomus. even the mangrove-restricted species prosciurillus weberi showed over  <dig> million years of divergence between individuals, indicating significant genetic diversity in a limited geographic range. these results highlight the evolutionary distinctiveness of the isolated populations of squirrels found in this highly threatened landscape. more exhaustive sampling across the range of individual species could reveal additional ancient lineages, and perhaps allow us to determine the level of divergence within and between all species.

evans et al.  <cit>  suggested conservation priorities for seven areas across sulawesi for which macaques and toads had similar species distributions. the squirrels are not tightly correlated to the same seven regions, and seem more habitat specific , which may, for example, instead explain the similarity to patterns revealed in species of viviparous freshwater snails  <cit> . an ecosystem approach might be a better method of determining conservation priorities to encompass the differences observed in faunal distribution across sulawesi, but more research, ideally involving well-sampled phylogenies across a much wider diversity of sulawesi biodiversity, is needed to address this question and ultimately to provide the best-informed conservation plan and practices.

CONCLUSIONS
the additional taxonomic sampling of sulawesi squirrels and outgroup taxa from sundaland obtained from museum specimens coupled with sequence capture of a large number of unlinked uce loci and mitogenomes resulted in a well-resolved phylogeny that dates the divergence of endemic sulawesi squirrels from their closest relatives to ~ <dig> – <dig>  mya. our results confirm the monophyly of sulawesi squirrels with deep divergences between the three endemic genera and support a single colonization event that likely occurred during the miocene and represents an old adaptive radiation that predates the amalgamation of the current island of sulawesi. the incorporation of novel hts technologies and newer geological models are leading to new biogeographic insights and further understanding of the evolutionary processes driving adaptive radiations in this region. these biogeographic insights and the patterns of faunal exchange in and out of sulawesi make this island an extremely interesting place for future research. also, we found incongruent evolutionary relationships derived from mitochondrial and nuclear markers which we hypothesize are due to an ancient introgression event. future research that incorporates dense taxon sampling and all nominal species is needed to completely understand the evolutionary history and allow us to test more fine-scale hypotheses concerning dispersal and diversification within this unique group of squirrels. finally, as deforestation has reached unprecedented rates in this region, it will be important to implement an ecosystem approach to better determine conservation priorities that encompass the differences observed in faunal distribution across sulawesi. future research with well-sampled and well-resolved phylogenies from a large set of representative taxa from sulawesi is needed to address this question and ultimately to provide the best-informed conservation plan and practices.

