BACKGROUND
discovering structural similarity between proteins or their parts can shed light on their evolutionary relationships. since evolutionarily related proteins are highly likely to share common aspects of function, measures of structural similarity that can distinguish between related and unrelated proteins can be particularly useful for protein functional annotation. discerning homology between structurally similar proteins is complicated by the fact that proteins can have very similar structures but be quite diverse in sequence and there is a belief that structurally similar proteins can arise due to either convergent or divergent evolution. sequence similarity searches very often fail to rank correctly structurally similar but remotely related proteins, and also have limited ability to distinguish structurally similar evolutionarily related proteins from the unrelated ones.

structure-structure alignment algorithms are the best known methods to produce evolutionarily correct alignments between remotely related proteins  <cit> . all structure alignment methods require a target scoring function to optimize and a large variety of different scoring functions have been developed in this connection. unlike sequence alignment methods which all use conventional amino acid substitution matrices for scoring, there is no consensus among different statistical scores used in structure alignment algorithms. moreover, these algorithms can be successful at finding a reasonable alignment but can fail at ranking good alignments ahead of the problematic ones using the target scoring functions  <cit> .

to compensate for this effect researchers have developed a number of different structural similarity measures to rank structurally similar proteins  <cit>  or to produce meaningful clustering based on structural comparison  <cit> . some commonly used measures are: length of the alignment, superposition rmsd, percent sequence identity and their various algebraic combinations. it has been shown that these particular measures of structural similarity have a limited success at ranking of structurally similar proteins and distinguishing structurally similar related proteins from unrelated ones  <cit> . as an improvement matsuo and bryant introduced the "homologous core structure overlap score"   <cit>  which is calculated as a fraction of a "homologous core" that is covered by a structural alignment, where the homologous core is determined by that part which is conserved in structural superposition of homologous proteins. more recently, panchenko and madej have introduced the "loop hausdorff measure" , which measures the  amount of deviation between the loop regions in a pair of superposed protein structures  <cit> . this new similarity measure is analogous to the traditional rmsd, but has the advantage that it can be applied to the corresponding but non-alignable regions in the two structures. it was shown that the loop regions in homologous proteins display a certain level of structural conservation, and the lhm is very sensitive in detecting subtle differences between protein structures otherwise unrecognized by conventional similarity scores  <cit> .

it should be noted that there are different ways to assess the ability of structural similarity scores to rank structurally similar homologs with respect to their relatedness. for example, yang and honig showed that there exists a correlation between the significant sequence similarity and their measure of structural distance even in the twilight zone of sequence similarity, so that high values of structural distance would correspond to the high probability that proteins are related by common descent and vice versa  <cit> . similarly, in a recent paper sequence-structure relationships for homologous proteins have been analyzed for different families/folds and it has been found as a corollary to other results that the quality of linear sequence-structure correlation varies depending on the structure similarity scores used in the study  <cit> .

in this paper we apply a roc analysis to the problem of ranking of structure neighbors with respect to homology, where we decide evolutionary relationships based on the scop database  <cit> . we use the "superfamily" level in the scop database hierarchy because almost certainly the proteins in a scop superfamily display probable homology and common functionality. using scop as a standard for evolutionary relationships in this study is problematic since other researchers have produced convincing arguments for homology between proteins in different scop superfamilies. however, the particular cases where difficulties would be expected are largely confined to families involving "superfolds", such as tim barrels or rossmann folds, and the analyses to convincingly establish homology are rather complicated. thus, although evolutionarily related proteins may be excluded because scop concluded there was insufficient evidence for homology, it remains the case that the superfamily members of a query protein are those for which there is clear and convincing evidence of functional relatedness. based on structure-structure superpositions we define different structure similarity scores and test their performance on the difficult benchmark of vast neighbors . we find that from among the scores we consider, the lhm, hcs, and gsas score  exhibit the best performance, especially for the remotely related proteins.

RESULTS
for convenience we quickly summarize out methods. further details are provided in the methods section. a selection of conserved domain  families were taken from the conserved domain database . for each cd family a query  structure was chosen and a list of similar structures  was generated using the vast algorithm. the lists were filtered by sequence identity to reduce redundancy. for a given query structure, those neighbors on its list were considered to be "true postives" if and only if they belong to the same superfamily as the query in the scop database. a given structural similarity measure/score can be used to rank the pairs of queries and neighbors, and for a chosen cutoff, we can compute the fractions of true positives  and false positives found at or above the cutoff. the fractions of true and false positives provide a basis for comparing the performance of the different similarity measures.

it is also of interest to compare the performance of the different measures with respect to the ranking difficulty. to estimate the ranking difficulty for each cdd family we take the average percent identity between its query structure and the non-redundant set of true positive structures . there is a broad distribution of sensitivity values across the different degrees of ranking difficulty as shown in figure  <dig>  implying that some domain families are easier to recognize than others. queries which have closely related structure neighbors show higher sensitivity and vice versa, this trend is apparent for all similarity scores used in the study. it should be noted that this analysis was done on a smaller test set of  <dig> families which had enough family members  to make the calculation of sensitivities per family more reliable. we also note that  <dig> of the cdd families are in the most difficult bin  and  <dig> are in the second most difficult bin, where the average sequence identity ranges from 10–20%. thus,  <dig> of the  <dig> cdd families may be considered to be well within the zone of sequence similarity where homology is hard to ascertain.

comparing the different scores, it is clear from this figure that hcs, gsas and lhm exhibit better sensitivity in the twilight zone of sequence similarity below 30% compared to other scores used in this study. moreover, hcs and gsas outperform the others in the most difficult cases below 10% of sequence identity. this is not surprising, for example, gsas represents a combination measure using alignment length, rmsd and the number of unaligned gapped regions. it is not unexpected that a combination measure should do well. as was shown earlier, a linear combination of alignment-based structural score  and loop-based structural score  had a much better performance compared to each of the scores used separately  <cit> .

the hcs scores use cd core models which have been determined by careful manual alignment curation using both sequence and structure data. from figure  <dig> it is quite clear that recognizing this common conserved core is a powerful method for inferring homology and functional similarity in the most difficult cases. for example, the class i amino acyl-trna synthetase  catalytic core domain  using the hcs score yields a sensitivity of  <dig>  at the 5% error rate whereas the sensitivities obtained with other measures are substantially lower . the aars catalytic core domain has  <dig> non-redundant structure neighbors of which  <dig> are in the same scop superfamily, with an average of about 10% sequence identity. the aars structural core is based on the rossmann fold and is well-conserved with a number of functionally important sites located at different core regions. these include a pair of atp-binding sites with important sequence/structural motifs  that are characteristic for class i aars and included in the core model. such features cause the hcs score to rank the scop superfamily members in this family more highly than the other numerous rossmann folds with more remote evolutionary relationships and less functional similarity.

the preceding analysis concerns the average performance of the various measures. however, in practice most researchers will be interested in particular protein families, and so we should also investigate what happens in specific cases. to do so, we first further limit the test set to those cdd families with at least  <dig> true positives and  <dig> false positives among their non-redundant structure neighbors; there are  <dig> such cdd families altogether. we found that there are  <dig> cdd families for which at least one similarity score  had a sensitivity higher than 80% at the 5% false positive rate. on the other hand, there are seven cdd families for which all three scores have a sensitivity of less than 50% at the 5% false positive rate .

it is apparent from table  <dig> that the seven "difficult" cdd families involve folds that span a broad range of sequence, function, and phylogenetic diversity and are often referred to as "superfolds". it is certainly to be expected that the measures we consider should encounter difficulty in the correct evolutionary ranking for structure neighbors of such families. most of these superfolds have protein cores which are very well conserved among all diverse members of these folds due to stability, foldability, or other requirements. certainly, subtle structural/sequence features or motifs that may provide clues to evolutionary relationships are not all included in our cdd-derived core models. moreover, as was shown previously there is evidence that all proteins from certain superfolds have a common ancestor and are all therefore possibly homologous   <cit> .

we also compared the measures over the four different major scop fold classes, at the 1% and 5% error rates. these results are available as supplementary data  and via the internet at  <cit> .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
most users of structure comparison methods will be interested mainly in those similarities which may shed light on the function of their query protein, and hence are primarily interested in the homologous neighbors. the scoring functions of the various structure comparison algorithms are useful for ranking the neighbors, however, the rankings they produce are much less than perfect, particularly in the "twilight zone" of similarity. this is not surprising. for example, vast scores and e-values are devised to recognize fold similarity for simplified vector models of protein structures. such vector models capture only gross similarities between the spatial arrangements of secondary structure elements in proteins, and one would suspect that such scores are too coarse-grained to do well at ranking homologs. in fact, in a recent paper by sierk and pearson  <cit> , the authors have found that the scoring schemes for a number of different structure alignment algorithms do not perform appreciably better at detecting homologs than normalized rmsd.

we have compared the different similarity measures via an roc analysis using the scop superfamily level as our definition of functional similarity/evolutionary relatedness. it is arguable as to whether or not this definition is inclusive enough, for example, the current consensus seems to be that almost all the tim barrels are homologous, although scop groups them into  <dig> distinct superfamilies . nonetheless, if we are to rank by functional relatedness, the scop superfamily members of a given query protein are surely more closely related than other similar structures.

in this paper we have presented scores such as the "loop hausdorff measure" and "homologous core structure", which are superior to the conventional structural similarity measures  at the task of ranking homologous, structurally similar proteins. a combination measure such as the "gapped structural alignment score" also performs well. we have shown  that in the more difficult cases, where the sequence identity between the query and its neighbors is low , the lhm, hcs, and gsas scores clearly produce the better rankings.

protein structure comparison continues to be an active area of research and highly interesting new methods and studies continue to appear, e.g.  <cit> . however, we have focussed on the lhm and hcs scores in this paper since they are of intrinsic biological interest. indeed, the lhm and hcs are easily interpretable as they quantify divergence of loop regions and conservation of structure, respectively, so that consideration of these measures can lead to deeper insights into structural evolutionary relationships.

more detailed case-by-case examination of individual cdd families shows that none of the scoring schemes works perfectly. for this reason it is important to make available several of the best-performing ranking schemes, and we are currently working on adding the lhm and hcs scores to the vast web server and vast search web service. improved rankings may reduce the number of neighbors in the "twilight zone", where it is difficult to discern homology/functionality, however, users will still need to examine other evidence such as sequence/structure conservation at functional sites in order to reach a firm conclusion.

