BACKGROUND
the brown planthopper  attacks rice plant and sucks fluid from the vascular bundle. heavy infestation in the field causes hopper burn: complete death of the rice plants. in addition to sucking damage, bph is a vector for the rice ragged stunt virus  and rice grassy stunt virus   <cit> . attack of this pest has caused intermittent serious famines in the east asia since ancient times; it became conspicuous in the southeast asia after the so-called green revolution of the 1960s. actually, bph shows two wing forms, long  and short  ones, in its adult stage. macropterous adults fly long distances and invade rice-growing area. most females of the subsequent generation of the immigrants are brachypterous – adapted for reproduction – and produce numerous offspring in rice fields. the wing dimorphism is induced by environmental stimuli during nymphal stages. these biological properties of bph are closely related to bph distribution, bph reproduction, and rice plant damage.

control methods of bph primarily include the application of insecticides; various chemicals, organo-phosphorous, carbamate, pyrethroid, and neonicotinoid insecticides have been used in the field. however, insecticide application poses two problems: appearance of insecticide-resistant planthoppers  <cit> ; and stimulation of planthopper propagation by insecticide treatment, known as resurgence  <cit> . planthopper-resistant varieties of rice, which are widely cultivated in asian countries, are also used as means of controlling bph. however, cultivation of the planthopper-resistant varieties has engendered new virulent strains of bph that can attack the resistant varieties  <cit> . elucidation of rice plants' genes that increase resistance against planthoppers and bph virulence mechanisms against the resistant rice plants have become important tasks. the former subject, that of resistance genes of rice plants, is studied extensively based on positional cloning, so-called map-based cloning procedures  <cit> . the latter problem, appearance of virulent strains of planthopper, awaits precise studies based on recent molecular approaches.

rice planthoppers have been studied from ecological and physiological viewpoints but they have remained poorly investigated in genetic terms. a valid method for introducing molecular studies into insects without a genetic background is construction of an est database. information of genes working in various tissues at various growth stages is extremely useful for molecular functional study in biology. the ests of many insects have been accumulated; those of target insects have expanded to include agricultural pests, such as the migratory locust  <cit> , aphids  <cit> , whitefly  <cit> , and armyworm  <cit> . generation of ests in these agricultural pests is a first step to development of genomic resources for helping to solve agricultural problems.

the order hemiptera, which includes nilaparvata lugens, comprises two suborders: heteroptera and homoptera. genome studies of heteroptera are poor and a small-scale est study have been reported  <cit> , although large scale ests have been generated from homopteran insects, the pea aphid acyrthosiphon pisum  <cit> , the whitefly bemisia tabaci  <cit> , the green peach aphid myzus persicae  <cit> , the cotton aphid aphis gossypii , and the glassy-winged sharpshooter homalodisca coagulata . in addition, est studies have been reported for the cereal aphid rhopalosiphum padi  <cit>  and the brown citrus aphid toxoptera citricida  <cit> . a whole genome sequencing project is undertaken in a model insect a. pisum.

the present study was designed to acquire elusive est data from different tissues and to provide data for discovery and identification of genes involved in fundamental biological phenomena and agricultural problems related to bph. we also intend to undertake microarray-based studies in this planthopper species. we have collected about  <dig>  high-quality est data and more than  <dig>  clustered unigenes from various tissues of this important pest. the datasets are available at dna databases under the following accession numbers:  and at the website for bph cdna  <cit> .

RESULTS
quality control of cdna libraries
we produced  <dig> libraries  from  <dig> different tissues or stages of the brown planthopper  to obtain various transcripts and to extract tissue-specifically expressed genes or planthopper-specific genes from the libraries. two vectors, lambda-zap ii and pgem, were used for construction of the cdna libraries. the former phage libraries were used in the early stages of study; later we constructed pgem libraries using smart technology. single-path sequencing of the cdna, which provided the sequence from the 5' region of mrna, was done in each library. in all, more than  <dig>  clones were processed, and  <dig>  high-quality sequences of more than  <dig> bp long were selected. vector sequences franking with the est sequences were trimmed manually. sequence contamination of lambda-zap ii vector or lambda phage  and the host organism escherichia coli  were deleted from the libraries based on in-house blast searches. the sequences of three major commensalistic viruses in the planthopper, nlrv  <cit> , nlcxv  <cit> , and hi-pv  <cit> , of which numbers in the ests were  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> clones, respectively, were discarded. the hi-pv sequences were mainly found from libraries of the female  and male  midgut, which is a major infection and propagation site of hi-pv  <cit> . mitochondrial sequences, which formed about 11% of the selected sequences , were subsequently eliminated. ribosomal rna  and retrotransposon r <dig>  sequences were also eliminated from the remaining ests. the resultant  <dig>  sequences were further checked for short vector sequences using ncbi vecscreen. chimeric sequences, which include two or more different mrna sequences in an est sequence, were then surveyed. ests were clustered based on the result of blastn ; positional distributions of ests in each group were shown on a computer screen using the graphical overview of ncbi blast. the chimeric sequences were checked manually to determine whether two contigs were included in an assembled group or not. the chimeric sequences were usually found as those connecting two est contigs or those having sequence extension to other members. some, but not all, chimeric sequences appear to have been deleted. finally,  <dig>  cleaned sequences were deposited in the bph database. some ests, however, might retain several extra nucleotides at the 5' end. the average length of all ests was  <dig>  bp; the range of most abundant sizes of sequences was 651– <dig> bp . ambiguous nucleotides, which are shown in "n", were  <dig> % on average  among all est sequences .

zap, lambda zap ii  phage vector; pgem, pgem-t plasmid vector; %"n", percentage of ambiguous nucleotides. ovary and testis includes the accessory glands of the reproductive organs. clustering was performed using clobb  <cit> . ests are deposited in the dna databases under accession numbers db20956–db <dig> .

est clustering
all cleaned est sequences were subjected to clustering using two clustering protocols, cluster on the basis of blast similarity   <cit>  and method of combined blast and phredphrap   <cit> . mainly, clobb was used but the results of clustering generally differ among protocols. for that reason, two clustering methods were compared. first, clobb analyses were performed using parameters of 95% identity and  <dig> bp coverage , resulting in  <dig>  clusters  . sequence assembly of the members of each contig, however, sometimes showed sequence variation . this seems to be attributable to the following reasons: planthopper specimens collected from the stock culture possess heterogeneity in genome sequences among individuals. in addition, more than one similar gene was encoded on the genome. the second protocol, cbp, created  <dig>  clusters  using the parameters in additive manner, >97% identity and > <dig> bp coverage  <cit> . actually, cbp tended to separate the members of each contig, whereas clobb sometimes included much sequence variation in each contig. a bph database  <cit>  was constructed based on cbp clustering results.

comparison of two cloning systems for est analyses
in the est project for small insects, the whole body is often used as the starting material because it is difficult to obtain a sufficient amount of total rna or mrna otherwise. in fact, female adult bphs are about 4-mm long; the rna amount from the dissected small tissue is therefore insufficient for a phage library. we used two cloning systems: lambda zap ii phage  and pgem plasmid . in general, the phage libraries are better than the plasmid libraries because the former can clone a larger insert dna and create a larger number of clones than the latter. however, cloning into the pgem plasmid is easier than that into zap ii phage; moreover, it can be performed using a smaller amount of mrna sample. here, we compared the quality of the plasmid libraries with the phage libraries in two respects: the rate of vector contamination and the unigene ratio in each library.

first, contamination of cloning vectors in the est sequences was compared in  <dig>  ests  using in-house blast, as described above. in the phage libraries,  <dig> lambda phage sequences were found, although no pgem vector sequences were detected in the plasmid libraries. host bacterial genome contamination was found in  <dig> clones in the phage libraries and one in the plasmid libraries. the plasmid library is excellent from the viewpoint of contamination of vector sequences and host bacterial genome sequences.

second, unigene ratios were calculated against the number of ests in each library. in the plasmid libraries, cdna was prepared using smart technology , which uses pcr amplification. therefore, the possibility is considered that biased amplification reduces the variety of cdna. this might consequently decrease the ratio of unigenes in ests. figure  <dig> shows the relation between the unigene ratio and the number of analyzed ests. the vertical axis shows the ratio , and the horizontal axis shows the number of ests analyzed. the number of unigenes corresponding to the number of clusters was calculated using clobb . no marked low unigene ratio in the plasmid library was observed; rather, the ratio was varied among libraries . one phage library  showed an extremely low unigene ratio , which was excluded for calculation of regression curve in fig.  <dig>  no remarkable disadvantage was observed in the plasmid libraries in terms of the unigene ratio. however, consideration of biased amplification and of polymerase amplification error is required for est sequences of the plasmid libraries. a low amplification cycle number is preferable for construction of plasmid libraries.

abundantly expressed genes
most abundantly expressed genes were extracted from the  <dig>  ests based on the clobb clustering results. the contigs that included the top ten members are presented in table  <dig>  contigs containing many ests were simply selected from the top, although the numbers of ests differ among libraries, which appears to affect the ranking of highly expressed genes.

the number of members was calculated using the clobb clustering algorithm. genes are shown by the est number that is representative of the cluster members. aa <dig> is the same cluster member of oc <dig>  which is highly expressed in the ovary, as shown in table  <dig>  "n.h." denotes no homology in blast searches .

the actin gene was the most abundantly expressed in this species: clobb clustering formed a single group of actin gene as the biggest contig. sequence alignment of the est members showed that the actin gene of bph had a coding capacity of  <dig> amino acid residues with a few single nucleotide polymorphisms among est members. the actin gene is highly expressed in the thorax . this result is in accordance with the planthopper internal structure: the thorax is rich in muscle. the ests of the myosin gene, the eighth highly expressed gene, is also found mainly in th and ht libraries.

a second abundantly expressed gene , which was mainly found in midgut libraries, showed no homology in the blast searches. this contig showed a coding capacity of a protein of  <dig> residues . interproscan  <cit>  indicated that the first  <dig> amino acids corresponded to a signal peptide. more than 96% of ests belong to the male and female midgut libraries . another five libraries, egg , 1st instar nymph , salivary gland , and testis  libraries respectively contained this gene sequence in small numbers: six, four, one, five, and five. subsequently, rt-pcr was performed to examine the expression stages of this gene in bph. in all,  <dig> individuals of each stage  were tested. gene expression, however, showed no uniformity among individuals and through the stages. some individuals showed the pcr product and some did not . quantitative rt-pcr showed a parallel level of expression with standard ribosomal protein l <dig> in the ovary, midgut and testis . therefore, the rna level of this gene seems to be high in bph. the gene expression pattern was unusual. for that reason, genomic pcr was performed to examine whether this gene is coded in the bph genome. however, we failed to obtain a pcr product from the genomic dna using various combinations of  <dig> primers throughout the gene sequence and various amplification conditions. genome-coded genes, such as the elongation factor  <dig> gene and ribosomal protein l <dig> gene, which are one-copy genes in drosophila melanogaster, were amplified in similar conditions. this result suggests that the mb <dig> gene is not in the bph genome but rather came from an exogenous source. in fact, bphs possess intracellular yeastlike symbiotes  in the fat body  <cit> , but this gene was not found in the genome of yls by a pcr-based survey. moreover, the expression of this gene was observed in the tissues where yls are not distributed. bacteria in the gut do not also appear to be the source of this highly expressed gene because expression was not restricted to the gut. moreover, genomic pcr from the intestine sample did not give a pcr product. a possible explanation is that this transcript or rna derived from an exogenous source of bph such as a virus or infectious rna. three virus species are known in bph  <cit> ; a different virus might be the source of this gene. transmitted dsrna replicons are often found in plants and fungi  <cit>  and have been reported in insects  <cit> .

thirdly, an uncustomary gene, which was highly recovered from the salivary gland library , was ranked. the gene product was rich in serine and alanine; some repeated amino acid sequences were found, suggesting that this gene product is a structural protein in bph. this gene showed high homology to the gene expressed in the small brown planthopper, laodelphax striatellus, which is annotated as mucin-like protein . mucin is a heavily glycosylated protein forming a polymeric structure. it functions as mucosal barriers in some tissues. planthoppers are vascular feeders and secrete coagulable saliva from the salivary glands for stylet feeding  <cit> . the protein of this gene product might be related to planthopper feeding. the predicted amino acid product, however, shows no homology with drosophila mucin   <cit> .

two enzyme genes, trypsin-like protease gene and enolase gene, were highly expressed in the planthopper. the protease was expressed in the midgut, showing expression in the libraries that contained the gut, aa, ab, ma, mb, na, nb, and th. about 97% of est was recovered from the midgut libraries ma and mb. the trypsin-like protease apparently works for food digestion. this gene corresponds to aj <dig> reported in bph  <cit> . on the other hand, enolase expression was found from a wide range of libraries, including the libraries of the salivary glands, ovary, and testis. enolase is an essential glycolytic enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of 2-phosphoglycerate. other highly expressed enzyme genes in bph were atp synthase subunit c , arginine kinase , and carboxylesterase . the former two genes work for energy production. the carboxylesterase is related to insecticide resistance by catalyzing the insecticidal compounds  <cit> .

another notable gene was vitellogenin or vitellogenin-like protein gene. results of clobb clustering showed that  <dig> ests belong to the vitellogenin gene cluster. the gene sequences of vitellogenin or vitellogenin-like proteins were not identical and were composed of several varied sequences. the fat body is the principal site of production of this yolk protein precursor in arthropods  <cit> . the expression of the vitellogenin gene, however, occurred throughout the female planthopper body; many ests  were found in the salivary gland library . no est of vitellogenin was found in the libraries of the egg, nymphal, and male libraries in bph. however, similar genes were found in male libraries: further precise analysis is necessary. the whitefly, bemisia tabaci, a homopteran insect like bph, shows much expression of vitellogenin in adults  <cit> .

two genes of low or no homology were ranked at seventh and ninth . the gene aa <dig> was found in libraries of the female gonad  and the female abdomen , which contained the gonad. this result suggests that this gene is specifically expressed in the female gonad. this gene is the same as the female gonad-sepcifically expressed gene oc <dig> described below. the cdna size was short, about  <dig> bp, exhibiting the longest coding ability of  <dig> residues. the putative amino acid sequence was mssklffvlatlalsallsatesdavysnyalgsyggyaypsyaypyygygypyysygypyygyrypyysygypyysygypyysygypyygyggyggypyggygaypgvgcva, suggesting that this gene codes for a structural protein that is rich in tyrosine  and glycine . in-situ hybridization of this gene sequence showed specific expression in the lateral oviduct of the ovary as described later. actually, bph has swelled lateral oviducts, which become large and produce white material during maturation. this gene product seems to be a material that is secreted with oviposition.

the gene of no homology at ninth high expression in bph  was expressed in the midgut. in all,  <dig> ests were in the libraries of ma or mb, and each est was found in ab, ac, na, and nb libraries, whose samples contain the midgut. the specific expression in the midgut was confirmed using rt-pcr; no rt-pcr products were observed from the ovary and testis. this gene showed about  <dig> bp of cdna size and coding capacity of  <dig> residues. the members of the est cluster were composed of two variant sequences, especially in the 3'utr. the two groups showed two amino acid differences in putative amino acid sequences, suggesting that they are variants of the same functional protein. homology searches showed no related genes in the databases.

ribosomal protein genes were also highly expressed. ribosomal protein gene rps <dig> was ranked at 5th and other ribosomal protein genes rpl <dig> and rbl <dig> were in the top  <dig> highly expressed genes.

expression of housekeeping genes among tissues – est map
the gene expression pattern among libraries was visualized using a key word search in the blastx annotation and an excel  macro program. this est map appears to disclose the pattern of differential expression of highly expressed genes among tissues and stages. in the analyses of abundantly expressed genes in the previous section, abundance was judged from the direct number of ests in the libraries. in the est map, a corrected value against the size of each library, the number of ests, was shown against  <dig>  expressed genes. although the ests that showed no key word in the highest score annotation text of blastx were not counted, the est map provides a rough comparison of the expression pattern of a certain gene among tissues.

highly expressed genes in each body part and developmental stage
abundantly expressed genes in each tissue or body part were examined. the top three contigs in the number of ests were selected using clobb analyses . most genes extracted in each library were so-called housekeeping genes. some highly expressed genes showed no homology with the present data in the databases. an example of a body-part-specific gene was rhodopsin gene, which works for visualization and was the third in the number of ests in the female head . the female thorax  highly expressed actin and myosin; these genes appear to be expressed for the flight muscle, as described previously. vitellogenin-like gene was the most abundant in the female abdomen . vitellogenin is an egg yolk protein that is synthesized in the fat body before transportation into the eggs. therefore, the high expression of this gene in female abdomen is reasonable. however, it was also found to be highly expressed in the salivary glands. tissue specificity in gene expression was apparent and some specific genes were more abundantly recovered as ests than housekeeping genes. functional analyses of these genes are important for elucidating specific features of bph and probably homopteran or hemimetabolous insects.

representative clones are shown by an est number in the cluster. "n.h." denotes no homology. ha <dig> showed no homology, but other members of the cluster showed homology to rhodopsin. other cluster members of ma <dig> and mb <dig> showed homology to trypsin-like protease.

genes specifically expressed in the gonads
reproductive organ-specifically expressed genes were sought. insects showed various types of reproduction. elucidation of the function of genes specifically expressed in the gonads is an interesting subject of research and an important topic for insect management through reproductive suppression or stimulation. planthoppers, which are hemimetabolous insects, have telotrophic ovarioles, whereas holometabolous insects, such as fruit flies, mosquitoes, honeybees, and silkworms, have polytrophic ovarioles. specific genes or specific function in the hemimetabolous insects are expected in the gonad-specifically expressed genes of bph.

in this species, the ovary starts to mature one or two days after adult emergence. library oa is made from the immature ovary and its accessory glands of 0– <dig> day old adults; ob and oc were made from mature ones of 4– <dig> days old. libraries aa and ab were made from the female abdomen, which includes the female gonad. therefore, the ests found only in the libraries oa, ob, oc, aa, and ab are candidate genes for female-gonad-specific expression. table  <dig> shows the example of candidate ests of female-gonad-specifically expressed genes. these genes were selected by high-frequency expression in these five libraries and no expression in the other libraries. the ests that show expression in the libraries ob and oc and no expression in the library oa  were probably expressed in the mature ovary and accessory glands. the restricted expression of these genes in the female gonad was confirmed by rt-pcr. figure  <dig> shows the restricted gene expression of est clone oc <dig> in the female gonad and abdomen. in situ hybridization showed expression of this gene in the lateral oviduct  as described previously. further examination is necessary for characterizing these genes in ovarian development of bph.

the numbers of ests detected in the five libraries related with the ovary and its accessory glands are shown. oa, ob and oc are the libraries from the female gonad and aa and ab are those from the female abdomen. the upper line is the number of cluster members in each library using the clustering algorithm cbp; the lower line those using clobb. "n.h." denotes no homology. the category for 'no homology' is described in gene annotation in methods.

male-gonad-specifically expressed genes are presented in table  <dig>  genes expressed in the testis and its accessory glands should be in the library ta and the libraries of the male abdomen ac and ad, in which the male gonad is included. since the male gonad starts to develop from the senior nymphal stage, the library nb might also include the gonad-specifically expressed genes. therefore, the genes expressed in these libraries and not in other libraries were nominated. candidate genes were brought into rt-pcr examination and the genes confirmed to be expressed only in the male gonad are shown in table  <dig>  the results of rt-pcr and in situ hybridization of est clone ta <dig> are portrayed respectively in fig.  <dig> and fig.  <dig>  ta <dig> was transcribed in an accessory gland of the testis.

the numbers of ests detected in the four libraries related with the testis and its accessory glands are shown. ta is the library of the male gonad, ac and ad are those from the male abdomen, and nb is that of 4th instar nymphs. the upper line is the cluster member in each library using the clustering algorithm cbp; the lower line those using clobb. "n.h." denotes no homology. the category for 'no homology' is described in gene annotation in methods.

the genes listed in tables  <dig> and  <dig> are some gonad-specifically expressed genes. these genes were able to be selected because they expressed highly in the libraries of the gonad or the body part containing the gonad. although this approach to extract tissue-specifically expressed genes is useful, it is not easy to obtain genes that are not actively expressed in the tissues.

general feature of est libraries and gene ontology analysis
insects are a large group among animals and are quite divergent. many ests of bph showed no homology in the nucleotide and amino acid sequences. to examine the similarity level of the genes among insect species, we conducted homology searches using blastx against protein data of three insect species, drosophila melanogaster, anopheles gambiae, and apis mellifera. all  <dig>  ests were examined against each protein database, and were grouped by the e-value shown in the blast result . of ests, 35–40% showed homology with the proteins of the three insect species with <e- <dig>  but 35–40% showed very little or no homology with the proteins of the three insects. some genes showing 'no homology' or 'no-hit-found' might be those that are not translated into proteins. it is worth consideration that bph is a hemimetabolous insect, which has no pupal stage, and the other three species are holometabolous ones. this difference might affect the low homology between them.

CONCLUSIONS
the most feared pest of rice plants is bph. the est database constructed in this study and described herein will be useful for the molecular studies of bph. bph shows resistance against various insecticides. insecticide resistance mechanisms are considered to be attributable to the high enzyme activities, which metabolize the compounds quickly  <cit> . they are also partially attributable to the mutations in the genome sequences in the target molecules, which cause insensitivity to the chemicals  <cit> . gene sequences of the metabolic enzymes and insecticide-target molecules might be obtained from the database. the est database is also useful for identifying potential target genes for developing novel insecticides against planthoppers  <cit> . the database will also be useful for finding important functional molecules  <cit>  as well as for searching for hemipterous insect-specific or tissue-specific genes. genomic sequence data are unavailable in nilaparvata lugens. therefore, est data will also be used for identification of proteins in proteomic studies  <cit> .

further determination of complete cdna sequences is underway. microarrays produced based on the est data and some additional sequences from ongoing full-length cdna analyses are expected to become powerful tools for gene expression analyses. the microarray analyses will be applied for elucidation of mechanism of wing dimorphism in planthoppers. long or short wings are induced by environmental stimuli during nymphs and the response is different between sexes. a recently developed molecular sexing method in bph  <cit> , which enable to distinguish sexes in nymphal stages, will contribute to studying wing dimorphism in bph together with the microarrays. gene expression profiles of bph that attack various resistant varieties of rice plants will be useful for elucidating the molecular mechanism of rice plant resistance and planthopper virulence against resistant rice plants. expressed genes related to plant-sucking and nutrient digestion are also important targets in bph physiological and biochemical studies. in addition, results reveal that rna interference  is quite effective in bph . this important agricultural pest might also be used as a hemimetabolous model insect in the near future as well as several aphid species. the continued accumulation of information related to nilaparvata lugens can promote efforts to control other economically important rice planthopper species: sogatella furcifera and laodelphax striatellus.

