BACKGROUND
onychophora  are commonly regarded as the sistergroup of euarthropoda, i.e. chelicerata, myriapoda, crustacea, and hexapoda  <cit> . morphologically onychophorans closely resemble the extinct cambrian lobopodians, which is why they are by some authors considered as "living fossils"  <cit> . due to their basal position within the arthropoda, onychophora represent a key group for the current discussion on the evolution of arthropods  <cit> .

currently, there are two competing hypotheses concerning the phylogenetic position of arthropoda within the bilateria:  the traditional articulata concept, and  the ecdysozoa hypothesis  <cit> . in the controversial debates on the validity of either hypothesis, the structure of the nervous system is one of the most contentious issues  <cit> . according to the articulata hypothesis , which proposes a sistergroup relationship of annelida and arthropoda, a "rope ladder-like" nervous system , is a synapomorphy of these taxa  <cit> . the rope ladder-like nervous system is characterized by segmental, bilaterally arranged ganglia, which are longitudinally linked by connectives  and transversely linked by commissures  <cit> . in many arthropods, the bilateral ganglia in each body segment have been fused, thus forming unpaired structures. yet, according to the competing ecdysozoa hypothesis , segmental ganglia do not necessarily represent an ancestral feature of arthropods since they are absent in their next relatives, i.e. nematodes, priapulids, and allies. only in kinorhynchs, which show an orthogonal nervous system, the mid-dorsal and mid-ventral longitudinal nerve cords are ganglionated  <cit> . under the ecdysozoa concept, segmental condensations of neuronal cell bodies, i.e. ganglia, might therefore have evolved convergently in annelida and arthropoda  <cit> .

notably, segmental ganglia, as seen in euarthropods, do not occur in onychophora  <cit> . according to the articulata hypothesis, segmental ganglia must thus have been reduced or modified in this taxon . based on studies of the nervous system in onychophora, however, there are contrary views as to whether the structural correlates or "rudiments" of segmental ganglia occur in this group  <cit> . if no such correlates or remnants exist in onychophora, this feature would not be useful for supporting the homology of segmentation in annelida and arthropoda  <cit> , which would seriously compromise the articulata hypothesis.

immunolocalization of serotonin seems to be well suited to explore segmental characteristics of nerve cords in a phylogenetic context. in representatives of echiura, which lack external body segmentation, recent immunocytochemical studies have shown that serotonin-like immunoreactive  neurons are nevertheless arranged in repeated units along the ventral nerve cord  <cit> . these repeated units were suggested to correspond to the typical segmental ganglia in annelida, suggesting that the ventral nervous system was primarily segmented in echiura and that this taxon might be closely related to or may even represent an in-group of annelida  <cit> . this assumption is supported by the phylogenetic analyses of different molecular data sets  <cit> . similar repeated sets of 5-ht-lir neurons occur in the ventral nervous system of the earthworm lumbricus terrestris  <cit> , an annelid species with secondarily modified segmental ganglia. comparable evidence of repeated sets of individually identifiable 5-ht-lir neurons in onychophora would suggest that segmental ganglia are an ancestral feature of arthropoda , supporting the articulata rather than the ecdysozoa hypothesis. onychophora, thus, represent an important group for understanding the evolution of nervous systems in arthropods.

the arrangement and architecture of serotonin-like immunoreactive neurons has been analyzed in a wide range of different arthropod species . in all representatives of euarthropoda studied thus far, segmentally iterated and bilaterally symmetric identifiable sets of 5-ht-lir neurons are present  <cit> . although biogenic amines, including serotonin, have been shown to be present in the onychophoran nervous system by histochemical methods  <cit>  and immunolocalization studies in the brain  <cit> , no data are as yet available on the arrangement of 5-ht-lir neurons within the ventral nerve cord.

this study describes the general morphology of the ventral nerve cord and the distribution of 5-ht-lir neurons in two representatives of the major onychophoran taxa, peripatidae and peripatopsidae. we confirm that the onychophoran nerve cord is of medullary type characterized by a scattered distribution of neuronal cell bodies along the antero-posterior body axis and the absence of somata-free connectives. in addition, we do not find any serially iterated arrangement of 5-ht-lir neurons, suggesting that segmental ganglia are primarily absent and not secondarily reduced in onychophora. this finding clearly weakens the traditional articulata hypothesis as it shows that a chain of ventral ganglia most likely does not represent an ancestral feature of arthropods.

RESULTS
general morphology of ventral nerve cords
the bilaterally paired ventral nerve cords of onychophorans represent longitudinal structures that are connected with each other by numerous commissures . typically, there are nine commissures per body segment, but their number varies from eight to ten in different segments . herein, each segment is characterized by the position of legs and associated structures , as there are no distinct metameric landmarks in the inter-pedal regions of the onychophoran body. at regular intervals, each cord gives rise to a pair of lateral nerves innervating the legs . additional peripheral nerves supplying the body wall musculature originate in the inter-pedal regions of successive segments . within the body, the nerve cords flank the gut in a ventrolateral position . they are dorsoventrally flattened and appear oval in shape in cross-sections . the internal structure of each nerve cord is uniform throughout the body, comprising a dorsal neuropil and a ventral, ventromedian and ventrolateral layer with neuronal somata . the median part of the neuropil bears numerous giant fibers, two of which are larger than the others . on its outer surface, i.e. towards the body cavity, each nerve cord is enveloped by a thick layer of collagenous connective tissue.

observations on several specimens of nerve cords of metaperipatus blainvillei and epiperipatus biolleyi sectioned in sagittal, horizontal, and transverse planes, or examined as whole-mount preparations  failed to reveal distinct segmental thickenings .

serotonin-like immunoreactivity
in accordance with earlier physiological and biochemical studies  <cit>  our data show that 5-ht-lir material is widely distributed throughout the ventral nerve cords in both species studied: metaperipatus blainvillei and epiperipatus biolleyi . no species-specific differences in the distribution patterns were observed. the neuropil contains a dense network of 5-ht-lir fibers . labeled fibers exit the neuropil via the median commissures towards the contralateral cord, via the paired lateral leg nerves, and via peripheral nerves innervating the body wall . 5-ht-lir neurons were exclusively unipolar . within the perikaryal layer of each nerve cord, the somata of 5-ht-lir neurons are arranged mainly in the periphery, i.e., near the ventral and ventrolateral surface of the nerve cords . the somata are small, measuring between 15– <dig> μm in size. their single neurites project towards the neuropil without fasciculating with other processes . the course of the neurites could not be followed within the neuropil because of the high level of labeling of 5-ht-lir fibers .

the analysis of vibratome sections as well as whole-mount preparations showed that in both onychophoran species studied the distribution of 5-ht-lir neurons does not exhibit any ordered arrangement . the immunoreactive neurons  are instead scattered randomly throughout the entire length of each nerve cord . specifically, we neither observed segmentally iterated nor bilaterally symmetric patterns. in addition, we did not find any individually identifiable 5-ht-lir neurons.

discussion
this study revealed that in onychophora, the arrangement of 5-ht-lir neurons does not show any recognizable serial or segmental organization, which is in contrast to the strict segmentally iterated arrangement of 5-ht-lir neurons in most other arthropods, including chelicerata, myriapoda, crustacea, and hexapoda . 5-ht-lir neurons are instead scattered throughout the entire length of each onychophoran nerve cord in an apparently random fashion. serotonin-like immunoreactivity accordingly does not provide any evidence for modified ganglionic concentrations of neurons or even ganglion rudiments in onychophora. our data clearly support previous reports  <cit>  in showing that the onychophoran nerve cord belongs to the medullary type  of nervous systems that are characterized by a scattered distribution of neuronal cell bodies along the nerve cords and the absence of somata-free connectives . in this respect, the organization of the onychophoran nerve cord resembles that of the longitudinal nerve cords in other bilaterians, such as platyhelminthes  <cit> , gnathostomulida  <cit> , nemertea  <cit> , mollusca  <cit> , nematoda  <cit> , and some representatives of annelida  <cit> , rather than that in euarthropoda. in euarthropoda, typical bilaterally arranged segmental ganglia are present, which are longitudinally connected by connectives  and transversely linked by commissures. this fact contradicts recent suggestions of segmental ganglia being a common or an ancestral feature of onychophora . furthermore, our data argue against the claims  <cit>  that only two commissures per segment are characteristic of the onychophoran nervous system. yet, the onychophoran medullary type nervous system, in which few elements e.g. the leg nerves  are serially iterated, may have served as the starting point, from which the euarthropodan rope ladder-like nervous system with its typical segmental characteristics has evolved.

in contrast to previous neuroanatomical studies  <cit> , we found that paired nerves innervating the legs represent the only segmentally arranged structures associated with the onychophoran nerve cord. this layout closely corresponds with the organization of musculature in onychophora since muscles supplying the legs are the only segmental structures within the onychophoran muscular system  <cit> . the metameric thickenings described by federow  <cit>  correlate with the position of legs, which are partially hollow and provide additional space for the nerve cords to evade laterally when the animal's body is contracted. although the commissures and peripheral nerves do show a repeated pattern, this organization is independent from the segmental arrangement of other structures and organs, i.e. legs, nephridia and heart ostia, which are typical for each onychophoran body segment  <cit> . in addition to the neuroanatomical data obtained from adult specimens, ganglia as discrete gross morphological entities are not apparent in the development of the onychophoran nerve cord  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, studies on neuroanatomy and neurogenesis  <cit>  in onychophora do not provide any evidence that segmental ganglia or a rope ladder-like organization is an ancestral feature of the onychophoran nerve cord. rather, this structure shows many similarities with the medullary or "markstrang" type of many other representatives of bilateria  <cit> , including platyhelminths  <cit> . whether this type of organization represents an ancestral or derived feature of onychophora must be clarified by further comparative studies using immunolabeling methods with other neuron-specific markers. however, recent neuroanatomical studies on representatives of annelida  <cit>  also contradict previous assumptions that their nervous system originally had a rope ladder-like organization like that seen in euarthropoda. this strongly suggests that a rope-ladder type of nervous system, comprising segmental ganglionic condensations linked by somata-free connectives, has evolved convergently in annelids and arthropods. thus, our results as well as recent immunocytochemical findings on annelids are in stark contrast to previous views  <cit>  that a priori suggest segmental ganglia to be one of the synapomorphies uniting the annelida and arthropoda. therefore, the character "presence of segmental ganglia" can no longer be taken as supporting the monophyly of articulata since these structures were most likely absent in the last common ancestor of onychophora and euarthropoda.

