BACKGROUND
disease definition and classification is an open problem and, nowadays, the traditional phenotype-based definitions and classifications such as the international classification of diseases 
 <cit>  or the systematized nomenclature of medicine 
 <cit>  have been enriched with molecular-based classifications with roots in genetic association databases such as online mendelian inheritance in man 
 <cit>  and genetic association database 
 <cit> , biological network analyses
 <cit>  and over-representation engines such as the dics  repository
 <cit>  and david
 <cit> .

as a sample of these works, goh et al.
 <cit>  introduced the term “diseasome” while generating a bipartite graph of all known genetic disorders  to the list of known disease genes . they presented a “disease gene network”  connecting genes related to the same diseases, and a “human disease network” , connecting diseases related to the same gene. lage et al. <cit>  introduced a network linking protein interactions to human disease groups generated by text mining techniques, in an attempt to re-define disease according to annotation in databases, and developed a predictor of genes to be considered as related to some diseases. feldman et al. <cit>  generated their own disease-interactome network and examined the network properties of disease-related gene mutations, finding that genes with intermediate connectivity are more probably disease-related and that disease genes display significant functional clustering. dietmann et al. <cit>  generated a web-based repository of protein complexes and computationally predicted functional modules, which allows the user to detect complexes or modules significantly enriched in a list of genes.

most of the previous works start from protein interaction networks  constructed by merging a few popular databases without explicitly stating how redundant information is normalized . in addition, some of these studies use mathematically generated “modules” that do not necessarily correspond to a biological concept or observation. these factors make it difficult to cross-compare strategies for examining relationships between diseases and interaction data.

in this paper, we present an analysis of the overlaps between disease groups and interaction data as well as pathway data. the work represents a baseline analysis that can be easily reproduced using the provided data sets and scripts. we use the irefindex as a source of interaction data consolidated from  <dig> different databases
 <cit>  where proteins are normalized to a canonical representative in order to limit redundancy 
 <cit> . this redundancy issue is especially important given that we employ the hypergeometric test in order to assess overlap between disease groups and interaction data. in addition, we pay special attention to treating separately overlaps between disease groups and the three types of interaction data: from binary records, n-ary records and spoke-represented complex records
 <cit> . we show that each is an important source of complementary data. finally, we show how disease-interaction overlaps can be monitored from one release of irefindex to another as the underlying data sets grow. in this paper, we have restricted our analysis to a simple ad-hoc definition of disease groups – titles from omim records are grouped using regular expressions to identify highly-similar titles describing various sub-types of the same disease. the causative genes are assembled into a “disease group”. this is a conservative grouping method and is easily reproduced – the groups themselves are also provided in the additional material. other, more sophisticated disease and phenotype groupings are possible and the provided groups of disease genes can be easily replaced for comparison purposes.

we focus on the relationship between disease groups and protein groups, such as complexes or pathways, to assess to what extent groups of genes that are phenotypically related are involved in the same protein group. many known diseases are multigenic in nature and, in some cases, may encode different partners in the same interaction, complex or pathway; disruption of any of these may lead to a related phenotype
 <cit> . one example is the disease known as “cerebral cavernous malformations” . according to omim, there are three types of ccm: ccm <dig> has been related to the krit <dig> gene, ccm <dig> to the ccm <dig>  gene and ccm <dig> to the pdcd <dig> gene. a search in irefindex reveals that these three genes belong to a single complex . therefore, a “ccm” disease group may be confidently related to one malfunctioning protein complex. in addition, some diseases have been reported to be related to dimers , ligand-receptor disruption  or pathway disruption 
 <cit> . a more complicated example is “fanconi anemia”. the  <dig> genes causing fanconi anemia have been recently grouped into three categories
 <cit> :  <dig> genes form the so-called “fanconi anemia core complex”,  <dig> genes belong to the “fa-id complex”,  <dig> other genes act downstream as regulators, and all three groups have been called the “fa pathway”.

these cases represent known relationships between diseases and complexes  and they are often cited in the literature as evidence supporting the idea that similar phenotypes may have underlying molecular associations. we wished to examine this idea for a spectrum of diseases in order to determine how broadly applicable it may be. in a previous paper, we introduced a plugin for cytoscape  that allows the user to search for interaction data related to any one of the disease groups used in this paper. here, we examine how likely a user is to retrieve statistically significant results that may help shed light on the mechanism of a disease. we also lay the ground work to track the progress of this result set over time as disease-group and interaction data evolve.

RESULTS
we compared thirteen protein interaction databases  to groups of proteins that are assumed to be involved in related diseases, which we called “disease groups” , in order to computationally determine all known diseases that might be related to known protein complexes and interactions in humans. after that, we performed a similar analysis for pathway databases. all analyses, tables and figures can be reproduced using the accompanying r script .

construction of disease groups
human inherited phenotypes and their related genes found in the omim morbid map
 <cit>  were assembled into related groups based on their titles, as described in methods. this method provided groups of genes that were used throughout the remainder of the study to identify related complexes and subnetworks found in protein interaction databases.

each table-entry from the omim morbid map describes a potential causal relationship between some gene listed in entrez gene
 <cit>  and a disease listed in omim. we used a system of regular expressions to identify sets of omim disease titles that were either identical or similar in order to arrive at groups of genes that were associated with phenotypically related diseases. each group of related genes was assigned a distinct disease group identifier  using this method.

the omim morbid map contained  <dig> entries.  <dig> of these entries contained strong evidence  for a relationship between a gene and a disease. these were assigned to  <dig> distinct disease groups  where each group contained between  <dig> and  <dig> genes. only  <dig> disease groups contained two or more associated genes and additional file
 <dig> shows the distribution of genes for these multigenic disease groups is highly skewed .  <dig> % of the multigenic digs  have between  <dig> and  <dig> genes per dig. the most complex disorders, in terms of number of associated genes, are: deafness , mental retardation , leukemia , diabetes mellitus , retinitis pigmentosa , colorectal cancer  and cardiomyopathy .

a total of  <dig> human genes are involved in all disease groups and  <dig> in multigenic groups . the complete table of disease groups, their corresponding entrez geneids and omim identifiers are provided in additional file
 <dig>  a summary table including gene and protein information per dig is provided as additional file
 <dig>  in this table, the dig name corresponds to the string identified by our regular expressions and, in most cases, can be used as a valid name for a disorder whose variants can be interpreted as specific disease subtypes corresponding to the distinct omim entries in the group; however, in a few cases, this string is only part of what should be a descriptive name of the inherited disorder, such as “viral infection”, which stands for “susceptibility to viral infection”, or “molybdenum cofactor”, which stands for “molybdenum cofactor deficiency”.

of course, some genes or even sets of genes are involved in multiple disease phenotypes; for example brca <dig>  is implicated in forms of both breast cancer and fanconi anemia. as such, our disease groups can be thought of as nodes in a graph where two disease groups share an edge if they share one or more genes. we examined these overlaps between disease groups and found that  <dig> of the disease groups share at least one gene with one other group  <dig> times and that  <dig> of these are significant  adjusted). the resulting dig network is a sparse graph composed mostly of isolated digs and a few larger components that contain digs related to such diseases as cancer and eye-disorders . these digs and their overlaps may be further explored using cytoscape and additional file
 <dig>  we show below that some protein complexes overlap with multiple disease groups when those disease groups are themselves closely related.
 <dig> can be directly loaded into cytoscape to replicate the figure and explore the disease groups. each node represents a group of related diseases associated with two to  <dig> genes. edges represent one or more genes that are shared between disease groups where the width of the edge is proportional to the jaccard index. the graph is sparse. only  <dig> edges exist between the  <dig> multigenic disease groups and  <dig> of these overlaps are significant  – the above shows only these significant overlaps but all are available in the provided file. a number of connected components group together related disease groups such as cancer and eye disorders .

in a few cases, our disease grouping method failed to group together multiple omim entries and their associated genes because their titles are completely different. for example, digenic iminoglycinuria  and hyperglycinuria  both contain the same three genes. this complete overlap between two disease groups happens in only one other case. we found that omim entries describing phenotypically related diseases are named uniformly for the most part and decided that this regular expression method provided easily interpretable groupings sufficient for an initial survey of interaction data. these groups are provided as a baseline method but could be easily replaced with alternatives in future studies.

overlap between disease groups and n-ary data
the human network may be divided into two data types. edges between protein nodes represent evidence for some relationship  between just those two proteins. we refer to these data as “binary” interaction records. in contrast, original source records from databases may list three or more protein interactors. in these cases, the experimental evidence is incapable of supporting a binary relationship between any given pair of proteins in the list; instead, the evidence simply supports the idea that all of the proteins are somehow related via some unknown set of direct or indirect binary interactions. the irefindex network contains a second node type to represent a complex of proteins. edges between a complex node and a protein node represent membership of the protein in that complex. we refer to this data type as n-ary or “complex” data. a more detailed explanation of interaction data types used in this paper and their representation is included in the methods section along with a figure at the end of this paper.

source databases including this type of information for homo sapiens include intact
 <cit> , hprd
 <cit> , corum
 <cit> , dip
 <cit> , bind
 <cit> , mint
 <cit>  and innatedb
 <cit> , and, to this date, there are a total of  <dig> distinct human complexes.

we assessed the overlap between each of our disease groups and each complex in the n-ary subset using a hypergeometric test and adjusting the p-values for multiple testing using the bonferroni, fdr and by methods . from these three metrics, we chose fdr to identify the best match to the dig, since it was the less conservative correction. results for all digs are provided as additional file
 <dig> 

this table shows that  <dig> digs were found to be significantly similar  to at least one complex in the n-ary subset. that is, 19% of multigenic digs could potentially be explained as complexes where different malfunctioning subunits may give raise to different varieties of the disease.

digs can overlap with multiple n-ary records and we wanted to have a rough idea of the maximal number of n-ary complexes that an analyst might have to review when looking for overlaps with a disease group. digs can match at least one subunit of a number between  <dig> and  <dig> complexes . however, the significant matches  are between  <dig> and  <dig>  and the corrected matches  have a complex span between  <dig> and  <dig>  the most complex disease in terms of overlapping complexes of the n-ary subset is colorectal cancer , followed by breast cancer . in these two cases, the number of records that would have to be reviewed is prohibitive. however, these are exceptions and 95% of all digs with significant overlaps match only  <dig> or fewer n-ary complexes.

figure 
 <dig> shows one such example. alport syndrome is associated with three genes: col4a <dig> with the x-linked form  while col4a <dig> and col4a <dig> are associated with the autosomal-recessive form . these forms were grouped into disease group  <dig> based on their similar omim titles. searching for this disease group in irefscape for interactions between any of the proteins in this disease group returns one record from intact describing a complex containing all three proteins . alport syndrome is in fact a genetically heterogeneous disorder where all forms result from mutations encoding type iv collagen components which form a major structural component of the basement membrane. these relationships are noted in omim, however, there are no cross-references to interaction data nor is there a complete listing of all six type iv collagen isoforms  that are components of the type iv collagen superstructure. this structure is indeed implicated in alport syndrome  but the structure itself is quite complex . each of the type iv collagen isoforms can combine with other isoforms to form trimers:  or  or . in turn, these heterotrimeric protomers can interact with one other protomer at their amino termini and three other protomers at their carboxy termini to form the supramolecular-mesh that is the structural component of type iv collagen. alport mutations disrupt the formation of the a3/a4/a <dig> protomer network thus explaining the molecular etiology of the disease. the intact record  corresponds to a description of this protomer. the record contains no link back to the omim record although links between the disease and type ivcollagen in general could be indirectly made by examination of the underlying uniprot records.

while we found that 19% of our disease groups had a significant overlap with n-ary data, we feel that a manual review of existing overlaps and a search for new overlaps would be pre-requisite to reaching any quantitative conclusions about the relationship between multigenic diseases and protein complexes - a review of all significant disease-complex overlaps found in this study showed that no single database has systematically covered all diseases for potential overlaps with protein complexes . so a manual review and search is required and this is non-trivial. for example, the work involved in confirming just the one overlap between alport syndrome and the a3/a4/a <dig> protomer required a re-searching of the primary literature – the interaction record did not cite any experimental evidence and the listed pubmed identifier points to a publication for the intact database itself. this example is not isolated nor is the problem specific to any one database. the record in question pre-dates imex curation rules
 <cit>  and would not be accepted today as an official imex record. however, these historical records and those produced by non-imex member databases are an important source of disease-complex overlaps. a review of these data could help put in place curated, reciprocal links between disease and interaction databases and would facilitate future automated data mining efforts.

to facilitate this review process, we have included additional file
 <dig> that can be used to view all disease-complex overlaps in cytoscape . a disease group may overlap with multiple observations of related n-ary complexes. for example, the region inside the red box shows an overlap between the cornelia de lange syndrome disease group and multiple n-ary records that contain subunits of the cohesion complex – all three causative genes in this disease group are members of the cohesion complex . conversely, a complex may overlap with multiple disease groups indicating a potential relationship between the diseases. for example,  benign familial hematuria  and alport syndrome  are both renal diseases due to type iv collagen defects of the basement membrane. both of these disease groups overlap with the collagen protomer described above and shown in figure 
 <dig> 
 <dig> can be directly loaded into cytoscape to replicate the figure and explore the overlaps. disease groups  and n-ary records  that have significant overlaps are indicated by edges whose width is proportional to the jacaard index
 <cit>  for the overlap. all disease-group overlaps with complexes are provided in the additional file. here, significant overlaps  are shown on the right and involve  <dig> disease groups. the region inside the red box shows an overlap between the cornelia de lange syndrome disease group and n-ary records that contain subunits of the cohesion complex. the region inside the green box  shows two disease groups  that both overlap with the same n-ary record .

overlap between disease groups and regenerated n-ary data
in a previous work
 <cit> , we have shown that some primary databases represent complexes using a spoke model, making them virtually indistinguishable from binary data and, therefore, the irefindex contains information regarding complexes that would normally be treated as binary data. we developed an algorithm to extract this information as a set of “regenerated complexes”. this method is currently used by both irefr and irefscape to identify potential spoke-represented complexes
 <cit> . using “irefr” with the software default values,  <dig> potential spoke-represented complexes were regenerated .

we assessed the overlap between each of our disease groups and each complex in the regenerated subset again using a hypergeometric test and adjusting the p-values for multiple testing using the bonferroni, fdr and by methods. results for all digs are provided as additional file
 <dig> 

this table shows that  <dig> digs were found to be significantly similar to at least one complex in the regenerated subset. that is, there is potentially more disease related information in spoke-represented complexes than there is in complex data represented as such. however, it is important to note that these “spoke-represented complexes” are only potential and it is possible that they may simply represent a set of unrelated binary interactions that, by chance, are observed in the same study using the same method and the same bait. a re-reading of the original source paper is required to distinguish between these two cases.

we reviewed papers for those diseases that had significant overlaps with the regenerated complexes . in most cases, our regenerated complexes were created from these papers because they all described a set of binary observations that all used the same method and the same bait protein. it was rare to find descriptions of bona fide complexes. figure 
 <dig> illustrates one such exception – two subunits of a sodium channel complex held in common with the liddle syndrome disease group.
 <cit>  contains evidence for a direct interaction between stx1a and the gamma subunit and for a complex that includes all four proteins using in-vitro translated components . the complex is represented as four binary interactions in the biogrid database. these interactions are identified as part of a potential spoke-represented complex by irefscape .

therefore, we concluded that while this method remains a formal possibility for finding overlaps between diseases and complexes in interaction data, it is not a reliable way of identifying complexes but a way to identify proteins that are usually related functionally. the majority of disease groups detected in overlaps using this method also had statistically significant overlaps with n-ary data and/or binary data , therefore, the method is not critical for retrieving disease group overlaps .

the complex span  is a number between  <dig> and  <dig> complexes. the significant matches  are values between  <dig> and  <dig>  and the fdr-adjusted matches between  <dig> and  <dig>  however, 95% of all digs with significant overlaps match only  <dig> or fewer regenerated complexes.

overlap between disease groups and binary data
binary data is different to the complex data that we have analyzed so far, therefore we have reformulated our question as how probable it is to find a statistically significant number of binary interactions between the proteins belonging to a dig. that is, in a network of  <dig> proteins, there are  <dig> , <dig> possible interactions but only  <dig>  are documented. in order to find out how probable it is to find a certain number of interactions among the proteins belonging to a dig, given this background, we performed a new hypergeometric test which uses a significant p-value of  <dig>  as a correction for the fact that the probability of randomly finding an interaction is dependent on the degree, as explained in methods. results for all digs are provided as additional file
 <dig> 

this table shows that  <dig> digs were found to be significantly enriched in binary interactions. groups of proteins found to have association or over-representation can potentially have a biological meaning. therefore, this result may reflect that there is a way of grouping proteins, related to the disease, for which we do not currently have a full explanation, although we can also hypothesize that they may correspond to unknown complexes, pathways, or other forms of functional organization. again, a review of the literature underlying the interactions in each case is required before coming to a conclusion. these results simply provide a ranked list of those disease groups that are associated with an unexpectedly high number of binary interactions. the irefscape plugin for cytoscape can be used to explore specific disease groups . figure 
 <dig> shows one example involving glycine encephalopathy.

combined list of disease group overlaps by interaction data type
combining the lists of dig overlaps related to n-ary, regenerated and binary data, we found a total number of  <dig> digs  that may be related to complexes or other forms of functional organization. the main contributors to this result were the regenerated n-ary and n-ary data sets followed by the binary data set.

we expect that our tables of significant matches will be useful to a more detailed study of the identity, similarity and nature of the matching complexes to a given dig. however, this is not practical for digs that have overlaps with a large number of complexes. in these cases, a visual interface such as irefscape can facilitate a review of the data – here similar complexes can more easily be identified and compared. however, a significant number of disease groups overlap with a manageable number of complexes and  <dig> out of the above  <dig> disease groups can be confidently related to one single protein complex .

these data are summarized in figure 
 <dig> using a venn diagram with the differences and coincidences between the dig-interaction matches after using irefindex's n-ary data, regenerated data and binary data as sources. the diagram shows that some matches are found using two or three of the data sources indicating the presence of mutually supportive data for half of the disease groups with significant overlaps. a total of  <dig> digs have significant overlaps with all three data sets.

however,  <dig> digs only overlap with n-ary complexes,  <dig> overlap only with regenerated complexes, and  <dig> are only enriched for binary data. this suggests that the three data sources are complementary and should be used together in order to create a full picture. tables 
 <dig> 
 <dig> and
 <dig> are summary tables for the dig overlaps found using only n-ary, regenerated or binary data respectively. additional file
 <dig> lists all disease groups and their best overlaps with each of the three data types. the reader can use these tables as a guide to diseases that have significant overlaps with interaction data. r code to retrieve reference information for each complex and dig pair is provided in additional file
 <dig> .

summary of the  <dig> digs that can be related to protein complexes but can only be found in irefindex n-ary data: mitochondrial complex deficiency  is a dig that groups  <dig> genes. at least one of the  <dig> genes in this dig was present in  <dig> complexes present in irefindex n-ary data  and  <dig> of them could be considered as significantly similar after a hypergeometric test with a p-value <  <dig> . after adjusting the p-values for multiple testing using the fdr method, only  <dig> of those complexes could be considered significantly similar to the dig, and therefore, their subunits related to the diseases involved in the dig. the best match, among those  <dig>  is the complex with the icrigid =  <dig>  which corresponds to the complex in the corum database with interaction identifier =  <dig> 

“3-methylcrotonyl-coa carboxylase” stands for “3-methylcrotonyl-coa carboxylase  <dig> deficiency” and “3-methylcrotonyl-coa carboxylase  <dig> deficiency”, while “ceroid” stands for “ceroid lipofuscinosis” and “mitochondrial complex” stands for mitochondrial complex i, ii, iii and iv deficiencies.

summary of the  <dig> digs that are significantly similar to protein complexes but can only be found in irefindex regenerated complex data: ichthyosis  is a dig that groups  <dig> genes. at least one of the  <dig> genes in this dig was present in  <dig> complexes present in irefindex regenerated n-ary data  but only  <dig> of them could be considered as significantly similar after a hypergeometric test with a p-value <  <dig> . after adjusting the p-values for multiple testing using the fdr method, only  <dig> of those complexes could be considered significantly similar to the dig.

summary of the  <dig> digs that are enriched in irefindex binary interactions and can only be found using this method: glycine encephalopathy  is a dig that groups  <dig> genes. there are  <dig> possible interactions between  <dig> genes. finding all of them in the pin is a very unlikely event  and, therefore, the existence of a functional group of proteins related to the disease can be hypothesized.

“immunodeficiency” stands for immunodeficiencies due to defects in cd <dig>  mapbp-interacting protein, with hyper igm and x-linked.

analysis per database and study type
we examined the list of distinct n-ary complexes that had the best significant overlap with each disease group in order to investigate the primary databases in irefindex from which matching complexes were retrieved. there are  <dig> distinct complexes overlapping with  <dig> disease groups. table 
 <dig> shows that these are described in seven different primary databases , which high-lights the importance of interaction database integration as a requisite to explore relationships to diseases. we note that  <dig> out of the  <dig> best matching complexes are derived from low-throughput studies , which indicates that they preferentially come from low throughput experiments and that the results are not dependent on high-throughput studies.

number of best matches to digs per source database.  <dig> different databases contribute with complexes that match at least one dig. in 87% of the cases the complex belongs to only one database. the other 13% can be found in  <dig> or  <dig> databases at the same time. the table shows how using only a subset of databases instead of a consolidated data set may lead to incomplete results regarding dig matches.

we also examined the list of distinct regenerated complexes that had the best significant overlaps with each disease group. there were  <dig> distinct complexes overlapping with  <dig> disease groups. table 
 <dig> shows that the  <dig> best matching regenerated complexes are derived almost entirely from biogrid
 <cit>  while only a few come from intact and mint. this is expected since biogrid represents n-ary data using a spoke model .

number of best matches to digs per source database.  <dig> different databases contribute with regenerated complexes that happen to match at least one dig. biogrid is the main contributor to this group of complexes. the table shows that the process of regenerating potentially spoke-represented complexes may be important to detect information on protein groups matching digs.

for binary interactions,  <dig> out of  <dig> databases in the “irefindex” provide human binary data . ophid is a source of predicted interactions in human based on orthologous transfer from observations in other experimental organisms. ophid did not have overlaps with diseases in the n-ary  data set since predicted interactions are based solely on binary interaction records. given that  <dig> disease groups significantly overlapped with the n-ary records that are present for human, we speculate that orthologous transfer of n-ary data from other experimental organisms to human could provide a useful source of information.

overlap between disease groups and pathways
as a complementary analysis, we decided to evaluate the overlap between our digs and a pathway database. we selected the kegg database
 <cit> , although the analysis could be extended to others.

additional file
 <dig> contains detailed results. in summary, kegg pathways match  <dig> digs :  <dig> matches already detected by interaction sources and  <dig> new matches. therefore, kegg lacked significant overlaps with only  <dig> disease groups that had overlaps in the irefindex data. figure 
 <dig> shows a detailed venn diagram of overlaps between disease groups and all three interaction data types plus pathway data.

these results suggest that pathway and interaction data sources may be complementary although further examination of individual cases will be required to confirm this. this work is non-trivial and we suggest that the disjoint lists of diseases found by either kegg or by interaction databases alone would make a good starting point for a collaborative curation project to investigate further the disease coverage of these data sets. in the meantime, there is good reason to consult both interaction and pathway data when performing disease-related analyses
 <cit> .

change of results over time
in order to see how conclusions change with time, we have compared all previous analyses between the irefindex versions  <dig>   and  <dig>  . table 
 <dig> shows that there is an increase in interaction records, both binary and complex, and disease genes with interaction information, from one version to the next. the direct consequence of this is that there is also an increase in n-ary and regenerated groups, as well as binary-enriched digs, and an increase in matches between digs and all three sources. moreover, it is important to highlight that not only the number of dig-complex matches grows but also the number of matches detected with only one of the data sources , indicating that using different sources has become more important with time. table 
 <dig> also shows that more databases contribute with significant information to the analysis , while the number of databases with spoke-represented complexes in need of being regenerated remains the same . finally,  <dig> of the matches detected using kegg but not interaction data from irefindex  <dig>  were found using irefindex  <dig> . the methods and scripts developed here will provide us with the means to monitor how these trends progress over time.

the first  <dig> rows show how knowledge about the human interactome grows from one database release to the next; that is, the growth of the number of interaction records , the number of genes associated to disease in omim having interaction information in irefindex , the number of complexes coming from n-ary  and regenerated  data, and the number of binary nodes and edges in the pin. this leads to an increase in the number of matches between digs and each of the three data sources  and, in total, an increase from  <dig> to  <dig> matching digs from one release to the following one. the number of digs matching only one type of data also grows, as well as the number of databases with n-ary data matching digs.

discussion
our overview of the relationship between diseases and protein interaction data indicates that roughly half of our disease groups could potentially be explained in terms of groups of proteins, which may be complexes, spoke-represented complexes, groups of binary interactions or pathways. these matches can occur between a disease group and either one or many protein groups . the situation as of release  <dig>  of the irefindex is detailed in the different tables and supplementary tables.

in summary,  <dig> digs  show significant similarity to a number of n-ary complexes , regenerated complexes , binary-groups  or pathways  and the number of matches per dig ranges between  <dig> and  <dig>  numbers that seem to increase as databases grow.

we have shown that disease group overlaps can be found within three types of interaction data: n-ary, spoke-represented complexes and binary. these sources are complementary and should be examined separately when searching for overlaps. it is particularly interesting that a large number of distinct overlaps were found with spoke-represented data: a data set that would not normally be amenable to overlap detection unless the analyst specifically attempted to detect binary data that was potentially describing a protein complex. however, we found that this data set by itself was unable to reliably identify bona fide complexes when we examined the source papers even though it was identifying a functionally related group of proteins.

one goal of this work was to assess how important data integration is to this type of study. since interaction databases are so redundant and since there are already databases that have specialized in capturing human-specific information and even complex data, one might conclude that not all data resources are really required. however, we found that interaction data and pathway data appear to be complementary and that overlaps with all three types of interactions included records from several databases. therefore integration of data sources is an important issue if analysts are to detect all significant overlaps with a disease. the quality and usefulness of these overlaps from individual databases is beyond the scope of this survey. this should be addressed in future. here, we have found sufficient evidence to show that no single database has systematically subsumed all significant disease group overlaps and that all diseases have not been thoroughly covered by the collective set of databases examined here. we would argue that this could be addressed by future collaborative efforts between these databases.

it is important to qualify these results and place them in the context of future studies. first, our method of creating disease groups is a fairly conservative and simple string-matching technique that could be replaced by more sophisticated methods
 <cit>  or disease-phenotype classifications. further, examination of these statistically significant overlaps is required to assess how often these groups truly represent relevant complexes or pathways that can offer an explanatory basis for a disease group. the accompanying tables, scripts and the irefscape plugin provide the means to direct, facilitate and track further study and curation efforts. these could be directed towards the significant overlaps found here and also towards the disease groups for which we did not find overlaps in interaction data or pathway data.

in the meantime, the data presented in this survey and the disease group search functionality in the irefscape plugin can act as a guide towards searching for disease-relevant interaction data across a number of databases.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper has examined the current relationship between diseases and protein interaction data. however, these results will change over time and, therefore, we prefer to place emphasis on the importance of data integration, the variety of data types that need to be taken into account and the tools we have developed for these analyses, which can allow future researchers to access updated results.

the predictions obtained from our results could be used as a feedback to interaction, complex and disease databases. irefindex includes no disease annotation, due to the fact that complex records in interaction databases rarely contain references to diseases or to omim. the work presented here could be used to systematically review and put in place cross-references between omim and interaction databases.

