BACKGROUND
because the concentration of dissolved oxygen  in water is influenced by many factors, including temperature, depth, salinity, and eutrophication, organisms living in aquatic environments can be subjected to temporal and spatial variation in do. among fishes, low levels of do, or hypoxia, is associated with impaired growth and reproduction  <cit> . if severe, hypoxia can lead to high rates of mortality in fish and other aquatic organisms depending upon their degree of hypoxia tolerance  <cit> . aquatic hypoxia is a major environmental stressor that has become a global issue  <cit> , and some predictions suggest that current global climate change will further exacerbate the problem  <cit> . thus, it has become increasingly important to understand mechanisms that fish use in order to persist and survive under hypoxia.

intraspecific variability in physiological traits plays a key role in the capacity of fish to adjust to low oxygen. such variability can be attributed to genetic differentiation, phenotypic plasticity, or a combination of both. the time course of phenotypic responses to low oxygen varies from minutes or hours  to days or weeks . depending on the duration and intensity of hypoxia exposure, fish may display adjustments at behavioural, morphological, biochemical, and physiological levels  <cit> . generally, during brief or moderate levels of hypoxia, fish attempt to maintain the same level of metabolic function observed under normal oxygen levels ; however, during prolonged or severe hypoxia, fish employ various mechanisms to enhance hypoxia tolerance. one of the major challenges to surviving hypoxia is balancing energy production and expenditure. accordingly, under severe hypoxic stress, fish tend to reduce their metabolic demands, a response that is frequently coupled with changes in metabolic enzyme activities  <cit> . however, the degree and direction of enzyme adjustments depend upon the duration and severity of hypoxia  <cit> , as well as the pathway, tissue, and species studied  <cit> . moreover, evidence for adjustments in tissue metabolic potential  in fish is almost exclusively drawn from laboratory acclimation studies.

in this study, we used a field experiment with the african fish barbus neumayeri fischer to study the role of acclimatization to low oxygen in determining growth and metabolic enzyme activities. b. nemayeri is a member of the cyprinid family, which is one of the most abundant and widespread freshwater families in africa  <cit> . b. neumayeri is widely distributed in eastern africa and inhabits a diversity of environments that display a great range of variation in do, from chronically hypoxic swamps to well-oxygenated open rivers  <cit> . previous studies have shown population specific variation in traits related to behaviour, respiration, morphology, and metabolism that may enhance hypoxia tolerance in populations from low do habitats  <cit> . here, we use reciprocal transplant acclimatization as our experimental design, which is not often used in physiological studies of fish. however, it is of great importance, since individuals are exposed to many other natural factors  that can affect the overall capacity of organisms to respond adequately to the main factor under study, in this case hypoxia. we use this design to determine the influence of site of origin versus oxygen acclimatization treatment on growth and tissue enzyme activities. the enzyme activities measured were chosen to reflect the tissue capacities for anaerobic and aerobic carbohydrate metabolism.

RESULTS
morphological variables of b. neumayeri used in this field transplant experiment are shown in table  <dig>  fish were selected at the beginning of the experiment in a narrow size range  to minimize size variation. nonetheless, starting mt and ls were significantly lower for fish collected from inlet stream west , although condition  did not differ between collection sites. after the four week acclimatization period, mt, ls, and k did not differ for fish from different collection sites or exposed to different acclimatization treatments. specific growth rate , however, was significantly affected by acclimatization treatment, being lower for fish acclimatized to the low oxygen habitat , as well as being significantly affected by cage assignment . the latter effect was for fish in cages holding fewer fish  to have higher gs. other than gs, cage assignment was not a significant factor in the nested anovas for any other response variable .

barbus neumayeri were collected from inlet stream west  and rwembaita swamp  and held under a reciprocal acclimatization treatment for four weeks. total mass , standard length , condition factor  were measured before and after the acclimatization treatment and specific growth rate  was determined for the four week experiment. data are shown as mean ± sem with sample size in parentheses.

a means were significantly different for fish from different sites of origin .

b means were significantly different for fish held at different acclimatization sites .

c means were significantly different among cages within acclimatization site .

maximal enzyme activities representing tissue glycolytic capacity  and aerobic capacity  are shown in figure  <dig>  figure  <dig>  figure  <dig> and figure  <dig>  exploratory data analysis indicated that body mass was positively related to brain ldh activity , and hence mass-corrected activities are shown for this enzyme only . in general, acclimatization site proved to be more important than collection site  in determining the maximal activities of these enzymes. acclimatization to the low oxygen habitat resulted in higher pfk activities in heart and skeletal muscle . conversely, fish acclimatized to the hypoxic swamp had lower heart cco activity . trends toward higher glycolytic enzyme activities and lower aerobic enzyme activities were observed in other tissues , but these were not statistically significant largely due to the high variation in enzyme activity determinations. site of origin was significantly related to liver ldh activity: fish collected from the hypoxic swamp habitat had higher activities than fish from the normoxic stream habitat . the interaction between site of origin and acclimatization site was not significant for any tissue enzyme activity.

because acclimatization treatment significantly affected gs  and certain tissue enzyme activities , correlation analysis was used to assess the relationship between gs and enzyme activity. of the three enzyme activities that were significantly influenced by acclimatization treatment, only heart pfk was correlated with gs . this negative relationship, while statistically significant, explained less than 10% of the variation in heart pfk. the other two enzyme activities affected by acclimatization treatment, muscle pfk and heart cco, were not related to gs .

discussion
oxygen availability in aquatic habitats is a major ecological factor influencing the distribution of fishes. the capacity of fish to survive, and even thrive, under conditions of low oxygen varies markedly among and within species, with more tolerant individuals being able to exploit low oxygen habitats. fishes of east africa provide outstanding examples of inter- and intraspecific variation in hypoxia tolerance. previous research on b. neumayeri has shown that populations inhabiting low oxygen swamps differ in respiratory behaviour  <cit> , gill morphology  <cit> , and tissue metabolic capacity  <cit> , all of which presumably enhance the hypoxia tolerance of individuals from these swamp populations. herein, we evaluate the influence of source population and acclimatization to low oxygen in determining growth and metabolic potential of b. neumayeri from habitats differing in oxygen availability.

among the various morphological and enzymatic measurements reported, only liver ldh activity was significantly related to site of origin, with individuals collected from hypoxic habitats displaying greater activities. this observation is consistent with our earlier observation that b. neumayeri from rwembaita swamp had higher liver ldh activity than fish from the normoxic njuguta river  <cit> . in the current study, the effect of site of origin was observed after four weeks of field acclimatization to different oxygen habitats, whereas in the previous study, the effect of collection site was measured immediately after collection as well as after long term laboratory acclimation to normoxia. although ldh plays a critical role in anaerobic metabolism, it is also involved in the process of gluconeogenesis by catalyzing the conversion of lactate into pyruvate, which can then be used for glucose production. consequently, the role of higher ldh activity in livers from fish collected in the hypoxic rwembaita swamp may be in the clearance of blood lactate and the provision of glucose for metabolism by extra-hepatic tissues such as heart and brain, which are important in the maintenance of an organism's homeostasis  <cit> .

the observation of differences between the rwembaita swamp and the inlet stream population populations of b. neumayeri in liver ldh activities after field acclimatization  and laboratory acclimation  <cit> , suggest a potential genetic component. this is supported by recent results using nuclear markers  that show significant genetic divergence between rwembaita swamp and inlet stream west populations of b. neumayeri . although we found strong evidence for plastic effects in some enzymatic traits, local adaptation to divergent oxygen regimes may also contribute to the observed trait variation as has been observed in other studies of fishes experiencing divergent selective environments  <cit> .

one theoretical expectation arising from local adaptation is that organisms adapted to their native environment should perform "better" than organisms transplanted from their native environment and acclimatized to a novel habitat. this expectation would be experimentally supported in our study by a significant origin by acclimatization interaction with respect to potential fitness correlates such as growth. in this study, growth rates were negative in all groups, regardless of site of origin or acclimatization treatment, ranging from -  <dig> % to -  <dig> % body mass per day. it can be argued that the negative growth observed in this study was due to the artificial conditions of the experimental enclosures ; however, for b. neumayeri population within this system, it is quite natural for fish to become trapped in small pools and experience mass loss during the dry season  <cit> . in a mark and recapture study of the foraging ecology of b. neumayeri during the summer season, schaack and chapman  <cit>  reported negative growth rates similar to those reported here.

interestingly, mass loss was greater, on average, for fish acclimatized to the hypoxic rwembaita swamp compared to those in the normoxic inlet stream west, irrespective of site of origin. the restrictive effect of low oxygen on growth is consistent with numerous laboratory and field studies demonstrating reduced growth in fish under hypoxia  <cit> . low growth under hypoxia in other species has been attributed to reduced rates of ingestion or assimilation efficiency or both  <cit> . previous work on b. neumayeri demonstrated a trade-off between respiratory and trophic morphology, such that relatively larger gilled swamp fish spent more time handling food items than smaller gilled stream fish  <cit> . in the current experiment, this trade-off did not result in lower growth in fish originating from hypoxic swamps when compared to fish from the normoxic stream in either acclimatization treatment. this result indicates that under these experimental conditions, this putative trade-off was without adverse effects on growth. it is possible that other, unmeasured fitness tradeoffs contribute to the maintenance of differences between these populations in ldh, haematocrit, and morphological traits such as gill size  <cit> .

acclimatization to differing oxygen levels also affected tissue levels of metabolic enzymes. in particular, pfk was greater in heart and skeletal muscle from individuals acclimatized to the low oxygen swamp site, while cco was lower in heart after hypoxic acclimatization. phosphofructokinase is an important regulatory enzyme of glycolysis, and changes in pfk activity are likely to impact the flux through the glycolytic pathway. higher pkf activities after hypoxic acclimatization, therefore, could represent an increased capacity for glycolytic atp production. cytochrome c oxidase, on the other hand, catalyzes the final step in mitochondrial electron transport to oxygen, and its rate is important in determining rates of aerobic atp production. the significant effect of acclimatization on heart cco was mirrored by a non-significant trend toward lower muscle citrate synthase , a mitochondrial enzyme catalyzing the first step of the kreb's cycle. the overall effect of acclimatization to low oxygen, therefore, was an increase in glycolytic capacity  and a trend towards decreased aerobic capacity . results from laboratory acclimation of fish to hypoxia have yielded similar, if sometimes mixed results . nevertheless, the current data are an important field validation of predictions based upon energetic considerations and laboratory studies.

the present study employed a reciprocal transplant experimental design that is not commonly used in physiological studies. there are certainly challenges to this field experiment, for example the escape of fish from one replicate cage and the sporadic loss of individuals from other cages, likely due to predators that could enter the cages through the open tops . another potential limitation of the study is that it was carried out at specific locations of known do level, and to extrapolate our results more broadly it would be necessary to replicate this study in other systems having divergent oxygen concentrations. in addition, it is possible that the cage restriction itself altered the response of the fish to the acclimatization treatment. however, free swimming b. neumayeri collected at this and other kibale field sites had negative growth rates  <cit> , condition factor  <cit> , and tissue ldh activities  <cit>  similar to those measured in fish after the 4-week acclimatization treatment. despite these concerns, our results suggest that reciprocal transplant experiments provide a powerful tool in uncovering physiological responses to naturally occurring ecological stresses.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, the relative contribution of native habitat and acclimatization to low oxygen were evaluated in the african cyprinid fish, barbus neumayeri in a reciprocal transplant field experiment. the biological end-points measured included variables related to fitness  and tissue metabolic potential . pronounced gradients in environmental oxygen availability affect multiple features of the respiratory behaviour, morphology, and physiology of b. neumayeri. for some traits, e.g, gill morphology  <cit>  and liver ldh activities , intraspecific variation persists after animals are removed from the field or transplanted to field sites differing in oxygen, arguing for a role of local adaption, whereas other traits, e.g., heart pfk and cco activities, are more plastic and influenced by recent exposure to differing oxygen regimes. thus, acclimatization of tissue metabolic potential may be an important response to the spatial mosaic of dissolved oxygen availability in this system. together, local adaptation and acclimatization appear to be operating to enhance this species' capacity to live in divergent oxygen environments.

