BACKGROUND
transcription factor proteins regulate genes by binding dna sequences at the promoters of the target genes. typically, each transcription factor  is able to recognize a set of similar sequences, centred around a consensus sequence  <cit> . the binding probability is generally believed to be higher the more similar a sequence is to the consensus sequence.

transcription factor proteins can be classified into super-families, each with a different dna-binding mechanism  <cit> . for example, the winged helix super-family consists of proteins which insert an alpha helix into the major groove of the dna, forming amino-acid-base contacts over a region spanning about 5– <dig> base-pairs. these proteins tend to form homo-dimers, which often contact two consecutive major grooves  <cit> . thus, their binding sequences are palindromic repeats of a 5– <dig> base-pair sequence. proteins from the homeodomain-like super-family insert an alpha helix parallel to the dna backbone, and tend to form heterodimers, thus forming more base-pair contacts than the winged helix proteins. other super-families like the c2h <dig> zinc-coordinating super-family are monomer proteins with variable number of dna recognition domains, or 'fingers', each recognizing  <dig> consecutive base-pairs  <cit> .

the total number of transcription factors  encoded by a genome increases with the number of genes in the genome  <cit> . the number of tfs has been shown to scale with genome size as a power-law . this is thought to reflect the fact that the more complex the organism, the more intricate the regulation needed to respond to environmental inputs and to carry out developmental programs.

here we ask whether there are limits on the numbers of transcription factors from different super-families. we find that the maximal numbers of transcription factors from most super-families is significantly smaller than the total number of transcription factors. the maximal number for each super-family appears to correlate with the number of possible sequences effectively recognized by the binding mechanism of that super-family. we also show that the binding sequences of different tfs from the same super-family are often highly similar, and that tfs with similar binding sequences tend to participate in similar biological processes. the results are compared to simple coding models that may provide an intuitive understanding of the origin and magnitude of the bounds on tf numbers.

RESULTS
maximal number of transcription factors in most super-families is bounded
the total number of tfs increases with the number of genes in the genome  <cit> , exceeding  <dig> tfs in organisms such as xenopus tropicalis. however, when considering each tf super-family separately, we find that the number of tfs from most super-families reach a maximum size which is significantly lower than the total number of tfs . for example, winged helix transcription factors increase with number of genes until reaching a maximum of about  <dig> tfs in organisms with ~ <dig> genes . larger genomes contain winged helix tfs but at numbers which do not appear to exceed this bound.

a similar picture is observed in other super-families , for example, the maximal number of lambda-repressor-like tfs is about  <dig> and the maximal number of helix-loop-helix proteins is about  <dig>  in one super-family – the multi-domain c2h <dig> zinc finger super-family, the maximal number of tfs is significantly higher than in other super-families. these proteins, found mainly in eukaryotes, increase in number with genome size, following genome size as about the number of genes squared .

the maximal number of tfs correlates with number of degrees of freedom in the binding mechanism
in this section we compare the magnitude of the maximal tf numbers with the number of degrees of freedom in the binding mechanism of each super-family. the results are summarized in fig  <dig> and table  <dig> 

the number of degrees of freedom of a binding mechanism is related to the number of different base-pairs that can be specifically recognized by the dna-binding mechanism. for example, lambda-repressor-like proteins recognize dna by inserting a short alpha helix into the major groove, specifically recognizing only three base-pairs  <cit> . these three base-pairs essentially determine the binding sequence of the tf, because these proteins usually form homo-dimers in which each monomer recognizes the same sequence  <cit> . thus the proteins from this super-family have a relatively constrained binding mechanism, with  <dig> possible binding sequences . the maximal number observed for proteins in this super-family is about  <dig> per genome .

winged helix  transcription factors recognize dna using a similar mechanism of inserting an alpha helix into the major groove. however, the longer alpha helix used by these tfs usually interacts with  <dig> bp positions instead of  <dig> bp. just as in lambda-repressor like tfs, these  <dig> base-pairs determine the binding sequence, because wh proteins usually form homo-dimers  <cit> . there does not appear to be any constraint on the possible  <dig> base pair sequences that can be recognized by a suitably designed wh protein. hence, the maximal number of different sequences that can be recognized by such factors can be estimated as 46/ <dig> =  <dig>  more than the number of sequences available for lambda-repressor like tfs. the observed maximal number for this super-family, about  <dig>  is higher than the maximal number for the lambda-repressor like super-family.

three other super-families have related mechanisms: helix-loop-helix proteins, zn2/cys <dig> proteins and glucocorticoid receptor-like proteins . these three super-families bind as dimers, in which each monomer binds a highly constrained sequence . helix-loop-helix proteins usually recognize one of only a few conserved major-groove hexamer sequences, such as the e-box or g-box  <cit> . in these sequences, only two positions are variable. these proteins can form homo-dimers or hetero-dimers. this is the most constrained of the three super-families , and has the lowest observed maximal number, about  <dig>  zn2/cys <dig> proteins bind to three bp identical half-sites. they have more possible binding sequences than helix-loop-helix proteins, because the half-sites can be at variable spacing and orientations . the maximal number for this super-family is higher, about  <dig> . glucocorticoid receptor-like proteins bind two half sites which can be at variable orientations and spacing  <cit>  and in addition can form hetero-dimers that bind to non-identical half-sites. this super-family therefore has the most degrees of freedom of the three super-families , and displays the highest maximal number, about  <dig> 

c2h <dig> proteins have between two to more than  <dig> finger domains, each recognizing three consecutive base-pairs  <cit> . these proteins have the largest number of possible binding sequences . the maximal number of such proteins in a single organism is the highest of all super-families, consistent with the large number of degrees of freedom for the possible binding sites.

evolutionary shift to super-families with more degrees of freedom
when examining the distribution of transcription factors among the different super-families for different organisms  one can observe a shift from the predominant use of super-families with less degrees of freedom and smaller maximal number of tfs to super-families with more degrees of freedom and higher maximal number of tfs. organisms with a small number of genes predominantly use tf super-families such as lambda-repressor like and c-terminal effectors, while as organisms with more genes shift to zn2/cys <dig> and glucocorticoid receptor-like super-families, which have higher maximal numbers of tfs. organisms with more genes, such as mouse and human, shift to the predominant use of c2h <dig> multi-domain zinc finger tfs, which have the highest maximal number.

coding theory suggests upper bounds for transcription factor numbers
what is the origin of the bounds on the numbers of transcription factors? as one possible explanation, we consider the mapping of transcription factors to binding sequences as a coding problem, analogous to the assignment of amino acids to codons in the genetic code. we would like to emphasize that the purpose of models in this study is not to serve as descriptions of precise biochemical mechanisms, but rather as simple conceptual guides to understand the forces at play. thus, the models neglect such details as whether each residue in the binding domain of the tf recognizes one or more dna bases, as well as issues of dna malleability, non-specific amino-acid base contacts, etc. the models also neglect important effects such as cooperative binding between tfs and other regulatory features.

to begin with, consider a hypothetical situation in which each sequence is assigned a different tf. in the case of winged helix tfs, for example, in which a binding sequence is effectively of length  <dig>  there are in principle 46/ <dig> =  <dig> different sequences / <dig> unique non-self complementary sequences). there are therefore a maximal number of  <dig> tfs that are perfectly stringent and recognize only one sequence. in reality, however, each tf recognizes a set of sequences, located around a consensus sequence  <cit> . thus, the assignment of tfs to sequences should assign to each tf a set of adjacent sequences. this raises a difficulty, because tfs with very similar sets of binding sequences can recognize each others binding sequences.

in the theoretical case of perfectly non-overlapping sequences, in which each sequence is assigned to only one tf, sengupta et al  <cit>  have noted that the coding problem is similar to the problem of packing non-overlapping spheres in the space of sequences, each sphere corresponding to the sequences belonging to one tf . let us make a simple estimate of the number of tfs according to this picture. as an example, suppose that a tf can on average recognize sequences that are one letter different from the consensus . for winged helix proteins, there are six positions in the sequence, each of which can be changed to one of  <dig> other letters, resulting in  <dig> ×  <dig> =  <dig> neighbours that are a hamming distance of one away. thus, there can be at most 2048/19~ <dig> distinct tfs with non-overlapping sequences  <cit> . this is on the same order of magnitude, although lower than the observed maximal number of about  <dig> .

coding theory suggests that one can increase the number of tfs by allowing sequences to overlap. this comes at a cost: tfs can mis-recognize each other's sequences leading to errors in gene expression. optimal codes that can minimize such errors are known as "gray codes" in information theory  <cit> . an optimal coding theory, which allows sequences to overlap, has been recently suggested in the context of the genetic code  <cit> . in the genetic code, codons differing by one base-pair correspond either to the same amino acid or to chemically related amino acids  <cit> . this mapping is thought to minimize the error load caused by errors in translation  <cit> .

here we apply this theory to tfs. since the theory takes into account the mis-binding errors, it can reach higher bounds than hard-sphere packing codes . importantly, the theory predicts that neighbouring "spheres", that is tfs with similar binding sequences, would tend to be close in biological function in order to minimize the error load. thus, the tfs with overlapping sequences should regulate the same genes, or genes with similar functions, so that effects of cross-recognition are minimized. such codes are called "smooth" .

factors with similar binding sequences tend to have similar biological functions
a qualitative prediction of the smooth coding theory is that transcription factors with similar recognition sequences should tend to have similar biological effects. the reason is that factors with similar sequences can sometimes bind to each others sequences. if the biological effects of binding of tf a and b are similar, the reduction in fitness caused by such errors would be smaller. hence, there may be a selection pressure to allocate similar sequences to biologically similar factors.

to test the prediction that tfs with similar sequences should tend to have similar function, we examined tfs in e. coli, yeast and human, and compared their sequence similarity by means of several distance metrics. in these organisms there exists a significant sequence similarity between the binding sites of some tf pairs . the yeast set of  <dig> well characterized tfs contained  <dig> pairs with highly similar sequences . the e. coli set of  <dig> well characterized tfs contained  <dig> pairs with highly similar sequences . the human set of  <dig> tfs contained  <dig> pairs with highly similar sequences . in other words, the tf "spheres" often overlap significantly .

to assess the similarity in function of the tfs with similar binding sequences, we used two measures. the first similarity measure was a significant co-regulation of target genes by both factors. the second measure was the similarity in functional annotation  <cit>  of the target genes of each tf. for both measures, we observed a significant enrichment of tf pairs with similar sequences and similar biological function measures.

we now provide more details on this result. to assess the functional similarity in yeast, we used an experimentally determined transcription network  <cit> . this network contained targets for  <dig> tfs in our data-set. about 14%  of all tf pairs had significant target co-regulation. when considering pairs with similar binding sequences, the fraction with significant target co-regulation increases to over 50%  .

as a second measure of functional similarity, we assigned to each yeast tf a profile according to the functional annotation of its target genes  <cit> . we then compared the average distances between the profiles of tf pairs with similar binding sequences to the average distances between the profiles of all tf pairs. we find that tf pairs with similar binding sequences have a lower average profile distance . thus their targets tend to have more similar biological annotations. examples of such pairs are the stress-response regulators msn <dig> and msn <dig>  the stress-response yap tfs, the cell cycle regulators fkh <dig> and fkh <dig> and the nitrogen regulators gln <dig> and dal <dig> 

similar results were obtained for e. coli. in our database of  <dig> tfs we found  <dig> pairs of tfs with significantly high binding sequence similarity . to assess the functional similarity between these pairs, using co-regulation criterion, we parsed the ecocyc database  <cit>  to obtain a network of  <dig> operons and  <dig> experimentally verified transcription interactions. only 4%  of all tf pairs had significant target co-regulation. when considering tfs with similar binding sequences, this fraction increases to over 65% . as a second test, we used a functional annotation for e. coli. we found that tf pairs with similar sequences have a lower average functional profile distance . thus, the target genes of these tfs tend to have similar biological annotations. examples of tf pairs with similar sites and similar functions include the drug and stress response regulators mara, soxs and rob that jointly regulate at least  <dig> operons, and the anaerobic metabolism regulators narl and narp that jointly regulate  <dig> operons. the similarity in sequences is so large that some of these factors bind the exact same sequence in some of their co-regulated genes. however, many of their binding sequences are also distinct .

for human, limited data currently prohibits a detailed statistical analysis. however, several examples are known where functionally related tfs recognize the same sequences. these include the interferon regulatory factors irf- <dig> and irf- <dig>  <cit> , and the ets transcription factors spi-b and spi- <dig>  <cit> .

many tf pairs with overlapping sequences and similar function are close paralogs   <cit> . in most cases there are additional paralogous tfs with non-similar binding sequences. for example the e. coli regulators mara, soxs and rob that recognize similar sequences, are all paralogs from the arac/xyls family. however, they differ in their binding sequences and in their biological function from their paralog arac. this suggests that homology of tf proteins does not fully explain the similarity in their binding sites. gene duplication may aid in generating paralogous tfs with similar binding sites, which can then be selected according to the cost and benefit of their action on the target genes.

discussion
the main result of this study is that the maximal numbers of tfs from most transcription factor super-families appear to be bounded. the number of these tfs in a genome does not seem to exceed a certain upper bound. these bounds range from around  <dig> for lambda repressor-like, to about  <dig> for homeodomain proteins. the bounds seem to correlate with the number of degrees of freedom of the dna-binding mechanism in each super-family. the multi-domain c2h <dig> zinc fingers super-family displays a significantly higher maximal number in the present data, compared to other super-families.

to understand these bounds, we considered the coding problem faced by the cell: how to assign different sequences to each transcription factor in a way that avoids erroneous recognition in which a transcription factor binds where it shouldn't. as organisms of increasing complexity evolve there is a need for more diversity in gene regulation, through the introduction of new transcription factors. the stochastic process of dna recognition by tfs may result in binding of a tf to binding sequences intended for another tf, if these are similar enough. this study examined the proposal that minimizing these misrecognitions limits the maximal numbers of tfs with a given binding mechanism, that is, tfs from a given super-family.

to examine the coding problem on a qualitative level, we considered two theoretical mappings of code-words  to messages : a sphere packing code in which each tf has unique sequences not shared with other tfs, and a smooth code in which sequences of different tfs can partially overlap. the latter appears to offer a more realistic representation, because many pairs of tfs have highly similar code-words. for some super-families, the observed bounds seem to approximately agree with the theoretical bound derived for smooth codes.

a prediction of the theory in which misrecognition errors are an important constraint on the coding, is that tfs with similar binding sequences should tend to have similar biological functions. this is because misrecognition between such tfs would have a smaller impact on fitness. this prediction agrees with the present observation that the tfs with overlapping code-words are significantly closer in their biological function than expected at random.

one possible scenario for the evolution of tf super-families is as follows. simple organisms, which require few tfs, employ certain super-families such as lambda repressor-like and winged helix. when these super-families reach their upper bounds, new super-families are needed. at these points organisms shift their tf usage to novel super-families with more degrees of freedom and higher maximal numbers . an example is the increased use of the c2h <dig> zinc finger tfs in the more advanced organisms.

it is important to note that the usage of different tf super-families is linked to the phylogenetic grouping of organisms. an example is the zn2/cys <dig> dna-binding domain tfs which are largely restricted to fungal organisms  <cit> . this hints at an interplay between the suggested coding limits that create pressure to use different tf super-families, and the pyhlogenetic history that might dictate the specific choice of these tf super-families.

much of the innovation of biological function has been attributed to events of gene duplications  <cit> . several species, such as zebra-fish and arabidopsis have undergone whole genome duplications. such duplication events may lead to a situation where the number of tfs from a given super-family exceeds its theoretical bound, as observed for helix-loop-helix proteins in arabidopsis. this could either create an evolutionary pressure which may lead to eventual loss of redundant tfs or result in a transient, non-equilibrium census of tfs.

to further test the present conclusions requires additional biological data. the current sets of tfs with known binding sequences  and gene-regulation networks, representing the functional annotation of the tfs, are still partial. for example, the current dataset for e. coli includes less than a fifth of all tfs in the organism. once datasets are enlarged, one may get a better estimate of the bounds, the amounts of overlap in sequence space, and the functional smoothness of the transcriptional code.

along the same lines, further knowledge of tf-dna binding mechanisms could allow one to obtain more accurate estimates for the number of degrees of freedom of each super-family in order to more accurately test the correlation of the observed bounds with this number. in the case of c2h <dig> zinc fingers, detailed structures of the tf-dna complex allowed a good estimation of the mapping between residues in the tf binding domain and the dna bases recognized by the tf  <cit> . in other super-families, however, no clear mapping has yet been devised. therefore, the present study presented only crude estimates for the number of possible sequences of each super-family. the present study predicts that the number of degrees of freedom in super-families with a lower observed bound should be smaller than for super-families with high bounds.

the present study focused only on one level of tf-dna interaction, the recognition mechanisms of dna binding sequences by transcription factors. there are many additional effects that govern transcription regulation. gene expression often depends on the combined effects of multiple tfs, integrated by a cis-regulatory input function at the promoter  <cit> . the functional role of each tf is influenced by the distance on the promoter of its binding sites from sites of other tfs and the transcription start site  <cit> , as well as the phase of the site along the dna helix  <cit> . in addition, there is often co-operative binding to other factors  <cit> , tissue-specific tf expression  <cit>  and differential exclusion of tfs from the nucleus that is dependent on cell type and conditions  <cit> . by effectively introducing more degrees of freedom into the binding mechanism, these additional effects may also alleviate the constraints anticipated by the high levels of sequence overlap observed in the present study. these effects may explain the abundance of tfs from super-families like the lambda repressor-like and helix-loop-helix tfs, for which the observed maximal number of tfs are higher than the expected bounds in the simplest coding models.

the creation of maximal diversity of tfs with minimal misrecognition error-load might not be the only factor underlying the smooth codes observed in this study. assigning tf pairs with similar biological function to similar binding sequences may have additional functional advantages. some of the tf pairs with overlapping binding sequences and similar biological function presented in this study, such as the yeast msn <dig> and msn <dig> stress response regulators, can partially backup each others function. other tf pairs, such as the irf- <dig> and irf- <dig> in humans have an antagonistic regulation mode, where one activates and another represses the same target genes on different time-scales  <cit> . this kind of regulation may create a transient activation profile, where target genes are activated for a short time following induction. tf redundancy  <cit>  and antagonistic regulation may form additional 'forces' pulling tf sequence sets together, increasing the number of tfs above the strict coding bounds.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the present study suggests that there are upper bounds on the number of transcription factors from different super-families. it seems that the more constrained the binding mechanism, the lower the bound. the present bounds may be understood in terms of an optimal coding strategy, in which misrecognition errors are minimized. as predicted by such a theory, the present data suggests that tfs with similar binding sequences tend to regulate genes with similar biological functions. more generally, similar coding problems may occur in other recognition problems in biology, such as protein-rna recognition and protein-protein interactions through defined protein recognition motifs  <cit> . coding constraints can potentially limit the number of different protein binding motifs of a given type in the cell, in order to avoid non-specific cross recognition. it would be interesting to extend the present approach to these and other molecular recognition systems.

