BACKGROUND
mefloquine is a quinoline derivative available since  <dig> as an antimalarial agent and is still considered highly effective for malaria chemoprophylaxis in populations with particular characteristics as pregnant women, children, and travelers  <cit> . it has been showed that mefloquine can quickly cross the blood–brain barrier and remain in the brain even for more than 24 hours  <cit> .

in vitro studies established that mefloquine blocks certain types of gap junction channels and consequently modifies the gap junctional coupling between both cortical and hippocampal neurons  <cit> . the gap junction channels are expressed in neurons and glial cells providing cytoplasmic continuity and direct communication between neighboring cells. these transmembranal channels contribute to the fast exchange of ions and some small molecules thus allowing the electrical coupling and the neuronal hypersynchronic activity  <cit> .

the neuronal hypersynchronic activity drives to convulsive events and hence is a hallmark of epilepsy. for this reason, it has emerged a hypothesis proposing that enhanced electrical coupling mediated by gap junctions is an underlying mechanism involved in the pathophysiological generation of seizure activity  <cit> .

nowadays, there are an increasing number of attempts trying to link seizures and gap junctional coupling. as a result, some studies have analyzed the effects produced by different gap junction blockers on seizures models, and diverse results have been described. in vivo studies have observed that the administration of quinine, a mefloquine-related compound, has anticonvulsant properties, even when administered by diverse routes and evaluated in different seizure models  <cit> . by contrast, paradoxically it has been proposed that quinine and also mefloquine show some excitatory effects increasing the frequency of seizure-like events in rat cortical slices  <cit> . although mefloquine seems to be more specific than other gap junction blockers  <cit> , its effects on acute seizure models are underrepresented.

in order to contribute clarifying this matter, the aim of this study was to analyze the effects of the systemic administration of mefloquine on generalized tonic-clonic seizures  and epileptiform activity induced by pentylenetetrazole  as well as on tonic hindlimb extension  induced by maximal electroshock . the present results suggest that mefloquine could be eliciting some protection against the seizures triggered by two acute models.

RESULTS
ptz model
previous to analyze the effects of mefloquine, we compared two control groups  on the behavior and epileptiform activity induced by ptz. we did not find significant differences between these groups  and, for this reason; we decided only to include the vehicle group  as the unique control.

in the control group, the 100% of the animals administered with vehicle plus ptz presented gtcs. these gtcs were characterized by a first clonic phase with myoclonus of the anterior limbs followed by a tonic phase characterized by hindlimbs extension and finally a second clonic phase with myoclonus of the posterior limbs. the administration of mefloquine induced a response although it was not clearly dose-related. it was observed that the incidence of gtcs decreased to  <dig> % in the group treated with 20 mg/kg; however, this change was not statistically significant. meanwhile, in both groups administered with  <dig> and 80 mg/kg of mefloquine there was a significant reduction  of 50% in the incidence of gtcs . in this study, we observed that in the control group, none rat survived after the expression of the gtcs induced by ptz. this parameter was modified by mefloquine . as a result, it was observed the  <dig> ,  <dig> and  <dig> % of survival with the doses of  <dig>   <dig> and 80 mg/kg of mefloquine respectively . the intraperitoneal administration of ptz 70 mg/kg quickly induced visible behavioral changes in all rats. the first behavioral sign presented after ptz administration was the myoclonic jerk characterized by an intense shaking of the whole body. in the control group, this behavioral parameter was shown  <dig>  ±  <dig>  minutes after ptz administration. however, mefloquine delayed the appearance of this behavioral parameter because the first myoclonic jerk was shown  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ±  <dig>    and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  minutes  after the administration of ptz .figure  <dig> 
mefloquine decreases the incidence of generalized tonic-clonic seizures and increases the percentage of survival. a) the intraperitoneal administration of mefloquine  significantly decreases the incidence of generalized tonic-clonic seizures  and b) significantly increases the percentage of survival after the administration of pentylenetetrazole . the level of significance  was determined by independent fisher’s exact probability tests comparing each experimental group versus control vehicle group. vehicle + ptz , mfq 20 mg/kg + ptz , mfq 40 mg/kg + ptz , mfq 80 mg/kg + ptz .
influence of mefloquine on the latency to the first myoclonic jerk induced by pentylenetetrazole. the latency to the first myoclonic jerk was significantly increased after the administration of mefloquine  40 mg/kg. values are expressed in minutes as mean ± sem. the level of significance  was determined by nonparametric kruskal-wallis analysis followed by dunnet test. vehicle + ptz , mfq 20 mg/kg + ptz , mfq 40 mg/kg + ptz , mfq 80 mg/kg + ptz .



the dose of 40 mg/kg was the only one that significantly modified all the behavioral parameters evaluated after the administration of ptz. for this reason, 40 mg/kg of mefloquine was selected to analyze the total spectral power of the eeg, as well as the duration, amplitude and frequency of the epileptiform activity induced by ptz. as a result, it was found that mefloquine significantly decreased  the total spectral power of the eeg compared with the control group . similarly, mefloquine significantly modified the epileptiform activity decreasing the duration and amplitude and increasing the frequency of the epileptiform activity induced by ptz .figure  <dig> 
mefloquine significantly modifies the total spectral power of the eeg and some parameters of the epileptiform activity induced by pentylenetetrazole. mefloquine   significantly decreased the total spectral power and modified the epileptiform activity in rats administered with pentylenetetrazole . a) total spectral power acquired in the frequency ranges of 0–32 hz; error bars represent sem. b) representative eeg traces obtained in 10-seconds epochs during basal recording and post-administration of vehicle or mfq and ptz. c) duration, d) amplitude and e) frequency of the epileptiform activity induced by ptz. mfq significantly modified these parameters. *p <  <dig>  statistically significant compared with the control group . #p <  <dig>  statistically significant compared with the basal recording. the total spectral power was analyzed using a nonparametric kruskal-wallis analysis followed by student newman keuls test. the duration, amplitude, and frequency were compared with a mann–whitney rank sum test. vehicle + ptz , mfq 40 mg/kg + ptz .



in order to relate the effects of mefloquine with the blockage of gap junctions, we conducted an additional experiment using chloroquine. this compound is chemically related to mefloquine but does not block gap junctions. interestingly, a similar dose of chloroquine , did not significantly modify the incidence of gtcs induced by ptz .figure  <dig> 
effects of chloroquine and mefloquine on the generalized seizures induced by pentylenetetrazole and maximal electroshock. a) chloroquine  did not protect against the generalized tonic-clonic seizures  induced by pentylenetetrazole . the level of significance  was determined by independent fisher’s exact probability test comparing each experimental group versus control vehicle group. vehicle + ptz , mfq 40 mg/kg + ptz , crq 40 mg/kg + ptz . b) crq did not modify the incidence of tonic hindlimb extension  induced by maximal electroshock . however, this drug decreased the duration of thle but in minor proportion that a similar dose of mefloquine. the level of significance  was determined by nonparametric kruskal-wallis analysis followed by dunnet test. vehicle , mfq 40 mg/kg , crq 40 mg/kg .



mes model
the mes model induced thle in all the rats evaluated including those administered with different doses of mefloquine. although the thle was the only parameter measured, at the end of this tonic phase, we also observed in all rats a clonic phase characterized by paddling movements of the limbs and shaking of the body.

the control group administered with vehicle exhibited thle with a mean duration of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  seconds. interestingly, the evaluated doses of mefloquine induced a decrease of the thle duration. this decrease was statically significant  only in the groups administered with 40 mg/kg  and 80 mg/kg  of mefloquine .figure  <dig> 
duration of tonic hindlimb extension induced by maximal electroshock after the administration of mefloquine. the duration of tonic hindlimb extension  was significantly reduced after the administration of different doses of mefloquine . values are expressed in seconds as mean ± sem. the level of significance  was determined by nonparametric kruskal-wallis analysis followed by dunnet test. vehicle , mfq 20 mg/kg , mfq 40 mg/kg , mfq 80 mg/kg .



when analyzed the effects of chloroquine , we also observed that this antimalarial drug did not protect against the thle induced by mes. however, the chloroquine significantly decreased the duration of thle  but in minor proportion that a similar dose of mefloquine   .

discussion
consistently, it has been assumed that gap junction blockers have certain anticonvulsant properties. quinine, another antimalarial drug chemically related to mefloquine, blocks gap junction channels similar to those blocked by mefloquine  <cit> . comparable to our results, others authors have demonstrated that the systemic administration of quinine 40–60 mg/kg, significantly decrease the duration of seizures induced by ptz  <cit> . the present results suggest that a single dose  of mefloquine protect against the gtcs induced by ptz and also reduce the duration of thle induced by mes.

despite to be clinically tested as an antimalarial drug  <cit>  and to be proposed as a specific gap junction blocker  <cit> , mefloquine has not been adequately evaluated as a possible anticonvulsant. probably, this fact is related to controversial reports that have associated mefloquine with proconvulsant effects. voss and collaborators  <cit> , described that in vitro mefloquine induced an increase in the spontaneous local field potential activity denominated as seizure-like activity. another study showed that in mice, doses as high as  <dig>  mg/kg of mefloquine elicited spontaneous tonic seizures probably modulated by gabaergic mechanisms  <cit> .

the maximal dose of mefloquine used in our study was 80 mg/kg, and this treatment decreased 50% the incidence of gtcs induced by ptz and also reduced the duration of thle induced by mes. interestingly, others authors have reported that rats administered with higher doses of mefloquine exhibited excitatory behaviors such as wild running  <cit> . however, our observations indicate that rats administered with mefloquine, even at the maximal dose used, showed a sedation-like state characterized by decrease in spontaneous locomotor activity and seemingly sleepiness. similarly, it has been observed that mefloquine  robustly suppressed the tremor in a mouse model of essential tremor  <cit> . this finding suggests that mefloquine could be inhibiting the hypersynchronized firing of neurons in the anatomical substrates involved in the tremor and consequently induces a reduction of motor activity.

interestingly, mefloquine reduced the incidence and amplitude of the epileptiform activity induced by ptz. some hypotheses suggest that gap junctions are related to the neuronal hypersynchronic activity that drives the convulsive events  <cit> . in accordance with this proposal, some studies have showed that in cerebral pathologies characterized by seizures there is a cellular hyperexcitability related to increased gap junctional intercellular coupling in cortical pyramidal neurons  <cit> . moreover, comparable with our results, it has been reported that mefloquine reduced the incidence, amplitude and duration of recurrent epileptiform discharges in hippocampal slices bathed with bicuculline, a gabaa receptor blocker similar to the ptz  <cit> . given that ptz induces neuronal hypersynchonic activity and mefloquine decreased the amplitude fluctuations, our results suggest that mefloquine could be exerting its anticonvulsant effects interfering with the synchronization of the neuronal activity.

additionally, in order to relate the effects of mefloquine with the blockage of gap junctions, we used chloroquine, an antimalarial drug chemically related to mefloquine but without effects on gap junctional intercellular communication  <cit> . interestingly, chloroquine showed only a slight modification of the incidence of gtcs induced by ptz as well as on the duration of the thle induced by mes. however, these modifications were of minor magnitude that those observed with mefloquine. given the differences found between mefloquine and chloroquine, we suggest that the blockage of gap junctions could be a mechanism involved in the anticonvulsant effects of mefloquine.

the clinical use of mefloquine has been criticized because of the neurological side effects observed such as nausea, dizziness, sleep disturbances, anxiety, psychosis, and convulsions  <cit> . however, animal studies have suggested that neurological effects induced by mefloquine are dose-dependent and that the threshold dose for the appearance of undesired side effects is around 187 mg/kg  <cit> . in our study, the protective treatment against the gtcs induced by ptz and the thle induced by mes was 40 mg/kg. for this reason, we can propose that 40 mg/kg of mefloquine is a safe dose and free of secondary effects. as a result, seems obvious that the beneficial impact of mefloquine may be inverted with high doses. since low doses could be anticonvulsant, high doses could be proconvulsant and even neurotoxic.

mefloquine shows low solubility in typical solvents such as water or saline solution, for this reason, we used dmso as vehicle. because the chemical properties, dmso is a solvent frequently utilized in a great variety of biological studies  <cit> . although the utilization of this solvent has been criticized, dmso has been described as a useful vehicle for diverse seizure studies. specifically, it has been showed that the direct intracerebroventricular administration of dmso 100% did not interfere with the epileptiform activity induced by proconvulsant drugs  <cit> . even, we did not find significant differences when comparing two control groups  on the behavior and epileptiform activity induced by ptz.

overall, it has been assumed that mefloquine elicits a specific blockage of gap junctions  <cit>  and, as a result, inhibit the hypersynchronized firing of neurons in some neuroanatomical substrates. however, some authors have proposed that mefloquine also modify the activity of chemical synaptic neurotransmission. specifically, zhou and collaborators  <cit>  established that, in vitro, mefloquine enhances gaba release onto midbrain dopaminergic neurons. probably, after administration of mefloquine, this enhanced release could be present in the brain and, as a result, contribute to the anticonvulsant effects observed in this work. however, although these findings give us an approach to the problem, more studies are necessary to determine if the anticonvulsant effects showed by mefloquine are mediated mainly by gap junctions or by a set of mechanisms acting in concert.

CONCLUSIONS
we found that systemic administration of mefloquine produces some anticonvulsant effects in two acute seizure models such as ptz and mes. despite the controversy about the neurotoxic and proconvulsant effects induced by mefloquine at high doses, we propose that mefloquine at low doses could be useful to evaluate anticonvulsant effects in seizure experimental models.

