BACKGROUND
falling costs have led to a surge in the number of complete human exomes and genome sequences available. large scale sequencing projects such as the  <dig> genomes project  <cit> , uk10k  <cit>  and nhlbi go exome sequencing project   <cit>  are being followed by even larger projects such as the  <dig>  genomes project  <cit> . while such datasets are of great interest to both researchers and clinicians, their ultimate value depends not on the number of variants identified, but rather on their functional interpretation or 'annotation'. an obvious starting point in the annotation process is to judge whether the variant lies in a genic or intergenic region and, if it is the former, whether it is found in coding  or non-coding sequence. in fact, any information placed onto the genome sequence can theoretically be used to annotate variation. for example, while variant annotation pipelines such as ensembl variant effect predictor   <cit> , annovar  <cit> , vaast  <cit>  and vat  <cit>  distinguish between cds and untranslated regions  of transcripts, they also consider whether variants fall within regions critical to the splicing process. however, as well as describing the location of variants, pipelines must also try and interpret their biological consequences. for cds variants, stop codon gain or loss events and frameshifting due to indels may be identified and tools such as sift  <cit>  and polyphen- <dig>  <cit>  can infer the nature of any amino acid changes due to missense substitutions and give an estimation of their deleteriousness.

clearly, the transcripts used for variant annotation are critically important to the process. recently, macarthy et al.  <cit>  reported a significant divergence in the annotation of the same set of variants when two different transcript sets , gencode  <cit>  and refseq  <cit> , were used. while they share many similarities, the disparity in variant annotation observed is nonetheless driven by fundamental differences between these genesets. the gencode consortium was established to produce a reference gene annotation for the encode project  <cit> . this geneset aims to capture the full extent of transcriptional complexity, including long non-coding rnas , pseudogenes and small rnas alongside protein-coding genes, and all transcripts that are associated with these loci. gencode combines manual annotation by the havana group  <cit>  with computational annotation by ensembl  <cit> , although  <dig> % of transcripts associated with protein-coding genes are either solely manually annotated or identical in both manual and automated annotation in release v <dig>  the extensive use of manual curation in gencode affords the use of a wider range of functionally descriptive gene and transcript 'biotypes'. pertinently, gencode can annotate transcripts containing a premature stop codon as 'nonsense mediated decay'  models on the basis that they are likely to undergo degradation by rna surveillance pathways  <cit> . gencode is also subjected to ongoing computational validation by other groups within the consortium  while putative models can also be targeted for experimental confirmation  <cit> . the gencode geneset is publically available via http://www.gencodegenes.org, and it can be visualised using the vega  <cit> , ensembl  <cit>  and ucsc  <cit>  portals. gencode is the default annotation used by the ensembl project, and the terms 'ensembl annotation' and 'gencode annotation' are thus synonymous when referring to human.

the widely used refseq geneset is produced by ncbi  <cit> . it can also be visualised using the ucsc and ensembl browsers, and downloaded from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq. the refseq human protein-coding transcript set also contains a significant manually annotated component. however, it also incorporates a large number of computationally-predicted transcripts; in ncbi homo sapiens annotation release  <dig> ~31% of transcripts within protein-coding genes are now categorised as reviewed, ~20% as validated and 2% as provisional, with <1% as predicted, inferred and ~45% as model. additional file 1: figure s <dig> shows the refseq annotation of the human brca <dig> locus, which includes predicted protein-coding 'xm' models alongside manually curated protein-coding 'nm' transcripts and non-coding 'nr' transcripts.

historically, the gencode geneset has been richer in alternative splicing  than refseq  <cit> . it also differs in the way it represents transcripts based on truncated evidence, i.e. where the rna obtained from sequencing is inferred to be a portion of the actual rna molecule. whereas refseq extend all transcripts at a locus sharing the same first and final exon to use the same transcription start and end site, gencode only extend a transcript as far as the supporting evidence allows. as such, gencode does not predict gene structures for which there is no or incomplete supporting evidence, and this geneset contains many truncated transcripts ; all such transcripts are clearly marked as such in genome browsers and gtf file with a start/end not found tag.

here, we present a detailed comparison of the most recent versions of gencode  and refseq  in order to identify the similarities and differences between the transcripts, exons and the cdss they encode. we analyse the expression profiles of transcripts unique to both the gencode and refseq genesets as well as those common to both, and discuss how this affects the utility of both sets in variant annotation. we then compare the effect of using different genesets in the annotation of two large variant sets mapped to the latest version of the human reference genome . finally, we describe an investigation of the use of rnaseq data to provide a biological basis for reducing complexity of the gencode transcript set. we did not include the alternative geneset aceview  <cit>  in this analysis, as its human gene model annotation does not appear to have been updated since  <dig>  well before the release of grch <dig>  furthermore, previous analysis identified several confounding features, such as confusing locus definitions and the addition of a cds to almost all transcripts  <cit> .

RESULTS
comparison of gencode and refseq annotated transcripts
to quantify the differences between the gencode and refseq genesets, we investigated the general properties of transcripts from protein-coding genes that map to the reference human genome . alternative splicing is the major source of transcriptional diversity within protein-coding genes, and this can occur in three ways:  through the 'skipping' of exons,  through the incorporation of additional exons, and  via the use of alternative splice sites within the same exon. further diversity is also provided by the existence of transcripts that have 'retained', i.e. haven't spliced out, particular introns  <cit> . we have used four genesets for this analysis: gencode comprehensive, gencode basic, and two sets we define as refseq nxr and refseq nr. the former contains all manually curated nm and nr transcripts, and all xm and xr transcripts at protein-coding genes while the latter contains only manually curated transcripts. gencode basic is a subset of gencode comprehensive, containing only full-length protein-coding transcripts, while refseq nr is a subset of refseq nxr; further details are provided in table  <dig> 

transcript functional biotypes and source e.g. manual or automated annotation, for the four genesets used in this study.

the gencode comprehensive geneset contains more than three times as many unique transcripts as refseq nxr , while gencode basic has approximately half the unique transcripts of refseq nxr . unsurprisingly, a very similar pattern is seen for unique translations . while gencode comprehensive and refseq nxr share more than  <dig>  translations, the former has greater than two fold more than refseq nxr. while the gencode basic set still shares more than  <dig>  translations with refseq nxr, it has ~ <dig>  fewer unique translations . identification of unique exons makes an obvious contribution to the annotation of unique transcripts and translations in both the gencode and refseq genesets. gencode comprehensive has approximately four fold more unique exons than refseq nxr , predominantly associated with transcripts with annotated cdss . the genomic coverage of unique exons in all four genesets, and the relative contribution of each transcript biotype to the genomic coverage of unique exons are also detailed in supplementary table  <dig>  the gencode basic set has nearly 20% fewer unique exons than refseq nxr. in summary, we find that gencode comprehensive captures a great many more novel transcriptional features than the refseq nxr set, while gencode basic set is more similar to refseq nxr.

expression of gencode and refseq transcripts
using rnaseq data from  <dig> encode cell lines, we investigated the expression of exons and introns belonging to protein-coding loci that were unique to either the gencode or refseq genesets or common to both. mapping exon and intron expression data from gencode and refseq transcripts constructed on grch <dig> to the grch38-based transcripts shows that exons and introns in all three categories possess very similar expression characteristics, with their cumulative distributions mapping very closely to one another, particularly where maximum expression is considered . a comparison of median expression across the  <dig> cell lines produces a slightly greater separation between the cumulative distributions. the higher y-intercept  indicates more features with a median of zero expression, and the small leftward-shift of the curve for median expression of exons highlights a slightly higher proportion of refseq-only exons, with lower expression than gencode-refseq common and gencode-only features . these data indicate that the exons and introns common to both gencode and refseq genesets are expressed, and the features unique to both refseq and gencode are as robust and reliable as those held in common. this is particularly significant with regard to the gencode comprehensive set, given that it has four times as many unique exons as the refseq nxr set.

impact of reference transcript set on variant annotation
to contrast the outcomes of using either the gencode or refseq genesets in the study of genome variation, we used the ensembl vep  <cit>  to annotate variants from a genome and exome sequencing study   <cit>  and an exome-only sequencing study   <cit> , separately using the gencode and refseq genesets for transcript annotation. it is important to note that the exome library used for capture in the esp study is based on refseq transcript annotation. where variation maps to transcripts from both genesets we define the variant annotation as 'concordant'. for variation that does not fit these criteria, there are two ways in which variant annotation can diverge:  where a variant overlaps a transcript in both sets but is assigned an alternative functional consequence due to differing transcript annotation , and  where a variant overlaps a transcript in one geneset but not the other .

additional file 6: figure s <dig> and additional file 7: figure s <dig> show the intersection between the gencode comprehensive and basic sets, and refseq nxr and nr sets, for 1kg and esp variants respectively. overall, the majority of variants map to transcripts in both genesets. gencode comprehensive and refseq nxr share 68% of  <dig>  million 1kg variants that map to at least one geneset, while 82% of the  <dig>  million 1kg variants mapping to gencode basic and refseq nxr are common to both sets. for the exome data, gencode comprehensive shares 93% of  <dig>  million esp variants with refseq nxr, and gencode basic and refseq nxr share 98% of  <dig>  million esp variants.

the number of discordant consequence calls for variants that map to both genesets was low for every comparison. for 1kg variants,  <dig>   of variants in common had different calls when using gencode comprehensive and refseq nxr as the reference gene annotation, compared with just  <dig>   between gencode basic and refseq nxr. for the esp set, discordant calls were identified for  <dig>   and  <dig>   of variants respectively. the second, and larger source of difference between consequence predictions arises from variants that map to only one dataset. additional file 8: figure s <dig> shows that, for the 1kg variants,  <dig>  variants map only to gencode comprehensive transcripts and  <dig>  map only to refseq nxr transcripts. there are also  <dig>  variants that map only to gencode basic transcripts compared to  <dig>  mapping to refseq nxr transcripts. a similar pattern is present for the esp setdata  <dig>  variants map exclusively to gencode comprehensive and  <dig>  variants map only to refseq nxr. conversely,  <dig>  variants map only to refseq nxr while only  <dig>  map only to gencode basic.

the largest classes of variants in the 1kg dataset that are called concordantly when comparing gencode comprehensive and gencode basic with refseq nxr genesets have cds and utr and non-coding transcript consequences. splice-site proximal variants and lof variants are considerably less highly represented . for esp data, concordant variants are significantly more likely to have a consequence associated with a cds than any of the other consequences, which are equally well represented . for most datasets and variant consequences, concordant calls are higher than discordant and unique calls. the exceptions to this are utr and non-coding transcript consequences for variants unique to the gencode comprehensive set in both 1kg and esp datasets and to a lesser extent gencode basic and refseq nxr 'other' variants when compared using both the 1kg and esp. a description of variant classification into the broad groups 'lof', 'cds', 'splice' and 'other' can be found in additional file 10: table s <dig>  for both 1kg and esp datasets, transcripts in the gencode comprehensive geneset overlap with more variants in all broad groups of consequences than refseq nxr transcripts. the opposite is true for transcripts in the gencode basic which overlap fewer variants than refseq nxr transcripts for variants in all broad groups of consequences except utr and non-coding transcript, 'other' variants in the 1kg dataset.

the distribution of variant consequences is recapulated by looking at the porportion of each class of variants within the concordant, discordant and unique variant sets. cds and 'other' variants compose approximately 50% of the concordant transcripts, in the 1kg dataset and ~85% in the esp dataset. discordant variants mapping to the gencode basic and comprehensive transcripts comprise 30-40% of cds variants for the 1kg dataset and ~60% in the esp dataset with a corresponding reduction in the 'other' variants . in every case refseq nxr discordant variants follow the same pattern with a slightly higher proportion of cds variants than discordant variants in gencode. for variants that only map to transcripts from one geneset, there is a much lower porportion of cds variants and corresponding increase in 'other' variants, indeed the highest proportion of cds variants mapping to transcripts from only one geneset is less than 40%, in the gencode basic vs refseq nxr comparsion of the esp dataset.

the proportion of discordant and unique lof, missense and synonymous variants contributed by each geneset reaveal large differences dependent on the reference gene annotation used . for both 1kg and esp datasets, the gencode comprehensive geneset contributes between 55-80% of all non-concordant lof variants and missense variants, only synonymous variants show a different pattern with 60% being contributed by the refseq nxr geneset. for the gencode basic geneset, the pattern is similarly consistent, but reversed with the refseq nxr contributing 60-65% of all non-concordant lof, synonymous and missense variants.

overall, variants affecting non-coding and utr  variants are the largest group in 1kg data, while cds variants are the largest group in esp data . the two datasets also represent the extremes of the concordance identified in variant annotation, with cds variants showing high  concordance in all conditions while 'other' variants show high discordance . one of the most striking findings demonstrated by macarthy et al. was that only 44% of lof variants were identified in common in the two transcript sets  <cit> . our own observation is that approximately 30% of lof variant calls are in conflict . this difference may be due to the use of a different variant annotation tools , or the fact that both genesets may have changed substantially since the releases used in the earlier study. the most significant differences we identify are between gencode comprehensive and refseq nxr, which is not surprising since they contain the most novel transcripts, splicing features and highest genomic coverage. similarly, variation identified in the 1kg variant set shows considerably more variation than that from the esp set, reflecting the additional genic features not captured by exome sequencing, and emphasising that exome design will inevitably lag behind transcript annotation.

discussion
it is clear that there are significant differences between the gencode and refseq genesets. the gencode comprehensive set contains more as, more novel cdss, more novel exons and a higher genomic coverage than the full refseq annotation. this is despite the inclusion of rnaseq-based computationally-predicted 'xm' transcripts in the refseq geneset. one explanation for this is that the refseq as complement seems enriched for exon-skipping or novel exon combinations, i.e. intronic features, neither of which increase genomic coverage. in contrast, transcripts in both the gencode comprehensive and basic sets have longer 5'and 3' utrs, which contributes to the overall greater genomic coverage. furthermore, the gencode comprehensive set includes two classes of transcripts that lack cds: 'retained intron' transcripts, and those where the truncated nature of the supporting evidence makes the coding potential of the model ambiguous . one consequence of the additional genomic coverage in gencode due to utrs and non-coding transcripts is that much of the discordance in variation calling we observe is annotated as non-coding rna or 5'/3' utr-linked. that is not to say such variation is unimportant; utr variation can affect many aspects of regulation  and while the sequences underlying these processes are largely cryptic at the present time, we predict they will be considered a more significant source of functional variation in future. similarly, processed-transcripts  within protein-coding genes are in fact likely to encode cds in reality, whether they are full-length or targets for the nmd pathway. it may thus be appropriate for certain variation studies to incorporate information regarding such putative cdss, depending on the overall goals of the study. even retained introns may not simply reflect the capture of immature transcripts or splicing aberrations, with several instances of functional intron retention being reported  <cit> .

while relatively low, the discordance in cds variant calling is likely to be problematic given the greater emphasis currently placed on the propensity of coding variation to be causal for phenotypic difference. for example, the identification of potentially deleterious missense mutations by the sift and polyphen <dig> components of the ensembl vep provides a clear starting point in the search for candidate disease-causing variants. however, differences between the genesets in terms of cds length, reading frame or especially the presence or absence of the cds could increase false positive reports, thus complicating interpretation. this captures the dichotomy at the heart of variant annotation. while one researcher might want to capture a large set of plausible functional variants, another may require the clarity of interpretation afforded by a reduced false positive rate. the gencode comprehensive geneset includes more splicing features than gencode basic, and it covers more genomic sequence. rnaseq data supports these additional exons and introns being expressed at least as highly as those features shared by gencode and refseq. gencode comprehensive also captures more lof, coding and splice region variants than the most complete refseq set. in contrast, gencode basic is a less complex geneset, containing fewer full-length protein-coding models. as a consequence, gencode basic shows less discordant variant annotation, and captures fewer unique lof, coding and splice region variants than the most complete refseq set. analysis of dominant transcript expression indicates that the gencode basic set is enriched for highly expressed transcripts . unfortunately, transcript reconstruction and quantification from rnaseq is not sufficiently reliable to allow tissue-specific filtering of transcripts on the basis of expression at present, but it does permit the most highly expressed transcripts to be identified with reasonable confidence. this will provide a useful basis on which to simplify the transcript set, particularly in combination with principal isoform call from appris which is also inlcuded in gencode.

CONCLUSIONS
gencode has a higher proportion of manually annotated gene models than refseq and includes more novel splicing features. given our modern understanding of 'pervasive transcription', one could question to what extent this excess transcription is truly functional, as opposed to potential 'noise'. we have demonstrated that the novel exons and introns annotated by gencode and refseq share characteristics of transcription with those features already annotated in both sets, suggesting that transcriptional noise is unlikely to be the major explanation for the existence of such transcripts, or at least no more so than for transcripts already independently added to both genesets. the additional coverage and diversity of gencode comprehensive transcripts leads to the identification of many more genic variants than refseq, however, transcriptional complexity can also make variant interpretation more difficult . the gencode basic geneset shares may characteristics with refseq, although it captures fewer novel lof and coding variants. furthermore, while transcript level quantification is not currently sufficiently reliable to be used as a basis for filtering transcripts in a tissue-specific manner, simply asking which is the dominantly expressed transcript holds some promise, and the gencode basic set, contains the vast majority of transcripts identified as dominant. this suggests it represents an effective filter for functional transcripts, in lieu of more reliable transcript quantification becoming available from the use of longer read technologies.

