BACKGROUND
in drosophila, a hierarchic segmentation gene cascade acts to stepwise pattern the early embryo into single segments . maternally provided factors such as bicoid and hunchback, rest at the top of this hierarchy, which allows these genes to regulate zygotically expressed gap genes  . the ggs, that are expressed in broad overlapping domains along the anterior-posterior axis of the embryo, regulate the pair rule genes  in transversal stripes in alternating segment primordia  <cit> . during a subsequent phase of segment formation, the prgs are often expressed in a single segmental periodicity and, at this point, act as segment-polarity genes  . in a combinatorial mode the prgs regulate the expression of the spgs, which maintain the parasegment boundaries and define the segments’ polarity.

this mode of segment formation is called long-germ developmental mode because all segments are patterned from a pre-existing field of cells, the blastoderm . drosophila development, however, is derived, and is, at best, comparable to some groups of higher insects. only the most anterior segments form from the blastoderm in the majority of arthropods, while the posterior segments are added in a single or double segment period from a posterior segment addition zone   <cit> . this ancestral mode of development and segment formation is called short-germ developmental mode.

recent studies have shown that the mechanisms and gene interactions acting at the bottom level of the drosophila segmentation gene cascade, i.e. spgs and hox genes, appear to be highly conserved among arthropods  and onychophorans  <cit> . at the level of maternally provided effect genes and ggs, however, the segmentation gene hierarchy appears to be less conserved . the level at which the prgs act is intermediate between that of the spgs and hox genes, and that of maternally provided effect genes and ggs . examination of prg expression and function in insects other than drosophila revealed that this level of the segmentation gene cascade is, to some degree, conserved in insects . the expression profile of prgs in most insects is, however, somewhat different from that in drosophila. in non-drosophilid long-germ insects, prgs are often initially expressed in double-segment wide stripes that later split into a single segmental pattern . in short-germ insects a similar pattern is found in the anterior blastoderm, but during posterior segment addition prgs are, like in non-insect arthropods, usually expressed in both dynamic patterns in the saz and in stripes in the newly formed segment . it is therefore debatable whether they are involved in a pair rule-like mechanism . data on early prg expression or function in the blastoderm in non-insect arthropods are scant  <cit>  and for that reason, it is unclear whether a pair rule-like mechanism may be present in anterior patterning.

to shed light on this topic we examined the expression of most of the known drosophila prg orthologs in the blastoderm of the pill millipede glomeris marginata . the orthologs of two drosophila prg genes are not subject of this study: the fushi-tarazu gene acts as a classical prg in drosophila, but in basal hexapods and other arthropods, including glomeris, it may have retained its ancestral role as hox gene and does not act as a prg  <cit> . the tenascin-major  gene  is a rather atypical prg in drosophila. it does not encode a transcription factor, like all other prgs, and only has been student in drosophila where it is only expressed in a pair rule pattern on protein level, but not on mrna level. therefore we decided not to include ten-m in the present analysis. we find that all investigated prg orthologs, except one, are expressed in transversal stripes that are typical for segmentation genes and which are in patterns that may be in accord with an underlying pair rule-like mechanism. the blastodermal expression of the prgs is different from that in segments added from the saz in glomeris <cit> : they do not appear in a strict anterior to posterior order and are often initially expressed in double  segment-wide domains.

methods
species husbandry, gene cloning, in situ hybridization, nuclei staining and documentation techniques
the handling of glomeris marginata is described in  <cit> . after oviposition, embryos were allowed to develop at room temperature. staging was done afterwards  <cit> . the developmental stage of all embryos was determined by using the dye, dapi .

cloning and sequence analysis of the glomeris pair rule gene orthologs has been described in  <cit> .

single whole mount in situ hybridization was performed as described in  <cit> . double whole mount in situ hybridization was performed as described in  <cit> .

embryos were analyzed under a leica dissection microscope equipped with either an axiocam  or a leica dc <dig> digital camera. brightness, contrast, and color values were corrected in all images using the image processing software adobe photoshop cs <dig> .

RESULTS
morphology of the early glomeris embryo and technical limitations of in situ hybridization experiments
we previously reported on the expression profiles of prg orthologs in the trunk of the pill millipede, glomeris marginata <cit> . here we present the expression patterns of these genes in the anterior region of the developing embryo from the blastoderm stage  to the formation of inter-segmental grooves at approximately stage  <dig>  shortly after the formation of the blastoderm, a posterior zone of enhanced cell density appears ; this domain is called the cumulus <cit> . soon after, a distinct area of enhanced cell density, the so-called regio germinalis, becomes visible anterior to the position of the cumulus and continues to grow into the anterior area of the developing embryo . all future anterior segments, including the first trunk segment , are formed from the regio germinalis . the anterior segments are patterned first but not completely simultaneously, as suggested by the expression of the spg engrailed    <cit> . the posterior segments, including t <dig>  form sequentially from a posterior saz. the term “saz” refers to the fact that this region, from which the posterior segments are added in a one by one period, does not represent an area of enhanced cell proliferation; we therefore want to avoid the somewhat misleading terms growth- or proliferation-zone that are often used in this context .

currently, it is not possible to perform mrna detection studies  in embryos younger than stage  <dig>  at this stage the inner vitelline membrane forms in glomeris. attempts to fix embryos at earlier developmental stages  in the absence of a functional vitelline membrane, have failed.

expression of even-skipped  in the regio germinalis
in drosophila the eve gene is under control of the upstream acting maternal effect genes and gap genes, and each of the seven transversal stripes of early eve-expression becomes specified separately by disjoined enhancer elements . because of this direct control of eve by the upstream level segmentation genes it represents a primary prg. one of its important functions during early development in drosophila is to indirectly regulate the segment polarity gene engrailed by regulating its activators paired and fushi-tarazu and its repressors runt and sloppy paired <cit> . the crucial function of eve among the prgs is also conserved in other insects such as tribolium <cit>  and gryllus <cit> , but may be different in other insects .

expression of glomeris eve is detectable at the blastoderm stage as single stripes in the future premandibular and maxillary segment, a broad domain corresponding to the postmaxillary and first trunk segment , and a second broad domain located in the posterior saz where the future t <dig> is patterned . the most posterior region of the embryo is free from eve transcripts. these cells will later sink in and form the proctodaeum. the two posterior broad expression domains are in circles around the posterior pole of the embryo . the same expression is described for eve at later developmental stages  <cit> . the postmaxillary+t <dig> domain begins to resolve into two distinct stripes , and the posterior domain in the saz transforms into a distinct stripe . the embryo shown in figure 2c is double stained for eve and collier , which serves as a spatial landmark. at this stage the col-stripe is located in the posterior part of the premandibular and the anterior part of the mandibular segment  <cit> . it now becomes clear that the intra-segmental position of the eve-stripe is anterior in the premandibular segment . the small gap between the posterior edge of the col-stripe and the stripe of eve expression in the maxillary segment indicates that eve is located anteriorly in this segment. double staining of eve and the segment polarity gene engrailed  supports this assumption and shows that eve is expressed posterior adjacent to en, and thus anterior in the segments . the intra-segmental position of eve in the regio germinalis is identical with that in the trunk segments . the split of the postmaxillary+t1-domain progresses , and at the subsequent stage  <dig>  the split is complete . a second stripe of eve appears in the saz . at stage  <dig> , expression corresponding to the later t <dig> segment appears in the saz. the premandibular stripe shortens, which is in accord with the changing morphology of this segment  <cit>  . the two dots that delimit the beginning of the dynamic cycles of eve expression in the saz first appear here  . expression of eve in the premandibular and maxillary segments starts disappearing at stage  <dig>  .

expression of runt  in the regio germinalis
like eve, also run acts as a primary prg in drosophila where one of its key functions is to regulate other prgs as well as primary upstream acting gap genes  and maternal effect genes. in drosophila run is thus an important component of the cross regulatory network of prgs, ggs and maternal effect genes  <cit> . the important function of run in the pair rule regulatory network is conserved in short germ insects as well  <cit> .

at the blastoderm stage, run is expressed as two broad domains corresponding to the later maxillary+postmaxillary segments and the t <dig> segment . like everun is also expressed in rings that surround the posterior pole of the embryo. a third ring of run-expression corresponding to the future t <dig> segment appears in the saz , and the anterior domain begins to split into two stripes. de novo expression appears in the posterior saz as a broad domain . splitting of the maxillary+postmaxillary domain proceeds . a stripe of run representing t <dig> has split off from the saz . at early stage  <dig>  the maxillary+postmaxillary stripe has completely split  and faint expression appears in the mandibular segment posterior and adjacent to the expression of col . expression of run appears in the ocular region . co-expression of run+ col reveals that run is expressed posterior and adjacent to col  and is thus expressed in the anterior of the mandibular segment . in the dorsal extraembryonic tissue the maxillary+postmaxillary stripe is, unlike in ventral tissue, not split . in stage  <dig>  embryos all segmental run-stripes are evenly spaced; dapi counter-staining of the same embryo reveals the position of the stripes in the anterior of the now morphologically distinguishable segments .

expression of hairy- <dig>  in the regio germinalis
in drosophila hairy acts as a primary prg  <cit> , but this function may only be partially conserved among insects  <cit> .

in the early blastoderm, h <dig> is expressed in a broad domain covering the area of the future antennal to mandibular region . at the posterior rim of this domain expression is enhanced. faint expression is visible in the tissue that will form t <dig> . expression then disappears from the centre of the antennal to mandibular domain . at the same time the level of expression at the anterior rim increases resulting in two distinct stripes: one in the antennal segment and one in the mandibular segment . a stripe of h <dig> appears within the saz . de novo expression appears in the ocular region as a broad band while expression at the posterior rim of this domain is enhanced . a very faint stripe appears in the maxillary segment . then additional stripes appear simultaneously in the saz and in the postmaxillary segment . slightly later ventral expression of the ocular domain disappears . co-expression of h <dig> with col reveals that the enhanced expression of h <dig> in the antennal to mandibular domain lies in the posterior of the mandibular and antennal segment, respectively . in late stage  <dig>  embryos expression disappears from the ventral region of the antennal segment . the h1-stripes that correspond to the postmaxillary segment, the maxillary segment, t <dig> and t <dig> become broadened and expression at the posterior rim becomes enhanced . dapi counter-staining reveals the affiliation of the stripes to their corresponding segments . co-expression in similar-stage embryos stained for h <dig> and en shows that the centre of the antennal to mandibular domain harbors the premandibular segment primordium . the posterior rim of segmental h1-expression likely corresponds with the posterior portion of the developing segments ). enhanced dot-like expression of h <dig> appears along the ventral edge of the embryo where the central nervous system forms .

expression of the second glomeris hairy ortholog, h <dig>  appears in transversal stripes at stage  <dig>  in the mandibular, maxillary and t <dig> segments and weakly in the saz . later, expression in the postmaxillary segment appears. expression in the mandibular and the maxillary segment broadens and expression corresponding to the t <dig> stripe forms in the anterior saz . double staining shows that h <dig> is expressed anterior and adjacent to the segment polarity gene engrailed  .

expression of sloppy-paired  in the regio germinalis
in the fly drosophila and the beetle tribolium slp acts as a secondary prg and is in these species regulated by the primary prgs  <cit> . in drosophila it acts as a gap gene in the head segments and a pair rule like regulator of spgs in the trunk segments where it functions as an activator of wingless  and as a repressor of engrailed   <cit> .

at the glomeris blastoderm stage, slp is expressed as a broad domain in the future premandibular+mandibular region . a stripe of slp appears anterior to the saz and corresponds to the future t <dig> . a new domain appears in the saz . then de novo expression appears in the ocular region and faintly in the future maxillary segment . ventral expression of the former ocular stripe disappears. expression appears in the saz corresponding to the future t <dig> segment . expression in the centre of the premandibular+mandibular domain starts disappearing and faint expression forms in the antennal region and the future postmaxillary segment . expression in the antennal and postmaxillary segment becomes stronger. disappearing of slp-transcripts from the premandibular+mandibular region proceeds . at stage  <dig>  these stripes are completely split into two. double staining with engrailed  reveals that the segmental expression of slp is anterior and adjacent to en . the intrasegmental expression of slp is thus conserved in segments formed from the regio germinalis and the segment addition zone . it appears thus possible that the function of slp as a regulator of the segment polarity genes wg and en may indeed be conserved in both, insects and myriapods.

expression of pairberry- <dig>  in the regio germinalis
in drosophila the paired  gene is classified as a so-called tertiary prg because it functions at the lowest level of the pair rule gene cascade as a direct activator of wingless  and engrailed   <cit> . expression and functional analysis of paired orthologs in other insects revealed that its function is conserved among insects .

the orthologs of the drosophila pax group iii genes are called pairberry-genes because they in fact represent the orthologs of the three drosophila genes pairedgooseberry and gooseberry-neuro <cit> . at stage  <dig>  embryos, glomeris pby- <dig> is expressed as a fuzzy domain within or directly anterior to the saz . this remains the only expression until stage  <dig>  . segmental expression appears simultaneously in the premandibular, the mandibular, the maxillary, postmaxillary and the t <dig> segment. expression in the premandibular, the maxillary and the t <dig> segment, is clearly stronger . during stage  <dig> , faint expression appears in the antennal segment and in t <dig>  at stage  <dig>  expression in the mandibular and the postmaxillary segment becomes stronger . during stage  <dig> , the t3-stripe first appears as a faint expression  that subsequently becomes clearer .

double staining with engrailed  reveals that pby- <dig> is expressed anterior to en in anterior segments that have formed from the regio germinalis . both genes also appear to be co-expressed in one row of cells, but this is not unambiguously clear from the available expression data . the intrasegmental expression of pby- <dig> is conserved in anterior and posterior segments , and this is consistent with a conserved regulatory function of pby- <dig> in segment polarity gene regulation.

expression of odd-paired  and odd-skipped  in the regio germinalis
in drosophila opa acts as a secondary prg. an oddity of opa is that it is not expressed in the typical striped pattern as all the other prgs, but it is expressed ubiquitously in the centre of the early embryo. its presence is required but not instructive for the regulation of segment polarity genes  <cit> . in tribolium opa is expessed in stripes but does not act as a pair rule gene  <cit> .

at the blastoderm stage opa is ubiquitously expressed in the regio germinalis, but not in the saz . within this domain, expression is enhanced in the future premandibular+mandibular, maxillary+postmaxillary, and the t <dig> segment . later, the broad stripes corresponding to the premandibular+mandibular and maxillary+postmaxillary regions split. at the same time, the ubiquitous expression anterior to the premandibular segment transforms into distinct domains in the later ocular and antennal regions . the t1-domain does not split. de novo expression corresponding to t <dig> appears in the saz . later, the t <dig> stripe appears in the saz . the expression of glomeris opa in a striped pattern of enhanced expression within a ubiquitous domain is thus intermediate between that of tribolium  and that of drosophila .

interestingly, in drosophila the odd gene is historically considered as a secondary prg that is under control of the primary prgs, and is repressed by eve <cit> . in tribolium, however, odd is part of the high-level regulatory circuit that controls secondary prgs, and even represses eve <cit> . based on the find that odd expression is regulated through stripe specific elements, recently it has been suggested that drosophila odd should rather be considered as a primary than a secondary prg  <cit> . furthermore also expression pattern analysis in another myriapod, the centipede strigamia, suggests an important role for an odd-related gene in this species  <cit> .

in glomeris the odd gene is initially expressed in the most anterior area of the developing embryo, while being weakly expressed in the future t <dig>  the saz and its posterior pole . at stage  <dig>  the anterior domain is restricted to a central position. two patches of expression are located dorsal and posterior to this domain. the affiliation of this expression is unclear, but is possibly within future antennal, premandibular and mandibular tissue . faint expression is visible in developing segments between this domain and t <dig>  three stripes of expression appear posterior to t <dig> representing expression in the future segments t <dig> to t <dig> . altogether, the expression pattern of odd is not indicative for a pronounced role during the formation/patterning of segments that form from the regio germinalis. this implies that it does not play such a crucial role in the segmentation process in this myriapod as it does in long and short germ insects and a centipede. in segments that arise from the posterior segment addition zone , however, glomeris odd is prominently expressed in the saz itself and subsequently also in the dorsal segmental units  <cit> . this on the other hand suggests fundamental differences between the patterning of anterior vs posterior segments.

other prg orthologs, i.e. the paralogs pairberry- <dig>  and hairy- <dig>  are not expressed in early stages in the regio germinalis.

discussion
the glomeris pby- <dig> gene is expressed in a pattern reminiscent of that of classical prgs
an important question that must be addressed is whether prg orthologs may be involved in a pair rule-like mechanism during segment formation and if this is comparable to that found in the model organism, drosophila .

one of the investigated prg orthologs in glomerispby- <dig>  is expressed in an early pattern in the regio germinalis and may be the result of an underlying classical pair rule-like mechanism. it appears simultaneously  in the premandibular to t <dig> segment, but expression in every other segment, i.e. premandibular, maxillary and t <dig>  is notably stronger . this expression profile is reminiscent of prg expression in drosophila, where an alternating pattern of weaker and stronger prd-stripes occurs after the splitting off of secondary stripes from primary stripes  <cit> . in glomeris pby-1-stripes are, however, not the result of splitting. notably, also in glomeris, segmental expression of pby- <dig> appears significantly later than that of the other prgs, and even later than the segment-polarity gene en <cit> . this late appearance of pby- <dig> is in accord with its late appearance during posterior segment addition in glomeris <cit>  and the confirmed role of prd as a tertiary prg in drosophila <cit> . therefore, pby- <dig> cannot act at high levels in the segmentation gene cascade in glomeris, and is unlikely to be involved in the regulation of the spgs. the expression pattern of pby- <dig> can however be interpreted as a possible secondary result of an underlying primary pair rule-like mechanism.

the early expression of prd/pby orthologs has also been examined in other insect species than drosophila. in the wasp, nasonia vitripennis, a long-germ insect, like drosophila, stripes of prd expression appear in an anterior to posterior progression with every other stripe being weaker. whether this is a result of splitting stripes like in drosophila is unclear from the present data  <cit> . in the short-germ insect, tribolium, broad stripes of prd expression appear that soon after split  <cit> . notably, the maxillary stripe is weaker than the mandibular and labial stripes. with the elongation of the germ band, additional stripes of prd expression appear in the anterior of the saz that later split into expression in t1+t <dig>  t3+a <dig> et cetera. importantly, in triboliumprd acts as a true prg with a clear pair rule phenotype setting an example that splitting domains of double-segment wide initial expression patterns can be functionally comparable to drosophila pair rule patterning  <cit> . in the hemimetabolous short-germ insect, schistocerca americana, the mandibular and labial stripes of prd expression first appear together with a broad posterior domain that gives rise to expression in the second and third thoracic segment. with some delay weaker stripes in between  appear  <cit> . notably, the mandibular stripe does not appear as a separate stripe but is the result of a broad splitting domain covering the gnathal arc that transforms also into the labial stripe  <cit> .

the early pattern in long-germ and short-germ insects is therefore similar. stripes form as broad double-segment wide domains that then split giving rise to the secondary pattern of prd expression . the result is often a secondary expression pattern with strong and weak prd/ pby expression in alternating segments , which is the pattern also present in glomeris.

interestingly, the same early expression profile of prd orthologs has also been described for the spider mite, tetraynchus urticae , where the paired ortholog, tu-pax3/ <dig>  is initially expressed in alternating segments in the anterior body. in somewhat later stages, expression of tu-pax3/ <dig> appears in the interjacent segments  <cit> . this pattern is virtually identical to that of glomeris pby- <dig> except the expression patterns of the first and third walking leg bearing segments  in the mite are clearly delayed . this finding, if not caused by convergence, may place the origin of the expression pattern of prd orthologs  at the very base of the arthropoda.

the early strong expression of tu-pax3/ <dig> is in the same  segments as the strong expression in glomeris, but the location of the primary  prd/ pby-stripes in insects is shifted by one segment towards posterior . since the homology of arthropod head segments appears to be solidly resolved by brain innervation patterns  and hox gene expression patterns , this difference must be the result of different regulation of prd/ pby genes in the different arthropod classes.

expression of prgs in double-segment wide domains: a feature of pair rule function?
we find that in glomeris all prgs except pby- <dig> are initially expressed in double- or multiple-segment wide domains in at least some segmental primordia . most of the broad expression patterns in glomeris extend into two adjacent future segments . splitting of double-segment wide expression domains of prgs is found also for one of the drosophila prgs, namely paired   <cit> , and for a number of prgs in other insects   . functional studies in the beetle, tribolium, have shown that this kind of expression pattern is indeed connected to classical pair rule phenotypes  <cit> , but  <cit> .

it is possible that the splitting of double-segment wide expression domains is an ancestral regulatory feature of arthropod prgs, because it is present in the blastoderm of insects, a myriapod  and also a spider  <cit> .

initial expression of prgs in broad domains may be a genetic constraint, because their early expression patterns are likely to be regulated by the gap-genes , as known from insects . since the ggs are expressed in broad domains they may activate prgs that are also initially located in broad domains, but that then transform into segmental stripes, possibly by the combinatorial action of the prgs themselves.

blastoderm patterning in long- and short-germ arthropods
in the model arthropod, drosophila melanogaster, all segments are patterned at the blastoderm stage. this, however, represents a derived developmental mode, and hence the segmentation gene cascade known to act in drosophila cannot function in the same way in short-germ arthropods that add posterior segments sequentially from a posterior saz .

functional studies and gene expression analysis have shown that the prgs are likely to be involved in segment formation in non-insect arthropods . despite that, it was largely unclear whether prgs are also involved in anterior patterning in non-insect arthropods, as only very few studies examine prg function and/or expression at early blastoderm stages in non-insect arthropods  <cit> .

the data presented here suggest that most of the investigated prgs in glomeris are involved in segmental patterning of the blastoderm. all prgs  are expressed in transversal stripes corresponding to one or multiple segment primordia . expression of any given prg does not appear simultaneously or in an anterior posterior order, but with minimal temporal variance in different segmental primordia. furthermore, the order of appearance of the segmental primordia differs for every prg ortholog . this is comparable to what happens in drosophila, where the prgs often appear in an irregular progression in the blastoderm and the initial expression is often in broad domains and not in the classical seven-stripe pattern .

the stereotypic appearance of the prgs in the regio germinalis in glomeris is superficially reflected by the appearance of the spg en <cit> . en transcription starts later compared to when most of the prgs are transcribed, which is in accord with a possible regulatory function of some of the prgs on en in the anterior embryo in glomeris. while the prgs appear to be active before the onset of the spgs  <cit>  and the expression of the hox genes  <cit> , the anterior acting ggs are expressed as early as, or possibly earlier  <cit> .

the principal hierarchy of segmentation gene interaction known from drosophila with ggs regulating prgs and prgs regulating spgs can be conserved in glomeris as well, at least with respect to segment formation in the blastoderm.

it is tempting to speculate that anterior patterning is indeed conserved among long- and short-germ arthropods and that this possibly ancestral patterning mechanism has been extended to the complete embryo in drosophila and other long-germ insects. results of this transition may have been the recruitment of the posterior acting ggs and the loss of the posterior segmentation clock as suggested by  <cit> .

pair rule-like mechanism in posterior segment addition?
patterning of segments in pairs may be an ancestral mechanism . the dynamic expression of some prgs in the posterior saz in myriapods  <cit>  may be the equivalent of double-segment wide stripes of prgs in the blastoderm. this condition is most evident in the centipede, strigamia, where the addition of posterior segments occurs in pairs and with the involvement of prgs, such as even-skipped, from the posterior saz  <cit> . further evidence for this hypothesis comes from centipedes where the number of trunk segments is always odd . this shows that there may be a genetic constraint that does not allow for the formation of an even number of trunk segments in centipedes  <cit> .

furthermore, in glomeris the number of trunk segments is always  <dig> for females and  <dig> for males. this indicates that the posterior segmentation clock in glomeris males may produce another two segments by adding one cycle of dynamic gene expression during its development.

CONCLUSIONS
we have found evidence, in the form of gene expression patterns, that drosophila pair rule gene orthologs are also likely involved in anterior body patterning in the myriapod glomeris marginata. this finding, however, requires further investigation through functional studies, which, at the moment, have not yet been established for glomeris, or any other myriapod species. the expression patterns found in glomeris are, to some extent, similar, and thus reminiscent of true pair rule patterning as seen in drosophila. comprehensive comparative expression data from other arthropods, and especially crustaceans, are necessary to gain a better understanding of the ancestral mode of arthropod segmentation.

authors´ contributions
rj designed the study, conducted the experiments and wrote the first draft manuscript. wgmd and geb were involved in data discussion and writing the final version of the manuscript. all authors approved the final version of the manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
figure s <dig>  intrasegmental expression of prgs revealed by double-staining with the spg engrailed . in all panels anterior is to the left. a stage  <dig>  embryo, flat-mounted. double staining of en  and even-skipped . b stage  <dig>  embryo, whole mount. double staining of en  with hairy- <dig> . c stage  <dig>  embryo, flat-mounted. double staining of en  and sloppy-paired . note that the anterior of the germ band was damaged during the process of mounting and removing the yolk. d stage  <dig>  embryo, flat-mounted. double staining of en  and pairberry- <dig> . abbreviations: an, antennal segment; md, mandibular segment; pmd, premandibular segment; pmx, postmaxillary segment; t <dig> and t <dig>  first and third trunk segment.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work has been supported by the swedish research council , the european union via the marie curie training network “zoonet” ) and the dfg via sfb  <dig> of the university of cologne .
