BACKGROUND
the use of venom for predation has evolved several times across the animal kingdom in organisms such as snakes, snails, and spiders  <cit> . the majority of venoms consist of complex mixtures of toxic proteins  and extensive variation in venom composition is documented at nearly all biological scales of study ranging from individuals to species . understanding the forces that shape venom evolution and variation in venom composition among predatory venomous taxa is not only of intrinsic interest to ecological and evolutionary studies  <cit> , but has far reaching implications across several biological disciplines, including drug development in pharmacology and understanding protein structure-function relationships in molecular biology  <cit> . diet is thought to be a major driver of venom composition patterns because venom is intricately linked to a species’ ability to capture and apprehend prey  <cit> . there are currently two major hypotheses that attempt to explain the impact of diet on broad-scale patterns of venom composition across taxa:  prey preference should determine venom components and , dietary breadth should be positively correlated with venom complexity  <cit> . while both hypotheses are often used interchangeably as evidence for the role of diet in venom evolution , they have separate and distinct predictions on patterns of venom composition among taxa: whereas the former hypothesis predicts the types of venom proteins expected for a given species, the latter hypothesis predicts how many proteins are employed for prey capture.

the idea that prey preference should determine the types of venom proteins employed by a given species is grounded in the logic that natural selection shapes the venom repertoires of species to become more effective at targeting the physiologies of their prey  <cit> . several studies support this relationship, including correlations between variation in diet and venom components among populations within species  <cit>  and functional studies which show that the toxic effects of venoms from different species were maximally effective on their preferred prey . for example, snake venoms from species that preferentially feed on arthropods were more toxic upon injection into scorpions relative to venom extracted from a species that feeds almost exclusively on vertebrates  <cit> . however, there are cases where variation in venom composition cannot be attributed to dietary preferences, challenging the generality of this pattern  <cit> . indeed, gene duplication, positive selection, and protein neofunctionalization are defining features of venom gene evolution  and these forces work in concert to promote divergence in venom composition among taxa. given the high evolutionary lability of venom toxins, it is unclear that a relationship between dietary preference and venom composition should be expected.

the second hypothesis on dietary breadth and venom complexity seeks to explain why some species employ more venom proteins than others for prey capture  <cit> . under this hypothesis, dietary breadth should be positively correlated with venom complexity because a greater number of venom proteins is necessary to target a wide variety of prey species  <cit> . although rarely invoked in venom studies, this relationship is explicitly predicted by the niche variation hypothesis, which posits that individuals or populations with wider niches should display greater phenotypic variance  <cit> . to date, nearly all evidence supporting the impact of dietary breadth in shaping patterns of venom complexity are essentially observational. for example, sea snakes, which mostly feed on fish, have less diverse venoms compared to land snakes, which typically feed on arthropods, reptiles, amphibians, birds, and mammals  <cit> . in addition, prey specialists tend to have less complex venoms compared to generalists  <cit> . despite the apparent signal, these observations have yet to be tested in a phylogenetically controlled and rigorous manner.

although diet is widely accepted as the dominant force governing venom evolution across disparate venomous taxa  <cit> , few multi-species comparative studies exist that explicitly examine the impact of diet on venom composition patterns across venomous radiations. the majority of studies implicating the prominent role of diet in venom evolution are based on variation in venom composition among populations within species or among closely related species  <cit> . in some cases, broad generalizations on the evolutionary trends of venom and diet are made from the analyses of a few individuals from a single species . in addition, knowledge on venom composition is often incomplete – most studies are restricted to commonly known gene families  <cit> , challenging the generality of previous results given that a substantial proportion of venomous cocktails potentially go unexamined. without employing a broad and robust comparative phylogenetic approach in conjunction with comprehensive venom data, it is not possible to determine whether previously reported patterns represent general evolutionary trends in venomous taxa or are idiosyncratic phenomena restricted to the particularities of a given study.

here, we examine the influence of both dietary preference and dietary breadth on venom evolution in cone snails , a hyper diverse group of over  <dig> predatory marine snails that typically prey on either worms, molluscs, or fish using a cocktail of venomous neuropeptides   <cit> . each species’ venom repertoire is estimated to contain 50– <dig> peptides and these peptides can be classified into more than  <dig> gene superfamilies  based on the similarity of the signal region   <cit> . to examine the relationship between venom composition and diet in cone snails, we sequenced the mrna from the venom duct of  <dig> phylogenetically disparate cone snail species consisting of  <dig> vermivores , one molluscivore, and one generalist that feeds on worms, molluscs, and fish  <cit> . we analyze ecological data and venom composition patterns under a comparative phylogenetic framework to test two previously proposed hypotheses that attempt to explain the impact of diet on cone snail venom evolution:  traditional prey taxonomic categories  should predict which gene superfamilies are expressed and  dietary breadth should be positively correlated with conotoxin complexity  <cit> .

RESULTS
transcriptome sequencing and assembly
we extracted rna from the venom duct of  <dig> species : californiconus californicus, conus arenatus, conus coronatus, conus ebraeus, conus imperialis, conus lividus, conus marmoreus, conus quercinus, conus rattus, conus sponsalis, conus varius, and conus virgo . here, we note that c. sponsalis refers one lineage of the c. sponsalis species complex, where a number of described species are comprised of several, paraphyletic lineages  <cit> . we use the name c. sponsalis to refer to this species complex pending taxonomic revision of this group. we synthesized rnaseq libraries and multiplexed all individuals on a single illumina hiseq  <dig> lane. we recovered an average of  <dig>  million reads per species  and assembled transcripts using trinity  <cit> . the number of contigs assembled ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , n <dig> was  <dig>  on average, and the total bases assembled ranged from 15 mb to 50 mb .table  <dig> conotoxin composition and diet for each species analyzed in this study


puncticulis
arenatus

californiconus
californicus

virroconus
coronatus

virroconus
ebraeus

stephanoconus
imperialis

lividoconus
lividus

conus
marmoreus

lividoconus
quercinus

rhizoconus
rattus

harmoniconus
sponsalis

strategoconus
varius

virgiconus
virgo

acalculated from no. of unique mature toxins



conopeptide identification, classification, and diversity
we used a combination of custom python scripts, blast+, conosorter , and conoprec  to identify, filter, and classify conopeptides . conotoxins are typically classified into gene superfamilies and the majority of gene superfamily names contain a single letter followed by an arabic numeral or are named based on their similarity to proteins from other venomous taxa   <cit> . conotoxins that could not be classified into these categories were generally given a new name with nomenclatural conventions highly dependent on the study organism and the research group  <cit> . for example, conotoxins from c. californicus were given the name “divergent” to reflect its divergent phylogenetic position relative to the rest of conidae  <cit> . through the investigation of conotoxin gene superfamily classifications, we noted several cases where changes in the current naming and classification of gene superfamilies were warranted. based on signal sequence similarity or protein domain similarity, we reclassified the divergent_mtfllllvsv superfamily as conkunitzins and reclassified the divergent_mstlgmtll superfamily as the n superfamily. we observed that the divergent_m---l-ltva superfamily contained several conopeptide precursors with unique and divergent signal sequences. we dissolved this gene superfamily and reclassified it along with all other conopeptides that we were not able to assign into known gene superfamilies.

we used a percent signal sequence identify cut off of 70 % to cluster unassigned conopeptides. we assign new names to  novel groupings of conotoxin gene superfamilies and  groups of conopeptides with similarity to previously characterized conotoxins, but were not given a formal classification. in total, we identified  <dig> unique conopeptide precursor sequences that ultimately become cleaved and processed into  <dig> unique mature proteins,  <dig> of which are new to this study . a substantial proportion of these conopeptides were never assembled by trinity , but discovered through read mapping and manual reconstruction. these conopeptides span  <dig> gene superfamilies, nine of which represent gene superfamilies given new names due to reclassification and two of which are newly described . several of these gene superfamilies were recently characterized , but not given conventional gene superfamily names . although we expanded the membership of these gene superfamilies, we refrained from changing their names pending functional experiments to determine their role in prey apprehension or defense.

conotoxins are often characterized by their cysteine framework, or the arrangement of cysteine residues often present in mature peptides, which can sometimes provide information on peptide structure and function  <cit> . we identified  <dig> unique cysteine frameworks across all the conotoxins identified from this study,  <dig> of which display a novel cysteine motif not yet described from conotoxins . we report  <dig> new associations between previously identified cysteine frameworks and gene superfamilies . of particular note, we identified cysteine-free conotoxins from the a and o <dig> superfamilies, which is in contrast to the cysteine-containing toxins previously described from these groups .

while comparing conotoxins described in this study with the conoserver database, we identified several discrepancies concerning the species of origin for particular conopeptides. for example, although we did not detect the qc23a precursor peptide  in our c. quercinus transcriptome, we found a precursor peptide with 100 % identity in our c. imperialis transcriptome. in another case, nearly every protein  identified from a recent study on c. flavidus  <cit>  had >95 % sequence identity to proteins identified from our c. lividus transcriptome. many of these species mismatches occur between distantly related taxa, where high identity between full precursor peptides is not expected  <cit> . we hypothesized that several of these discrepancies are cases of species misidentification because we confirmed species identification in this study morphologically and genetically using mitochondrial dna sequences from the transcriptome. we note these instances in the supplementary for further inquiry .

phylogeny inference
we employed an all-by-all blast approach using the lottia gigantea protein database  as our reference to identify  <dig> putatively orthologous loci suitable for phylogenetic analysis. these loci represent a total of  <dig>  bp and each species had, on average,  <dig>  % of the total bases possible in the data matrix. we inferred a maximum likelihood phylogeny in raxml and generated a time tree using the program r8s with two fossil calibrations from previous studies . the phylogeny was highly resolved with all but two nodes having 100 % bootstrap support .fig.  <dig> conotoxin expression in a phylogenetic context. time-calibrated maximum likelihood phylogeny of conidae species sequenced in this study generated from  <dig> loci. values at nodes represent bootstrap support and • indicates bootstrap support =  <dig>  tree is rooted with californiconus californicus. taxa are colored by diet . heat map shows relative contribution  of gene superfamilies that contributed to at least 10 % of overall conotoxin expression in at least one species



interspecific conopeptide diversity patterns
across all species examined in this study, the number of unique conotoxin precursors ranged from as low as  <dig> conopeptides in c. imperialis to as high as  <dig> conopeptides in c. sponsalis . these precursors encoded between  <dig> and  <dig> unique mature toxins . we detected only one instance where c. coronatus and c. virgo expressed the same mature toxin . in all other cases, each species expressed a unique repertoire of mature toxins with no overlap between species.

species varied widely in which gene superfamilies were expressed . on average, each species expressed  <dig> gene superfamilies, with c. marmoreus expressing the lowest number of superfamilies  and c. arenatus expressing the highest number of superfamilies . only four gene superfamilies were expressed by all the species examined in this study . these four superfamilies were also the only superfamilies in common amongst the vermivores. the distribution of conopeptides across gene superfamilies per species tended to be skewed, such that > 50 % of the conotoxins originated from three to six gene superfamilies . the o <dig> superfamily contained the highest number of mature toxins for seven species, the m superfamily was the most abundant for three species, and the p and con-ikot-ikot superfamilies were each the most abundant for one species . interestingly, the o <dig>  m and con-ikot-ikot superfamilies were also amongst the most abundant conotoxins from a recent study from the transcriptomes of conus tribblei and conus lenavati  <cit> . the average number of cysteine frameworks found in each species was  <dig>  with c. arenatus expressing the highest number of cysteine motifs  and c. marmoreus expressing the lowest number of cysteine motifs .

interspecific conotoxin expression patterns
we used the rsem algorithm to generate transcript per million  values to compare venom duct expression levels between species  <cit> . total conotoxin expression, or the summed tpm values of conotoxin genes divided by total tpm of all transcripts, averaged 53 % among species and ranged from as low as 26 % in c. californicus to as high as  <dig>  % in c. coronatus . the most highly expressed gene superfamily was the m superfamily for four species, the t superfamily for two species, the o <dig> superfamily for four species, and the divergent_mrfyiglmaa and l superfamilies each being the most abundant for one species . on average, the most abundantly expressed gene superfamily represented  <dig>  % of total conotoxin transcripts . in c. ebraeus, c. marmoreus, c. sponsalis, and c. virgo, the most abundantly expressed gene superfamily did not contain the most highly expressed mature conotoxin . for example, while the most abundant gene superfamily was the m superfamily for c. ebraeus, the most highly expressed transcript was eb_sf-mi2_ <dig>  a conotoxin from the sf-mi <dig> superfamily . the average contribution of the highest expressed mature toxin from each species to overall conotoxin expression was  <dig>  % . conotoxin expression patterns tended to be dominated by a few gene superfamilies and mature conotoxins, such that 2– <dig> gene superfamilies and 2– <dig> mature toxins represented more than half of each species’ conotoxin expression levels . amongst the most highly expressed gene superfamilies , we did not identify a single superfamily that was shared across all species . we identified  <dig> gene superfamilies with expression levels contributing to at least 10 % of overall conotoxin expression in at least one of the species examined in this study, whereas  <dig> superfamilies never constituted more than 5 % of total conotoxin expression in any of the species .table  <dig> conotoxin expression patterns among species


arenatus

californicus

coronatus

ebraeus

imperialis

lividus

marmoreus

quercinus

rattus

sponsalis

varius

virgo


pseudogene expression
we report a single instance where a premature stop codon interrupts the coding region of an o <dig> conotoxin expressed by c. sponsalis . the stop codon appears within the signal region and the predicted mature conotoxin is identical to another conotoxin expressed by c. sponsalis . the pseudogenized copy, sp_o1_ <dig>  is more highly expressed than the functional copy, sp_o1_ <dig>  by two orders of magnitude .

diet and conotoxin composition
we employed the similarity statistic schoener’s d, a value commonly used to measure niche overlap in diet and/or microhabitat, to quantify the degree of overlap between conotoxin composition among cone snail species with different diets  <cit> . d values can range from  <dig>  to  <dig>   <cit> . to quantify venom composition similarity, we calculated the d statistic for  the percentage of mature toxins belonging to each gene superfamily  and  the percent expression of gene superfamilies  between all possible pairwise species comparisons. dmature  values on average, were higher than dexpression  values . to control for phylogenetic signal, we generated residuals from a linear model between both values of d and pairwise phylogenetic distances from the time calibrated phylogeny. we used the residuals in an analysis of variance  to determine whether the distribution of conotoxin overlap values differed depending on whether or not the pairwise species comparison consisted of  a generalist and a vermivore,  a molluscivore and a vermivore, or  two vermivores. anova results revealed no significant differences between these categories in both dmature  and dexpression .fig.  <dig> conotoxin composition overlap and dietary preference. boxplots showing the distribution of conotoxin overlap values  categorized by whether the species comparison occurred between a generalist and a vermivore, a molluscivore and a vermivore, or two vermivores. values were calculated by the percentage of mature toxins belonging to each gene superfamily  and the percent expression of gene superfamilies 



dietary breadth and conotoxin complexity
to quantify dietary breadth, we retrieved shannon diversity index values  representing the diversity of prey species consumed by ten of the cone snail species in this study that was available in the literature . to account for phylogenetic non-independence in regression analyses between conotoxin complexity and dietary breadth, we used a phylogenetic generalized least-squares  analysis implemented in the caper package within r  <cit> . we found a significant positive relationship between averaged h’ derived from the literature and three measures of conotoxin complexity: the number of mature toxins , the number of gene superfamilies , and the number of cysteine frameworks  . the inclusion of c. californicus in the pgls analysis may bias the results because c. californicus is often regarded as an atypical member of conidae due to its extremely broad diet and its distant phylogenetic relationship to the rest of conidae  <cit> . when removed, relationships remained significant between dietary breadth and the number of mature toxins , the number of gene superfamilies , but not the number of cysteine frameworks .fig.  <dig> dietary breadth and conotoxin complexity. correlations between dietary breadth  and measures of conotoxin complexity: number of mature toxins, number of gene superfamilies, and number of cysteine frameworks. graphs are labelled with correlation coefficients. *denotes significant correlation from a pgls analysis



discussion
broad scale patterns of cone snail venoms
through analysis of venom duct transcriptomes of  <dig> species spanning a broad phylogenetic distribution within conidae, we were able to provide a snapshot of species level variation in conotoxin expression. for eight species within this study, the total number of predicted mature toxins was within the range of decades-old estimates of 50– <dig> conotoxins expressed per species . the number of mature toxins for the four remaining species was above  <dig> . our species-level estimates of conotoxin diversity conflict with a recent study that documented the existence of  <dig> conotoxin precursor peptides from the venom duct transcriptome of conus episcopatus  <cit> . even when considering the total number of unique conotoxin precursors identified in this study across  <dig> species , this value is still significantly less than what was reported from c. episcopatus  <cit> . additionally, estimates of conopeptide diversity from our c. marmoreus transcriptome  is much lower than estimates from a previous study on the same species . we hypothesized that these large differences occurred because of the somewhat common practice among cone snail transcriptome studies to identify conopeptides directly from read depth and subsequently to not verify each conotoxin through read mapping  <cit> . in many cases, unique conopeptide precursors were only supported by a single read  <cit> . these practices produce over-estimates of conopeptide diversity and can lead to erroneous insights on conotoxin variation among species by confounding biological variation with sequencing errors produced by next-generation sequencing platforms  <cit> . indeed, recent studies have invoked molecular mechanisms such as ‘mrna messiness’  <cit>  and ‘rna editing’  <cit>  to explain the unexpected abundance of lowly expressed transcript variants likely caused by sequencing errors. our results echo the sentiments of a previous study emphasizing the importance of carefully and rigorously examining conotoxin sequences generated by new sequencing technologies  <cit> .

our results confirmed that conotoxin compositions are dominated by a few gene superfamilies and by a few number of transcripts  <cit> . this pattern was evident whether we examined conopeptide counts  or expression values . interestingly, this pattern where venom compositions are dominated by a minority of toxins is also evident in some species of spiders  <cit>  and snakes  <cit> . conticello et al.  hypothesized that lowly expressed transcripts, which represent the majority of the conotoxins in cone snail venoms, may not be critical for prey capture and are thus subject to weaker selection pressures that allow for functional divergence over time. these transcripts may provide the substrate for phenotypic novelty as adaptive regimes change, whereby lowly expressed transcripts that have gained new functions become upregulated in response to the environment  <cit> . it is unclear whether these processes are occurring in cone snail venoms because it is difficult to determine levels of gene expression that are biologically relevant. further, the strong relationship between dietary breadth and conotoxin diversity documented in this study suggests that the entire complement of toxins is necessary for species to apprehend prey in their environment, indicating that lowly expressed transcripts likely have a significant role in prey capture .

our estimates of total conotoxin expression in cone snails species from this study were within the range of values estimated from previous work . due to low sample sizes per species and a lack of variation in treatment conditions , we cannot determine whether conotoxin genes are always expressed at similar magnitudes in the venom duct, or expression levels change due to demand at different time points in the lifetime of these organisms. however, if the level of transcription devoted to conotoxin production is constant among adult individuals, total conotoxin expression magnitude may be related to the frequency in which venom is utilized for prey capture, as implicated in  <cit> . several laboratory observations report that some cone snail species swallow their prey whole without first injecting venom, though the extent to which this occurs in nature across conidae is not well documented  <cit> . interestingly, c. californicus has the lowest total conotoxin expression level estimated in this study and is known to scavenge on dead prey  <cit> , providing some evidence for this hypothesis.

similar to reports from the de novo assembly of the c. episcopatus venom duct transcriptome  <cit> , trinity performed poorly in reconstructing all conopeptide precursors reported in this study . this may be attributed to the conservation of the signal sequence in precursor peptides, which essentially function as abundant repetitive regions in venom duct rnaseq data. we hypothesize that algorithms devoted to assembly of repetitive regions  may streamline efforts to characterize conidae venom duct transcriptomes, which will be the subject of future research efforts.

conotoxin composition and diet
although few broad comparative studies exist that examine variation in venom composition patterns across cone snail taxa, prey taxonomic class has remained the dominant framework by which cone snail venom evolution is studied  <cit>  and forms the basis for categorization of conotoxins on conoserver, a molecular database of known conotoxins  <cit> . contrary to common wisdom derived from numerous previous studies of cone snail venom, our results show unequivocally that prey class performs poorly in predicting conotoxin composition patterns among cone snail species. we did not detect a single gene superfamily that separated vermivores from the molluscivore or the generalist ; rather, the defining feature across cone snail venoms was that every species, regardless of diet category, expressed a unique repertoire of conopeptides and gene superfamilies at different magnitudes . the uniqueness of each species’ conotoxin composition is underscored by moderate to low d values  and no apparent differences in the distribution of d values among species that do or do not share the same diet class . unfortunately, we were not able to obtain venom duct rnaseq data for several molluscivores and piscivores, but our results are in agreement with a meta-analysis indicating that there is no gene superfamily that there is exclusive to any of the traditionally recognized diet types  <cit> .

the poor predictive power of diet class on venom composition patterns may be due to several factors. estimated rates of gene duplication and nonsynonymous substitution rates for conotoxin genes are the highest across metazoans  <cit>  and these extraordinary rates of molecular evolution may be more likely to promote divergence rather than convergence in venom composition, as documented in this study. alternatively, the lack of predictive power may be in part, due to how categories are constructed for venom components and diet classes. prey specialization exists at the level of protein function, but it is known that conotoxin gene superfamilies generally do not provide predictive information on protein function and conotoxins targeting similar neurological targets can evolve convergently in several gene superfamilies  <cit> . further, a past meta-analysis showed that the distribution of signal sequence identities  between conotoxins within a gene superfamily and between gene superfamilies are largely overlapping  <cit> , suggesting that the gene superfamilies are somewhat arbitrary constructions in and of themselves. therefore, characterizing conotoxin composition patterns by gene superfamilies does not fully measure functional similarities and differences in conotoxins between species. prey classes may not explain conotoxin composition patterns potentially due to an over generalization of the diversity present within the vermivorous category. vermivory, as traditionally used in conidae studies, is broadly defined and includes a wide variety of taxa that represent hemichordates, echiurans, and several polychaete families that diverged ≥  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . future studies that account for the taxonomic breadth of worms and the functional diversity of conotoxins may better predict patterns of venom composition among species.

we found strong support for a highly significant, positive relationship between venom composition complexity and dietary breadth across cone snails , corroborating hypotheses that were made from species that represent the extremes of the dietary breadth spectrum in conidae  <cit> . the total number of mature toxins provided the strongest predictor of this relationship, possibly because mature toxin diversity better encapsulates functional diversity in cone snail venoms. the relatively weaker correlations documented for gene superfamilies and cysteine frameworks support the notion that these traditional means of classifying conotoxins are not simple or direct correlates of conotoxin function . the positive relationship between dietary niche breadth and venom composition complexity corroborates the niche variation hypothesis, suggesting that diverse venoms are required to subdue diverse prey. although the majority of studies invoking this hypothesis focus on population level trait variance within species , our results extend the generality of this hypothesis to species-level patterns of conotoxin complexity across cone snails. these results also align with observations on venom complexity in snakes  <cit> , suggesting that dietary breadth may explain evolutionary trends in venom complexity across radiations of venomous taxa.

at the population level, cone snails follow the predictions supported by the niche variation hypothesis, such that snail populations with a larger dietary breadth show greater population-level allelic diversity in some conotoxin loci  <cit> . how these population-level patterns translate into species-level properties remains unclear. although conotoxin allelic diversity is higher in populations with greater dietary breadth, each individual within the population possesses only a small subset of the available alleles per locus because these alleles belong to individual loci and are not separate genes  <cit> . presumably, gene products encoded by these loci are effective at paralyzing diverse prey and toxins encoded by variants at these loci may be more effective if expressed in tandem  <cit> . given the exceptional rates of gene duplication estimated within this group  <cit> , gene duplication presents a mechanism by which allelic variants previously restricted to a single conotoxin locus can ultimately evolve to be expressed simultaneously through duplication, potentially leading to species-level patterns of venom composition complexity and dietary breadth.

what are the evolutionary consequences of increased dietary breadth? our results imply that dietary breadth plays a role in determining how many conotoxins are utilized for prey capture. consequently, this also determines the number of genes available for forces such as mutation, selection, and drift to generate novel functions for adaptation. higher gene diversity is thought to provide increased opportunities for novel phenotypes to arise  <cit> , potentially shaping a lineage’s evolvability, or a lineage’s capacity to evolve in response to their environment  <cit> . therefore, greater dietary breadth  may signify a larger potential for lineages to diversify, potentially influencing patterns of species diversification in cone snails. although venom is viewed as a key innovation and thought to play a major role in the evolutionary diversification of venomous taxa  <cit> , the interplay between diet and venom on patterns of lineage diversification is rarely tested explicitly. high resolution molecular phylogenies of venomous taxa and comprehensive venom composition data that can now be rapidly obtained using new sequencing technologies will provide the necessary datasets to facilitate an examination of the evolutionary dynamics of diet, venom, and speciation over long evolutionary time-scales.

a recent study showed that cone snail species may inject separate suites of conopeptides for predation and defense, and that defensive venoms are produced in the proximal region of the venom duct while predatory venoms are produced in the distal region  <cit> . because we generated our venom duct rnaseq data from the entire length of the organ, our results may be confounded between these two distinct ecological roles that venom performs. however, it is unclear how broad this pattern is throughout cone snails. in many cases, functional work has shown that venoms extracted from different regions of the venom duct were able to successfully paralyze prey  <cit> . in addition, the functional roles of conotoxins that are relevant to each species’ ecology are poorly understood. conotoxin function is typically determined by assays in mice or vertebrate neuronal cells which are not representative of the intended targets of conotoxins  <cit> ; as previously asserted in snake systems  <cit>  over-interpretation of these results can lead to misleading or conflicting inferences. for example, a δ-conotoxin  isolated from the vermivore, conus susturatus, was implicated as a defensive toxin against fish predators due to its effects on vertebrate sodium ion channels and its proximal expression in the venom duct, where defensive toxins are thought to be synthesized  <cit> . however, behavioral observations from conus tessulatus, a vermivore in the same subgenus that also expresses a similar δ-conotoxin, was shown to prey on fish on occasion through venom injection  <cit> . these results emphasize the necessity of examining conotoxins in the context of each species’ ecology to accurately understand the natural history of cone snails.

CONCLUSIONS
in contrast to the most widely accepted hypothesis of cone snail venom evolution, diet class did not predict patterns of venom composition among cone snails. these results suggest either  the fast rates of venom evolution drive rapid divergence of conotoxin composition that bear no relationship to prey taxonomic class, or  current ways of categorizing both prey species  and conotoxins  fail to accurately reflect evolutionary interactions between dietary specialization and venom function. therefore, future studies placing more emphasis on the taxonomic breadth of cone snail prey and conotoxin function on prey capture may better encapsulate the impact of diet on cone snail venom evolution. in addition, our results highlight the importance of dietary breadth in shaping species-level venom complexity patterns among cone snails. to our knowledge, this relationship is rarely tested quantitatively across venomous radiations despite its potential to explain variation in venom complexity as demonstrated here. while our results show that species with broad diets tend to have more diverse venoms, the evolutionary consequences of this tendency remains unclear. what is certain is that selective pressures driven by diet plays a major role in shaping evolutionary patterns in venom across cone snails and other venomous taxa.

