BACKGROUND
there has been a rapid proliferation of whole mitochondrial genomes  sequenced in recent years, no doubt driven in part by the increasing speed and decreasing cost of sequencing technologies. whole mitogenomes are increasingly used in phylogenetic studies  <cit>  and in analyses of genome rearrangements  <cit> , which can also be used for phylogenetic inference  <cit> .

however, the utility of these datasets for these purposes greatly depends on taxon sampling. currently,  <dig> insect mitogenomes have been fully sequenced , yet the taxa utilized for these sequencing studies often do not reflect the distribution of species diversity. for example, hymenoptera is one of the most species-rich insect orders , yet only  <dig> mitogenomes have been fully sequenced . despite a further seven hymenopteran mitogenomes being partially sequenced , taxon sampling still poorly reflects phylogenetic diversity of this important order across many taxonomic levels. naturally, sampling is highly dependent on the questions a given researcher wishes to address with the data, yet biased sampling greatly limits the utility of the generated mitogenomic data in a comparative framework. for example, of the ten families of bees  and of the nine families of vespids  only a single family  of each superfamily has a sequenced mitogenome. but not only are many taxonomically and ecologically important families unsampled, there is also a dearth of mitogenomes for closely related species. we follow gissi et al.  <cit>  in arguing that to better understand mitochondrial genome evolution we require an improved taxon sampling scheme that not only captures phylogenetic diversity more broadly but also takes into account various evolutionary depths, including variation within or among closely related species.

hence, we here present the first complete mitogenomes of ants  and discuss their evolution in light of the other hymenopteran mitochondrial genomes. the four mitogenomes presented here represent important contributions to the ever expanding dataset of complete hymenopteran mitochondrial genomes in that they represent a previously unsampled, highly diverse, and ecologically dominant vespoid family . our mitogenome data for three fire ant species belonging to two species groups  <cit>  also provides insights into mitogenome evolution at lower taxonomic levels. such data generally are rare  <cit> , with the notable exceptions in insects of a study employing comparable sampling for nasonia  <cit>  and much more extensive sampling in drosophila .

RESULTS
for the present study we sequenced four complete mitogenomes from three fire ant species. these included two mitogenomes from solenopsis invicta buren,  <dig> , one mitogenome from the closely related species s. richteri buren,  <dig>  and one mitogenome from a more distantly related fire ant species s. geminata  . these first complete mitogenome data for ants expand taxon selection of one of the largest and most diverse hymenopteran superfamilies .

at first look, the mitogenomes of solenopsis appear to be unremarkable compared with other hymenopteran mitogenomes, containing the same complement of protein-coding loci, trnas, rrnas, and a pronounced a+t-bias . overall the ant mitogenomes are less divergent than those of nasonia , however this comparison should be viewed with caution since it does not consider the potential differences in age among species within the nasonia and solenopsis species groups, which is not known. also, we found no clear evidence of positive, directional selection acting on the ant mitogenomes .

pcg: protein coding genes; enc: effective number of codons   <cit> ; cbi: codon bias index  <cit> . the scaled χ <dig>  <cit>  used to test for codon bias was corrected for g+c bias using yates' correction.

gene content and order
consistent with other published hymenopteran mitogenomes, the four solenopsis mitogenomes contain all  <dig> protein-coding genes and both rrnas in the same order and direction of the hypothesized ancestral pancrustacean mitogenome . as in the three nasonia species  <cit> , the four solenopsis mitogenomes share identical architectures at the trna loci as well. however, the three methods we used to identify trnas greatly differed in sensitivity and accuracy . both dogma  and arwen over-predicted trnas . as a result, they usually identified more of the  <dig> trnas than trnascan-se. trnascan-se was more conservative, although some predictions were not well supported . it also misidentified trnas three times: two trna-f in geminata  and at the same position in vms  and trna-p  also in vms. since all of these trnas overlap with srrna  or nad <dig>  and have relatively low cove scores, we considered them false positives. only twice were none of the methods able to detect trnas: trna-s <dig> in geminata and trna-n in vms. however, we were able to manually fold these trnas.

dogma and arwen generally overpredicted trnas  and trnascan underpredicted trna loci. cove scores > <dig> are generally considered to indicate reliable identification of trnas. some trnas were readily identified by all methods, whereas some proved harder to identify and had to be manually folded in some mitogenomes . loci underlined are located on the n strand.

the location of trnas differs from the hypothetical ancestral hymenopteran mitogenome  <cit> , which is also a typical feature of hymenopteran mitogenome architecture  <cit> . however, with only three apparent translocations, the solenopsis mitogenome architecture appears to be less derived than that of the other hymenopteran mitogenomes  <cit> . most mitogenome rearrangements in hymenoptera appear to be selectively neutral and involve trna translocations around the coxii - atp <dig> junction  <cit>  and the nd <dig> - nd <dig> junction  <cit> . the solenopsis mitogenomes show no variation in the coxii - atp <dig> junction and a translocation of trna-n from the nd <dig> - nd <dig> junction to the srrna - nd <dig> junction. the trna-v translocation also moved to the srrna - nd <dig> junction. various types of gene order rearrangements are generally recognized, differing by their location  and whether they retain their original orientation  and generally can be classified into one of several categories: local inversions, local translocations , translocations, and remote inversions   <cit> .

visual inspection of the source locations for these two translocations led us to test the manner of the rearrangement, since short sequences of the length of typical trnas  remained at the source locations . a duplication/loss model of translocation seems plausible for the trna-v translocation, whereas this model seems less likely for the trna-n rearrangement, since this rearrangement also involves an inversion . we consider an intra-mitochondrial recombination event  <cit>  an unlikely mechanism in this particular case as well, since the translocation spanned half of the mitogenome and none of the intermediate genes are inverted or rearranged. since dogma and arwen had placed an additional trna-n in the same position but opposite orientation as the trna-d in the vms mitogenome , we included all hymenopteran trna-n, -v, and -d loci in a phylogenetic analysis with the relevant solenopsis trnas. the resulting tree placed the trna-d, trna-v, and degenerate trna-n firmly among their respective trna species, whereas the degenerate trna-v and new trna-n are clearly not closely related to any other trnas . this suggests that the identification of the overlapping trna-n over trna-d in vms was erroneous. also, the "new" translocated trna-v is clearly homologous to the other hymenopteran trna-v genes, suggesting a real translocation event. however, the identity of the degenerate locus is less clear. since it forms a distinct and highly supported clade, we are inclined to interpret this as a duplication/loss translocation and the "degenerate" trna-v as a vestigial spacer, which we initially erroneously hypothesized to be a degenerate trna due to its position and length. finally, the source of the trna-n is not clear and at present since we are unable to determine the source trna in our dataset , but it is becoming increasingly clear that our understanding of trna evolution is rapidly changing  <cit> . we will require better sampling of other mitogenomes to shed light on the evolution of this trna.

visual inspection of trnas across species reveals that there is considerable amount of variation due to point mutations and indels in almost all trnas. this variation results in differences in ability of the three trna identification methods to correctly identify trnas across species , suggesting that congeneric comparative studies of trnas are fruitful endeavors to studying trna evolution and mitgenome architecture  <cit> .

nucleotide and codon bias
the four solenopsis mitogenomes are consistently a+t-biased, but this bias is less pronounced than in any of the other apocritan hymenoptera . wei et al.  <cit>  describe the same pattern for a distantly related evanid wasp, which suggests that the a+t-bias is perhaps more variable across the hymentoperan phylogeny than previously realized. there was no significant difference in nucleotide bias of the four ant mitogenomes . additionally, a t-bias persisted across protein coding regions on the coding strand . this was especially pronounced across the second codon positions. no evidence for codon bias was found after correcting for nucleotide bias .

recombination
recombination in animal mitogenomes has been well documented  <cit> . nonetheless, such recombination remains difficult to detect reliably, no doubt in part due to the lack of power of many analytical methods developed for detecting recombination  <cit> . this pattern is reflected in our data set as well, as most methods were unable to detect statistically significant signatures of recombination. however, three local methods found significant support for a single recombination event within the pms mitogenome , with an approximately  <dig> bp surrounding the nd <dig> - cytb junction  derived from a vms-like ancestor.

significant probability values are indicated in bold, statistically insignificant values that still show a pattern of recombination at that position are italicized . asterices  mark methods used to verify recombination detected by other methods.  <dig> was run on  <dig>  kb window around the  <dig> bp recombinant.

consistent with this scenario, six additional methods of analysis showed statistically non-significant yet congruent signals of recombination in the same location. one likely reason for the comparatively weak support for the hypothesized recombination event is that the translocation could have occurred sufficiently long ago that the signal of the event has decayed. our results are unlikely an experimental artifact, since the recombinant sequence was recovered from separate pcr  reactions in which the initial pcr reactions utilized different conserved primers flanking this region. further, the sequence data were high quality, the sequences differ slightly from the other three sequences, and the sequence traces do not show any evidence of conflicting base calls.

phylogeny
the phylogenetic tree recovered from all four solenopsis mitogenomes is identical to a tree generated previously using sequence data from a much shorter region  and demonstrates that the s. invicta mitogenomes are not monophyletic: the pms invicta mitogenome is more closely related to richteri than the vms invicta mitogenome  <cit>  . this phylogenetic pattern is upheld throughout the complete mitochondrial alignment, except for the short fragment shown above to have been transferred during the recombination event .

our phylogenetic analysis of all hymenopteran mitogenomes encountered similar problems described previously  <cit>  in that some expected relationships were not recovered, e.g. the sister taxa relationship between the proctotrupomorpha  and the remainder of the apocrita  <cit>  or the sister relationship of the ichneumonoidea  with the aculeata   <cit> . also, our phylogenetic analyses were unable to support the monophyly of the vespoidea  due to the placement of solenopsis outside of the vespidae + apoidea clade with high branch support. while ants generally are considered to belong to the vespoidea  <cit> , some doubts have been raised regarding the monophyly of this superfamily  <cit>  and our results mirror those of dowton et al.  <cit>  using only the mitochondrial  <dig> s rrna locus.

our homotachous  bayesian analysis recovered a topology fully concordant with that of dowton et al.  <cit>  . this was not surprising, since we tried to follow the suggestions made by dowton et al.  <cit>  regarding the best analysis parameters for hymentoperan mitogenomic data . this suggests that the phylogenetic inference was robust to additional taxon sampling . however, this topology differed from our other analyses in the placement of ichneumonidae. whereas the homotachous bayesian analysis recovered the ichneumonidae as a sister group to schlettererius , the other analyses placed the ichneumonidae basal to an aculeata + evania clade. the analyses also differed in the placement of primeuchroeus. both maximum likelihood methods placed primeuchroeus with solenopsis, whereas both bayesian analyses left its position unresolved at the base of the other aculeata. however, all of these placements were poorly supported regardless of the branch support measure. our analyses suggest that optimality criteria and models of nucleotide evolution have a stronger influence on the resulting phylogenetic inference in our dataset than taxon sampling. the importance of optimality criterion was previously also noted by dowton et al.  <cit>  and suggests that the extraction of phylogenetic signal from hymenopteran mitogenomic data is not simple.

while dowton et al.  <cit>  showed that the accuracy of mitogenomic phylogenetic analysis is greatly improved by the implementation of a particular partitioning scheme in a bayesian framework, their analyses failed to account for heterotachous  and non-stationarity  substitution processes between branches during phylogenetic analyses  <cit> , of which the latter is an especially well-known feature of the hymenopteran mitogenomes . hence, we compared the phylogenies derived under homotachous and stationary models of nucleotide substitution with those allowing site specific rates of change and base frequencies to change between branches. we implemented the covarion model  <cit>  in mrbayes to accommodate heterotachy and the model of galtier and gouy  <cit>  to account for non-stationarity  using nhphyml. applying galtier and gouy's  <cit>  model under the maximum likelihood criterion significantly improved the fit of the model to the data , but it did not result in a different topology . use of the covarion model  in the bayesian framework did not result in an improvement in log-likelihood , but recovered a different topology almost identical to that recovered under the maximum likelihood optimality criterion . this decrease in log-likelihood of the covarion model was surprising , but the exact implementation of heterotachy may be important  <cit>  so the evaluation of other heterotachous models  may be warranted. more thorough studies are undoubtedly required to tease apart the contribution and possible interaction between different models and optimality criteria  <cit> .

it is evident that reconstructing the hymenopteran phylogeny using only mitogenome data is problematic due to a variety of factors, e.g, differences in gc-content and rates of evolution among branches  <cit>  or an ancient rapid diversification event  <cit>  which is known to greatly complicate phylogenetic inference  <cit> . to account for these confounding factors, one should attempt to break up long branches by increased taxon sampling wherever possible. including several species per genus  as we have done is not very effective. hence we suggest adding more genera and previously unsampled higher level taxa to more effectively break up long branches. while increased taxon sampling will likely rapidly occur in the near future, we agree with earlier suggestions of the importance of not relying on mitogenomes as the sole source of data for inferring phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . mitochondria essentially provide one very specific evolutionary history of a lineage since they are maternally inherited as single markers independently from the nuclear genome, and their utility can be further compromised if their transmission is influenced by intracellular symbionts such as wolbachia  <cit> . given the rapidly decreasing costs in high-through-put sequencing and the various rapidly increasing genomic resources for several apocritan lineages , we are hopeful that future phylogenetic work will be based on a broader genetic basis employing many more molecular characters  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
to fully clarify the evolution of mitochondrial genomes in the hymenoptera will require much greater sampling at all taxonomic levels , which should provide much needed data to fully address the patterns and rate of evolution and genome organization in this organelle. while this information will yield an increased understanding of hymenopteran evolutionary history, mitogenome studies need to be complemented by phylogenetic studies utilizing other sources of data against which we can compare and contrast the information yielded by whole mitochondrial genome analyses. given the recent rate of publications with full mitogenomes, this will no doubt occur in the near future, yet could be greatly optimized through concerted sampling efforts by the greater scientific community.

