BACKGROUND
the statistical elucidation of genetic regulatory networks from experimental data  is an important problem that has been the center of a large body of work  <cit> . because this problem is underconstrained , many efforts include some means for dimensionality reduction. a common practice for reducing the dimensionality of this problem space has been to cluster genes into co-expressed groups based on their expression profiles, prior to network inference. such a practice has the additional advantage that, if done properly, the signal-to-noise in the data can thereby be reduced through signal averaging. the genes in such clusters are often assumed to be co-regulated, i.e. to share the same regulatory controls, thereby implying biological relevance for such a pre-clustering step. however, gene transcript levels can be correlated either by chance  or because of indirect effects, and therefore they might not actually be directly co-regulated. the integration of additional biologically-relevant evidence into a clustering procedure may be used to provide constraints on the identification of groups of co-regulated genes.

co-regulated genes are often functionally  linked  <cit> . for example, genes whose products form a protein complex are likely to be co-regulated. other types of associations among genes, or their protein products, that  imply functional couplings include  presence of common cis-regulatory motifs;  co-occurrence in the same metabolic pathway ;  cis-binding to common regulator;  physical interaction;  common ontology;  paired evolutionary conservation among many organisms;  common synthetic phenotypes upon joint deletion with a third gene;  sub-cellular co-location; and  proximity in the genome, or in bacteria and archaea, operon co-occurrence. these associations can be either derived experimentally or computationally ; indeed it is common practice to use one or more of these associations as a post-facto measure of the biological quality of a gene cluster. however, it is important to note that some of these data types, to varying degrees, can contain a high rate of false positives, or may imply relationships that have no implication for co-regulation. therefore in their consideration as evidence for co-regulation, these different sources of evidence should be treated as priors, with appropriately different weights, based upon prior knowledge  of their quality and/or relevance.

because a biological system's interaction with its environment is complex and gene regulation is multi-factorial, genes might not be co-regulated across all experimental conditions observed in any comprehensive set of transcript or protein levels. also, genes can be involved in multiple different processes, depending upon the state of the organism during a given experiment. therefore, a biologically-motivated clustering method should be able to detect patterns of co-expression across subsets of the observed experiments, and to place genes into multiple clusters. so-called biclustering , is a widely studied problem and many different approaches to it have been published  <cit> . unlike standard clustering methods, most biclustering algorithms place genes into more than one cluster. because biclustering is an np-hard problem  <cit> , no solution is guaranteed to find the optimal set of biclusters. however, many of these procedures have successfully demonstrated the value of biclustering when applied to real-world biological data .

we have previously described a procedure, the inferelator  <cit> , for learning global regulatory influences from expression data using continuous models of transcript levels. for this analysis , a pre-clustering step is desired to reduce the dimensionality of the data and enable noise reduction through signal averaging of clustered gene profiles. low-level  changes in expression of the clusters play an important role in constraining the model parameters, and the inclusion of these conditions in the biclusters can be important. thus, a trade-off needs to be found between including as many experiments as possible in each cluster , while enforcing that these experiments be co-expressed. different biclustering methods have different models of a "perfect" bicluster; for example constant rows/columns, coherent values, coherent "evolution"  <cit> . for our modeling purposes, only methods which derive biclusters with coherent, or correlated, gene profiles, such as those of cheng and church  <cit> , yang et al.  <cit> , and lazzeroni and owen  <cit>  are suitable. for example, algorithms which identify biclusters with constant levels of activation and/or repression  <cit>  and/or which discretize the data  <cit>  do not contain low or intermediate-levels of expression changes to constrain the regulatory network inference; indeed they often do not generate biclusters with many experimental conditions at all. our analysis and previous reviews  <cit>  of the cheng and church  algorithm  <cit>  show that it is not suitable for large-scale expression analysis. it, and the plaid models of lazzeroni and owen  <cit>  both produce biclusters that focus on low-variance sub-matrices of the expression data. the floc algorithm of yang et al.  <cit>   provided the early inspiration for this work, which is essentially a re-formulation of their δ-cluster model with a basic probabilistic model for the expression data. this enables a more rigorous and intuitive integration of the model of expression data with models for the additional data types, as well as with prior distributions for constraining bicluster sizes and redundancy.

guided by these motivations and requirements, we herein describe an algorithm that detects genes putatively co-regulated over subsets of experimental conditions by integrating the biclustering of gene expression data and multiple gene association networks with the de novo detection of cis-regulatory motifs. we applied this method to a global expression data set collected for the archaeon halobacterium nrc- <dig>  to find co-regulated gene sets as part of our ongoing efforts to model its regulatory network, and we present detailed evidence for the biological utility of this procedure as part of our modeling procedure. in addition, we used cmonkey to compute co-regulated gene clusters for three additional organisms in the two remaining domains of life: helicobacter pylori, saccharomyces cerevisiae, and escherichia coli. the biclusters are presented to the biologist using the interactive visualization tools, the gaggle  <cit>  and cytoscape  <cit> , at our web site  <cit> .

RESULTS
in this section we summarize the results of the application of our algorithm to four organisms, and describe its usefulness as a first step in our modeling of the halobacterium regulatory network in conjunction with the inferelator  <cit> . we perform a detailed analysis of its capabilities and assess its global performance, both internally and in comparison to other biclustering methods. the complete set of biclusters for all organisms are available for exploration using cytoscape and the gaggle  <cit>  at our web site  <cit> .

the bacteriorhodopsin regulon in halobacterium
the induction of phototrophic growth of halobacterium nrc- <dig> under anaerobic conditions triggers the synthesis of bacteriorhodopsin , a light-driven proton pump that is further assembled into a purple membrane. br is the major component of halobacterium phototrophy, one of two anaerobic atp generation pathways utilized by the organism  <cit> . four genes responsible for br synthesis , bop, brp, bat, and crtb <dig>  are co-regulated by bat  <cit>  through a common transcription factor motif that was characterized by saturation mutagenesis   <cit> . this is the most well-studied regulon in halobacterium, and the only one whose cis-regulatory motif has been experimentally verified. bicluster # <dig>  recapitulates much of what is known about this regulon, including all four br genes, and a very close match to the bat uas . the additional genes in this bicluster are consistent with the co-regulation of br with anaerobic respiration, including phytoene synthases, members of a dmso-related operon  <cit> , alcohol dehydrogenases, and an iron transporter. while the bat uas is not found upstream of many of these latter genes, a second significant motif  was identified by cmonkey upstream of these genes.

the bicluster also includes cdc48a, which encodes a cell-division cycle – associated protein, with a strong match to the bat uas. we note that initial studies of the bat uas suggested that the regulatory sequences of as many as  <dig> genes contain instances of the motif  <cit> ; clearly not all of these instances are active over the experiments used here. no similar bicluster, in terms of completeness of gene membership or similarity of motifs detected  to the bat uas, was found using other bi/clustering methods . when the cmonkey motif-detection component was turned off , the uas was not detected.

sirr as a regulator of transport processes in halobacterium
cmonkey detected a bicluster  primarily composed of transporter genes, including two phosphate transport systems, co transporters, a mn uptake system, glycerol phosphate transporters, and two peptide transport systems. while the phosphate, peptide, and mn transport systems might have been included in the bicluster by virtue of their functional associations, the glycerol phosphate and co transport system genes appear to have been included due to a strong match in the biclusters' putative motif # <dig>  we can hypothesize that motif # <dig>  which is present upstream to  <dig> out of the bicluster's  <dig> genes, is responsible for the high degree of expression correlation over ~ <dig> conditions in this bicluster. none of the other bi/clustering methods tested identified a cluster containing the complete set of these transporters that enabled the generation of this type of model of the joint regulation of transporter activity in halobacterium.

a potential advantage of the inclusion of de novo motif detection as part of the cmonkey biclustering procedure is that, for transcription factors that are not autoregulated, motif detection can break the causal symmetry between regulator targets and regulators controlling those targets. for example, an activator and several of its targets might seem co-expressed  when considering expression data alone. the absence of the regulator's binding site from its upstream sequence could, however, cause cmonkey to exclude the regulator from the bicluster, and thus assist any subsequent regulatory network inference on that bicluster. although the above case is somewhat idealized, we find specific examples where motif detection correctly separates co-regulated groups from the co-expressed super sets that merge regulators and their targets together. sirr was predicted to regulate bicluster # <dig>  <cit>  and this relationship was confirmed via a sirr knockout experiment  <cit> . sirr is annotated as an iron-dependent regulator in staphylococcus epidermis and staphylococcus aureus and is associated with mn and fe stress response in other microbial systems  <cit> . while sirr is correlated with the bicluster , it was omitted from the bicluster by cmonkey, in part due to the poor match of sirr's upstream sequence to the bicluster's significant motif # <dig>  while phou and prpl  are also putative regulators of genes in bicluster  <dig>  the inclusion of motif detection  suggests that sirr may have a more general role in the regulation of these transporter genes than phou and prpl.

regulation of flagellar biosynthesis in e. coli and h. pylori
in e. coli, the repertoire of more than  <dig> genes that encode proteins involved in motility  are regulated in a cascade that can be separated into three classes. these regulatory classes correspond to the ordering of the genes' temporal requirement during flagellar assembly  <cit> . class- <dig> genes are regulated by an rpod/σ <dig> and flhdc activation complex, and encode flagellar structural and assembly proteins and two regulators . flia and flgm subsequently activate the class- <dig> operons   <cit> . cmonkey detected a bicluster in e. coli  that is enriched in flagellar biosynthesis genes ; most of these genes' upstream sequences contain motifs  that correspond to the known promoter binding site for this activator complex  <cit> . while several other bi/clustering methods , such as k-means and samba, detected clusters that were enriched in both flagellar- and chemotaxis-associated genes, we were unable to detect the σ70/flhdc binding motif in any of these clusters due to the presence of many additional unrelated sequences that added noise to the search. the cmonkey bicluster included only two  annotated "chemotaxis"-related genes , whereas the larger samba bicluster, for example, did not discriminate between these two related functions . if meme  <cit>  is run independently on upstream sequences of the flagellar function-annotated genes , it detects the σ70/flhdc binding motif in ~ <dig> of them, while it does not detect a motif for the  <dig> chemotaxis-annotated genes . this analysis suggests that while many genes in both class- <dig> and class- <dig> are co-expressed in the e. coli data, cmonkey can correctly separate the two classes on the basis of motif detection and association networks.

the h. pylori cluster in fig.  <dig> is also highly enriched in class- <dig> flagellar-associated genes, many of which are associated with the rpon/σ54-regulated flagellar regulon  <cit> . the most significant motif detected in this cluster corresponds to the rpon binding site: 5'-ggaa-n5-tttgctt-3'  <cit>  that is similar to the σ <dig> binding site in e. coli  <cit> . other biclustering algorithms identified biclusters in the h. pylori data containing some of the same genes as this cmonkey bicluster, however most of those clusters contain >  <dig> additional genes , and thus the rpon-binding motif was undetectable for clusters generated by any of these methods. individual clusters found using hierarchical clustering  and fc-means  on the h. pylori data had matches to this motif, suggesting that because the data set is small , biclustering is not always necessary here. however, neither of these respective clusters were as complete in their list of genes with the rpon-binding motif as was the cmonkey version . the similarity in function and putative regulatory motifs for these two orthologous biclusters points to the potential future use of algorithms such as cmonkey for cross-species analyses of gene regulation  <cit> .

a novel putative ricin-like toxin in h. pylori
the integrated analysis of the full set of biclusters in the context of additional biological knowledge  can result in biological insights into the combined roles of multiple biological modules. such an analysis requires the presentation and integration of cmonkey biclusters with the visualization and exploration tools cytoscape  <cit>  and the gaggle  <cit>  . an illustrative example in h. pylori involves a group of biclusters containing cag pathogenicity genes. it has been hypothesized that a drop in ph may act as a signal to induce genes encoding several virulence factors including caga , which upon injection into target cells plays a role in the early events of gastric colonization. a known promoter motif ttttaa  <cit>  appears conserved upstream to several of these ph-induced genes. several biclusters were detected which contain this motif and numerous pathogenicity island genes, including cag <dig>  cag <dig>  and virb <dig>  which encode type iv secretion system proteins and flaa and flab, which encode key flagellin subunits  <cit> . other processes represented in these biclusters include outer membrane biogenesis  and peptidoglycan biosynthesis - which have all been implicated as important for pathogenesis  <cit> . through the analysis of these related biclusters and their common motif, we identified a novel putative ricin-like toxin among the un-annotated h. pylori genes   <cit> .

biclusters in s. cerevisiae
the algorithm detected many strongly significant biclusters in s. cerevisiae, many of which with known or previously-observed cis-regulatory motifs, and combinations thereof. some examples of these are included in ; all cmonkey-generated yeast biclusters may be viewed and explored using cytoscape and the gaggle  <cit>  at our web site  <cit> . histograms of the positions of the detected motifs in the yeast upstream sequences show a marked peak near - <dig> bp, which hints that many of the motifs identified by cmonkey for s. cerevisiae are functional, since the motifs are actually searched for in the first  <dig> bp upstream of each gene .

validation and comparisons with available methods
tracking the cmonkey optimization
by tracking the mean progression of all biclusters during their optimization, we can quantify the degree to which the biclusters improved with regard to each model component . examples of such measures for halobacterium are shown in fig.  <dig>  the scores shown are mean bicluster residual  <cit> , the mean motif log-p-value  <cit> , and mean log p-values of mutual clustering coefficient in certain association networks  <cit> . it is clear that most of these measures greatly improve  throughout the optimization, even though the procedure is not optimizing any of the "scores" that are plotted in fig. 6; rather it is optimizing a joint discriminative model that includes terms which are related to these measures. we obtain similar trends in cmonkey runs on all organisms .

testing the cmonkey model
tests of data integration
we tested whether cmonkey is correctly optimizing the joint model with respect to the different data types by varying the weights which parameterize the influence of each of those data types on the joint model . when we down-weight the mixture parameter for a given data type and thus eliminate its influence on the bicluster optimization, as expected, we find that this down-weighted component is poorly-optimized. at the same time, the remaining components are almost always optimized better. thus each model component serves to regularize the bicluster model, preventing the biclusters from being over-fit to one or more individual subsets of the data. not surprisingly, we also find that when certain components are up-weighted, they are better optimized, at the expense of a somewhat diminished ability to optimize the remaining components.  displays mean measures of bicluster quality  for these different cmonkey runs with weights adjusted in this manner . these tests show that our inclusion of the three data types results in biclusters that simultaneously satisfy our joint model better than biclusters supported by subsets of the data types . a similar conclusion may be drawn from comparisons of these different cmonkey runs to "external" sources of evidence .

additional tests of the relationship between multiple data types and model components
by successively removing individual components of the model, we can also characterize relationships that exist between an individual data type and the others, that have not been removed, by observing the degree to which the optimization of the removed data type still improves. for example, by turning off an individual network n , we can rank that network with respect to the degree to which it improves  when the other components  are optimized. for example, we find that the operon associations and protein-dna interaction networks are well-optimized via the indirect optimization of co-expression, while metabolic pathways and phylogenetic profile associations show weaker, but still significant, correlation to co-expression. protein interaction networks and rosetta stone associations appear to be the least-significantly correlated with co-expression, possibly due to their higher false-positive rate. carrying out this type of analysis on-the-fly could allow us to iteratively update the weighting parameters as cmonkey optimizes the biclusters .

randomization and shuffling tests
as an alternative to the difficult task of generating biologically realistic "synthetic" data, we chose to randomize the data instead, in order to further assess the significance of patterns discovered by cmonkey. if we completely shuffle an individual data type, then we effectively eliminate any signal that exists in that component but preserve any influence that the noise component of that data type adds to the procedure . the resulting effect is very similar to strongly down-weighting that component of the model, as described above. a more stringent test can be performed by randomizing only the associations between each gene's expression data, its sequence, and its location in the association networks. this preserves the higher-order structure of each data type, but scrambles the mutual support each data type might present to the overall model. on data randomized in this manner, cmonkey is unable to find biclusters that, on average, are as well-optimized  as in the original data. the significance of this result varies depending upon the organism and the quality and amount of data available; on the halobacterium data, this type of data shuffling results in average bicluster residuals ~20% higher, and average motif p-values ~ <dig> log10-unit higher than in the un-shuffled data. the algorithm does not find significant association subnetworks in any of the shuffled trial runs.

comparison of cmonkey with other methods
in our assessment of cmonkey's performance, we compared cmonkey-generated biclusters against those generated using the following algorithms: cheng-church , order preserving sub-matrix , iterative signature , xmotif  <cit> , bimax  <cit> , and samba  <cit> . we also compared our method to hierarchical clustering and k-means clustering  <cit>  with k varying between  <dig> and  <dig> . in addition, we performed these analyses on cmonkey runs with various model parameters up- and down-weighted, as described above, to demonstrate the effect of including various subsets of the cmonkey model components in the comparisons. additional details on the analysis are provided in the methods section; supporting figures are shown in . all bi/clusters generated by the various algorithms are available for interactive exploration via cytoscape and the gaggle  <cit>  at our web site  <cit> .

comparison in the context of regulatory network inference
a major motivation of this work is to provide a method for deriving co-regulated groups of genes for use in subsequent regulatory network inference procedures. to do this, we wish to find coherent groups of genes over those conditions with a large amount of variation. in other words, we are hoping to detect submatrices in the expression data matrix which are coherent and simultaneously have high information content or overall variance. in addition, we need to find biclusters with many conditions/observations included, as this increases the significance of each bicluster and also of the subsequently inferred regulatory influences for that bicluster. some relevant summary statistics of the runs of various algorithms on all four organisms are listed in . in general we see that cmonkey generates biclusters with a significantly greater number of experiments than the other methods. even with this additional constraint  and further constraints that cmonkey imposes with the association- and motif- priors, the algorithm in general generates biclusters with a "tighter" profile, as measured by mean bicluster residual  <cit> . thus, we find that biclusters generated by cmonkey are generally better-suited for inference algorithms such as the inferelator  <cit> , and potentially other linear or continuous models as well. we tested this by running the inferelator on biclusters generated by samba  <cit>  for halobacterium and then comparing the predictive performance of the resultant regulatory network models on newly-collected data, relative to those generated for cmonkey-generated biclusters  <cit> . we found that, largely due to the smaller number of experiments included in samba biclusters, the inferred network was significantly less able to predict new experiments .

comparison against external measures
defining an unbiased external measure of "success" of a bi/clustering algorithm is a very difficult problem  <cit> . in fact, even if a good, unbiased measure were to be found, a comparison of different bi/clustering results in the context of that measure is also not straightforward. we have attempted to estimate various measures of success of different algorithms in various contexts, with regard to sensitivity, selectivity, and two measures of coverage, in order to provide the reader with a fair comparison of cmonkey with other previously published methods. we define the sensitivity of a bi/cluster set as the commonly-used fraction of bi/clusters that are significantly enriched with genes that  have the same functional annotation in go  <cit>  or kegg  <cit> , or  contain a known cis-regulatory motif  <cit> , or  mimic groups of co-regulated genes, from experiments such as chlp-chip assays  <cit> . these measures are shown for s. cerevisiae  and for halobacterium  for the different algorithms. bi/cluster specificity measures how well the bi/clusters segregate genes along the same lines as the different classes; here, we use a measure of the fraction of genes in each significantly-annotated bi/cluster that have the same significantly-enriched annotation found for that bi/cluster. we use coverage to describe two distinct measures:  the fraction of all observed genes and experimental conditions in the data which are included in at least one bi/cluster , and  the fraction of all groups in a given class that are significantly enriched in at least one bi/cluster for s. cerevisiae  and for halobacterium . we should note that it is debatable which of these metrics of bicluster quality represent the best measures of "correctness" for a bi/clustering method. for example, genes that modulate the protein and transcript levels of other proteins might have similar go functional categories  but may be correctly partitioned separately with the processes they individually regulate. it is also important to note that all of these statistical measures of bi/cluster validity contain inherent flaws or biases that correlate strongly with bi/cluster size, overlap degree, and gene coverage. for example, opsm generated  <dig> biclusters which excluded less than ~1/ <dig> of all measured genes from its clusters, yet it outperforms all other methods in the sensitivity measure. we have used the false discovery rate  to correct these p-values for multiple testing , however, we still find a size bias in the corrected scores . in addition to go and kegg, we assess bi/clusters against known cis-regulatory motifs  <cit> , and high-throughput protein-dna interaction sets  <cit> . we included the runs from various test parameterizations of cmonkey in the analysis , so the effect of the different input data sets could be seen. we also divided each tested bicluster set into "big" and "small" halves, so that the size-related biases in this measurement may be seen and accounted for in the comparisons .

in general, we find that cmonkey performs well in comparison to all other methods when the trade off between sensitivity, specificity, and coverage is considered, particularly in context of the other bulk characteristics . we find that samba also performs well when these measures are considered; however because its biclusters contain on average  <dig> × more genes than cmonkey's, and far fewer experiments , the direct comparison is difficult. cmonkey, as it was designed to do, covers more of the data space  for each organism, and it is therefore more suitable for our regulatory network learning motivations. in particular, while it includes far more experiments per cluster and restricts its clusters to have significantly tighter co-expression, it still does comparably well when assessed against the external measures due to its data integration.  shows, for example, that the cmonkey runs carried out with the association networks up-weighted, in particular, do partition the functional classes better . the final judgement is that because cmonkey biclusters do a better job at regenerating the expression data than other methods, and at least a comparable job at recapitulating the external  measures of bicluster quality, they are, overall, more parsimonious with, and more generative of the patterns found in the available data. thus, cmonkey biclusters are arguably well-suited for the inference of gene co-regulation and regulatory networks, in comparison to available bi/clustering methods.

bicluster visualization
because a population of biclusters will contain some overlapping elements which can confuse their interpretation, it is important to present them to the biologist in a format that promotes their interpretation and exploration in the context of supporting information, cmonkey automatically generates, for each bicluster, a "bicluster diagram" , presents to the biologist the bicluster's co-expression pattern, motif logos  <cit>  and upstream sequence locations , as well as the various functional associations among the bicluster's gene members. we have found that a useful and intuitive visualization scheme for a population of overlapping and often redundant biclusters is via an association network  of rectangular bicluster nodes ; analogous to "module networks" published in previous works. we visualize this bicluster network using cytoscape  <cit> . each bicluster is annotated with its gene and condition members, a measure of its co-expression, significant functional annotations , and significant motifs. edges are drawn between two biclusters if they contain non-redundant genes which are connected individually in any association networks. connections are also added between pairs of biclusters that have a large amount of overlap in gene membership, motif similarity, expression correlation, and/or functional annotation. a spring-embedded layout algorithm  <cit>  is used to spatially organize the network, placing highly-connected  biclusters spatially closer to each other. as a result, groups of biclusters with common function, or which lie in adjacent biochemical pathways, may be easily identified in the network, as shown in figure  <dig>  the integration of cytoscape with the gaggle  <cit>  automatically cross-references biclusters with their respective "bicluster diagrams", and enables searching and browsing of additional biological information  or further analysis  of a bicluster's gene members, greatly facilitating their analysis.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the integration of clustering or biclustering of expression data with additional information is a problem of growing interest. the method presented here may be compared favorably with several recently published clustering and biclustering algorithms that have integrated different types of data, including de novo detection of sequence motifs  <cit> , known sequence motifs  <cit> , and various types of association information  <cit> . we have  seen each of these other methods applied primarily to yeast, which is unique in the quantity of data available relative to the complexity of its genome. many aspects of our method are inspired by these works. cmonkey does not require discretization of expression data, and is therefore capable of capturing patterns in low-level responses, while still being robust to noise due to its integration of different types of biological information. for example, although the h. pylori and e. coli data was limited in size and quality , we were able to detect several interesting biclusters with significant putative  motifs. in addition, cmonkey includes a greater number of experiments in each bicluster than other methods, while still obtaining a higher amount of correlation among its gene members. finally, cmonkey is model-based and variables  are parameterized using simple statistical distributions. therefore, their adjustment is intuitive and understandable, as well as robust to varying data size and quality. in our experience, this is in contrast to other biclustering algorithms, which often require tweaking of p-value cutoffs, dimensionless variables, or thresholds, which often result in unpredictable effects on the biclusters' properties.

we believe that the ability for the cmonkey user to explicitly control the contribution of different data types through their weights opens up many potential uses for the algorithm beyond the basic identification of co-expressed clusters of genes. this flexibility enables the detection of biclusters which stress certain type of biological information over others. indeed, in many cases it is still not known whether a certain type of pair-wise association between genes is actually correlated with co-expression. such "guilt-by-association" is often assumed, e.g. between co-expression and functional categories  <cit> , but such conclusions can be controversial  <cit> , as bioinformatics has "only codified a small proportion of the biological knowledge required to understand microarray data"  <cit>  . cmonkey users can easily choose to generate tightly-co-expressed biclusters that are strongly supported by evidence provided by one or more other sources of information for their system of interest, and they can do so by including them as highly-weighted components of the bicluster model. for example, they could  identify active or co-expressed signaling or regulatory pathways or complexes, as in  <cit> , by up-weighting protein interaction networks or metabolic networks;  reconstruct metabolic pathways, by up-weighting the metabolic network and expression data, as in  <cit> ;  attempt putative de novo cis-regulatory motif detection in newly-sequenced genomes , by setting the expression weight to zero;  assess the quality of complete networks or individual edges in operon associations or protein-dna interactions, as in  <cit> , by up-weighting these associations and the expression data. future improvements to the method could be made to learn the appropriate weights for each data type, from the data , for example by using an unconstrained multi-parametric logistic regression as briefly described in the methods section, or by adaptively constraining the weights such that no component of the model over-regularizes with respect to the other components .

for sake of simplicity, flexibility and statistical transparency, we have used simple models for each of the individual data types and logistic regression to integrate them into a joint model. however, this simplicity comes at the expense of several trade-offs, which could be improved upon. whereas it may be more appropriate to treat some associations as a property of sets rather than networks, we have treated all the same. certain types of associations  could be treated differently. in addition, any confidence values associated with individual edges in some of the networks are currently ignored. while edge weights could currently be included, for example, by dividing the high and low confidence edges into separate networks with different weights, it would be preferable to more cleanly model such association evidence. third, we have reason to believe that our use of meme for motif detection may be increasing our sensitivity to noise. the method could benefit from an assessment of different algorithms for detecting motifs in conjunction with biclustering, or the consensus of more than one method can be integrated, as in  <cit> . also, as we move to more complex organisms, we find that multiple motifs cooperate in their regulation function, with conserved patterns, orientations, and upstream locations, such additional motif correlation and positional information may be exploited, with little modification to the current framework, to increase the sensitivity and specificity of identified motif patterns, such as via meta-meme,  <cit>  or others  <cit> . also possible is the move toward the integrated multi-species biclustering of expression data, merging the multi-species clustering motivations of  <cit>  with additional phylogenetic associations and motif detection .

because the goals of the development of cmonkey are unique relative to previous biclustering methods , the resulting biclusters have unique characteristics when compared to many previously-published methods. we have shown that the procedure "works harder" to insure that a greater percentage of genes that are observed in the data set are included in at least one cluster, while reducing redundancy between overlapping biclusters and maximizing the number of experiments that are included in each bicluster. because of these characteristics, standard methods of assessment of biological relevance of cmonkey-generated clusters  are far from ideal, as they do not account for varying bicluster sizes, redundancy, and coverage of the data. choosing the appropriate biclustering procedure for one's needs therefore involves finding a balance of these different bicluster-set properties that returns the desired outcome. as was written by patrick d'haeseleer,  <cit>  "there is no one-size-fits-all solution to clustering, or even a consensus of what a 'good' clustering should look like."

