BACKGROUND
despite decades of research and clinical experience with surgical, radiotherapeutic, chemotherapeutic, and other therapy modalities, prognosis for malignant glioma has remained dismal, with median survival for who grade iv tumors still being approximately one year despite aggressive treatment  <cit> . immunotherapy represents a theoretically promising treatment  <cit> , though early experiences with glioma immunotherapy have been disappointing  <cit> . in the past, these disappointments would have been attributed to the "immune privilege" of the brain  <cit> , citing the relative impermeability of the blood-brain barrier to immune cells, lack of cns lymphatics, and the relative immunoincompetence of microglia, the resident cns macrophage. however, more recently, evidence of immunity to exogenous as well as endogenous antigens in the cns  <cit>  suggests that the interaction between the cns and immune system is much more complex  <cit> . immunosuppression by gliomas may contribute to tumor progression and treatment resistance. it is not known when immunosuppression occurs during tumor development but it likely involves cross-talk among tumor cells, tumor-associated macrophages and microglia , and peripheral as well as tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes   <cit> .

in humans, we and others  <cit>  have observed that up to a third of the gbm tumor mass can consist of tams. however, these gbm-infiltrating tams are reported to be functionally impaired  <cit> . as these cells represent the large immune infiltrate in human gliomas, understanding the mechanisms by which tams are rendered non-functional represents an important step in developing effective immunotherapy for this disease.

we and others have shown in humans and animal models that the lymphocyte population from within gliomas is larger than in unaffected brain, and exhibits functional impairment as well  <cit>  . glioma-associated immunosuppression has also been observed in peripheral immune cell populations, notably tregs, a t cell population that plays a role in the maintenance of tolerance to self antigen  <cit> . evidence suggests that tregs may play an important role in the maintenance of self-tolerance in neoplastic disease, including gbm  <cit> .

the dynamics by which this immunomodulation occurs has not been systematically studied throughout the course of tumor development. humans cannot be studied until clinical diagnosis, a relatively late timepoint in the disease. there is also a paucity of animal research describing the kinetics of such effects  <cit> . accordingly, using a pdgf-driven syngeneic murine glioma model, we have performed a kinetic study of this immunomodulation, assessing the dynamics of immune infiltration and function, both within the tumor and peripherally.

RESULTS
in an initial series of experiments, we aimed to determine the relative frequencies of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes  versus tumor-associated macrophages/microglia . in this preliminary study, tams were defined as cells isolated from  <dig> dpi ex vivo tumor specimens expressing cd <dig> but not expressing cd3; in our more extensive follow up study, however, we defined tams as cells expressing cd <dig> and cd11b, a marker for cells of myeloid lineage that includes monocytes, macrophages, and microglia  within the tumor bed). tils were defined as cd3+cd45+, and may include a variety of t cell subsets, including both cd4+ t helper cells and cd8+ cytotoxic t lymphocytes . after excluding cells with extreme side and forward scatter properties, the frequencies of these two cell populations were quantified . noteworthy was the much higher frequency of tams relative to tils in all animals examined . not surprisingly, greater numbers of tils were apparent when there were also greater numbers of tams, suggesting a correlation between infiltration of both adaptive  and innate  cell populations.

while use of multiparameter flow cytometric analysis of ex vivo tissue specimens gives more quantitative measurements of cell populations than traditional immunohistochemical techniques, the anatomical location of the cell populations of interest are lost. accordingly, we performed immunofluorescent staining of tissue that included the tumor/parenchyma border, in order to determine better where tams were located in tumor-bearing mice. immunofluorescent staining of cd11b in animals with late stage disease shows a robust population of tams along the tumor border and within the highly cellular tumor .

while our initial experiments demonstrated that tams outnumbered tils early after tumor implantation, it remained unclear whether this was true throughout the course of tumor growth. furthermore, we were interested to test if these cells maintained their functional activity, and what immunological changes were occurring systemically. this last question was of interest given that increases of tregs have been observed in many tumors, including gbms  <cit> , and there is evidence that tregs may function in part by suppressing apc activity. we thus performed a more comprehensive study that investigated immunological changes both systemically and within the tumor microenvironment, which included an evaluation of the function of tams isolated from ex vivo tumor specimens. mice were examined after tumor implantation at early , intermediate , and late  stages of disease.

within the periphery, we assessed the ifn-γ production in t cells, as this is the major immunostimulatory cytokine in this cell population. there was a modest increase in the proportion of ifn-γ-producing cd4+ t cells  between the early and intermediate time points examined, with these frequencies elevated through the course of disease  . in contrast, more profound changes were observed in the frequency and function of tregs  in the periphery . the proportion of tregs among cd4+ t cells increased substantially between the early and intermediate time points , and remained elevated, though with a slight decrease from the peak frequency, throughout the course of disease . noteworthy was that the proportion of tregs expressing il- <dig>  the major immunoinhibitory cytokine in this cell population, increased between the early and intermediate time points , with a decrease in this frequency by the final time point  .

tils were defined as cells present within ex vivo tumor specimens that expressed both cd <dig> and cd <dig> . between the early and intermediate time points, there were no observed changes in til frequency  . however, later in the course of disease, when comparing the intermediate and late time points, an increase in til frequency was observed  . among these cd3+cd45+ tils, we observed a decrease between the early/intermediate and the late time point in the proportion of tils that were cd4+ , suggesting that alternate t cell subsets may be infiltrating the tumor microenvironment, such as cd8+ ctls or nk t cells .

we again quantified the frequencies of tams, this time over the course of tumor growth and with the more specific apc-marker combination of cd <dig> and cd11b. moreover, these cells were assessed for secretion of tnf-α and il- <dig>  the major immunostimulatory and immunoinhibitory cytokines from this cell population, respectively. between the early and intermediate time points, very little change in tam frequency was observed . between the intermediate and final time points, however, there was a substantial increase in frequency of tams  . of greatest interest, there was no observed change in the proportion of tams secreting tnf-α ex vivo between the early and intermediate time points , but at the late stages of tumor growth, a  <dig> -fold reduction in the proportion of these tams expressing tnf-α was observed  . no changes in il- <dig> expression were detected .

discussion
in this study we report on the dynamics of central and peripheral immunomodulation in a murine glioma model. the most notable change within the tumor microenvironment was an increase in tam frequency over the course of tumor growth, which correlated with functional impairment, demonstrated by a decreased proportion of tnf-α-secreting cells after mitogenic stimulation of ex vivo tams. til frequency also increased during tumor growth, with a decline in the relative proportion of cd4+ t cells among the til population. in the periphery, consistent with other tumor models that include glioma models  <cit> , the proportion of tregs in the spleen increased substantially relatively early in tumor development, which was accompanied by increased frequencies of il-10-expressing tregs. there was a modest increase in ifn-γ-secreting cd4+ t cells throughout the course of tumor growth.

prior studies in humans and animal models have shown the frequency of tams to be higher than that of apcs in non-tumor-bearing brain  <cit>  . our findings are consistent with these observations, and may represent local microglial proliferation, microglial migration into the tumor, and infiltration by peripheral monocytes with subsequent differentiation to a macrophage or microglial phenotype. previous studies have demonstrated that tams have an immunosuppressive phenotype, unable to promote t cell activation  <cit> . our study has extended these observations by demonstrating that a tumoricidal function of tams, namely secretion of tnf-α, is lost at a relatively late point in tumor growth.

tregs have been implicated in the complex immunomodulatory phenomena of gliomas  <cit> , cem unpublished observations). prior studies in humans have shown an increased fraction of tregs centrally and peripherally  <cit> , but it is unclear if this is an early event, with a potential for assisting in tumor progression, or a late event, suggesting that the tregs may be epiphenomenological. our study suggests that the peripheral treg population is increased relatively early in tumor development, raising important questions about the role of these cells in tumor progression. previous studies have shown tils to consist of a higher proportion of tregs compared to cns lymphocytes not associated with gliomas  <cit> . although this was not assessed in the present study, we did observe that the relative proportion of cd4+ t cells among tils decreased over time. although the frequency of cd8+ t cells was not addressed in these samples, it is likely that the overwhelming majority of these cd4- tils are cd8+ t cells. it will be important in future studies to determine if these are indeed ctls, or an alternate population of immunosuppressive t cells  <cit> .

the increase of treg frequency observed in this study occurs relatively early compared to the observed cns effects. in fact, between the intermediate and final time points examined in the course of tumor growth, when all observed cns changes occur, the peripheral treg proportion actually decreases, though still elevated from baseline. a similar effect is seen in the proportion of tregs expressing il- <dig>  these data suggest that the peripheral immunosuppressive effects may occur prior to the local effects present in the tumor microenvironment. indeed, it is tempting to speculate that tumor infiltrating tregs may contribute to the loss of tam function later in the course of disease.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study represents to our knowledge the first detailed kinetic analysis of the frequency and function of tams present in gliomas. our discovery that the function of tams is not affected until relatively late in tumor growth suggests that a therapeutic window may exist in which to preserve the function of these cells, and potentially have a positive clinical effect on glioma outcome.

