BACKGROUND
the "aromatoleum"/thauera/azoarcus cluster within betaproteobacteria comprises most of the currently known denitrifiers capable of anaerobic degradation of aromatic compounds  <cit> . "aromatoleum aromaticum" ebn <dig> is a metabolically versatile and the first genome-sequenced representative of this cluster, completely oxidizing > <dig> different aromatic compounds under anoxic conditions. these include the alkylbenzenes toluene and ethylbenzene, phenol, as well as the alkylphenols p-cresol and p-ethylphenol . the multiple sensory/regulatory proteins predicted from the genome were suggested to constitute a fine-tuned regulatory network  <cit> . subsequent experimental studies indeed implicated the latter in substrate-specific formation of catabolic modules  <cit> , as well as in the adaptation to substrate-limiting  <cit>  and stress conditions  <cit> . synthesis of the hitherto accomplished physiological-proteomic insights qualifies "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig> as a promising systems biology model  <cit> .

the anaerobic degradation of the growth substrates p-ethylphenol and p-hydroxyacetophenone by "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig> was recently shown to be analogous to the ethylbenzene pathway  <cit> . initial oxygen-independent hydroxylation to 1--ethanol and subsequent dehydrogenation to p-hydroxyacetophenone is followed by decarboxylation and thiolytic cleavage yielding p-hydroxybenzoyl-coa. proteins involved in this degradation pathway and a presumptively associated efflux system are encoded in a  <dig> kbp "catabolic" and a  <dig>  kbp "efflux" gene cluster located in direct neighborhood on the chromosome of "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig>  the specific transcriptional induction of these two "p-ethylphenol" gene clusters in the presence of p-ethylphenol as well as p-hydroxyacetophenone was previously inferred from the highly similar abundance profiles of respective transcripts and proteins  <cit> . this substrate-specific regulation was suggested to be mediated by the predicted σ54-dependent regulator eba <dig>  that is encoded in between the "catabolic" and "efflux" gene clusters . typically, σ54-dependent regulators consist of  an n-terminal regulatory,  a central atp-hydrolyzing  and  a c-terminal dna-binding domain  <cit> . upon effector-binding, such regulators oligomerize and bind to distinct dna-enhancer sequences upstream of the transcriptional start site  <cit> . in the process of transcription initiation, σ <dig> binds to a highly conserved −12/− <dig> consensus sequence  and recruits rna polymerase and the σ54-dependent regulator; the now formed rna polymerase holoenzyme is activated by atp-hydrolysis at the central domain of the regulator  <cit> . in accord, the promotor regions of the p-ethylphenol-related “catabolic” and “efflux” gene clusters in "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig> contain conserved σ54-dna-binding motifs  <cit> . regulation of aerobic aromatic compound degradation by σ54-dependent regulators has been well-studied in pseudomonas spp. the ntrc-type regulators xylr and dmpr induce transcription of gene clusters for aerobic toluene/xylene  <cit>  and phenolic compound degradation  <cit> , respectively. in both cases, direct binding of the aromatic substrates or structurally related compounds to the regulatory domain relieves the repression of the atpase activity of the central domain, allowing atp-hydrolysis and subsequent transcription initiation  <cit> .fig.  <dig> generation of Δetpr deletion and etpr-complemented mutants. scale model of enlarged section of the "p-ethylphenol" gene clusters on the chromosome of "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig>  displaying etpr and its 3'- and 5'-neighbouring regions in the wild type  and the Δetpr mutant . the chromosomal hybridization location of primer pairs used for construction of the knockout vector pk <dig> Ωacsaeba326/ <dig> and the complementation plasmid pbbr1mcs- <dig> Ωetpr are shown in grey . the positions of the primer pair Δetpr_f/r for identifying the knockout genotype and an etpr-specific primer pair are indicated in black and the lengths of the corresponding pcr products are given below the gene model . electropherogram of pcr products obtained from the wild type, the Δetpr mutant and the etpr-complemented mutant applying different primer pairs. using the primer pair Δetpr_f/r, a  <dig>  bp long amplicon was obtained for the chromosome of the wild type and a shorter, 318 bp long, amplicon for the Δetpr mutant and the etpr-complemented mutant. accordingly, amplification of etpr  was not possible for the Δetpr mutant, but for the etpr-complemented mutant . abbreviations: Δetpr, Δetpr mutant; etpr-compl., etpr-complemented mutant



in the present study, an unmarked ∆etpr in frame deletion mutation was generated to verify the predicted regulatory function of etpr. the ∆etpr mutant and the in trans etpr-complemented mutant were characterized by means of physiological experiments as well as on the molecular level.

RESULTS
generation of the ∆etpr and etpr-complemented mutants
the unmarked in frame ∆etpr deletion mutation was generated to test the predicted regulatory function of etpr in mediating p-ethylphenol- and p-hydroxyacetophenone-specific expression of the two “p-ethylphenol” gene clusters. in the Δetpr mutant, only the start and stop codons of etpr were preserved to maintain the reading frame . accordingly, no pcr product could be obtained using etpr-specific primers and only a small 318 bp amplicon was observed applying primers targeting the up- and downstream intergenic regions of etpr . in addition, correctness of the deletion site and its 5'- and 3'-flanking regions  was confirmed by nucleotide sequencing . this newly generated ∆etpr mutant was in trans complemented via an etpr-bearing broad-host range plasmid, yielding constitutive expression of etpr . the resultant etpr-complemented mutant had the genotype Δetpr, pbbr1mcs- <dig> Ωetpr.

the ∆etpr mutant cannot grow with p-ethylphenol and p-hydroxyacetophenone
detailed growth analyses of the Δetpr mutant were performed in comparison to the wild type and the etpr-complemented mutant. all three strains were benzoate-adapted and transferred at ½ odmax to fresh media containing either benzoate, p-ethylphenol, p-hydroxyacetophenone or a binary mixture of benzoate and p-hydroxyacetophenone as sole source of carbon and energy. selected growth parameters are compiled in table  <dig> table  <dig> selected growth parameters determined for wild type, Δetpr mutant and etpr-complemented mutant  of "a. aromaticum" ebn1a


substrateb
bz1 + phac2c
bz1 + pep2c

aall growth experiments were performed in duplicates with high reproducibility; the given values are mean values


bbz, benzoate; phac, p-hydroxyacetophenone; pep, p-ethylphenol


csuperscript “1” denotes substrate 1; superscript “2” denotes substrate 2


dΔetpr, Δetpr mutant; etpr-compl., etpr-complemented mutant



growth with benzoate
growth of the wild type and the Δetpr mutant with benzoate was nearly identical, while the etpr-complemented mutant grew slightly faster, despite the presence of kanamycin in the medium . furthermore, the Δetpr mutant displayed growth similar to the wild type with all other known substrates , except for p-ethylphenol and p-hydroxyacetophenone.fig.  <dig> physiological characterization of strains. growth of "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig> wild type , Δetpr mutant  and etpr-complemented  mutant  under nitrate-reducing conditions with p-ethylphenol , benzoate , p-hydroxyacetophenone  and a binary mixture of benzoate and p-hydroxyacetophenone . cultures were inoculated with cells adapted to anaerobic growth with benzoate. all growth experiments were performed in duplicates with high reproducibility; for each experiment one representative experiment is depicted. the wild type harboring pbbr1mcs- <dig> showed wild type-like growth with p-hydroxyacetophenone. in contrast, the ∆etpr mutant with pbbr1mcs- <dig>  like the ∆etpr mutant, was unable to utilize p-hydroxyacetophenone . optical density: black, filled symbols; substrate concentrations: colored, open symbols



growth with p-ethylphenol and p-hydroxyacetophenone
the Δetpr mutant could not grow with p-ethylphenol and p-hydroxyacetophenone . the minute initial increase in optical density can probably be attributed to consumption of residual benzoate, co-transferred during initial inoculation. the unexpected complete depletion of p-ethylphenol from Δetpr mutant cultures after ~160 h of incubation is most likely due to unspecific membrane accumulation, as it is not coupled to denitrification and also observable in wild type cultures with de novo protein synthesis inhibited by kanamycin . noteworthy, the etpr-complemented mutant started to grow after a markedly shorter lag-phase as compared to the wild type, even though maximum growth rates and substrate depletion profiles of the two strains were similar . this shorter lag-phase may be due to the higher etpr abundance in the complemented strain .

growth with a binary mixture of benzoate and p-hydroxyacetophenone
when the three strains were shifted from benzoate to a binary mixture of benzoate and p-hydroxyacetophenone, highest rates of growth and benzoate consumption were observed for the Δetpr mutant , while the concentration of p-hydroxyacetophenone remained unchanged in this strain . however, growth rate and odmax were lower as compared to growth with benzoate, most likely due to the toxicity of p-hydroxyacetophenone. rates for growth and benzoate consumption of the wild type with the binary substrate mixture were higher as compared to the etpr-complemented mutant, but the rate of concomitant p-hydroxyacetophenone depletion was lower . hence, the etpr-complemented mutant seems to more preferentially consume p-hydroxyacetophenone than benzoate as compared to the wild type . similar results were obtained for growth experiments with a binary mixture of benzoate and p-ethylphenol .

etpr mediates substrate-specific expression of the "p-ethylphenol" gene clusters
the simultaneous utilization of benzoate and p-hydroxyacetophenone , i.e., absence of catabolite repression, is a prerequisite for subsequent analysis of transcript and proteomic profiles. in the ∆etpr mutant benzoate sustains growth while at the same time the hypothesized loss of response to the effector p-hydroxyacetophenone due to etpr deletion can be tested. p-hydroxyacetophenone was used as substitute of p-ethylphenol due to  its higher water solubility ,  the apparent absence of a passive uptake as observed for p-ethylphenol  and  the uniform induction of gene expression and protein formation by both substrates  <cit> .

gene expression was analyzed for the wild type, the Δetpr mutant and the etpr-complemented mutant anaerobically grown with benzoate as single substrate or a binary mixture of benzoate and p-hydroxyacetophenone. as reference, transcripts were analyzed for p-hydroxyacetophenone-grown cells of the wild type and the etpr-complemented mutant. target genes were located at the beginning, in the middle and at the end of the two "p-ethylphenol" gene clusters, i.e., acsa, hped and pchf for the "catabolic" gene cluster and eba <dig>  eba <dig> and eba <dig> for the "efflux" gene cluster . transcripts of both gene clusters were only detected in wild type and etpr-complemented mutant cells growing with either p-hydroxyacetophenone or the binary substrate mixture . in accord,  <dig> out of the  <dig> proteins encoded in the two "p-ethylphenol" gene clusters were only detected in the corresponding subproteoms. in case of the Δetpr mutant, none of these transcripts or proteins was detectable in cells grown with the binary substrate mixture . similar proteomic results were obtained with a binary mixture of benzoate and p-ethylphenol . hence, expression of the “p-ethylphenol” gene clusters depends on the presence of etpr and either p-ethylphenol or p-hydroxyacetophenone. the expression of genes framing the knockout locus  by the etpr-complemented mutant in the presence of p-hydroxyacetophenone confirms the absence of polar effects arising from in frame deletion of the etpr gene.fig.  <dig> transcript and proteomic analysis of the p-ethylphenol degradation pathway. scale model of the chromosomal organisation of genes encoding proteins involved in the anaerobic degradation of p-ethylphenol and p-hydroxyacetophenone in "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig>  genes selected for transcript analyses are marked in black and identified proteins highlighted in grey  . transcript and proteomic analysis of wild type, Δetpr mutant and etpr-complemented  mutant grown with either p-hydroxyacetophenone , benzoate  or a binary mixture of benzoate and p-hydroxyacetophenone . detected transcripts are indicated in black. mascot scores for identified proteins are indicated by the intensity of grey shading  . according to recent functional characterization, hped was renamed from its original designation chna  <cit> 



non-detection of the etpr protein in the wild type suggests protein abundance below the detection limit of the applied method. in contrast, etpr was detected in all samples of the etpr-complemented mutant with high confidence indicating a markedly higher abundance of etpr. the absence of "p-ethylphenol" gene cluster expression in benzoate-utilizing cells of the etpr-complemented mutant, despite the artificially high etpr abundance in this strain, demonstrates the effector dependence of etpr for transcriptional activation.

hints on constitutive expression of etpr
binding of the xylr protein to the upstream region of the xylr gene was previously reported to reduce the σ70-dependent expression of the latter, by what xylr negatively influences its own formation; moreover, effector presence was shown to enhance this effect  <cit> . to investigate if a similar feedback mechanism exists for etpr, transcription of etpr was quantitatively analyzed in the wild type and the etpr-complemented mutant grown with benzoate, p-hydroxyacetophenone and a binary mixture of benzoate and p-hydroxyacetophenone. the wild type displayed even expression levels  independent of the growth substrate and effector presence, respectively. if etpr influenced its own formation as reported for xylr, i.e. stronger decrease of expression due to effector presence, a significantly higher etpr expression level would have to be expected for the wild type in presence of benzoate as compared to the p-hydroxyacetophenone-containing conditions. conversely, a positive feedback may also be unlikely, as the etpr upstream region does not contain a −12/− <dig> consensus sequence. taken together, expression of the etpr gene is apparently constitutive.fig.  <dig> analysis of etpr expression. relative expression levels of etpr in the wild type and the etpr-complemented  mutant grown with benzoate , p-hydroxyacetophenone  and a mixture of both substrates . cells of the wild type adapted to growth with p-hydroxyacetophenone served as reference state and the bcrc gene  was used as reference gene



wild type etpr abundance probably sufficient for full-level transcription
the etpr-complemented mutant strongly expressed etpr under all three tested substrate conditions , agreeing with the medium copy number of the vector , the strong vector-inherent promoter, and the exclusive detection of the etpr protein. notably, the artificially high abundance of etpr in the etpr-complemented mutant did not yield an increased abundance of proteins involved in p-ethylphenol degradation  as compared to the wild type . hence, maximum transcription/translation levels are apparently achieved also with the lower etpr abundance occurring in the wild type, which is also reflected by the similar μmax of both strains with p-ethylphenol or p-hydroxyacetophenone. the higher etpr level in the etpr-complemented mutant may allow for reaching the maximum levels of catabolic proteins faster, which may explain the significantly shorter lag-phase as compared to the wild type .

sequence comparison of regulatory domains
etpr belongs to the σ54-dependent ntrc/xylr-type transcriptional regulators with the typifying architecture of a less well conserved effector-binding n-terminal regulatory domain, connected to the more conserved central activating and c-terminal dna-binding domains   <cit> .fig.  <dig> amino acid sequence comparison of σ54-dependent regulators involved in aromatic compound catabolism. domain structure of etpr: xylr-n, activator of aromatic catabolism ; v4r, 4-vinyl reductase ; rna-polymerase/σ54-interaction domain ; aaa+ atpase domain ; dna-binding hth domain, fis-type  . schematic enlargement of the regulatory domain  displaying the positions of amino acid residues conserved/similar among the six compared regulatory proteins. b sequence alignment of the effector specifying region  in the v4r domain of: pseudomonas sp. dmpr , phlr  and xylr ; t. aromatica k <dig> dmpr ; "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig> pder  and etpr  . the full-length alignment of the regulatory domain sequences is provided in the additional file 1: figure s5



known phenol- or alkylbenzene-specific ntrc-type regulators
dmpr and phlr are closely related regulators of aerobic phenol catabolism in pseudomonas sp. cf <dig>  <cit>  and p. putida h  <cit> , respectively. they are activated by direct binding of phenol or derivatives thereof, e.g., cresol and dimethylphenol isomers  <cit>  . notably, dmpr also recognizes o- and m-ethylphenol  <cit> . similarly, dmpr of thauera aromatica k <dig>  <cit>  and pder of "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig>  <cit>  are suggested to regulate anaerobic phenol degradation; differential proteomics indicated pder to also respond to p-cresol  <cit> . xylr of p. putida regulates aerobic toluene degradation, and is activated by this as well as other alkylbenzenes such as m- and p-xylene  <cit> .

alteration of regulatory domain residues in xylr and dmpr from pseudomonas spp. yielded broadened or restricted effector spectra, or even completely inhibited the response to aromatic effectors . most of these residues are confined to a stretch of  <dig> amino acids, defined as effector specifying region   <cit> . 3d-models of xylr and dmpr predicted structural features for shaping an effector-binding pocket and interaction with the central domain  <cit> . the current knowledge on the regulatory domain is compiled in additional file 1: figure s <dig> 

comparison of etpr to known regulators
the phylogeny of the inspected regulatory domains reflects effector spectra as well as deployment for anaerobic vs. aerobic catabolism. etpr branches off from the "anaerobic" phenol-specific regulators , while the three together separate from those of aerobic phenol degradation . the alkylbenzene-specific xylr of p. putida is more distantly related to the other five regulators .

current proteomic data demonstrated specific formation of the "p-ethylphenol"-proteins only in cells anaerobically growing with p-ethylphenol or p-hydroxyacetophenone, but not with  <dig> other aromatic substrates  <cit> . therefore, activation of etpr may be restricted to the former two. such a narrow effector spectrum would distinct etpr from the above described three regulators of pseudomonas spp..

to identify primary sequence features, possibly linked to the effector spectrum of etpr, aligned regulatory domain sequences were analyzed , with the esr emphasized in fig.  <dig> . across these six complete regulatory domains,  <dig> residues  were strictly conserved, comprising most of the reported conserved residues of ntrc-type regulators  <cit> . sixty-two other residues  are conserved to differing degrees and are mostly esr-located; they may therefore be effector specifying for etpr and are briefly described in the following.

recognition of the phenolic moiety may involve  <dig> residues  that are exclusively conserved in the five phenolic compound-sensing regulators . further  <dig> residues  could also contribute to phenol-specificity, as they are conserved in dmpr, phlr and pder, but not in alkylbenzene-sensing xylr and alkylphenol-sensing etpr.

notably, a total of  <dig> residues  are conserved in all proteins except for etpr, with  <dig> of them located in the esr. the sensory relevance of these residues is reflected by four of them being located in the predicted binding pocket of dmpr and xylr  <cit>  and two at locations that broaden the effector spectrum of dmpr  <cit> . from an inversed perspective, these  <dig> residues are distinct in etpr. they may therefore be involved in specific sensing of, e.g., the keto group in p-hydroxyacetophenone, since the latter is not known to be an effector of the other five compared regulators. alternatively, these  <dig> residues may at least indirectly contribute to a structural shaping of the etpr-specific sensory properties. these scenarios may also account for another group of  <dig> residues , which are differently conserved in dmpr, xylr and phlr of pseudomonas spp. as compared to dmpr of t. aromatica and pder of "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig>  but are again distinct in etpr.

more than  <dig> residue changes  in the regulatory domains of pseudomonas dmpr and xylr  broaden their effector spectra   <cit> . they may not be effector specifying for etpr, as none of the changes yields etpr-residues.

notably, the effector specificity of etpr may not only be attributed to single residues, since also the interaction of different regions contributes to defining effector spectra, i.e., loops  and interactions of regulatory and central domain   <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
aerobic aromatic compound degradation pathways of pseudomonas spp. may accommodate several, structurally related aromatic substrates, e.g., toluene, m- and p-xylene as well as  <dig> ,4-trimethylbenzene in case of p. putida  <cit> . this substrate promiscuity of single pathways is also reflected in rather broad effector spectra of the involved transcriptional regulators  <cit> . in contrast, the substrate ranges of the individual anaerobic pathways in "a. aromaticum" ebn <dig> appear to be more restricted and the substrate-specific expression of their genes is assumed to be individually controlled by corresponding one- or two-component regulatory systems  <cit> . the observed highly p-ethylphenol/p-hydroxyacetophenone-specific induction of the anaerobic p-ethylphenol degradation pathway by etpr can be attributed to a concurrence of unique sets of amino acids accumulating in the esr , in particular between position  <dig> and  <dig>  since they are most specific for etpr as compared to the other regulators, they possibly specify the sensing of phenolic-, ketonic- and/or alkylbenzylic-moieties, and determine the observed narrow effector spectrum of etpr. this further supports a general role of esrs in mediating sensory recognition of aromatic compounds as previously reported for dmpr and xylr of pseudomonas spp.  <cit> . the apparent constitutive, low level expression of etpr in the wild type allows for a full level formation of catabolic proteins that may be only reached faster at higher regulator abundance as observed for the etpr-complemented mutant. hence, the extent of "p-ethylphenol" gene cluster expression should depend on the presence of the substrates/effectors p-ethylphenol and p-hydroxyacetophenone rather than on the abundance of the regulator itself . overall, the present study demonstrates etpr  to serve as transcriptional regulator in the p-ethylphenol catabolism, and represents to our knowledge the first molecular genetic study on a σ54-dependent regulator in an anaerobic aromatic compound degrader.

