BACKGROUND
one major problem that dairy cattle farmers face is the prevalence of udder infections. despite considerable technological advancements in animal husbandry, udder inflammation is still widespread, particularly in high-yielding herds. identification of marker sequences related to immunity to mastitis may be instrumental in improving this trait and therefore reducing the costs associated with the prevention and treatment of the disease. in the case of low heritability traits  which have high negative genetic correlation with other traits being subject to selection, marker-assisted selection  programmes are more effective than traditional methods
 <cit> .

due to their biological functions, tnf-α, ltf and mlyz genes have been proposed as potential dna markers for immunity to mastitis. the genes are located in the chromosome regions which have been shown by some authors to contain loci linked to susceptibility to udder inflammation
 <cit> .

tnf-α is one of the main pro-inflammatory cytokines involved in the immune response. along with other factors, tnf-α stimulates the proliferation, differentiation and activity of many immune system cells: b lymphocytes, t lymphocytes, nk  lymphocytes and lak  cells
 <cit> . it exerts chemotactic and activating effects on monocytes, macrophages and eosinophils, thereby increasing their cytotoxicity. tnf-α also enhances the phagocytic properties of neutrophils, accelerates their release from the bone marrow, and stimulates them to produce reactive oxygen species, which increases their antibacterial and cytotoxic properties. moreover, tnf-α induces the release of many other cytokines
 <cit> . the gene encoding tnf-α contains four exons and three introns and is located on chromosome bta23q22
 <cit> . it is expressed in many types of mammalian cells, but most strongly in macrophages and monocytes. tnf-α production in these phagocytic cells is stimulated by lipopolysaccharide  found in the bacterial cell wall. in lps-stimulated macrophages, the expression of tnf-α gene triples, the level of mrna increases approximately 100-fold, while the secretion of the protein itself may be as much as  <dig>  times higher
 <cit> .

ltf is a multifunctional protein with antimicrobial properties. it is active against many gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, enveloped and non-enveloped viruses, and various types of fungi and parasites
 <cit> . ltf has an ability to bind fe3+ ions
 <cit>  and other growth agents such as phosphorus and zinc
 <cit> . thus, availability of chemical elements to potential pathogens becomes limited. ltf is found in plasma, tears, semen, and various mucoserous secretions. however, it is most abundant in neutrophil granules and with them it can be transported to the infection site. moreover, ltf stimulates neutrophils, the reticuloendothelial  system and myelopoesis
 <cit> . thus, it constitutes a vital element of innate immunity, which functions as the organism’s ‘first line of defence’ during an infection
 <cit> . the bovine ltf gene has been mapped to chromosome bta22q <dig>  the coding sequences are divided into  <dig> exons of  <dig>  bp. however, the ltf gene expression pattern is markedly different in various mammal species as well as in various tissues and cell types. the expression is regulated via different signal pathways, e.g. by steroid hormones, the growth hormone or the kinase cascade
 <cit> .

lyz is present in most body fluids, the highest concentration being found in tears and chicken egg white. it occurs in the primary and secondary granules of polymorphonuclear granulocytes, and is also produced in monocytes, macrophages and epithelial cells
 <cit> . lyz is one of the elements of the humoral adaptive immune response. the bactericidal properties of lyz are primarily due to its destructive effect on the bacterial cell wall: it damages the outer membrane, disintegrates the cytoplasm and increases the permeability of the inner membrane, which eventually leads to bacterial lysis
 <cit> . this mechanism is strongest against gram-positive bacteria whereas gram-negative strains are less susceptible to lyz as their cell walls have a more complex structure
 <cit> . the antimicrobial activity of lyz may also be related to its cationic and hydrophobic properties
 <cit> . lyz present in different tissues is coded by different genes. the bovine mlyz gene analyzed in this study is an immune-dependent gene. the gene’s structure as well as its organization predispose it to being expressed both in leukocytes  and in the mammary gland tissue. it consists of four exons and three introns and is located on chromosome bta5q26
 <cit> . in intron  <dig> of this mlyz gene at position  <dig>  a single nucleotide polymorphism   related to cows’ immunity was detected by pareek et al.
 <cit> .

RESULTS
the laboratory analysis showed three genotypes of tnf-α and two genotypes of ltf and mlyz. their frequencies are given in table 
 <dig> 

due to the very low frequency of mlyz allele t, the gene was excluded from further analysis. the effects of the tnf-α and ltf genes on all the three udder health indicators were found to be non-significant when analyzed for all inter-calving periods taken together. however, quite a different picture arose when the effects were estimated for each period separately.

when analyzing the number of mastitis cases with a lactation-averaged model , the gene effects were found to be statistically non-significant, whereas when analyzing the interactions between the tnf-α gene and parity , significant effects were observed. in particular, allele t of tnf-α was associated with a lower number of mastitis cases in lower parities and a higher number of mastitis cases in higher parities. the associations were confirmed statistically for the second intercalving period .

asterisks indicate statistical significance levels * p ≤  <dig> .

as for the number of infected udder quarters, no significant associations were found with the parity-averaged models . however, in the case parity-specific estimates , association was detected between allele t of the tnf-α gene and a lower number of infected udder quarters, but only in the earlier intercalving periods. a statistically significant effect was observed in the second intercalving period. similarly, allele b of the ltf gene was associated with a lower number of affected udder quarters in the first intercalving period whereas in the subsequent periods the same allele had an unfavourable effect .

asterisks indicate statistical significance levels * p ≤  <dig> .

the gene x parity interaction was even stronger when related to the number of days with mastitis. the effects of the genes under study proved to be statistically non-significant when averaged over parities . on the other hand, an association was found when using a model which included interactions between the genes and parity . allele t of the tnf-α gene was significantly associated with a higher dm, but only in the fifth and sixth intercalving period. furthermore, allele b of the ltf gene in the first parity was associated with a lower number while in the fifth one – with a higher number of days with mastitis .

asterisks indicate statistical significance levels * p ≤  <dig> , ** p ≤  <dig> .

discussion
the analysis of the effects of the tnf-α and ltf genes in relation to clinical mastitis showed strong associations between gene x parity interaction and mr, em and dm of the disease. our hypothesis is that these interactions might be related to a phenomenon known as inflamm-ageing.

in humans, ageing is associated with significant changes in the innate immune system such as impairment of the phagocytic activity of neutrophils and macrophages, increased production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and decreased antibacterial defence
 <cit> . the name given to the global age-related dysfunctions of the immune system is immunosenescence
 <cit> . the deterioration of the immune system leads to an increased risk of infections such as bacterial infections  and some viral infections 
 <cit> .

one of the aspects of immunosenescence is “inflamm-aging”, a term coined by franceschi to refer to a low-grade, chronic and systemic inflammatory status which probably results from a continuous long-term exposure to antigens
 <cit> . many studies on older individuals showed higher lps-induced production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, particularly il- <dig>  il- <dig>  and tnf-α, which are mainly produced by macrophages and fibroblasts
 <cit> .

the aging process results from a combination of cellular, genetic and environmental factors
 <cit> . in modern theories of aging, a key causative role in this process is attributed to factors that have a direct effect on cells , and to genetic factors .

ageing is not only a major risk factor for infection, but also vice-versa: infection may contribute to the aging process. franceschi et al.
 <cit>  suggested three possible models to explain this relationship. first, in the simplest model, direct tissue destruction by a pathogen may play a role in the ageing process. second, there is possibly a “trade-off” between the capacity of the host defence system to kill pathogens and the damage it causes to the surrounding host tissue. thus, the beneficial effects of inflammation consisting in the neutralization of pathogenic microbes early in life and in adulthood become detrimental late in life due to an accumulation of damage to the host tissues. in fact, a chronic low-grade inflammation can be seen even in healthy elderly individuals
 <cit> . third, it is possible that latent or chronic infection contributes to the ageing process. latent infection might periodically be reactivated, leading to immune-mediated killing of the productively infected cells. although microorganisms that are able to cause chronic infection usually find ways to avoid immune response, they might contribute to aging through their manipulation of the cell and tissue function
 <cit> .

recent findings suggested that genes involved in the immune response may be particularly prone to age-related changes in dna methylation
 <cit> . for example, gowers et al.
 <cit>  reported age-related loss of methylation of tnf cpg motifs in both peripheral blood leucocytes and macrophages. lower dna methylation in the tnf promoter may contribute to both an increase in the production of this cytokine and a higher incidence of inflammatory diseases in older individuals. this data suggested that age-related loss of the epigenetic signature of this cytokine may contribute to inflamm-aging.

in the light of the above findings, our concept that significant interactions between the effect of the tnf-α gene and parity has to do with inflamm-ageing seems highly probable. in earlier lactations, allele a of the gene encoding tnf-α, whose role is to activate the immune system during infection, proved to be very beneficial – it is linked to higher immunity against infection compared with the other allele in this locus. however, with each successive lactation the effect of the gene becomes increasingly less favourable. the application of the theory of inflamm-aging to interpret the results of this study seems even more justified when we consider the fact that the highest number of statistically significant effects of the tnf-α gene was observed for the duration of mastitis. this indicator is most closely related to the chronic status of the disease, which is characteristic of inflamm-aging. although cows in the sixth or seventh lactation can hardly be considered old, in the case of high-yielding animals the immune dysregulation process is accelerated considerably due to long-term exposure to stressors such as previous infections, mechanical injuries, chemical irritation , and strain related to high productivity. the importance of extrinsic factors in the progression of inflamm-ageing has been emphasized, among others, by larbi et al.
 <cit> .

the hypothesis that the interaction between the effect of a gene and parity may be associated with inflamm-aging is also justified in the case of the ltf gene. this is because ltf, in addition to its bacteriostatic and bactericidal activity, is characterized by anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic properties.

besides being a natural antibiotic, ltf has immunoregulatory, antineoplastic, and anti-inflammatory functions and plays a role in regulating haematopoiesis
 <cit> . moreover, ltf is able to bind lps and soluble cd <dig>  thereby preventing initiation of a cd14-activated proinflammatory expression pattern
 <cit> . the protective properties of ltf are due to the fact that it regulates the production and release of cytokines and other factors involved in the inflammatory response: it inhibits pro-inflammatory factors  and stimulates anti-inflammatory factors 
 <cit> . acting as an antioxidant, ltf also protects against oxidative stress. moreover, ltf has the ability to bind directly to bacterial cpg motifs and thus inhibits their immunostimulating effect
 <cit> . furthermore, ltf may play an immunoregulatory role and alter the expression pattern in cells via an intracellular signal generated in ltf receptors located on the surface of many cell types 
 <cit> .

perhaps, in the case of the analyzed ltf gene variants the above properties of the gene’s product decline with age, which leads to an imbalance between pro- and anti-inflammatory factors. this hypothesis is supported by the results of studies carried out on people). carrieri et al.
 <cit>  have shown that centenarians are equipped with gene variants that allow them to optimize the balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory factors and other mediators involved in inflammation. similarly, lang et al.
 <cit>  suggest that research into the capacity of centenarians to exert a protective effect against the adverse outcomes of ageing will help to develop a better understanding of the dysregulation of the balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory pathways.

our hypothesis is also supported by evolutionary theories of ageing based on antagonistic pleiotropy of the immunity genes
 <cit> . the immune system, by neutralizing pathogens, plays a beneficial role until the time of reproduction and parental care. subsequently, by causing chronic inflammation, it can have a negative effect late in life, in a period not expected by evolution
 <cit> . age-related diseases are “the price” for an active immune system that defends the body in youth but harms it later in life
 <cit> . crimmins and finch
 <cit>  even suggest that the genetic polymorphisms responsible for a low inflammatory response in humans might result in a greater chance of longevity.

CONCLUSIONS
although our study showed significant associations between tnf-α and ltf and immunity to mastitis, the results would be difficult to apply in marker-assisted selection programmes due to interactions with parity. on the other hand, our findings provide insight into the complex mechanisms of immunity to infections. it is supposed that the interactions between gene effects and parity are related to the phenomenon of inflamm-ageing.

