BACKGROUND
during the early drug discovery stage, discovering potential target proteins for a compound is important to drug design and to reduce cost and time by detecting the potential harmful side effects. on the other hand, it could provide the new usages for old drugs. recently, to design a drug inhibiting multiple target proteins  builds a new paradigm for diseases with complex mechanisms, such as cancers and diabetes. therefore, discovering polypharmacological targets, share similar interfaces and are often inhibited by the same compound, is a valuable issue in understanding binding mechanisms and drug development.

to identify the proteins with similar binding sites of a given protein sequence or structure by searching the sequence or structure databases has usually used  <cit> . in general, the proteins  bound the same ligand should share similar binding environments, but they may not have significant evolutionary relationship in both sequences and global structures. as the exponential growth of the number of protein structures, protein structures have been proposed to analyze the structural motifs and to describe the binding environment  <cit> . most of these studies  search the similar local structures or binding sites  based on only one structural motif. however, a protein-ligand binding interface usually consists of a set of spatially discontinuous structural motifs. for example, two motifs  catalyse the amino acid activation with atp in class-i aminoacyl-transfer rna synthetases  <cit> .

to address these issues, we proposed space-related pharmamotif  method to identify the pharma-interfaces  sharing similar binding environments from the polypharmacological targets. the pharma-interface consists of a set of spatially discontinuous peptide segments , which surround the ligand-binding site. by transforming the 3d structure segments into 1d structural alphabet sequences through in-house tool , we can rapidly search the potential target proteins with similar binding environment against protein data bank   <cit> . and then a structural alignment tool, such as dali  <cit> , was used to precisely locate the possible binding environment in these protein structures. experimental results showed that around 56% interacting residues were considered as highly conserved in our identified pharma-motifs. these conserved residues involving in pharma-motifs often play the key roles for biological functions and binding mechanisms. furthermore, these pharma-motifs can be transferred into sequence-based motifs for searching similar proteins with local binding-site similarity from protein sequence databases. we believe that srpmotif is useful for studying protein functions and discovering the polypharmacological targets for drug design. the srpmotif is available at http://gemdock.life.nctu.edu.tw/srp/.

materials and methods
pharma-motifs and pharma-interfaces
here, we proposed a new concept and a fast method  to identify space-related pharma-motifs and pharma-interfaces for discovering polypharmacological targets. we considered a pharma-interface as a conserved binding environment which consists of several spatially discontinuous pharma-motifs. a pharma-interface can be described as follows:  a pharma-interface is a conserved binding interface of multiple proteins  which share similar interfaces and are often inhibited by the same compound;  a pharma-interface consists of a set of pharma-motifs;  a pharma-motif is a short conserved peptide forming a specific sub-interface with interacting residues and specific physico-chemical properties. figure  <dig> shows the details of our method to identify a pharma-interface and pharma-motifs from a given complex by the following steps.

step 1: search candidates of polypharmacological targets
to find the candidates of the polypharmacological targets of a query protein, we firstly transformed the 3d protein structure of a query complex  into a 1d sequence with  <dig> states of a structural alphabet by using in-house tool 3d-blast   <cit> . we then identified the binding segments in the interface of the query complex. for each segment, its corresponding 1d structural alphabet sequence was used for rapidly searching structural alphabet sequence database  by using 3d-blast and a list of similar protein structures of the query binding segment was returned within several seconds. for the tolerance of the flexible binding environment, the proteins matching more than 75% query segments are considered as the candidates.

here, we identified a binding segment  of a given complex by using a contact residue as a central point to extend seven amino acids forward and backward. an amino acid is considered as a contact residue if the distance between any atom of this residue and the atoms of the binding ligand is less than 4Å. any of two binding segments with at least one overlapped amino acid are merged into a single one. as a result, the binding environment of a given complex is characterized by spatially discontinuous binding segments.

next, srpmotif utilizes 3d-blast, a fast protein structure database search, to detect the candidate proteins  with similar binding segments. 3d-blast encodes the 3d structures into a serials of structural alphabets using κ and α angles defined in the dssp program  <cit> . based on the  plot of  <dig> structural pairs and a nearest neighbour clustering, a 23-state structural alphabet represents the profiles of most 3d fragments  <cit> . a blosum-like substitution matrix, called structural alphabet substitution matrix  was developed by using a method similar to that used to construct blosum <dig>  <cit>  based on  <dig> structural protein pairs. 3d-blast searches the sadb using this sasm to quickly discover homologous structures of a query protein.

step 2: establishment of the pharma-interface
in this step, the polypharmacological targets were determined and used to construct pharma-interface. to determine the polypharmacological targets through the candidate proteins identified in the step  <dig>  a structural alignment tool  was utilized to precisely locate the possible binding environment in these candidate protein structures . the dali program is a structural alignment tool based on contact similarity patterns. discontinuous binding segments are aligned to a candidate protein and the value of root mean square deviation  between all binding segments and a candidate protein is calculated. to estimate opened gaps in a structural alignment, the value of aligned ratio of a binding segment is measured. the aligned ratio is defined below:

  alignedratio=numberofalignedresiduesofcandidatesnumberofresiduesinqueriedbindingsegment 

the range of aligned ratio is from  <dig> to  <dig>  the rmsd value and the average aligned ratio of discontinuous binding segments are used to evaluate the structure similarity between a query and the candidate proteins. here, a candidate protein is considered as a polypharmacological target when the value of rmsd is less than  <dig> Å and the aligned ratio is great than  <dig> . consequently, a pharma-interface is constructed based on the conserved binding interfaces of polypharmacological targets.

step 3: characterization of pharma-motifs
the pharma-interface is composed of a set of pharma-motifs, short conserved peptides with interacting residues, to form the binding environment. according to the structure-based multiple sequence alignment  of the pharma-interfaces of a query, pharma-motifs could be characterized as 1d sequence patterns with the pattern syntax of prosite database  <cit>  .

in order to encode 1d sequence patterns of pharma-motifs, structure-based msas are used to measure the sequence conservation. for the position i in a msa, we used rate4site algorithm  <cit>  to evaluate a conserved score  by computing the relative evolutionary rate. the range of spi is from  <dig> to  <dig> and a position with score of  <dig> is the most conserved.

in prosite syntax, a position labeled as alphabet 'x' means that any kinds of amino acids can occur in this position. based on  <dig> motifs of prosite database , the average spi of encode 'x' is  <dig> . here, a position of pharma-motif is encoded as alphabet 'x' when spi is less than  <dig>  finally, 1d sequence patterns of pharma-motifs are characterized.

non-redundant protein-ligand complex dataset
to verify the pharma-interfaces involving key interacting residues and functional sites, we collected a protein-ligand complex dataset which contains  <dig> fda approved drugs recorded in drugport of pdbsum  <cit> . we eliminated some protein-ligand complexes based on below criteria:  the protein structure is an incomplete structure or a theoretical model;  the co-crystal ligand is metal;  the number of heavy atoms of ligand is less than six heavy atoms;  the co-crystal ligand interacts with multiple protein chains;  proteins have greater than 25% sequence identity with others or redundant co-crystal ligands. final, we selected  <dig> non-redundant protein-ligand complexes  with structure-based classifications  and all of the proteins are recorded in the uniprot database  <cit>  .

evaluation measures
for evaluating the performance of our method for predicting polypharmacological targets, the recall and precision were calculated. here, we used biological process  and molecular function  of the gene ontology   <cit>  to annotate polypharmacological targets. in addition, the structural classifications, scop  and cath , were also used to annotate the polypharmacological targets. the recall and precision are defined in the following:

  recall=truepositivestruepositives+falsenegatives 

  precision=truepositivestruepositives+falsepositives 

where true positives are predicted as the polypharmacological targets of a query protein and have the same annotation with the query protein; false negatives are predicted as not polypharmacological targets of a query protein and have the same annotation with the query protein; false positives are predicted as the polypharmacological targets of a query protein, but the annotations are different from the query protein.

RESULTS
evaluations of srpmotif
in the fda <dig> set,  <dig> pharma-motifs could be identified and the average number of pharma-motifs for each protein-ligand complex is four. to examine whether the pharma-motifs are similar with the prosite motifs, a pharma-motif is considered consistent with a prosite motif when the intersections of two patterns  are greater than the cut-off  of the pharma-motif or the prosite motif . the overlapped ratio is defined as the maximum value between the length of the aligned pattern divided by the length of the pharma-motif and that of the prosite motif. the result shows that the percentage of overlapped motifs decreases significantly if the overlapped ratio ≥ 50%. here, the cut-off is set to 50%. among  <dig> prosite motifs in the fda <dig> set, our derived pharma-motifs are consistent with 65%  prosite motifs. moreover, we compared the evolutionary conservation of the interacting residues with other residues. figure  <dig> shows the distributions of the conservation score  between the interacting residues and other residues in  <dig> pharma-motifs. for highly conservation , the spi values of the interacting residues  were significantly higher than those of other residues . in addition,  <dig> % interacting residues were conserved with the highest spi values. these results show that the interacting residues involved in pharma-motifs are highly conserved and encoded as conserved pattern.

precision and recall rates were utilized to assess the similarity of biological functions  and structural classifications  between polypharmacological targets and their query proteins of protein-ligand complexes. based on bp and mf annotations, the precision rates are  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively . these experimental results show that polypharmacological targets not only are involved in the similar cellular process but also perform similar biological functions. moreover, the precision rates are  <dig> % and  <dig> % for scop and cath, respectively . in the above results, the polypharmacological targets without annotations are considered as negatives. the precision rates are more than 90% when the polypharmacological targets without any annotations are removed. the high precision rates show that polypharmacological targets of each protein-ligand complex are usually recorded in the same structure family.

however, the results with low recall rates may imply that proteins with the same annotation  sometimes have the key difference in protein-ligand binding environments. for example, viral neuraminidase  of influenza virus is a drug target for prevention of influenza infection and has several homologous proteins ) in the human genome. both of na and neu <dig> are a type of glycoside hydrolase enzymes   <dig> . <dig> ). na  and neu <dig>  have crystal structures with the same drug, zanamivir , and are classified as identical structure family in scop  and cath .

the neu <dig> or na is not the polypharmacological target of na-zmr complex or neu2-zmr complex, respectively. after observing the binding environments of na-zmr and neu2-zmr complexes, the interacting residues and identified binding segments of two complexes are different . previous experiment results showed that na is inhibited by zmr in nm level  while neu <dig> is inhibited by zmr in μm level   <cit> . the proteins in the same structure family  might be subdivided to many sub-families by srpmotif due to different binding environments. therefore, the srpmotif method is sensitive and precise to identify the pharma-motifs for describing the binding environment between protein and ligand.

example analysis: isoleucyl-trna synthetase and mupirocin
pharma-motif  <dig> contains a highly conserved region  which is not recoded in prosite database. this region includes the kmsks loop  and one of residues  is important to atp binding  <cit>  . the conserved residues, g <dig> and n <dig>  interact to kmsks loop by hydrogen bonds . it suggests that two conserved residues could stabilize the structure of kmsks loop and enable k <dig> to bind atp. in addition, several residues of derived pharma-motifs are highly conserved to stabilize the structure or protein-ligand interaction, such as d <dig> in pharma-motif  <dig>  and g <dig> in pharma-motif  <dig> . these results show that srpmotif could recognize the proteins with similar functions and binding motifs, even are recoded in the different structure families. furthermore, the pharma-motifs include the conserved interacting residues on functional sites for studying protein functions and binding mechanisms.

example analysis: tyrosine-protein kinase kit and imatinib
protein kinases play important roles in cell growth and signal transduction. protein kit is one of tyrosine-protein kinases and a kind of receptor of stem cell factors. imatinib  is an inhibitor for tyrosine-protein kinases, including kit, abl <dig>  abl <dig>  and pdgfr. by blocking atp binding site, imatinib inhibits tyrosine-protein kinases and is approved to treat chronic myelogenous leukemia and gastrointestinal stromal tumor. here, we used tyrosine-protein kinase kit  and imatinib complex as query to search against the pdb database and construct the pharma-interface and pharma-motifs.

the polypharmacological targets of kit-imatinib complex consists of  <dig> tyrosine-protein kinases. srpmotif recognizes the protein csf1r, which has no crystal structures of imatinib binding. figure 4a presents the residues interacted with imatinib by hydrogen bonds in three structures having co-crystal imatinib . these residues  are conserved in sequence and structure of protein csf1r . previous experiment has also showed that csf1r is inhibited by imatinib in 19nm  <cit> . it suggests that imatinib could be possible to treat acute myeloid leukemia through inhibiting csf1r.

the pharma-motifs, pharma-motif  <dig> and  <dig>  have overlapped with the identical prosite motifs . the highly conserved regions, --x-g---g-x-v and -a--k, are similar to ps <dig> . it also involves to the gxgxfg motif in p-loop of a kinase  <cit> , which is related to interact with phosphate of atp. the pharma-motif  <dig> contains two highly conserved regions, -h-r-d---a--n and k--x-d--. the former is alike to the known motif  and is related to kinase catalysis, named the catalytic loop in a kinase . previous study has showed that the conserved aspartic acid in the catalytic loop may be important in positioning the substrate hydroxyl for in-line nucleophilic attack  <cit>  . the latter has been reported as conserved peptide, dfg motif  <cit> , which is the beginning of activation loop of a kinase. the conformation of dfg motif is relevant to kinase activation and the conserved aspartic acid binds directly to the magnesium ion cofactor orienting the γ-phosphate group of atp for transfer .

we also observed the conserved lysine in the front of dfg motif in pharma-motif  <dig>  figure 4b shows that the residue k <dig>  interacts many neighbouring residues in space by hydrogen bonds, such as e <dig> in hinge region, m <dig>  i <dig>  and n <dig>  the residue v <dig> close to k <dig> usually interacts with inhibitors. it suggests that conserved k <dig> could compact the kinases structure to keep the interaction of v <dig> and inhibitors. figure 4c shows that these conserved residues of the identified pharma-motifs are related to phosphorylation. for example, the conserved lysine in pharma-motif  <dig> is helpful for stabilizing γ- and α-phosphate groups of atp. the conserved glutamic acid in pharma-motif  <dig> is helpful for stabilizing γ-phosphate group of atp. these results show that pharma-motifs involved important interacting residues and conserved positions of the pharma-motifs could play important roles in protein function and binding mechanisms.

computational time
srpmotif utilizes structural alphabets and 3d-blast for searching similar structure segments within  <dig> minute on average. during the construction of a pharma-interface and pharma-motifs, the computational time for a query complex depends on the number of polypharmacological candidates and hit targets. on average, for a query complex, such as isoleucyl-trna synthetase-mupirocin complex, srpmotif searches the structure database and characterizes the pharma-interface and pharma-motifs within  <dig> minutes. in some cases, srpmotif identified pharma-motifs from over hundreds of target proteins within  <dig> minutes. these tests were conducted on a linux platform with intel® quad-core processors and 8g ram.

CONCLUSIONS
srpmotif is able to identify similar pharma-interfaces and pharma-motifs sharing similar binding environments for polypharmacological targets by rapidly searching against the protein structure database. the experimental results demonstrate that the identified pharma-motifs would comprise key residues and important functional sites. pharma-motifs describe the conservations of binding environments for polypharmacological targets and provide clues for discovering new sequence-based motifs for predicting protein functions from protein sequence database. we believe that srpmotif is useful for elucidating protein functions, protein-ligand interactions, and drug discovery.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors' contributions
yyc, lzc, and jmy conceived and designed the experiments. yyc, lzc, and jmy implemented the materials/analysis programs. yyc, ctl, lzc, and jmy performed the experiments and analyzed the data. yyc, cyl, ctl, kch, and jmy wrote the paper.

supplementary material
additional file 1
supplementary figures and table.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this paper was supported by national science council, partial supports of ministry of education and national health research institutes . this paper is also particularly supported by "center for bioinformatics research of aiming for the top university program" of the national chiao tung university and ministry of education, taiwan. jmy also thanks core facility for protein structural analysis supported by national core facility program for biotechnology.
