BACKGROUND
ras-like small gtp-binding proteins  regulate diverse processes in eukaryotic cells including signal transduction, cell proliferation, cytoskeletal organization and intracellular membrane trafficking. gtpases are activated by gtp binding and inactivated by subsequent hydrolysis of bound gtp to gdp, thus acting as molecular switches in these processes  <cit> . the rab gtpase family is the largest and most complex within the ras protein superfamily. rab gtpases are important regulators of endomembrane trafficking, regulating exocytosis, endocytosis and membrane recycling processes in eukaryotic cells  <cit> . rab gtpase functions have been extensively studied in yeast and mammalian systems. both in vivo and in vitro experiments have demonstrated that different rab proteins function in distinct intracellular membrane trafficking steps and they are hypothesized to work together with soluble n-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor  proteins to promote specificity of vesicle transport to target compartments and facilitate vesicle and target membrane fusion  <cit> . they are therefore essential for the transport of proteins and membrane through the endomembrane system to their destination.

the arabidopsis thaliana genome encodes  <dig> putative ras superfamily proteins. fifty-seven of these are rab gtpases, more than in yeast but similar to the number in humans  <cit> . according to their sequence similarity and phylogenetic clustering with yeast and mammalian orthologs, these rab proteins were assigned to eight subfamilies, atraba to atrabh, which can be further divided into  <dig> subclasses  <cit> . relatively few of the plant rab orthologs have been investigated functionally. most of these studies have used constitutively active  and/or dominant negative  mutations, generated by direct mutation of the conserved domain to restrict mutant gtpase proteins to the active gtp-bound form  or inactive gdp-bound form . expression of ca or dn rab gtpases can perturb the activity of the endogenous rab, revealing their functional significance. for a number of plant rab gtpases, expression of their ca and dn mutants in transformed plants, together with protein localization information, has shown that these rabs perform functions similar to those of their yeast and mammalian orthologs  <cit> .

several reports indicate that rab proteins are important for elongation of tip-growing cells in plants. for example, atraba4b is reported to localize to the tips of root hair cells and was proposed to regulate membrane trafficking through a compartment involved in the polarized secretion of cell wall components  <cit> . ntrab <dig> gtpase is important for trafficking between the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi bodies in tobacco pollen tubes and may be specialized to optimally support the high secretory demands in these tip growing cells  <cit> . ntraba  in tobacco is predominantly localized to an inverted cone-shaped region at the pollen tube tip, and both constitutively active and dominant negative mutants resulted in reduced tube growth rate, meandering pollen tubes, and reduced male fertility  <cit> .

there are four genes in the arabidopsis rabd subfamily, atrabd <dig> , atrabd2a , atrabd2b  and atrabd2c   <cit> . in mammals, the orthologs of atrabd, rab <dig> isoforms, physically associate with the er, er-golgi intermediate compartment and golgi and regulate membrane trafficking between the er and golgi complex  <cit> . fluorescent protein fusions with atrabd <dig>  atrabd2a and atrabd2b localize to the golgi and trans-golgi network  <cit> , and transient expression in plant cells of dominant negative mutants of rabd2a or rabd <dig> resulted in the inhibition of er-to-golgi trafficking  <cit> , suggesting a related function for the plant rab <dig> homologs. pinheiro et al.  <cit>  isolated t-dna insertion mutants in each of the atrabd family genes and reported that each of the single and double mutants lacked a detectable phenotype. by contrast, a rabd2a rabd2b rabd2c triple mutant was lethal and a rabd <dig> rabd2b rabd2c triple mutant had stunted growth and low fertility, indicating that these gene family members perform important and overlapping functions.

we previously hypothesized that closely related genes with a high pearson correlation in their rna accumulation level are functionally redundant, and showed that expression patterns of both the atrabd2b and atrabd2c genes are negatively correlated with the process of starch synthesis  <cit> , whereas the expression patterns of the remaining rabd genes are not. we therefore predicted that these two rab proteins may have redundant functions that are not shared by the other two atrabd family members. here we show that atrabd2b and atrabd2c are highly correlated in their rna accumulation level across a variety of experimental conditions. phenotypic analysis of knockout mutants indicates that they are at least partially functionally redundant, and are important in pollen development and pollen tube growth. the proteins both localize to the trans-golgi, consistent with their proposed role in trafficking from the er to the golgi apparatus.

RESULTS
the expression patterns of atrabd2b and atrabd2c are closely correlated
the four rabd family members in arabidopsis share about 88% identity at the amino acid level. the accumulation pattern of the associated transcripts is quite distinct across a wide variety of experimental conditions and developmental stages  . atrabd2b and atrabd2c expression patterns are correlated , whereas atrabd <dig> and atrabd2a show very low correlation with the others . based on their high sequence similarity  and the correlation between their mrna accumulation patterns, we hypothesized that atrabd2b and atrabd2c might have some functional overlap that is not shared by atrabd <dig> and atrabd2a.

identification of null mutations in the genes atrabd2b and atrabd2c
it was reported previously that an atrabd2b atrabd2c double mutant has no phenotype  <cit> . based on our correlation analysis above, we hypothesized that this mutant may have some more subtle defects that cannot be compensated for by the remaining family members. to investigate this further, we identified t-dna insertion mutants  in atrabd2b  and atrabd2c . homozygous lines for the t-dna insertions were identified by pcr, using primers selected by isct primers , and the insertion sites were determined by sequencing the pcr products . analysis of mrna levels by rt-pcr indicated that atrabd2b- <dig>  atrabd2b- <dig> and atrabd2c- <dig> are null mutants. however, the atrabd2b- <dig> mutation had no effect on atrabd2b rna accumulation . progeny from atrabd2b- <dig> and atrabd2c- <dig> heterozygotes showed a t-dna segregation ratio of approximately 3: <dig> based on kanamycin resistance, consistent with a single insertion. atrabd2b- <dig> was supplied as a homozygous line. to generate atrabd2b atrabd2c double mutants, atrabd2b- <dig> and atrabd2c- <dig> homozygous single mutants were crossed, f <dig> plants were allowed to self fertilize and the atrabd2b-2/atrabd2c- <dig> double mutant was identified from the f <dig> population by pcr using the primers for both atrabd2b- <dig> and atrabd2c- <dig>  hereafter, the atrabd2b-2/atrabd2c- <dig> double mutant will be referred to as atrabd2b/2c, and atrabd2b- <dig> and atrabd2c- <dig> single mutants will be referred to as atrabd2b and atrabd2c respectively.

siliques are shorter in the atrabd2b/2c double mutant than in either single mutant or in wild-type lines
to evaluate phenotypes associated with the atrabd2b and atrabd2c mutants, homozygous atrabd2b , atrabd2c and atrabd2b/2c mutants, along with wild-type siblings, were grown on agar plates with or without various hormone, nutrient and light treatments. we tested over  <dig> of the conditions described in the gantlet website ; however, no significant phenotypic differences were observed in the seedlings for any of the mutant alleles . in addition, we tested the seedling phenotype on media with or without sucrose or vitamin b <dig> and, consistent with previous reports  <cit> , no obvious phenotypes were observed.

by contrast, atrabd2b/2c double mutant lines showed a phenotype associated with reproduction. in these lines, siliques were shorter when grown either under continuous light or long day  conditions. neither the atrabd2b nor the atrabd2c single mutant alleles displayed a short silique phenotype. the length of atrabd2b/2c siliques was 70% of that of wild-type, atrabd2b or atrabd2c single mutant lines . to evaluate whether this reduced silique size is associated with a seed defect, siliques from atrabd2b/2c, wild-type, atrabd2b and atrabd2c mutant lines were opened at  <dig> daf . consistently, no defects in the seeds of either atrabd2b or atrabd2c single mutants were observed. however, approximately half of the ovules in the atrabd2b/2c double mutant were not fertilized . consistent with this observation, the atrabd2b/2c mutant plants produced a smaller quantity of seeds than wild-type plants or single mutants . these results are consistent with a functional overlap between atrabd2b and atrabd2c that cannot be fulfilled by atrabd <dig> or atrabd2a.

complementation of atrabd2b/2c mutant phenotype
to demonstrate that the atrabd2b/2c mutant phenotype is due to the mutations in the atrabd2b and atrabd2c genes, constructs containing either atrabd2b or atrabd2c, each expressed from their native promoter, were introduced into the atrabd2b/2c double mutant. both constructs were able to rescue the silique length phenotype of the mutant  and restored the seed fertilization defect  and seed number , confirming that the loss of atrabd2b and atrabd2c is responsible for these phenotypes.

atrabd2b/2c, atrabd2b and atrabd2c pollen have defects in morphology and pollen tube elongation
two possibilities could explain the unfertilized embryos seen in the atrabd2b/2c double mutants. one possibility is that the pollen bears a defect that leads to pollen sterility and inability to fertilize the embryos. alternatively, ovules may bear an abnormality such that their fertilization is reduced. to distinguish between these two possibilities, we observed the pollen by scanning electron microscopy . all of the pollen from wild-type plants looked normal, whereas more than 20% of the atrabd2b/2c pollen exhibited an irregular, collapsed morphology . we also observed that some abnormal pollen grains from the atrabd2b/2c double mutant were devoid of nuclei, as indicated by dapi staining, whereas all pollen from wild-type  and single mutant plants  have nuclei. this defective pollen may be the severely collapsed pollen visualized under the sem. surprisingly, even the atrabd2b and atrabd2c single mutant lines produce aberrant pollen at a level of about 10%. this is unexpected, as the atrabd2b and atrabd2c single mutants have normal-appearing siliques and seed quantities similar to the wild-type plants. a likely explanation is that there are sufficient normal pollen grains in the single mutants to efficiently fertilize the ovaries in the atrabd2b and atrabd2c single mutants.

we originally identified atrabd2b and atrabd2c because the transcript accumulation patterns of these two genes correlate with those of many genes associated with starch metabolism. indeed, the atrabd2b/2c double mutant pollen stained less intensely with iki than wild-type pollen , suggesting a decreased starch content in the atrabd2b/2c mutant pollen. this is consistent with the expression correlation, although the reason for this phenotype is unclear.

a single flower of arabidopsis produces thousands of pollen grains, but usually there are less than  <dig> embryos in one silique. if only 20% of the pollen grains are abnormal, we would not expect the strikingly reduced fertility seen in the atrabd2b/2c double mutant. we therefore looked for additional explanations for the reduced fertility. to evaluate germination and tube growth of the pollen grains, pollen was germinated in vitro. after overnight incubation, almost all of the pollen from wild-type plants germinated and showed a typical tip growth. however, about 10% of the pollen from the atrabd2b/2c mutant did not germinate at all and 50% of the pollen germinated but did not grow apically as did pollen of wild-type plants . instead, these pollen tubes were shorter and had swollen tips, some burst , and others branched . the germination rate of the pollen from the single mutants was similar to the wild-type pollen. however, approximately 20% of the germinating pollen also had swollen tips , although the phenotype was not as severe as the atrabd2b/2c double mutant; burst or branched tubes were never observed in either single mutant . moreover, the pollen tubes of the atrabd2b/2c double mutant were much shorter than those of wild-type plants or either single mutant , and the single mutants had shorter pollen tubes than wild-type plants . even though the atrabd2b and atrabd2c single mutants had collapsed pollen, shorter pollen tubes and swollen tips, their siliques were normal compared with wild-type plants. we hypothesize that the single mutants may still have sufficient normal pollen to enable all embryos to be fertilized. the in vitro pollen germination phenotypes were confirmed by analyzing pollen tube growth after in vivo pollination . open flowers from wild-type or atrabd2b/2c mutant plants were incubated overnight on agar medium. the atrabd2b/2c mutant flowers had reduced pollen germination and decreased pollen tube length compared with wild-type plants, suggesting that pollen germination and pollen tube growth may also be defective in vivo.

pollen and pollen tube defects cause the shorter siliques in the atrabd2b/2c mutant
to investigate whether the unfertilized seeds are due to the observed pollen abnormality, or whether the ovary also has defects that might contribute to the reduced rate of fertilization, we crossed wild-type and atrabd2b/2c mutant plants. if the shorter silique phenotype is borne only by the abnormal pollen, wild-type plant pollen should rescue the atrabd2b/2c mutant silique phenotype to a normal length . in contrast, the atrabd2b/2c mutant plant pollen crossed with a wild-type female would mimic the mutant phenotype of decreased fertilization . alternatively, if the ovary also has some abnormality, wild-type pollen would not completely rescue the mutant phenotype, and atrabd2b/2c mutant pollen would not mimic the mutant phenotype. the results of these crosses indicated that pollen from wild-type plants can rescue the atrabd2b/2c short silique phenotype, and the pollen from atrabd2b/2c can bestow the shorter silique phenotype on wild-type plants . specifically, about half of the seeds were not fertilized in the siliques that developed from wild-type pistils fertilized by atrabd2b/2c pollen . in contrast, the siliques from atrabd2b/2c usually had about 50% unfertilized ovules, but when these pistils were fertilized by wild-type pollen, all seeds looked normal, and the siliques were longer than those siliques in the same inflorescence which were self-fertilized . these results confirm that the unfertilized ovaries are mostly, if not exclusively, caused by pollen defects in the atrabd2b/2c mutant.

in silico and gus analysis of atrabd2b and atrabd2c expression
if atrabd2b and atrabd2c are involved in pollen development and pollen tube growth, they are expected to be co-expressed in pollen and pollen tubes. public microarray data indicates that both atrabd2b and atrabd2c are expressed throughout development, including high expression in floral organs and particularly in the stamen .

to directly examine the spatial expression pattern of the atrabd2b and atrabd2c genes, transgenic lines containing promoter:gfp/gus constructs for each gene were analyzed for gus activity at various stages of development from germination to senescence. as indicated by the in silico analyses, both atrabd2b and atrabd2c were expressed widely during development. gus staining further indicated that in cotyledons, rosette leaves and cauline leaves, atrabd2b expression was localized predominantly in vascular tissues , whereas atrabd2c was expressed ubiquitously in cotyledons and in mature leaves throughout the entire leaf. interestingly, in emerging leaves, atrabd2c was only expressed in the trichomes, while atrabd2b was not expressed in these cells . in flowers, atrabd2b was expressed in sepals, stamen and stigma, while atrabd2c was expressed in sepal, stamen, stigma and style . this dichotomy of expression suggests that atrabd2b and atrabd2c may function independently of each other in certain cells. both genes were expressed in pollen grains and germinating pollen , which is consistent with their role in pollen development and pollen tube growth. they both also showed expression in roots, but atrabd2b was ubiquitously expressed throughout the root, while atrabd2c expression was excluded from root hairs and root tips .

subcellular localization of atrabd2b and atrabd2c
in mammals, different atrabd orthologs  are localized to the er, er-golgi intermediate compartment or golgi compartments. in plants, atrabd2a and atrabd2b are associated with the golgi apparatus and trans-golgi network  <cit> , and we predicted that atrabd2c will share this localization. to determine the subcellular localization of atrabd2c, gfp-atrabd2b and gfp-atrabd2c constructs were introduced into arabidopsis leaf protoplasts and the gfp signal was observed by confocal microscopy. for both constructs, gfp localized to punctuate structures, reminiscent of the golgi apparatus. to verify the identity of these structures, gfp-atrabd2b and gfp-atrabd2c were co-transfected into arabidopsis leaf protoplasts with the trans-golgi marker st-yfp  <cit> , and yfp and gfp signals were observed. confocal results indicated that both atrabd2b and atrabd2c primarily colocalized with st-yfp  and are therefore associated with the golgi, consistent with a role in golgi trafficking. occasionally, atrabd2b or atrabd2c-labeled structures were seen that did not contain st-yfp; these could be the post-golgi compartments described previously  <cit> . cells expressing a single gfp or yfp fusion demonstrated the absence of cross talk between gfp and yfp signals .

discussion
rab gtpases are critical players in the transport of materials through the endomembrane system, controlling exocytosis of proteins and cell wall materials, endocytosis of receptors and transporters, and membrane recycling processes. together with snare proteins, they promote specificity of vesicle transport to target compartments, ensuring that vesicles fuse only with their appropriate target and thus maintaining the distinct identity of individual organelles. two rab subfamilies, rab <dig>  and rab <dig> , have been reported to function in membrane trafficking between the er and golgi in mammalian cells  <cit> . the plant rab <dig> and rab <dig> homologs atrabd <dig>  atrabd2a and ntrab <dig> have also been reported to function in er to golgi vesicle transport  <cit> . here, we demonstrate a distinct physiological role for the rab <dig> homologs atrabd2b and atrabd2c in pollen development and pollen tube growth.

using the bioinformatics tool metaomgraph   <cit>  to determine the pairwise pearsons correlation value between the expression patterns of all of the  <dig> atrab genes , we found that among the four atrabds, only the expression of atrabd2b and atrabd2c are highly correlated. from this data, we hypothesized that atrabd2b and atrabd2c have partially redundant functions that are not shared by the remaining atrabd family members. to test our hypothesis, we used t-dna insertion single and double mutants to confirm that atrabd2b and atrabd2c have functional overlap and show that they are both required for normal pollen development and tip growth of pollen tubes. we also showed that they both co-localize with the trans-golgi marker st-yfp, consistent with their proposed role in golgi trafficking.

the conclusion that atrabd2b and atrabd2c are partially functionally redundant is based on several lines of evidence. first, although single mutant plants containing atrabd2b or atrabd2c mutant alleles are indistinguishable morphologically from their wild-type counterparts, even when grown under a variety of growth conditions, the atrabd2b/2c double mutant has a short-silique phenotype. second, both atrabd2b and atrabd2c mutant plants produce a small percentage of deformed and collapsed pollen grains, while atrabd2b/2c lines produce a higher percentage of deformed pollen grains, many of which are severely deformed, some lacking nuclei. it is probable that such aberrant pollen would give rise to defects in pollen germination, and indeed, though the germination rate is similar between atrabd2b or atrabd2c single mutants and wild-type plants, about 10% of the pollen grains from atrabd2b/2c double mutant plants are unable to geminate. furthermore, atrabd2b and atrabd2c mutant pollen tubes do not grow apically as well as do wild-type pollen tubes and tend to have swollen tips and a shorter length; this phenotype is substantially more severe in atrabd2b/2c double mutants. in addition, some pollen tubes from atrabd2b/2c double mutants branch or burst, which is not seen in pollen tubes of wild-type plants or either single mutant. these data also indicate that the loss of function of the atrabd2b/2c genes cannot be compensated for by the atrabd <dig> or atrabd2a genes, suggesting that either some function of the atrabd2b and atrabd2c proteins are distinct from those of atrabd <dig> or atrabd2a, or that they are not expressed in the same cell types.

both atrabd2b and atrabd2c co-localize with the golgi marker st-yfp upon transient expression in arabidopsis leaf protoplasts, as was reported also for atrabd2a   <cit> . it is therefore possible that atrabd2b and atrabd2c function in vesicle trafficking between the er and golgi apparatus, as does atrabd2a  <cit> . complete disruption of rab function in er-to-golgi trafficking is expected to be lethal, due to loss of plasma membrane, vacuole and cell wall assembly and integrity. however, the atrabd2b/2c double mutant is indistinguishable from wild-type plants, except for shorter siliques due to the pollen and pollen tube defects. there are several possible explanations for this. first, other atrabs must perform the same function in vegetative tissue. the most likely candidates are atrabd2a and atrabd <dig>  which could compensate for the loss of function in the atrabd2b/2c mutant in most cell types  <cit> . moreover, other rab families, such as tobacco rabbs  have also been shown to be regulators of membrane trafficking between the er and golgi apparatus  <cit> . atrabbs  may have the same function, such that they also participate in er to golgi vesicle trafficking. the pattern of atrabb1b rna accumulation is most highly correlated with that of atrabd2b  and atrabd2c  . these genes might compensate in part for the loss of function of atrabd2b/2c.

second, pollen tubes grow very rapidly compared with many other cell types. pollen tubes elongate by tip growth, whereby the pollen cytoplasm is confined to the most proximal region of the tube, and growth is restricted to the tube apex  <cit> . in vitro, lily pollen tubes grow at about  <dig> nm/sec  <cit>  and arabidopsis pollen tubes at  <dig> nm/sec  <cit> ; in vivo, tobacco pollen can grow at  <dig> nm/sec  <cit> . this fast growth is contingent on rapid vesicle trafficking to deliver large amounts of membrane and cell wall components to the apical region of the tubes. this extensive trafficking requirement may preclude the remaining rabs from completely compensating for loss of atrabd2b and atrabd2c.

third, computational analysis of public microarray data, together with studies of the expression pattern directed by the atrabd2b and atrabd2c promoters, indicated that both are widely expressed in most organs and several cell types, with high expression in pollen. root hairs also showed expression of atrabd2b, and, like pollen tubes, root hairs elongate by tip growth. however, root hair growth in the atrabd2b/2c double mutant is indistinguishable from that of wild-type plants. this is consistent with the idea that atrabd2b and atrabd2c are required for vesicle trafficking in multiple cell types, and that the highest demand for this process may be in pollen and pollen tubes, in order to optimally support the large secretory requirement of these very rapidly elongating cells. in combination, these data indicate that the high expression of atrabd2b and atrabd2c in pollen may be important to facilitate membrane trafficking needed for pollen tube growth.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we used a t-dna insertion mutant approach to demonstrate the function of atrabd2b and atrabd2c. our data indicated that both are golgi residents; they have similar but not identical expression patterns, but are both highly expressed in pollen; they are both involved in tip growth of pollen tubes; and they are at least partially functionally redundant. future work will focus on elucidating the molecular basis for the pollen phenotype in the atrabd2b/2c double mutant.

