BACKGROUND
autism is a complex neurobiological developmental disorder belonging to a group of conditions known as autism spectrum disorder   <cit> . asd has an overall prevalence of approximately one case in every  <dig> children in usa  <cit> , notably affecting four times as many males as females  <cit> . to date, several studies have reported asd−associated genetic factors and have categorized them into  <dig> groups: rare variants  and common variants   <cit> . these genetic factors, however, are responsible for only 2-3% of identified asd cases  <cit> .

in most other instances, studies suggest that asd results from unknown environmental triggers acting on genetically susceptible individuals  <cit> . susceptibility may be associated with gene variants  <cit>  involved in biological pathways associated with asd such as cell adhesion, synaptic vessel release, neurotransmission, and synaptic structure  <cit> . these biological pathways are inter-connected in a very complex manner  <cit> . however, it is unclear how environmental contaminants interact with or otherwise perturb asd-associated biological pathways  <cit> .

today, genetically susceptible individuals may be exposed to combinations of  <dig> synthetic chemicals via air, food and water  <cit> . synthetic chemicals are generally categorized into two groups: pharmaceuticals and personal care products , and other industrial chemicals, such as organophosphate insecticides and organic solvents   <cit> . ppcps include extensively used psychoactive pharmaceuticals  <cit> , but also include bis-phenyl a in plastics, phthalates in cosmetics and household products, and known teratogenic pharmaceuticals  <cit> . in this study we focus on psychoactive pharmaceuticals that 1) may find their way to drinking water from clinical dosages excreted by patients, 2) are generally untreated by waste-water treatment plants  <cit> , and 3) have sufficiently long half-lives  <cit>  to eventually emerge in drinking water. because many ppcps are known to perturb neurological systems, exposure of a fetus to these contaminants by way of the pregnant mother's water consumption is a plausible environmental risk factor for neurological disorders like asd  <cit> .

in a previous study, we investigated psychoactive pharmaceuticals presented at very low concentrations in the environment  <cit> . juvenile fathead minnows  were exposed to fluoxetine , venlafaxine  and carbamazepine  individually and in mixtures at environmentally relevant concentrations  <cit> . using gene-class analysis  <cit> , gene expression data indicated enrichment  of gene sets associated with neuronal growth, regulation, and development in the juvenile minnow brains in response to psychoactive drug exposure  <cit> . moreover, a significant behavioral change  was observed in fish exposed to pharmaceuticals. we sought to identify potential pharmaceutical-associated gene expression mechanisms underlying these responses. as a first step, we considered the interaction of pharmaceuticals within the underlying asd-associated protein network. this approach has been used elsewhere to determine how altering expression of one or a few genes can influence biological pathways, ultimately contributing to complex phenotypes  <cit> .

we found previously that fathead minnows exposed to ppcps had a significantly altered behavioral phenotype compared to a non-exposed  group  <cit> , and that ppcp-enriched gene sets represented biological pathways, which play a major role in neuronal systems. thus, we predicted 1) that gene sets enriched by cbz, vnx, flx and mix  contained proteins that would be more interconnected than genes in the overall asd-network, and 2) that gene sets enhanced by individual pharmaceuticals would have distinct network characteristics from each other.

to address these hypotheses, we constructed a protein-protein interaction  network of gene products known to be associated with asd  <cit> , and examined 1) genes enhanced by particular ppcps in fish brains, and 2) genes enhanced by a ppcp mixture and valproate  in human neuronal cells. we note that vpa is known to induce asd-like phenotypes in mice  <cit> . we sought to quantify patterns among gene sets enriched by ppcps in both fish brains and human cell cultures by analyzing their network indices. of particular interest was the identification of relationships between pcpp treatments and highly interconnected gene sets, as these are more likely to have profound effects on the functioning of the protein network because of their ripple effects on downstream proteins  <cit> .

RESULTS
we postulated that proteins within ppcp-enriched groups would have both distinct network characteristics from each other and higher levels of importance in the asd protein-protein network. support of this hypothesis would suggest that any dysregulation in the expression of ppcp-enriched proteins would result in large impacts to the network due to ripple effects on downstream proteins. to address this question, we generated an asd protein-protein interaction network. the network consisted of  <dig> nodes, with approximately  <dig> primary neighbor proteins and  <dig> secondary neighbor proteins . the average number of adjacent neighbors  for proteins in the network was  <dig> , while the median degree centrality was  <dig> . additional summaries of network properties are listed in additional documents to this manuscript. 

in fish brains: carbamazepine- and venlafaxine- enhanced gene sets were more inter-connected in the asd-network than both fluoxetine- enhanced gene sets and the non-enriched portion of the network
when considering fish brain cells, the vnx and cbz groups had significantly higher location shifts , compared to the overall network, for network indices widely deemed to be most important in identifying nodal importance . the omnibus null hypothesis of equal location shifts for groups was rejected for all four of these measures allowing protected pairwise comparisons of groups  <cit> . in these comparisons the cbz and vnx groups were statistically equivalent with respect to degree centrality, betweenness centrality and stress. the cbz and vnx groups, however, had significant location shifts compared to the flx group, and significantly higher locations than the overall asd network . strikingly, the flx group degree centrality, closeness centrality, betweenness centrality, and stress locations were less than or equal to those of the overall asd network .

the collective network characteristics of pharmaceutical groups were considered using both permutation multivariate analysis of variance  and non-metric multidimensional scaling . the fish brain cell genes of the non-enriched portion of the asd network and individual pharmaceutical groups were significantly different in network space . in pairwise permanova tests cbz and vnx groups were indistinguishable from each other . both of these groups, however, were significantly different from flx  after adjustment for family-wise type i error . further, both the cbz and vnx groups were statistically distinct from the non-enriched portion of the asd network , whereas the flx group was not significantly different from the non-enriched fraction of the asd-network . the basis for these results is graphically evident in a non-metric multidimensional scaling  dimension reduction of network space . we note that the cbz group and vnx groups have similar network characteristics with high degree centrality, betweenness centrality, stress, and radiality. conversely, the flx group  had particularly small responses for these variables, but high values for eccentricity, average shortest path length and clustering coefficient.

in human neuronal cells: mixture  and valproate - enhanced gene sets were more inter-connected than the overall network
to extend inference to human tissues, we extracted rna from human neuronal cells treated with a pcpp mixture  and valproate , and carried out transcriptome analysis. we then compared network characteristics of gene set groups, enriched by pharmaceuticals, both to each other, and to the overall network.

we found that both the mixture and vpa group locations were significantly higher than the overall network with respect to degree centrality, betweenness centrality, and stress. the mixture and vpa groups were, however, not statistically distinguishable from each other with respect to these measures .

we rejected the omnibus null hypothesis that collective asd network characteristics were equal for all groups, including the non-enriched portion of the asd network . pairwise differences among groups, however, were not significant after adjustment for family-wise type i error . characteristics of the vpa and mixture groups that may distinguish them from the overall asd network are evident in figure  <dig>  we note both vpa and mixture groups are split between genes that have higher degree centrality, betweenness centrality, closeness centrality, and radiality, and those--more representative of the non-enriched portion of the asd network--that have smaller outcomes for these measures.

discussion
researchers have identified many abnormal level of gene expression in the potential etiology of complex psychiatric disorders like asd  <cit> . due to many genetic factors like cnv deletions, mutations, allelic exclusion, or epigenetic silencing, the expression of synaptic proteins within the developing brain of a fetus might get altered  <cit> . this alteration in the level of synaptic proteins leads to the formation of abnormal neuronal circuits, which has been considered as one of the potential mechanism in asd  <cit> . other linked and association studies have found that these genetic factors are responsible for 2-3% of asd cases  <cit> , suggested the role to unknown environmental factors. therefore, environmental factors are likely to be a major determinant because they may interact in combination with other genetic  factors causing varying asd disease phenotypes  <cit> .

we believed that psychoactive pharmaceuticals at environmental concentrations may dysregulate the expression of key synaptic proteins that further disturb the process of synaptogenesis. we carried out preliminary studies on juvenile fathead minnow fish exposed with carbamazepine , venlafaxine  and fluoxetine  at concentrations, which were detected in the surface waters in us  <cit> . interestingly, along with significantly altered gene expression in exposed fish brains, we also observed a significant behavioral change in treated fish   <cit> . similar work has been done in zebrafish, which showed abnormal behavior after exposing them with valproic acid   <cit> . this suggested that psychoactive pharmaceuticals at environmental concentrations might be altering neuronal circuits by interacting with key genetic factors, thus caused different phenotypes in fish  <cit> .

in the context of fish brain tissues our primary hypothesis was that human homologs of protein products of genes in synaptic cells, perturbed by exposure of pharmaceuticals, would have distinct asd network parameters. to test this, we determined the extent to which protein products of genes from gene sets enhanced by individual pharmaceuticals in fish brains were interconnected in the asd-associated protein-protein interaction network. as predicted, ppcp-enhanced sets had higher degree, closeness, betweenness and stress than the overall network. further, we found that cbz and vnx groups had higher degree centrality, closeness centrality, stress and betweenness centrality than flx group, and were distinct from the flx group and the non-enriched portion of the asd-network in multivariate network space . interestingly, these distinctions were reflected by behavioral data in our previous study  <cit> . in this work, fish exposed to environmental concentrations of cbz and vnx displayed more agitated behavior  than fish exposed to environmental concentrations of flx  <cit> .

to extend these findings to human tissues, we cultured and differentiated human sk-n-sh neuronal cells and carried out transcriptome analysis after exposing them with the mixture  at environmental concentrations and valproate at a clinical dosage  <cit> . we then identified proteins groups significantly enriched in the presence of these pharmaceuticals, and quantified their importance in the asd protein-protein network. we chose valproate  as a treatment because prenatal exposure is associated with childhood autism  <cit> . mixture and valproate groups had greater importance  than the overall network . we note that half of the genes from mixture group were also in the valproate group . this suggests that the pcpp mixture would induce gene expression in cell cultures in a similar pattern to valproate.

carbamazepine is a mood stabilizer and anticonvulsant used in conjunction with valproate to treat bipolar disorders and epilepsy  <cit> . cbz and vpa block sodium channels, thus inhibit the epileptic effects in the brain  <cit> . cbz is present at very low concentrations in the surface waters of united states  <cit> , and may diffuse into groundwater  <cit> . because the mixture group  and valproate perturbed similar genes with relatively high network importance, we posit that 1) protein products of genes from both pcpp mixture and vpa serve as important nodes within the asd-associated network, 2) enrichment effects of clinical doses of vpa are similar to those for environmental concentrations of pharmaceutical mixtures, and 3) gene dysregulation caused by pcpps will have relatively profound effects on asd protein network because these genes would effect more downstream proteins when perturbed  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
genes connected to a large number of neighbors in the asd-associated protein-protein interaction network may play an important role in neuronal growth, development, and regulation. we found that protein products from gene sets with enriched expression in fish brains and human neuronal cells, due to an exposure of psychoactive pharmaceuticals, were comparatively more inter-connected to other neighboring proteins than protein products of non-enriched gene sets. thus, these genes are more likely to experience altered expression upon exposure to ppcps, causing further dysregulation of the whole interactome due to a ripple effect.

