BACKGROUND
clostridium difficile infections, with an annual occurrence in the us of over  <dig> , cause potentially fatal diarrhea and colitis  <cit> . these pathologies arise from the release of two potent, homologous, protein toxins—tcda and tcdb—into the host gut. another toxin, binary toxin, is associated with higher patient fatality rates, yet binary toxin alone is not sufficient to cause disease in animal models  <cit> . the interactions of tcda and tcdb with many cell types lead to disease, yet the relative sensitivities and roles of different cell types remain poorly understood. both toxins disrupt the epithelial barrier by causing epithelial cells to round and detach  <cit> . neutrophil infiltration and activation of other immune cells, driven by inflammatory signals, are also key to toxin-induced enteritis  <cit> . though several molecular mediators of disease have been identified, little is understood about the host cell dynamics and the role of each cell type involved  <cit> . to explore the toxins’ effects on different cells, facets of the host response have been studied using cell lines treated with tcda and/or tcdb . most of these assays used in previous studies are limited to few time points, and since both toxins affect cells rapidly , it is unknown if either toxin has additional effects on finer time scales and if any of these effects are consistent across cell lines at comparable concentrations.

assays or methods that record measurements with high temporal frequency reveal small, but potentially important changes that would go unnoticed in endpoint assays. for example, live cell imaging or high-content screening methods produce near-continuous, sensitive readouts of different cellular responses. we and others have tracked temporal changes in cell morphology and attachment in response to tcda or tcdb by continuously measuring electrical impedance across the surface of a cell culture  <cit> . in this method, cells are grown on top of a bed of electrodes covering a large portion of the surface of a well. the media completes the circuit between electrodes. when cells grow or increase their footprint or adherence, electrical current cannot as easily pass between electrodes and the electrical impedance rises. cell rounding, shrinking, and/or death decrease impedance. it is important to note that impedance data alone does not measure one particular cell interaction . impedance is affected by a combination of many variables. however, because of the high sensitivity and precision provided, impedance data has been used as a sensitive diagnostic to detect the presence of a toxin—as a more quantitative replacement of assays that are dependent on visualization of cell rounding.

in this study, we recognize that this impedance data, in addition to indirectly detecting the amount of toxin in samples, can further be analyzed to reveal previously unrecognized, dynamic responses of host cells. our analyses and associated metrics also allow precise comparisons between the effects of tcda and tcdb and between different cell types. using epithelial and endothelial cells, these analyses identify characteristics such as the minimal effective toxin concentrations and the shortest time to measurable toxin effects; standard curves with wide dynamic ranges can also be derived. impedance changes of other cells, such as macrophages, are not as easily linked to known cell functions, but the data reveal toxin effects that would not otherwise be observed at lower temporal resolution. this understanding contextualizes the potential roles and relative abilities of different cell types to respond directly to toxin during an infection.

impedance curves that profile cell responses also provide insight into the toxins’ molecular functions. tcda and tcdb have glucosyltransferase domains that inactivate small gtpases. with the use of engineered mutant toxins, glucosyltransferase activity has been found necessary for cell rounding  <cit> . however, evidence that some glucosyltransferase-deficient mutants of tcdb  are cytotoxic has raised questions about whether there are other, previously unknown toxin activities  <cit> . in order to identify changes dependent and independent of glucosyltransferase activity, we use gdtcdb to evaluate the dynamics of the response of macrophage and an epithelial cell line to gdtcdb. we also leverage the unique response profiles to tcda, tcdb, and gdtcdb in order to investigate synergy or antagonism between toxins.

the cell response profiles define the dynamics of basic changes in cell physiology  across multiple cell types in response to tcda, tcdb, and gdtcdb. this understanding identifies those times most representative of the entire cell response, delineates the contribution of glucosyltransferase activity to overall toxin effects, and suggests the relative roles of various cells during toxin-mediated disease.

methods
cell culture
our experiments include huvecs, cho cells, hct <dig> cells, t <dig> cells, or an immortalized, cecal, mouse epithelial cell line . hct- <dig> cells were cultured in rpmi- <dig> supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum  and 1 mm sodium pyruvate. j774a. <dig> cells were cultured in dmem high glucose media supplemented with 10% hi-fbs, 1 mm sodium pyruvate, and mem nonessential amino acids . huvec cells  were cultured in endothelial growth medium . t <dig> cells were grown in an equal mixture of ham’s f <dig> and dulbecco’s modified eagle’s media supplemented with  <dig>  mm l-glutamine and 5% hi-fbs. all cells were incubated at 37°c/5% co <dig>  in our analyses, we include our previous data from imce cells which were derived by becker et al. and incubated at 33°c as described previously  <cit> . for experiments with neutrophils , procedures were approved by the university of virginia institutional review board for health science research and each donor gave written consent. tcda and tcdb, isolated and purified from strain vpi- <dig>  were a generous gift from david lyerly . recombinant gdtcdb  and tcdb were a generous gift from the laboratory of aimee shen. all reported results are from experiments using native tcdb. the cytopathic effects of recombinant tcdb was confirmed using hct- <dig> cells .

electrical impedance assay
impedance was measured using the xcelligence rtca system , which consists of an rtca dp analyzer and 16-well e-plates. pbs was added around all wells to prevent evaporation. in each well, 100 μl media was incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes, and one baseline reading was taken. cells in 100 μl media were then added and allowed to settle at room temperature for 30 minutes. cells were allowed to grow directly on electrodes, without coating, in order to provide the most direct measurement of changes in cell morphology and/or adherence. plates were then moved inside the rtca dp analyzer inside a co <dig> incubator at 37°c. subsequent readings were taken at frequencies ranging between every 4 seconds to every 10 minutes, with higher frequency measurements reserved for times directly before toxin addition to at least 6 hours after addition .

since the impedance measurements are sensitive to slight movements or vibrations, the method by which toxin was added to cells was an important consideration. in our initial experiments, mechanical agitation and replacement of media sometimes caused small, sharp spikes in electrical impedance. to minimize disturbances, plates were not removed from the rtca analyzer once the experiment was begun. toxins prepared in media  were gently pipetted using only one or two depressions. media was not replaced after the addition of toxin.

cell viability
viability was assessed by the ability of cells to metabolize a colorless tetrazolium salt to formazen, an orange-colored product . in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions,  <dig> μl of cck- <dig> solution was added to  <dig> μl wells and incubated for 1 h before measuring the absorbance at 450 nm. viability is reported as the percentage of signal of untreated cells. lysed cells did not produce any signal.

analyses
the protocols, data, computer code, and instructions for running the code that reproduce all results and figures are provided in the additional file  <dig>  due to the volume of data , the standard deviation is visualized as shaded regions.

RESULTS
quantification of the cytopathic effects elicited by tcda and tcdb
in order to assess the cytopathic effects of tcda and tcdb, we measured changes in impedance across the surface of electrode-embedded wells . impedance is dependent upon cell number, adherence, and morphology. it increases as cells proliferate or spread, and it decreases when toxin is added and cells round up . the rate at which impedance decreases is dependent on the toxin, toxin concentration, and cell type . to summarize the data-rich “impedance curves”, we calculated simple metrics: the area between the curves of control and toxin-treated cells  and the maximum slope of a curve . both metrics produce log-linear calibration curves . a negative abc indicates that the impedance curves of toxin-treated cells are below the curves of untreated cells. blue, dashed lines in figure 2c show the variability of the abc of control cells from their average impedance curve. standard curves relating the time for impedance to drop by 50%  to toxin concentration have been generated before  <cit> , yet we found that small experimental error in recording times at which toxin was added directly translated to errors in td <dig>  however, maxs was more consistent between replicates. in simpler terms, for replicates within and between experiments, the time required to observe a change in impedance was more variable than the rate of that change. the other metric, abc, captures long-term effects by integrating readings over several hours. the minimal concentration to induce an observable change in impedance from control is denoted as the minimal cytopathic concentration . when abc and maxs are considered together, toxin concentration can be determined with a dynamic range spanning six orders of magnitude or more . together, these metrics allow for thousands of data points and hundreds of wells to be simultaneously visualized and summarized to dozens or fewer of numbers that can be easily interpreted .figure  <dig> 
measurement of toxins’ cytopathic effects by tracking electrical impedance across the surface of a cell culture. all impedance readings were divided by the impedance at the time toxin was added . shaded regions above and below lines represent the standard deviation of technical replicates . readings were taken as quickly as every four seconds . the brightness of each photograph was adjusted digitally  to make the overall brightness across all photographs similar.
quantification of cytopathic effects.  the cytopathic effects between cell types and toxins can easily be distinguished.  the impedance curves can be analyzed to produce two metrics, abc and maxs, which can then be used to define the minimal cytopathic concentration .  the mcc of tcda and tcdb for five cell lines define cell line specific sensitivities.



epithelial and endothelial cells: similar characteristic responses but different sensitivities to tcda and tcdb
in the first set of comparisons, we chose four well-characterized cell types or cell lines—one endothelial  and three epithelial —and one immortalized, cecal, mouse epithelial cell line . for these five cell lines, the mcc for tcda and tcdb varied over ranges of  <dig> -1 ng/ml and  <dig> -100 pg/ml, respectively . we did not find a maximal effective concentration of either toxin . tcdb was consistently 100– <dig> times more potent than tcda, except in t <dig> cells, which were equally sensitive to tcda and tcdb . the curves were largely similar in that they all consisted of a short delay followed by a sharp decrease that then leveled off ; differences were primarily in scale. determining the time to the onset of the first toxin effects was complicated slightly by the physical process of adding toxins to wells—a process which caused disturbances that temporarily affected impedance . nevertheless, differences between control and toxin-treated cells can be distinguished. across all cell types, the time required for an impedance curve to diverge from control was more than ten minutes. nothing clearly suggested an immediate response to toxin binding. morphological changes might not occur until after toxins enter cells and act intracellularly. we next examined early effects of toxins on macrophages and investigated the contribution of glucosyltransferase activity to the dynamics of cell responses.

macrophages: rapid, sensitive, complex concentration-dependent responses to tcda and tcdb
j <dig> mouse macrophages were as sensitive and responsive to tcda and tcdb as epithelial cells. the impedance of macrophages treated with tcda  and tcdb  diverged from controls in  <dig> and 20 minutes, respectively . in contrast to epithelial cells, however, the impedance of macrophages increased after toxin addition , and the responses of j <dig> cells to tcda and tcdb differed in shape and scale. tcda caused a rise in impedance at  <dig>  ng/ml, and the magnitude and speed of this rise increased until tcda concentration reached 100 ng/ml . the elevated impedance correlated with spreading and protrusions from macrophages . at higher concentrations , the slope of the rise continued to increase, yet the rise was inhibited, as if stopped prematurely before reaching its peak, and then impedance dropped below that of control cells . this decrease at 24 h correlated with a loss of viable cells . the unexplained, increased viability at 4 h may be due to altered metabolism of j <dig> cells. tcdb at  <dig> ,  <dig>  and 10 ng/ml caused impedance to rise and stabilize at approximately double the initial value; only the slope of the rise  was affected by toxin concentration . like tcda, cell spreading correlated with elevated impedance. unlike tcda, the concentrations of tcdb that caused increased impedance did not result in any loss of viable cells .figure  <dig> 
macrophage responses to tcda and tcdb.  impedance curves from a range of tcda and tcdb concentrations. both graphs represent one experiment where confluent cells were treated with toxin .  replicates experiments were performed in transparent wells for brightfield microscopy. the viability of cells as measured by the cck- <dig> assay  is shown in the bar charts beneath the microscopy images.



at  <dig> and 1000 ng/ml of tcdb, the impedance curves were entirely different than lower concentrations. instead of rising, impedance fell. this characteristic correlated with a loss of viability . hence, at or between  <dig> and 100 ng/ml, the response of macrophages to tcdb switches from cell stretching and increased adherence to a degradation of cell structure and loss of viability.

tcdb glucosyltransferase activity is required for full cytopathic effects in hct <dig> epithelial cells
since the cytopathic effects of tcda and tcdb have been attributed to their glucosyltransferase activities, we expected that gdtcdb would not cause cell rounding. indeed, the responses of hct <dig> cells treated with gdtdcb-treated  and untreated cells were indiscernible in the first ten hours after toxin addition . after five days, gdtcdb at 1000 ng/ml did eventually cause cytopathic effects . however, it is not clear if such a slow effect is glucosyltransferase-independent or is due to residual toxin activity. nevertheless, glucosyltransferase activity is required for the full, rapid cytopathic effect of tcdb in hct <dig> cells.figure  <dig> 
response of hct <dig> epithelial cells and j <dig> macrophages to tcda + gdtcdb, and tcdb + gdtcdb.  confluent hct <dig> cells treated with toxins .  confluent j <dig> cells treated with toxins .



a glucosyltransferase-independent tcdb mechanism decreases macrophage viability
we next determined glucosyltransferase-dependent toxin effects on j <dig> macrophages. gdtcdb at 1 ng/ml did not cause macrophages to change their morphology as did tcdb . at 10 ng/ml, gdtcdb slightly raises impedance, yet the overall structure and viability of cells was similar to untreated cells . however, gdtcdb at 100 ng/ml resulted in a loss of intact and viable macrophages, similar to tcdb at 100 ng/ml . hence, glucosyltransferase activity is required for macrophage stretching. however, at or above 100 ng/ml, a glucosyltransferase-independent mechanism of tcdb triggers a rapid loss of viability in j <dig> macrophages.figure  <dig> 
macrophage responses to tcda and tcdb.  changes in impedance and of confluent j <dig> cells in response to gdtcdb and tcdb  a replicate experiment in transparent wells for brightfield microscopy and viability assays. controls are the same as in figure  <dig> 



gdtcdb delays tcda’s effects in epithelial cells
to investigate if tcda and tcdb have overlapping activity, we performed experiments with gdtcdb plus tcda or tcdb. we anticipated that gdtcdb would attenuate or delay the effects of tcdb and perhaps tcda. indeed, a tenfold excess gdtcdb delayed the onset of the effects of tcda and tcdb in hct <dig> cells .

with j <dig> macrophages, gdtcdb in 100-fold excess did not clearly delay the effects of tcdb at  <dig>  ng/ml . in two other experiments, the average rise in impedance with gdtcdb + tcdb was delayed from the rise with tcdb alone, yet the short duration of the delay  and the variability of replicates made it difficult to definitively show that gdtcdb delays the effects of tcdb in j <dig> macrophages . higher gdtcdb concentrations could not be used since they would decrease cell viability . gdtcdb did not delay the effects of tcda .

discussion
in this study we systematically profiled the dynamic responses of epithelial, endothelial, and macrophage cell lines to tcda and tcdb, revealing relative sensitivities and complex concentration-dependent cell responses. the impedance “response profiles” provide continuous readouts representing external changes in morphology and adherence that occur from a combination of several changes within the cell. we explored how glucosyltransferase activity contributes to these changes by using gdtcdb. the response profiles raise many questions about the mechanisms for the differences we observed. although addressing each of these in detail is beyond the scope of this study, we highlight, in the following text, the findings that bring about these questions, discuss their relevance to previous studies, and explain how they improve our current understanding of host cell responses to tcda and tcdb.

the cytopathic effects of tcda and tcdb are the gold standard diagnostic for infection  <cit> . however, the kinetics of these effects have typically been characterized at a limited number of time points. with a continuous assay, we were better able to observe immediate effects of toxin. although toxins may interact immediately with the cell surface, the morphological differences  occurred after a delay of ten minutes or more. since tcda  has been found to enter ht <dig> cells in 5– <dig> minutes, the delay we observed is likely because toxins must enter hct <dig> cells to alter their morphology  <cit> . also, in our experiments with more than one toxin, gdtcdb often delayed the onset of cytopathic effects by one hour or less. without high temporal resolution, we would have likely missed the time window in which tcdb + gtcdb was different than tcdb alone. hence, without precisely tracking changes in cell impedance, several molecules or proteins that delay or accelerate toxin effects could be missed.

epithelial and endothelial cell lines had similar morphological changes, yet the rapidity of the changes distinguished different cell types, toxin concentrations, and tcda versus tcdb. these differences could be summarized by condensing the data into metrics that represented the greatest rate of the change  and the cumulative amount of change over several hours . when these metrics are considered together, standard curves over many orders of magnitude can be used to measure toxin concentration and determine the minimal amount of toxin necessary to induce an effect . the cho cell line was second-most sensitive to tcdb, making cho cells a good choice for toxin detection. indeed, a modified cho cell line was used in the development of an ultrasensitive assay of toxin activity  <cit> . t <dig> cells, the least sensitive to tcdb, were similarly sensitive to tcda and tcdb, as has been found previously  <cit> . for tcdb, the two rodent cell lines  were more sensitive than the three human cell lines , although more cell lines would be needed to confirm any species-specific sensitivity. for tcda, cell line sensitivities were less variable than for tcdb, indicating that factors that make cells vulnerable to tcda may be more consistent between cell lines.

comparisons between tcda and tcdb have often been a prominent research focus. tcdb is more cytotoxic in cell culture; tcda is more enterotoxic in animal intoxication models  <cit> ; and there are varying results about which toxin is essential for c. difficile infection  <cit> . by correlating differences in host cell responses to differences in disease severity, particular cell types or toxin activities can be prioritized. for instance, tcda is more enterotoxic than tcdb in mice and hamster ceca  <cit> . this observation agrees with findings that tcda binds more strongly than tcdb in the hamster intestine  <cit> . one might then expect that cecal epithelial cells from mice of the same genetic background as those used in the aforementioned in vivo studies  would be more sensitive to tcda than tcdb. instead, imce cells were over  <dig> times more sensitive to tcdb than tcda, suggesting that factors in addition to the cytopathic effects on epithelial cells are important in explaining the pathologies of toxins in vivo. the extracellular environment or other cell types may be the key mediators determining disease severity.

previous studies have quantified the viability of either tcda- or tcdb-treated macrophages at one or two time points  <cit> . in our results, tcda or tcdb rapidly induced macrophages to increase adherence and/or spread. after 24 h or more of tcda or tcdb  treatment, macrophages became larger and more circular. the decreased impedance with tcda was correlated with a partial loss of viability. this result agrees in part with melo filo et al. who reported that tcda and tcdb killed 30% and 60%, respectively, of primary mouse macrophages   <cit> . in our experiments with j <dig> cells, tcdb-treated cells at 10 ng/ml or less remained viable, and tcdb-treated cells at or above 100 ng/ml lossed nearly all viability. the balance of morphological changes and increased adherence versus death likely account for the complex rise and fall of impedance in toxin-treated macrophages.

tcdb caused two distinct responses in j <dig> macrophages: stretching  or a loss of viability . siffert et al. showed tcdb-treated, human macrophages “arborize”, or stretch, with little loss of viability   <cit> . it is possible that tcdb also causes two distinct responses in human macrophages, but siffert et al. only reported results at one concentration. although much remains to be determined about the mechanisms of these effects, early stimulation of macrophages may be associated with acute inflammation, while eventual death correlates with macrophage depletion and neutrophil accumulation in c. difficile-associated diarrhea  <cit> .

the cell responses described above prompted questions about potential responses that are independent of the toxins’ glucosyltransferase activity. only after several days were we able to observed cytotoxic or cytopathic effects of gdtcdb in hct <dig> cells. chumbler et al. found that glucosyltransferase mutants were cytotoxic to hela cells after only  <dig>  h  <cit> . the different cell types  and different glucosyltransferase mutants may account for the differences in timing. the effects of mutant toxins have never been assessed over such long time scales with such great sensitivity.

since tcda and tcdb are homologous, one might expect that gdtcdb should interfere with tcda. indeed, in hct <dig> cells, gdtcdb delayed the cytopathic effects of tcda and tcdb. although impedance data alone do not show that a direct or toxin-specific molecular interaction is responsible for the delay, one possible interpretation of this result is that tcda and tcdb compete for cell entry. however, two studies using truncated toxins found that the c-termini of each toxin  do not inhibit internalization of the other toxin  <cit> . since the glucosyltransferase domains of tcda and tcdb share substrates, another possible interpretation is that the toxins compete after internalization. indeed, blocking glucosyltransferase activity would reduce the cytopathic effects as is shown with gdtcdb. however, as described below, glucosyltransferase activity may not be required for all toxin effects in all cell types.

since macrophages detect a variety of antigens, one might expect that the responses to toxin might not be entirely dependent on glucosyltransferase activity. the stretching of macrophages with tcdb concentrations at or below 10 ng/ml required glucosyltransferase activity. however, tcdb at or above 100 ng/ml destroyed macrophage structure by an unknown, glucosyltransferase-independent mechanism.

the high sensitivity of epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and macrophages to tcda and tcdb suggests they could be damaged by direct toxin interaction in the host. however, the location of toxin during infection is poorly understood. with sensitivities of cells reaching as low as 100 pg/ml, tracking toxins by immunohistochemistry is technically challenging  <cit> . assessing sensitivities in vitro provides an indirect measure of the roles of cell types in isolation. additionally, tcda and tcdb initiate a cascade of deleterious events involving multiple cells. neuronal signals have been implicated in beginning the disease process, stimulating mast cells or macrophages that may then recruit other cells  <cit> . neutrophil infiltration is a hallmark of intoxication, yet neutrophils in vitro require much higher toxin concentrations to be recruited   <cit> . to confirm the low sensitivity of neutrophils, we attempted to measure impedance changes of neutrophils in response to toxins, yet the variability in these primarily non-adherent cells was too high to identify differences . elements of the toxin responses of other cell types  have been studied, yet the dynamics of their responses—and in some cases concentration-dependent effects—are unknown. in the future, precisely capturing the time and concentration-dependent responses to tcda and tcdb will better contextualize their potential roles in the host.

CONCLUSIONS
our analyses of endothelial cells, epithelial cells, and macrophages in the same experimental framework set a precedent for high-temporal resolution comparisons of the effects of clostridium difficile tcda and tcdb. we precisely determine the relative sensitivity of various epithelial cell lines, showing an overall greater tcdb sensitivity with few exceptions. interestingly, an immortalized mouse epithelial cell line is more sensitive to tcdb although mice injected with toxin are more sensitive to tcda. using gdtcdb, we found that glucosyltransferase activity is necessary for the rapid cytopathic effects of hct <dig> epithelial cells or the rapid spreading of j <dig> macrophage-like cells. however, the ability of gdtcdb to decrease j <dig> cell viability indicates a glucosyltransferase-independent mechanism contributes to cell death. additionally, responses of j <dig> cells to tcda and tcdb were characteristically different, suggesting important differences in toxin mechanism and/or targets in these cells. in the future, the framework and simple analyses in this study may also be used to investigate synergy, antagonism, or interactions between bacterial toxins and other host factors that affect cells over a wide range of time scales.

additional file
additional file 1: 
supplement.




competing interests

the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions

kd and mb performed computational and statistical analyses and drafted the manuscript. kd made all figures and wrote the supplement. kd, mb, yr, mg, and eo performed experiments. kd, jp, and eh conceived of the study. kd, mb, yr, mg, jp, and eh participated in the study design and coordination. all authors edited drafts and approved the final manuscript.

