BACKGROUND
the emergence of phenotypic divergence among populations of the same species, especially in features important for reproduction, is a central concept in speciation  <cit> . this is because the accumulation of phenotypic changes in different populations is often critical for instigating—and subsequently maintaining—reproductive isolation between populations. there are three possible ways by which phenotypic differentiation might originate among populations: via sexual selection, natural selection, or genetic drift. in the case of sexual selection, there is extensive evidence from numerous taxa that shows sexual selection can elaborate or otherwise increase the magnitude of characteristics that influence an animal’s reproductive success . populations that differ in the intensity of sexual selection should subsequently differ in the elaboration or size of characteristics that influence reproduction . however, natural selection on the same features can have different effects. in particular, sexually selected features are often conspicuous to both prospective mates and predators , and differences in predation pressure among populations can subsequently determine the extent to which ornaments can be elaborated by sexual selection  <cit> .

in addition to the phenotypic variance caused by sexual and natural selection, populations can diverge from one another through the process of neutral evolution. here, divergence between populations occurs as the direct accumulation of genetic drift. the extent to which neutral evolution in itself might ultimately instigate reproductive isolation among populations is debatable  <cit> . however, theoretical models and a growing number of empirical studies have begun to link population variation in mating and territorial signals to neutral genetic differentiation among populations  <cit> . at the very least, then, neutral evolution among populations represents an important null model that should be considered in studies of population divergence. conversely, populations experiencing high gene flow or those that have only recently become isolated from one another are expected to exhibit little phenotypic divergence due to the homogenizing effect of dispersing individuals mating among populations or because mutations have yet to arise in populations to cause phenotypic divergence  <cit> . in this context, populations may appear phenotypically ill suited  to their local selection environments unless characteristics are plastic. without an adequate understanding of the history of connectivity among populations, interpreting an apparent lack of response to selection or a response that might be plastic in origin would subsequently be difficult.

taken together, sexual selection, natural selection and the degree of genetic differentiation exhibited by populations each have the potential to culminate in  phenotypic variation among geographically separated populations within the same species. while some of these variables have been examined individually—most notably sexual selection—any study wishing to adequately identify the origin  of phenotypic divergence among populations needs to consider all three effects simultaneously . we did so here for several reproductively important characters in a fish, the pacific leaping blenny . this species is a highly social fish that lives its adult life on land and at high densities along the rocky foreshores of the island of guam. as a model system, the pacific leaping blenny offers a unique opportunity to study sexual selection and natural selection for the following reasons.

first, despite several key adaptations that allows the pacific leaping blenny to thrive on land  it is still vulnerable to desiccation and is subsequently confined to the intertidal rocks within the splash zone around the island. the fish is further limited by fluctuations in tide level and air temperature: at high and low tides, movement on exposed rocks is inhibited, while at high and low temperatures there is an increased chance of desiccation or it is too cold for terrestrial activity  <cit> . this brief, variable window of activity means the pacific leaping blenny is under considerable time pressure to find mates and acquire other resources needed for reproduction . any shift in the number of mates or competitor density in a population should subsequently translate into large effects on the intensity of sexual selection experienced by fish in that population.

second, the pacific leaping blenny is acutely vulnerable to predation on land  <cit> . most of its activity is spent out in the open on exposed rocks. predators include birds, predatory land crabs and lizards . any differences among populations in predation pressure should also have important consequences for the extent to which populations can express conspicuous ornamentation. in particular, both sexes rely on flashing a large, bright red dorsal fin during courtship and aggressive interactions  <cit> . this red dorsal fin is highly conspicuous against the rocky background on which fish are typically viewed  <cit> . the flash of red during dorsal fin displays makes an otherwise cryptically coloured fish highly localisable.

furthermore, previous research on the pacific leaping blenny has shown clear differences in the intensity of red in the dorsal fin, the overall size of the dorsal fin and the size of a prominent head crest in males between two populations separated by only a few kilometres  <cit> . extensive behavioural observations inferred that population differences in some of these ornamental features were probably attributable to differences in mating competition . the potential cause of variation in other characteristics was less obvious , suggesting some other factor has limited ornament expression in some populations but not others .

in this study, we intensively surveyed five populations around the island of guam and measured morphological and ornamental characteristics that included: body size, dorsal fin size, the proportion of the dorsal fin that was conspicuously coloured, the chromatic properties of the dorsal fin  and the size of the male head crest. we used sex ratio and competitor density to estimate the opportunity for sexual selection. “flight” distance  and the number of predator hits to realistic blenny models distributed in the environment  <cit>  were used to estimate the intensity of natural selection from predation on each population. to evaluate the consequences of genetic differentiation  on phenotypic divergence among populations, we used data from microsatellite loci and selected populations that were distributed around the island at various distances from one another .

RESULTS
our analyses were done in three parts. first we evaluated how phenotypic characteristics were related to one another to inform our selection of characteristics for further study . second, we determined whether the allometries of ornaments within populations were consistent with characteristics under sexual selection. finally, we tested whether indices of sexual selection, natural selection  or genetic differentiation accounted for population variation in selected phenotypic characteristics.

principal component analysis
the relationship between phenotypic characteristics was assessed using principal component analysis . pcas generally revealed two independent axes of phenotypic variation, one relating to characteristics of size  and another relating to characteristics of colour . mean and standard deviations for all characteristics are provided in additional file 1: table s <dig>  based on these results, we selected body size, head crest size, and dorsal fin redness as representative features to examine phenotypic differentiation among populations as a function of variation in selection .

prominent loadings  are highlighted in bold. characteristics highlighted by an asterisk were examined in population differentiation analyses .

allometry
in a power function of the size of a morphological feature, y, on overall body size, x  the allometric exponent, b, represents the proportional growth of that feature relative to an animal’s body size within a population. ornaments under sexual selection are expected to exhibit positive exponents of  <dig>  or greater  <cit> . in the same power function, the allometric elevation, a, reflects the overall size of a feature in respect to body size for a population. sexual selection on the exponent would presumably lead to increases in elevation over evolutionary time as well .

as predicted for a sexually selected ornament, the allometric exponents of male head crest size and male dorsal fin size within a population were all greater than  <dig>  . we also compared these exponents with a control region—the ventral fin—to provide an additional benchmark of the extent to which head crest and dorsal fin exponents might reflect sexual selection and not some other phenomenon . again, consistent with ornaments subject to sexual selection, the computed 95% confidence intervals for the majority of male head crest and male dorsal fin exponents did not overlap the confidence intervals of exponents computed for the ventral fin control region. there were some exceptions. first, neither the head crest nor dorsal fin of males from the talofofo population could be reliably identified as exhibiting exponents greater than the control ventral fin . this population also had the lowest recorded sex ratio, which implies competition among males for females was low . second, the dorsal fin of males from umatac was also indistinguishable from the estimated exponent for the control ventral fin, but the exponent of the head crest for this population was the largest estimated exponent for any population and any morphological feature .

nb: females lack a headcrest. coefficients with 95% confidence intervals that do not overlap the confidence intervals of the ventral fin are highlight with an asterisk.

allometric exponents for female dorsal fin area were also positive, but lower than  <dig>  and had computed 95% confidence intervals that overlapped the confidence intervals of the ventral fin control region.

comparison of the estimated elevations for head crest area, dorsal fin area and ventral fin area was not relevant because the size of these features were different . however, comparisons can be made for the same feature between the sexes, and this revealed strong male-biased size dimorphism in both the dorsal and ventral fin .

overall, male head crest area and dorsal fin area exhibited allometries consistent with sexually selected features, in both the magnitude of exponents and sexual dimorphism in elevations . the particularly large allometric exponents for male head crest area  also reaffirmed our selection of this characteristic for the study of phenotypic differentiation among populations . in contrast, the allometry of female dorsal fin area could not be reliably distinguished from features that were not sexually selected .

population divergence in phenotype
we evaluated the extent and cause of divergence in phenotype among our five populations using a model selection approach. models with the lowest aic value were considered the best supported models, although any model within two units of these lowest models  were also considered biologically viable models . when the null model in model sets obtained compelling support , we followed up with mantel tests to determine whether phenotypic variation among populations was correlated with genetic differentiation.

overall, predation , sex ratio and the null model were generally ranked as the highest models accounting for phenotypic variation among populations in both sexes. however, the nature of relationships was not straightforward and only population differences in head crest allometry and the redness of the dorsal fin in males could be reasonably attributed to differences in selection. genetic differentiation among populations as measured using dest was extremely low . this result effectively excluded at the outset the possibility that neutral genetic drift among populations might account for any phenotypic divergence since there was virtually no genetic differentiation between populations. we detail the results for our three representative phenotypic characteristics below.
dest comparisons among the five sampled populations

body size
the highest ranked model for both male and female body size was one that predicted population differences in size as a function of differences in predation pressure among populations  suggesting that attacks to the blenny models were a reasonable reflection of blenny-specific predation). sex ratio was another plausible predictor of male size , while the null model was also ranked highly for female size . but the effects of all of these models were not especially compelling: effect sizes were all small and often counter-intuitive in their direction of influence. for example, we might expect that predation leads to a general decrease in body size, but the direction of influence highlighted by effect sizes and visual inspection of plots suggested a positive relationship between predation and body size . populations under high predation pressure could exhibit increased mean body size if predation resulted in high juvenile mortality . however, predation was explicitly measured on adults , so this explanation is unlikely. similarly, while the null model ranked comparatively high for both sexes, subsequent mantel tests revealed little relationship with neutral genetic differentiation among populations . this was not surprising given the almost complete lack of genetic differentiation among populations .

model support was evaluated using akaike’s information criterion . effect sizes indicating the magnitude and direction of effects are reported for models receiving the most support  and shown graphically in figure  <dig>  models that included a random effect for population are highlighted with an asterisk.

in short, no selection model or neutral evolution model provided a convincing explanation for body size variation among populations.

head crest allometry
we used the computed allometry elevations and exponents as population-level dependent variables . as male head crests are relatively small, they are difficult to identify from a distance and, as such, we assumed they would not increase susceptibility to predation independently of body size . sex ratio was clearly the only compelling model explaining variation in the exponent of male head crest allometry, with a positive and very large effect size . as competition for females increased among males in a population, the magnitude of the allometric exponent has increased across populations , inferring that the exaggeration of the head crest is the product of sexual selection.

in contrast, no selection model provided a compelling explanation for the allometric elevation of the head crest . here, only the null model obtained any support . a subsequent mantel test failed to provide any evidence that differences in head crest elevation was instead a by-product of neutral genetic differentiation among populations .

r
mantel tests were used to determine whether supported null models in table  <dig> reflected instances of neutral evolution.

dorsal fin redness 
the null model, predation pressure  and to some extent sex ratio were plausible models accounting for population variation in the intensity of dorsal fin redness in both sexes . mantel tests ruled out any relationship between population differentiation in fin colouration and neutral genetic differentiation among populations . the next best supported models after the predation only and null models were sex ratio or a more complex model that incorporated both predation and sex ratio .in males, plots suggested that, in general, the intensity of dorsal fin redness decreased with predation pressure and increased with increasingly male-biased sex ratios . in females, the relationship between dorsal fin redness and predation was unclear, but there was a negative trend evident between dorsal fin redness and sex ratio . these general trends were broadly consistent with the prediction that sexual selection  should increase the conspicuousness of ornaments, while predation should decrease the conspicuousness of ornaments.however, one population—talofofo—was clearly an outlier in figure 3c and the interpretation of relationships was highly dependent on whether this population was included or excluded: in males, its inclusion could have increased support for the null model; in females, its inclusion could have increased support for the sex ratio model. we repeated our model fittings with this population removed. overall model ranks remained unchanged, but only the predator model received any credible support for either sex.

taken together, the underlying causes of population variation in dorsal fin redness appeared complex, with some support for the negative influence of predation and—perhaps—the positive influence of sexual selection.

discussion
before the implications of our findings can be fully appreciated, we need to first interpret the absence of genetic differentiation among populations. while ecological barriers isolate adult populations, the pacific leaping blenny has a roughly one month pelagic larval phase . during this larval phase, larvae have the capacity to disperse several hundred kilometers around the island . given the distance between our furthest populations was less than a hundred kilometers and that pelagic larval dispersal is a well-known cause of high genetic connectivity among marine fish , the lack of genetic differentiation among populations of pacific leaping blenny almost certainly reflects contemporary gene flow rather than the recent isolation of populations .

this high gene flow among populations is significant because the general assumption has been that populations only phenotypically diverge in the absence of the homogenizing effects of gene flow  <cit> . this in turn predicts that features that might facilitate reproductive isolation are unlikely to evolve if members from different populations frequently mate with one another. this has generated considerable debate over the extent to which adaptive differentiation might occur in response to geographic gradients in selection  and the likelihood of sympatric speciation occurring in nature  <cit> . yet there are compelling examples of both adaptive differentiation among parapatric populations and speciation occurring without geographic isolation  <cit> . the question is whether these are special cases or whether adaptive differentiation is more common in the presence of gene flow than currently assumed.

our results suggest that phenotypic divergence among populations of the pacific leaping blenny has resulted from a complex interaction of natural and sexual selection, and in the presence of high gene flow among populations . sexual selection measured by male-biased sex ratios was clearly associated with population divergence in the exaggeration of the male head crest, and has also potentially increased the conspicuousness of the dorsal fin colouration in males and females. in contrast, natural selection operating through predation appears to have dampened the conspicuousness of dorsal fin colouration in at least males.

the strong, positive correlation between male head crest allometry and sex ratio reflects an increase in ornament size as population sex ratios became increasingly skewed towards males. this implies that greater competition for females has led to an increase in the investment made by large males in the size of the head crest . males defend rock holes from other males and attempt to entice females to enter and spawn in these holes through an elaborate head-nodding display. the head crest is clearly visible during this display and presumably an additional feature used by females to assess the quality of males. yet this divergence among populations in ornament size has occurred in the presence of high gene flow. presumably, a large adult male from talofofo would have more difficulty in mating with females at umatac or pago because he would be competing with more males and males with larger head crests . the question that follows is the extent differences in head crest allometry  are genetic or plastic in origin. a high rate of larval dispersal among populations, as suggested by our genetic data, implies ornaments are plastic. such plasticity would likely be dependent on a population sex ratio that is in itself temporally variable . all populations might therefore share the same underlying  allometry in head crest expression, but the observed investment in large head crests by large males  depends on the level of competition for mates in a given population at a given point in time. that is, the density of males dictates the extent to which male larvae settling at that location subsequently invest in the exaggeration of the head crest. this is not to say that plasticity breaks the allometric constraint associated with ornament development , rather that the extent males “choose” to invest to reach their maximum potential ornament size varies by population. this type of plasticity has been demonstrated for other sexually selected characteristics , but has generally not been considered in the context of the allometry of ornaments . if ornamentation is developmentally plastic, then ornament divergence among populations might still limit reproduction among adults from different populations, but genetic isolation would only occur if larval dispersal connecting populations was disrupted in some way. in this sense, plasticity in ornament expression has the potential to facilitate future reproductive isolation among populations if ocean currents or the nature of storm surges facilitating larval dispersal were to change around guam . future studies on the pacific leaping blenny will need to assess the extent to which the size of the head crest is plastic and the implications of this for reproductive isolation among populations.

the population differences in the allometric exponent of head crest size, but not its allometric elevation, has other implications as well. classically, evolutionary change in the allometric exponent of sexually selected features was believed to be constrained by the very developmental costs believed to produce the distinctive pattern of positive allometry in ornaments . these costs should be less apparent in the allometric elevation of ornaments, which should subsequently be more evolutionary liable than the exponent  <cit> . this has been confirmed by selection experiments  and at least one phylogenetic comparative study that documented extremely slow evolutionary change in within-species exponents of sexually selected characteristics .the findings of our study clearly differed from these past findings. the allometric exponent of a prominent ornament in the pacific leaping blenny—the head crest—seemed to be highly reactive to changes in the intensity of sexual selection , whereas there was virtually no change in the allometric elevation of the ornament under the same conditions . that is, plastic or genetic changes in allometric exponent in response to changes in sexual selection have not subsequently lead to an overall change in head crest size in a population : small males are still limited in their ability to produce larger head crests. this implies that allometric elevations are not plastic in the pacific leaping blenny, and either the intensity of sexual selection has not been stable enough from generation to generation to induce adaptive change  or that evolutionary change in allometric elevations are constrained in some way .

going beyond the study of ornament allometries, there have been few studies that have examined the potential trade-off between sexual selection and predation in the expression of ornaments and other sexual signals more generally. of these studies, most have examined colour signals that are constantly exposed to both conspecifics and predators . however, when an animal’s colour signal can be concealed from predators—for example, by restricting the colour signal to a part of the body only exposed during a social display to conspecifics  <cit> ; this study—the influence of predation should be reduced. in the pacific leaping blenny, the dorsal fin was only erected and visible during bouts of signaling  <cit> . in this sense, the impact of predation on the conspicuousness of the dorsal fin colouration should be low. yet, our results suggested that the intensity of dorsal fin redness in males was potentially the target of predation . in contrast, however, dorsal fin colouration was far more conspicuous in females , but female dorsal fin colour did not appear to be influenced by predation. we suspect this reflects differences in the frequency of dorsal fin displays between the sexes, which were much higher in males than females . more generally, though, our results imply that any conspicuous behavior, if used frequently enough, can be the target of predation that can lead to measureable differences in ornament expression among populations.

there are, of course, other potential selection pressures that were not examined by our study and may also have contributed to population divergences in ornamentation or body size. for example, ornaments are only effective sexual signals if mates and rivals are able to distinguish those ornaments from habitat backgrounds. this was an implicit assumption in our study and has been confirmed by previous study for at least the dorsal fin  <cit> . given that habitat backgrounds do tend to vary among locations  <cit> , some of the variation in dorsal fin coloration could be attributed to selection for increased conspicuousness in local environments. furthermore, red pigmentation in fish has often been shown to be carotenoid based and consequently diet dependent . differences among populations in the availability of carontenoids in the environment are another source of potential variation that was not examined here. the availability of food resources more generally might also account for differences in body size among populations .

CONCLUSIONS
our study documents phenotypic differentiation among populations that have apparently experienced extensive gene flow, and in phenotypic features important in reproduction . there are a number of other studies that have reported similar findings in a range of taxa  <cit> , suggesting that selection  can frequently be strong enough to push populations to diverge in reproductively important features despite gene flow. in this respect, our findings are not entirely unexpected. however, our study is one of only a handful that has documented population divergence in ornamentation . furthermore, this divergence has been recent  because it has not yet led to changes in regions of the genome that are subject to the influence of genetic drift . our study may therefore represent an early snapshot of divergence in reproductively important features that could facilitate the formation of future reproductive barriers among populations under some circumstances.

our study also highlights the importance of adopting an integrated approach for investigating the effects of selection. phenotypes are invariably the product of a complex interaction of various positive and negative selective pressures, and these pressures need to be considered collectively if we are to fully understand the adaptive process. furthermore, unless the history of connectivity among populations is also assessed, it is impossible to determine whether changes in phenotype have led to, or been caused by, neutral genetic differentiation among populations. in the first instance, changes in phenotype have the potential to act as barriers to gene flow through assortative mating, while in the latter instance, divergence may simply be the by-product of geographic isolation and may have little role in maintaining reproductive isolation on secondary contact. in the particular case of this land fish, the lack of genetic differentiation among populations suggests extensive dispersal among populations and the possibility that population divergences in ornamentation have a plastic origin. if so, such plasticity has important implications for how reproductive isolation might originate among populations and how the evolution of ornament allometries should be viewed.

