BACKGROUND
mining the unprecedented wealth of information contained in complete genomes may help understand the evolutionary history of species. available genomes from the three phylogenetic domains, covering a wide spectrum of lifestyles, provide through global comparative analyses, new opportunities to decipher genomic characteristics related to the adaptive evolution of organisms, notably for extreme conditions such as high  <cit>  or low  <cit>  temperatures. at the dna level the simplest analyses concern the gc compositions and, similarly, at the proteomes level the simplest analyses concern the amino acid compositions. yet, even such simple comparative descriptions can reveal important evolutionary properties for the genomes. for example, at local levels, significant variations in gc  compositions were associated with horizontal transfers or pathogenicity islands in bacteria . at more global levels, gc compositions revealed complex isochore organisations in various eukaryotes . for proteomes, compositional description is more elaborate, because of the number of amino acids as compared to the number of bases. also, in comparison to the simple one-dimensional linearity associated with dna, the analysis of compositional properties in proteomes makes it necessary to resort to appropriate multi-dimensional representations for the data. such analyses have been performed from different perspectives, trying for example to identify signatures associated with different lifestyles. in such background, it was shown that amino acid usage is under the influence of gc content, reflecting adaptations to specific environmental conditions  <cit> . also, analyses of amino acid compositions in a limited number of proteomes  revealed a discrimination of hypethermophiles.

in this work, we consider an extensive analysis of amino acid usage in  <dig> proteomes, taking advantage of the recent significant number of available complete genomes with the notable increased representation for eukaryotes, psychrophiles and hyperthermophiles. the work here extends our previous study concerning  <dig> genomes  <cit> . resorting to correspondence analysis, we derive the distribution of species following amino acid usage, characterizing the associated fundamental discriminant signatures and the underlying evolutionary trends.

the analysis here fully confirms the previous observation for the discrimination between hyperthermophiles and mesophiles, with, in addition, a striking clearcut segregation of eukaryotes from all other species. in sharp contrast, it appears that psychrophilic lifestyle is not associated with specific profiles as the corresponding species are not distinguished from mesophilic prokaryotes, at the level of amino acid compositional analyses. we analyze statistically the segregated groups , highlighting the associated discriminant signatures. finally we attempt to characterize the evolutionary trends underlying the observed segregations. we observe that the distribution of species, acccording to amino acid usage, can be associated essentially with a separation of amino acids following their early or late recruitment into the genetic code, as inferred in a series of recently published works  <cit> . this separation, from early to late, can be associated with a directionality from high gc contents and high optimal growth temperatures towards lower gc contents and moderate temperatures.

the evolutionary implications for the various observations, in terms of segregation and time directionality in relation to amino acid recruitment into the genetic code, are discussed. the results could also be relevant to practical grounds for protein comparison methods, with the perspective of refined amino acid substitution scores.

RESULTS
we used correspondence analysis  to compare amino acid compositions of  <dig> predicted proteomes with large representations of the three phylogenetic domains as well as various lifestyles . figure  <dig> shows the resulting distribution of species and amino acids as projected on the first factorial plane, representing 77% of the total information in the original data table. we analyze first the distribution of species, in terms of global properties and discriminated groups. we then focus on more detailed statistical characterizations of the various groups, with their associated amino acid signatures. finally we explore potential evolutionary trends associated with the various observations.

distribution of species and segregations
global description
confirming and refining the results of previous analyses  <cit>  the global distribution of species is first following gc content, as corresponding to f <dig> factorial axis , increasing from left to right , and secondly following optimal growth temperatures, as corresponding to f <dig> factorial axis , increasing upward from moderate to high temperatures. it is important to stress that gc content and optimal growth temperatures are not included in the set of analysed parameters, but correspond rather to observations underlying the distributions of species as obtained from their amino acid compositions.

species segregation and discrimination following lifestyles and phylogenies
based on phylogenetic and lifestyle classifications , we observe a striking segregation for eukaryotes, prokaryotic mesophiles and hyperthermophiles, with sharply defined non-overlapping associated strips. with respect to this segregation, the only 'discrepancy' concerns the eukaryotic e. cuniculi, in the territory of mesophilic prokaryotes. the thermophilic species are essentially at the border between hyperthermophiles and prokaryotic mesophiles . in contrast with such clearcut segregation, we observe that psychrophiles are in the strip associated with prokaryotic mesophiles.

concerning this general stratified structure in the distribution of species, we observe  that the barycenters of the various categories considered above , thermophiles , prokaryotic mesophiles , psychrophiles  and eukaryotes ) are roughly aligned along the second factorial axis. this structure shows that species are rather homogeneously distributed within each category around the barycenters axis  according to their gc content. with this respect, based on the  <dig> available species, it appears that the scattering of psychrophiles around the corresponding barycenter is of limited extent as compared to the other categories.

statistical characterization of segregated groups and associated signatures
statistical characterization of segregated groups
for detailed characterization of the species distribution observed in figure  <dig> we compared for the various groups  the mean amino acid compositions, along with pooled means associated with physico-chemical characteristics . we used one way analysis of variance, followed by newman-keuls multiple comparison test for pairwise differences. for robustness and consistency reasons we choose a high probability limit of significance, set at the probability p <  <dig> . such comparisons revealed significant signatures  between the three following groups: a merged group associated with hyperthermophiles and thermophiles ; a merged group associated with prokaryotic mesophiles and psychrophiles  and finally eukaryotes . the corresponding signatures and characteristic trends are detailed below.

physico-chemical signatures
the pools of polar, charged and hydrophobic amino acids are represented on the factorial plane in figure  <dig>  the pools associated respectively with polar and the difference  amino-acids are characteristic of each one of the three segregated groups , all three mean value pairs being significantly different at p <  <dig> . the abundance of the polar and  pools increase steadily from hth-th to pmes-psyc, from hth-th to euk and from pmes-psyc to euk . as for the hydrophobic pool, we observe a decrease from hth-th to euk and from pmes-psyc to euk. the relative abundance in the hydrophobic pool thus appears as a characteristic signature for eukaryotes , since the corresponding mean value is significantly different from that of each of the two other groups .

amino acid signatures
based on the discrimination of the three segregated classes hth-th, pmes-psyc and euk we classify  amino acids following three groups :

a) amino acids whose relative abundance is characteristic of each one of the three groups : val , his and ser .

b) amino acids characterizing hth-th or euk: for euk, cys is high and leu, gly and ile are low; whereas for hth-th, tyr and glu are high, asp, thr and gln are low.

c) amino acids with no discriminative characteristics : all others .

in summary, the characterizations above  are represented in figure  <dig> in correspondence with the segregation following the three main groups , with the non-discriminative amino acids essentially concentrated in a median horizontal strip in the factorial plane. the description would of course vary according to the threshold . more detailed amino acid comparison results are reported in additional file  <dig>  file  <dig> and file  <dig> 

overall trends and amino acid chronologies
we investigate overall trends which could underly the segregation of species, following amino acid territories as shown in figure  <dig> 

protein conservation
for the three phylogenetic domains of life , bacteria  and eukarya ), based on systematic comparisons of proteomes, the subsets of proteins conserved exclusively in one or in combinations of domains  were determined, along with the subset of species specific proteins . the comparative data were from results in a recent study  <cit> , concerning  <dig> species . the amino acid compositions for the different subsets were determined and used as dummy observations  in the factorial analysis distribution shown in figure  <dig>  following this analysis, the trend from the core set eab  model of jordan et al.:

following the model of jordan et al.  <cit>  amino acids are classified as "gainers"  or "losers" , with "gainers" corresponding to amino acids supposed to be recruited late into the genetic code. in this model the "strong gainers" are his, ser and cys  along with phe and met. conversely, in this model, the "strong losers"  are pro, ala, glu and gly. this separation between "strong losers" and "gainers" is recovered rather faithfully in our factorial analysis if we separate the factorial plane into two regions t <dig> and t <dig>  corresponding respectively to - and - characteristics, with a roughly defined border. with such a separation of the factorial plane we observe that the "strong gainers" his, ser and cys are in t <dig>  with phe and met at the border. in addition, the "weak gainers" in this model  also lie within the t <dig> space. conversely, all "strong losers" lie within t <dig>  while the "weak loser" lys is situated in t <dig> 

2) model of trifonov:

with the factorial plane separation above, we observe that the amino acids in t <dig> correspond largely to the first amino acids recruited into the genetic code according to the chronology suggested by trifonov  <cit>  . in this list, the first discrepancy according to the separation in figure  <dig> concerns the amino acid ser in position  <dig> . it is nevertheless interesting to note that in the analysis of trifonov it appears that ser was also the first amino acid in the chronological classification for which two distinct positions were considered, following the associated codons . as for thr  its position in figure  <dig> is at the border between t <dig> and t <dig>  the two discrepancies between the chronology by trifonov and the separation t1/t <dig> concern ser and thr and appear to correspond to contradictions between the models by trifonov and by jordan et al. .

3) miller's experiments and data from the murchison meteorite:

the ancient amino acids, as derived from miller's experiments  <cit>  and analysis of murchison meteorite  <cit>  , are essentially clustered in t <dig>  it is striking to observe that the most abundant amino acids in these experiments  <cit>   are deep situated in t <dig>  whereas those reported to be less abundant tend to cluster at the boundary between t <dig> and t <dig>  it is also not surprising to observe that the possible "discrepancies" between the spark data  and the t1/t <dig> scheme concern again the amino acids ser and thr. however, interestingly, these amino acids do also correspond to the observed discrepancies between the spark data and the murchinson meteorite data  as well as to discrepancies between the two models above, as already mentioned. finally, the overall decreasing gradient from t <dig> to t <dig>  in terms of ancient amino acid abundance is further enhanced with the chronology following the "yields of amino acids in imitated primordial conditions" as compiled by trifonov  <cit>  .

the various schemes above, relevant to the analysis of chronologies in correspondence with the recruitment of amino acids into the genetic code, let us suggest a time-directionality, the arrow from t <dig> to t <dig> in figure  <dig>  overall, the direction of this arrow points in the same direction than the one associated with proteins conservation: from the most conserved ancestral common "core" of proteins to the set of species-specific proteins.

discussion
based on amino acid compositions of proteomes, correspondence analysis revealed a clearcut segregation of species following three lifestyle-phylogenetic classes: eukaryotes, prokaryotic mesophiles-psychrophiles and hyperthermophiles-thermophiles. detailed statistical analyses confirmed the separation of the three classes, with associated signatures in terms of amino acids usage. notably, the three classes are discriminated by the relative abundances in his, ser and val, and in the pools associated with polar and  amino acids. with respect to such signatures, it is interesting to note that the  criterion is not exclusive to the hyperthermophiles-thermophiles class  <cit> , but is a distinctive feature of each one of the three classes.

the evidence for sharply defined non-overlapping territories for species based on amino acids usage raises many questions relevant to the evolution of lifestyles and to phylogenies: for example are the segregations following general trends and what underlies such observed segregations?

concerning the overall trends, a separation of the factorial plane into two regions  revealed striking correspondences between the distribution of the amino acids in the respective regions and various classifications relative to chronologies for the recruitment of amino acids into the genetic code. in such correspondences, through convergent criteria, it appears that amino acids found in t <dig> are essentially those supposed to be the earliest in the genetic code, and, conversely, that amino acids found in t <dig> are essentially those supposed to be most recent. an interesting feature in the convergent picture is the emergence of a possible basic consensus between the various considered schemes relative to amino acid chronologies . in this direction, it may well be that the analysis here, based on completely independent criteria , could provide an efficient 'filtering' scheme for capturing genuine convergences between the various models. for example, following all models and data, it is clear that the core of inferred most ancient amino acids are in t <dig>  such a core could correspond to the list , in which the only notable discrepancy is for val following the jordan et al.  <cit>  model . the other way round, the amino acid ser, which is next in the chronology by trifonov, is situated deep in t <dig>  in agreement with the model of jordan et al.  <cit>  . this contradictory assignment could be further resolved in favour of ser not early in the list by noting that even though present in the spark experiment  this amino acid was absent in the meteorite composition. and finally, in the trifonov chronology itself, ser was the first amino acid for which a dual rank was considered, following codon usage.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, an overall trend could be suggested for the observed segregation of species with amino acids usage, corresponding to an underlying time arrow from t <dig> to t <dig>  this trend would be consistent with the following global evolutionary model: early steps of life were associated with high gcs and high temperatures  <cit> , and, with the further recruitment of amino acids into the genetic code, the overall evolutionary trend was towards lower gcs, reduced temperatures and the appearance of new lifestyles, including mesophily and psychrophily, as well as the eukaryotic phylogenetic domain.

this study allowed to gain new insights into how amino acid usage has changed over evolutionary time. such results could also help to better understand proteins evolution, notably in terms of physico-chemical and structural properties in adaptation to various conditions. with this respect, a discriminative feature associated with psychrophiles, despite their non-segregation, appears to be the limited extent of their spreading on the factorial plane around mean values. if further confirmed, this observation concerning the  <dig> available genomes, could reveal complex characterizations for psychrophilic proteins with constrained mutual dependences in amino acid compositions.

finally, on application grounds, the results here could lead to enhanced amino acid substitutional models, taking into account amino acid frequencies reflecting the topology of species segregations as demonstrated here.

