BACKGROUND
annelids, commonly known as segmented worms, are typical triploblastic coelomate animals belonging to the protostomes. annelids, and especially polychaetous annelids, are important systems for understanding evolution and development in animals . fossil records  <cit> , as well as comparative morphology studies  <cit> , suggested that the urbilaterian  may have resembled annelids. although such an assumption is difficult to verify, it is widely accepted that polychaetes exhibit many ancestral traits in their body plan and embryonic development  <cit> .

despite this long history as evo-devo model organisms, polychaete annelids, and more generally lophotrochozoan representatives, are still poorly represented in sequence databases. sequencing projects have mainly focused on deuterostomes  and ecdysozoa, i.e. molting protostomes including arthropods and nematodes  <cit> . the recent enlargement and diversification of the sequencing project panel has played a decisive role in obtaining a more realistic picture of animal evolution. for instance, the analysis of genomic loci in the marine polychaete platynereis dumerilii has revealed the intron-rich nature of annelid genes  <cit> . more recently, the genome of a bilaterian sister group, the cnidarian sea anemone nematostella vectensis, has proved to be more complex than expected, with a gene repertoire, exon-intron structure, and large-scale gene linkage more similar to vertebrates than to flies or nematodes  <cit> .

among polychaete annelids, alvinella pompejana  <cit> , the "pompeii worm", has attracted attention since it is currently considered to be one of the most thermotolerant eukaryotes on earth, withstanding the largest known chemical and thermal ranges   <cit> . this tube-dwelling worm forms dense colonies on the surface of hydrothermal chimneys and can withstand long periods of hypo/anoxia and long phases of exposure to hydrogen sulphides  <cit> . a. pompejana specifically inhabits chimney walls of hydrothermal vents on the east pacific rise  <cit> . it often co-occurs with alvinella caudata, a very closely related species, and can be found in variable proportions according to the chemical conditions. the chimney walls are characterised by high flows of vent fluid, and therefore the highest temperatures for vent metazoans , as well as high concentrations of potentially toxic compounds . the thermotolerance of alvinellid worms has been confirmed by laboratory observations of paralvinella sulfincola thermotaxis  <cit> . to survive, alvinella has developed numerous adaptations at the physiological and molecular levels, such as an increase in the thermostability of proteins and protein complexes  <cit> . as such, a. pompejana constitutes a precious source of thermostable proteins and macromolecular complexes of eukaryotic origin for the biochemical, biophysical or structural characterisation of proteins of fundamental or biomedical relevance. it has been selected as a model organism for structural studies by the structural proteomics in europe  <dig>  initiative. the pertinence of the model is confirmed by the recent study of the superstable superoxide dismutase recombinant protein  <cit> . the crystal structure at  <dig>  Å resolution reveals anchoring interaction motifs in loops and termini, accounting for the enhanced stability of the a. pompejana protein compared to its human ortholog.

here, we report the construction, sequencing and analysis of four full-length enriched cdna libraries of a. pompejana. one of these libraries has been constructed from complete animals after removal of the dorsal tegument, which harbours an episymbiont community of epsilonproteobacteria  <cit> . the other three libraries have been prepared from distinct tissues: the gills located at the anterior part of the animal and oriented towards the outside of the tube, the ventral tissues and the posterior region. this latter includes the pygidium and the subterminal growth zone of the animal where cell proliferation takes place. these three tissues, radically different with respect to their physiological roles, have been chosen in order to improve the transcriptome coverage. they also represent samples along the antero-posterior axis of a. pompejana since it has been reported that the body of the animal experiences a temperature gradient, the posterior part of a. pompejana being exposed to higher temperatures  <cit> .

analysis of the cdna sequences allowed the determination of  <dig>  putative protein sequences that were annotated using a new integrative functional annotation pipeline. the observed abundance of transcripts related to oxidative stress resistance, detoxification, anti-bacterial defence and heat shock protection, as well as the compositional bias detected in the protein sequences, may contribute to the adaptation of the pompeii worm to its challenging habitat. from an evolutionary perspective, our analysis reveals striking similarities between annelids and deuterostomes, both in terms of sequence conservation and gene repertoires that raise interesting issues concerning the nature of the bilaterian ancestor.

RESULTS
cdna libraries, est assembly and cdna characterization
four non normalized libraries enriched in full length cdna were constructed, with an average insert size of  <dig> - <dig> kb. the first library was prepared using whole adult individuals while the others were constructed from dissected tissues: gills, ventral tissue, and pygidium. a total of  <dig>  chromatograms were processed by our semi-automated assembly pipeline . 76% of the initial raw sequences fulfil our stringent quality criteria, and have a mean length of  <dig> bp . the percentage of sequences exhibiting a poly tail ranges between  <dig> and 12% in the different libraries, except in the ventral tissue library in which 42% of the sequences contain a poly tail. the sequences were submitted to the est section of the embl database under accession numbers fp <dig> to fp <dig> and fp <dig> to fp <dig> 

the assembly of the  <dig>  selected sequences  was performed by cap <dig> using stringent parameters to avoid misassembly problems such as creation of chimeric contigs or combination of paralogs. we performed a global assembly of all sequences as well as a separate assembly for each library . the global assembly yielded  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singlets . contig size ranges from  <dig> to  <dig>  reads with a mean of  <dig> and a median of  <dig> . the average length of contigs is  <dig>  bp. taking into account our conservative approach, each contig and singlet of this assembly ideally represents a unique version of an expressed gene, i.e. paralogs, divergent alleles or splicing variants should not coalesce into the same contig.

the  <dig>  unique sequences from the global assembly were analysed using two independent methods  to determine the boundaries of the coding sequences  and untranslated regions . a total of  <dig>  coding regions was obtained, including  <dig>  complete cds. the complete cds lengths range from  <dig> nt to  <dig>  nt with a mean of  <dig> nt . the mean gc content in the cds is  <dig> %. as previously observed in eukaryotic mrnas  <cit> , the mean gc content in a. pompejana is higher for the 5'utr  than for the 3'utr  tail) and is comparable to the value previously observed in annelids .

a. pompejana genes undergo a neutral evolutionary process?
to investigate the evolutionary model driving the gc content in a. pompejana, an in-depth gc analysis was performed on the  <dig> almost complete mrna coding for ribosomal proteins, including  <dig> genes expressed at low levels associated with the mitochondrial ribosome, and a set of genes with mid-to-high expression associated with the nuclear ribosome. the analysis shows that the gc <dig> content of cds  was significantly higher than the overall gc content of cds  and both utr regions . unexpectedly, the gc <dig> was found to be constant, regardless of the length of the coding regions , even though a significant positive relationship exists between the cdna length and its level of transcription  when estimated from the number of gene repeats in cdna libraries. this number ranges from one  to  <dig> copies . another striking result was the non linear evolution of the gc <dig> content of ribosomal protein transcripts with the level of gene expression. both gc <dig>  and gc  contents rapidly increased with the number of copies until they reached a plateau at a threshold value of c.a. 25- <dig> copies . the gc <dig> and gc content asymptotic values of cds and utr were close to  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the correlation was significant , although it was not significant when the mt ribosomal-protein genes were removed from the dataset. analysis of codon usage in the ribosomal set revealed that eight of the most frequent codons are terminated by c or g , seven by a or t  and three by two equally-frequent codons . the search of optimal  codons using the factorial multivariate analysis tool in the codonw software indicated that  <dig> at-ended codons  were clearly associated with low-expressed mitochondrial ribosomal genes . five gc-ended codons  and cgt  were positioned at the other extremity of the first axis but without a clear relationship with the level of expression.

in general, synonymous codon usage biases are explained by two alternative but non exclusive models: a neutral mutational-bias and a selective model  <cit> . the expectation of the mutational-bias model corresponds to a positive relationship between the base composition of synonymous sites and their neighbouring silent sites . in agreement with this model, we found a positive correlation between the gc <dig> and the gc, suggesting that both gc classes are evolving in the same way. the selective model postulates a co-evolution between synonymous codon usage and the abundance of trna to optimize the translation efficiency . according to eyre-walker  <cit> , selection maximizes the speed of the translation and minimizes the costs of proofreading, resulting in a codon usage correlated with the expression level and the mrna length. such correlations have been observed in drosophila and caenorhabditis  <cit>  but not in vertebrates  <cit> . in a. pompejana, there is no correlation between the gc <dig> and the level of gene expression within the set of nuclear ribosomal genes used. even if differences were observed when considering the level of ribosomal gene expression, this was mainly due to the presence of two distinct sets of ribosomal protein genes . such a result also held for the fop codons since no clear gradient of expression was found among the nuclear ribosomal genes along the first axis of the coa although the preferred at-ended codons were clearly associated with the mitochondrial ribosomal genes. additionally, no correlation was found between gc <dig> and cdna length. thus, there is no evidence for a selective process acting on silent sites although extended analyses on gc content bias over the genome and the whole transcriptome  <cit>  are clearly necessary to validate the predominance of the neutral model in a. pompejana.

integrative functional annotation
the  <dig>  protein sequences from the global assembly that exhibit homology in the protein databases were analysed using a new integrative functional annotation pipeline . the originality of this pipeline lies in the exploitation of the evolutionary context of the protein sequences based on a clustered multiple alignment of complete sequences   <cit> . the sequences are thus analysed in the framework of the overall family and subfamily, allowing a reliable propagation of sequence annotations in conserved regions. thanks to this novel pipeline,  <dig>   of the  <dig>  protein sequences with homology were annotated with either a text mining definition, an ec number, pfam-a domains or a gene ontology term .

this primary annotation was used to map the a. pompejana query proteins to the networks of the kegg and embl string databases. the reconstructed metabolic pathways and interaction networks constitute an integrative second level annotation which is essential to the study of the biological processes at work in a. pompejana. among the  <dig> metabolic reference pathways of the kegg database,  <dig> pathways  have been populated by a. pompejana proteins at a level greater than 50% . since the reference pathways are highly redundant , the a. pompejana cdna appear to provide a good coverage of a large panel of metabolic pathways. common pathways such as glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, citrate cycle, purine and pyrimidine metabolism are functionally complete or almost complete. more specific pathways are also well represented, such as androgen and estrogen metabolism or steroid biosynthesis, as illustrated in additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig>   <dig>  a. pompejana proteins  have also been mapped to human networks in the string database, which were first cut into smaller sub-networks .  <dig> % of these human sub-networks were populated by at least one a. pompejana ortholog.

in the absence of a complete annotated genome of a close relative of a. pompejana and considering the diversity of genome size reported in polychaete annelids , we cannot estimate the coverage of our cdna libraries. however, the mapping of a. pompejana proteins on kegg metabolic pathways and on string networks emphasizes the broad coverage of our cdna databases and provides an integrative framework for the interpretation of a. pompejana's proteome features.

a. pompejana database and website
the sequences and annotation features are stored in a relational database  <cit>  that maintains fine grained information about  the library origin of each clone,  the nucleic sequences and their phred quality values,  the different assemblies and their associated parameters,  the predicted protein sequences and  all the results of the annotation process.

the data are accessible via a user-friendly web interface. to allow intuitive querying of the database and convivial data visualisation, we developed dedicated tools, ranging from trace visualization to the interactive display of the alignment of a. pompejana protein sequences and their families . two modules are available for querying the database: a homology search module using ncbi blast and a module for performing full-text searches of all annotations. subsets of relevant data can then be selected from the search results for display purposes. different views are available:  nucleic cdna sequence,  est trace and six-frame translation,  contig schematic representation,  consed-like  <cit>  contig alignment view,  macsims annotated protein alignment with customisable features display,  integrative view of the annotation process .

adaptation to hypoxia, oxidative stress and heavy metals
as an endemic species of the hydrothermal vent ecosystem colonizing the chimney walls, a. pompejana has to deal with very variable conditions that are the result of a chaotic mixing of vent fluid  and deep-sea water . in this environment, oxygen and co <dig> concentrations, ph and sulphide levels vary quickly and over a wide range. these challenging environmental conditions seem to be reflected in the highly expressed gene pool detected using two complementary indicators: the size of the cdna clusters   and the abundance of transcripts corresponding to a pfam-a domain . domains involved in protein-protein or protein-dna/rna interactions are particularly abundant , as frequently observed in studies of eukaryotic transcriptomes  <cit> . the highly expressed genes also include genes encoding extracellular structural proteins, such as collagen, as well as cytoskeleton proteins . more interestingly, most abundant transcripts encompass genes clearly linked to oxygen homeostasis, oxidative stress resistance, detoxification and to a lesser extent, antibacterial defense and heat shock protection. considering the stress of depressurization, dramatic temperature decrease, and the general trauma endured by animals during sampling, the transcript abundance should be interpreted cautiously. a more detailed analysis using species-specific oligo microarrays on a set of specimens from an isobaric collection would be required to safely deduce the precise role of a given gene in the environmental response of the worm. nevertheless, highly expressed genes related to environment provide interesting clues about general aspects of the worm adaptation.

*the last column indicates the number of reads in the global assembly.

among these genes, the most important fraction corresponds to proteins from the respiratory chain and three main types of hemoglobins  reported in alvinellidae, namely a non-circulating cytoplasmic globin, the extracellular giant annelid hexagonal bilayer hbl-hb of the vascular system and the circulating intracellular hb found in the coelomic fluid . the abundance of hbs in a. pompejana and their high oxygen affinities  <cit>  may be determinant in the respiratory adaptation to hypoxic/anoxic environments. interestingly, the set of highly expressed genes includes several "hypothetical proteins" . they exhibit sequence segments with a biased residue composition and have no significant similarity with known proteins, except in some cases for low complexity regions. one of these specific proteins, tera <dig>  belongs to a family of proteins that is highly conserved in a. pompejana. a comparative proteomics study  <cit>  revealed that three members  of this family are differentially expressed depending on the oxygen concentration. these oxygen-responsive genes represent potential candidates that may contribute to oxygen homeostasis.

despite the hypoxia encountered in its environment, the pompeii worm can be subject to exogenous oxidative stress  <cit> . high levels of ferrous iron and sulphide have been reported to favour the formation of reactive sulphide species , an analog to ros. this is in agreement with the high level of expression observed for the major antioxidative enzymes in a. pompejana: mn and cu/zn superoxide dismutases, peroxiredoxins, glutathion peroxidases , thioredoxin. interestingly, no catalase cdna was detected in our set. although we cannot exclude the existence of a catalase gene , the absence of cdna in our sample suggests that h2o <dig> formation might not be the most common mechanism of detoxification. an earlier study  <cit>  also questioned the presence of catalase in paralvinella grasslei, a close relative of a. pompejana. the authors suggested that alternative h2o2-scavengers, such as antioxidant osmolytes or other enzymes might replace the catalase activity. indeed, taking into account the diversity and level of expression of glutathione peroxidases and peroxiredoxins in a. pompejana, sod-derived h2o <dig> could be degraded by peroxidases rather than by catalases as suggested by dixon and colleagues  <cit> .

in addition to hypoxia and oxidative stress, a. pompejana has to deal with large amounts of heavy metals. invertebrates possess a variety of cellular detoxification pathways that reduce the concentrations of potentially toxic metals circulating in the blood . these pathways include metal binding by cysteine-rich proteins known as metallothioneins, followed by their elimination through the lysosomal endomembrane system. we detected a single est coding for a metallothionein-like protein in our library suggesting that involvement of metallothioneins is not the major detoxication process. however, we cannot exclude the possibility that the pool of highly expressed genes of unknown function contains genes coding for new metallothionein-like proteins, since the pool of unknown genes appears to be enriched in cysteine-rich proteins. another alternative for heavy metal detoxication is the intracellular sequestration in specific vacuoles producing solid granules  <cit> . this would be in agreement with the presence of arsenic, zinc and copper detected in a. pompejana epidermal cells  <cit>  and the production of a large amount of iron-containing granules by a. pompejana mucocytes  <cit> . finally, rhodanese also appears to be preponderant among the highly expressed genes. rhodanese can perform a variety of roles , including the modulation of general detoxification processes and the maintenance of redox homeostasis.

thermo-adaptive features in amino-acid composition
as one of the most thermotolerant eukaryotes known to date, the pompeii worm clearly provides a unique model for the study of adaptation to high temperature in this domain of life. its thermal regime generally fluctuates between  <dig> and 60°c, with exceptional bursts up to 105°c  <cit> . these high and variable temperatures require adaptations at the physiological and molecular levels, even though we are far from the optimal temperature range reported in hyperthermophilic prokaryotes. at the molecular level, several studies have revealed the higher thermostability of a. pompejana proteins and complexes compared to their orthologs from other eukaryotes  <cit> . we thus investigated the composition of a. pompejana proteins and found a biased composition compared to their orthologs from  <dig> major metazoa lineages  . the amino acid composition differed significantly among taxa . a. pompejana exhibits the highest proportion of charged amino acids : a characteristic also shared by the cnidarian n. vectensis . this is mainly due to an increase of the positively-charged amino acids lysine and arginine . this excess of charged residues may enhance protein stability in thermophilic eukaryotes, notably by increasing salt-bridges, if they can interact with negatively-charged residues. this would be in keeping with the structural analysis of the superoxide dismutase of a. pompejana  <cit> , suggesting that extra salt-bridged interactions may be involved in the superstability of this protein.

in prokaryotes, thermoadaptive molecular features appear to be multiple and variable  <cit> . berezovsky and shakhnovich  <cit>  suggested two distinct evolutionary strategies to conciliate these conflicting observations. in prokaryotes with an ancestral thermophilic character , proteins may be significantly more compact and more hydrophobic than their mesophilic counterparts. conversely, organisms that recently colonized a hot environment such as the bacteria thermotoga maritima, may have evolved under a more ''sequence-based'' mechanism of thermostability. in this latter case, a few charged amino acid replacements or amino acid deletions increased occurrences of hydrogen bonds and inter-subunit electrostatic interactions or decreased the length of surface loops respectively. the enrichment in charged residues detected in a. pompejana suggests that the sequence-based mechanism of thermostability reported to hold in thermotoga may also apply to a. pompejana. however, the molecular basis of eukaryotic thermotolerance is probably more complex than that of the bacterial/archaeal domains, and additional studies are needed to decipher the molecular basis of thermostability in a. pompejana. these may include massive structural comparisons between a. pompejana proteins and mesophilic orthologs, as well as in-depth comparisons of amino acid compositions between close relatives of a. pompejana since thermoadaptive features are often masked by a background of evolutionary sequence divergence.

proximity between annelids and vertebrates
contradictory results have been obtained in whole-genome based phylogenetic studies that favour either the classical "coelomata hypothesis" positioning nematodes and plathyhelminthes as early branching clades  <cit>  or the new animal phylogeny dividing protostomes in ecdysozoa  and lophotrochozoa   <cit> . to address the evolutionary relationships between a. pompejana and other animals, we first investigated the phylogenetic position of a. pompejana using a pool of  <dig> ribosomal proteins. a phylogenetic tree reconstruction was performed on the concatenation of the corresponding multiple alignments using mrbayes . the obtained topology, together with a maximum parsimony analysis , supports the phylogenetic tree proposed by aguinaldo et al., with the exception of schistosoma japonicum  that clustered within the ecdysozoa represented by arthropods and nematodes, rather than lophotrochozoa .

compared to other protostomes used in this study, the annelids a. pompejana and lumbricus rubellus and the mollusc argopecten irradians show relatively small branch lengths. thus, the slow evolutionary rate previously observed in diverse species of the polychaete lineage  <cit>  seems also to hold in a. pompejana, despite its challenging habitat. in contrast, fast evolutionary rates are observed in the parasitic worms schistosoma or caenorhabditis, that might lead to a long-branch attraction artefact between these two lineages in the present analysis and partly explain the contradictory results obtained in whole-genome based phylogenetic studies. differences in the rate of evolution are reflected in the mean percent identity between orthologs observed in a pool of  <dig> unambiguous ortholog families  conserved in  <dig> major metazoa lineages . a. pompejana, homo sapiens and n. vectensis exhibit high sequence conservation relative to s. japonicum or c. elegans while d. melanogaster appears intermediate. thus, the proximity between annelid and vertebrate sequences previously reported for proteins from the polychaete platynereis dumerilii  <cit>  is now observable at a larger scale and can be partly extended to cnidaria.

differential gene losses
the proximity between alvinella, vertebrates and cnidaria discussed above is also observable in the gene repertoire of the pompeii worm. only  <dig> protein families present in a. pompejana are specific to protostomes. among them, only  <dig> are conserved in all the arthropod, nematode and platyhelminthe representative species, illustrating the prevalence of differential gene losses in protostomes. moreover, only  <dig> proteins in our dataset are specific to annelids and platyhelminthes. as we only have access to the proteome of a parasitic platyhelminthe, this apparent split may actually be the consequence of massive gene losses in schistosoma linked to its parasitic lifestyle. this illustrates the urgent need for the sequencing of complete genomes from free-living species of platyhelminthes, and more generally from diverse representatives of lophotrochozoa, in order to identify the relationships and synapomorphies unifying the spiralia  and platyhelminthes within lophotrochozoa. considering the high proportion of a. pompejana "specific" genes , these genomes would be especially valuable for the discrimination of genes that are truly specific to alvinellidae  and those that are in fact shared by other lineages of lophotrochozoa.

in contrast to the small sets of proteins specific to protostomes,  <dig> a. pompejana proteins belong to families or superfamilies specific to deuterostomes. this deuterostomia-set is significantly enriched in glycoproteins  that play a key role in many biological processes, in particular intercellular communication and adhesiveness, hormonal regulation, or immunity. for instance, the protein tera <dig> belongs to the superfamily of secreted cysteine rich factors and its n-terminal domain sequence exhibits the idiosyncratic features of the igfbp  family reported to be vertebrate-specific  <cit> . another noteworthy result is the enrichment in proteins containing an epidermal growth factor -like domain that is frequently found in the extracellular part of membrane-bound proteins or in proteins known to be secreted. in addition, the deuterostomia-set is enriched in proteins involved in the i-kappab kinase/nf-kappab cascade or in death-domain containing proteins that can be involved in the regulation of apoptosis and inflammation or linked to innate immunity. this includes close homologs of the cradd and dedd/dedd <dig> protein families  that play a role in the stress-induced apoptosis signalling pathway and are important mediators for death receptors  <cit> . if we exclude the possibility of horizontal gene transfer, these genes encoding important functions previously considered as specific novelties of deuterostomes were in fact already present in the bilaterian ancestor and were subsequently lost in ecdysozoa and platyhelminthe model species or diverged beyond recognition in the representative species of ecdysozoa and platyhelminthes used in our study.

in addition to this deuterostomia-set,  <dig> a. pompejana protein families are specifically present in both deuterostomes and cnidaria, while  <dig> are specifically found in both cnidaria and at least one protostome. these  <dig> families present in the last common ancestor of the eumetazoa may also have been lost in the ecdysozoa and platyhelminthe representatives. interestingly, this set exhibits an enrichment in the selenium binding function. notably, it includes the ortholog of the selenoprotein n involved in the regulation of oxidative stress and calcium homeostasis  <cit> . differential gene losses in ecdysozoa are also observed for more ancestral genes. for instance, the pompeii worm possesses orthologs of the component of the phagocytic nadph oxidase   and of some of its regulatory proteins  that play a critical role in innate immunity of deuterostomes. p47phox and p22phox genes are present in the cnidaria n. vectensis and the unicellular choanoflagellate m. brevicollis, but are absent in several lineages of ecdysozoans including drosophila and caenorhabditis.

indeed, with the multiplication of genome and est sequencing projects in invertebrates, many "vertebrate novelties" have been shown to be present in cnidaria and/or placozoa, but lost in the canonical model protostomes, i.e. d. melanogaster and c. elegans  <cit> . there is now an increasing body of evidence supporting the prominent role of lineage-specific losses in animal evolution , especially in protostomes. the present analysis suggests that massive losses are not a shared trait of the protostomes, since genes involved in major metazoan functions are retained in a. pompejana, a lophotrochozoan representative. however, we cannot exclude that losses exist in annelids and/or molluscs. for instance, no enzyme involved in urea excretion has been identified in the alvinella database, as expected from previous studies reporting an incomplete or non-functional urea cycle in a number of annelid species .

genes are not the only genome features differentially lost in the course of metazoan evolution, as suggested by a study of genomic regions of the polychaete platynereis dumerilii that revealed intron-rich genes in annelids  <cit> . according to the authors' estimates, two-thirds of human introns would have been present in the bilaterian ancestor and retained in annelids, while lost in the insect and nematode genomes. the hypothesis of an intron-rich bilaterian ancestor  has been extended to the ancestor of metazoa through the examination of the exon-intron structure of nematostella and trichoplax genes  <cit> . thus, the emerging picture of evolution is one of a complex ancestor of metazoa, with a gene toolkit and a gene structure closer to those of extant vertebrates and annelids than to model ecdysozoa. this contradicts the intuitive view of a linear evolution, from simple ancestral networks to more complex ones in vertebrates, although it is in line with several studies suggesting a reductive evolution from a complex community of ancestors as a general trend in the evolution of life .

CONCLUSIONS
the construction and sequencing of four non normalized cdna libraries from a. pompejana, one of the most thermotolerant eukaryotes known to date, resulted in  <dig>  unique cdna sequences and  <dig>  annotated protein sequences. as indicated by the pathways and interaction networks mapped, our cdna libraries provided a good coverage of the a. pompejana gene repertoire. our analysis revealed that, apart from house-keeping genes, most abundant annotated transcripts were directly related to adaptation to the challenging physico-chemical conditions encountered by a. pompejana, in particular hypoxia, oxidative stress and heavy metals. in addition to these annotated genes, we also detected an important pool of unknown, specific and highly expressed genes that represent valuable targets for the study of a. pompejana adaptation. we also detected a compositional bias that may enhance protein thermostability in this eukaryote facing an extreme and variable thermal regime.

from an evolutionary perspective, our analyses support the new animal phylogeny and seem to indicate a slow evolutionary rate in a. pompejana despite its challenging environmental conditions. moreover, we found that an important pool of ancestral genes involved in major metazoan functions are lost in other representatives of protostomes but retained in a. pompejana, suggesting that massive losses are not a shared trait of the protostomes. sequence conservation together with ancestral gene retention identified a surprising proximity between a. pompejana and deuterostomes. this makes a. pompejana thermostable proteins outstanding models for the study of human protein targets.

special attention has been paid to making the sequences, assembly and annotations accessible via a user-friendly web site. they represent a significant contribution to the successful exploitation of a. pompejana proteins in the future annotation of genomes from annelids and related phyla and will hopefully stimulate future research on metazoan evolution and adaptation.

