BACKGROUND
in flowering plants, unlike animals, the male and female germ units are multicellular, haploid structures that develop in different organs of the flower . in arabidopsis thaliana, the male gametophyte, the pollen grain, comprises two sperm cells enclosed within a vegetative cell. the female gametophyte, the embryo sac, is a seven-cell structure that includes the egg cell and other haploid cells crucial for forming a viable seed; it is enclosed within maternal diploid tissue in an ovule . the sperm cells of flowering plants are non-motile and are transported through pollen tubes from the stigma to the embryo sacs . after a pollen grain contacts the stigma, it polarizes and develops a growing extension  that traverses the pistil, eventually fertilizing an ovule by growing along its funiculus, entering through its micropyle , and releasing sperm cells into its embryo sac.

many mechanisms have been proposed to explain how pollen tubes are guided to ovules, including mechanical tracts that direct growth, surface-expressed guidance cues, and diffusing signals  <cit> . in vitro experiments showed that nicotiana alata pollen tubes use water as a directional cue in their initial growth through the stigma  <cit> , and chemocyanin, a molecule released in the lily style, has been shown to induce chemotropism  <cit> . these observations suggest that following a gradient may play an important role in the earlier stages of pollen tube growth. semi-in vitro investigation suggests that fertilized ovules may emit a short-lived repulsive signal to prevent multiple pollen tubes entering  <cit> , and nitric oxide has also been shown to repel pollen tubes in in vitro  <cit>  and semi-in vitro assays  <cit> . more recently, it has been shown that the synergid cells of torenia fournieri secrete small peptides that induce chemotropism  <cit> . although these observations provide evidence for diffusible attractants, the mechanisms of action of the participating molecules remain unknown, as do their identities in most species. furthermore, a lack of detail in characterizing pollen tube responses has complicated discussions of the range at which the guidance operates and, in turn, the role of guidance in vivo.

a series of semi-in vitro experiments have provided substantial evidence that diffusible signals that are released by the ovule in vitro play a potentially important role in later stages of guidance. in these experiments, stigma are pollinated, cut, and placed on an agar medium  <cit> . ovules are dissected from the ovary and arranged around the cut end of the stigma . the pollen germinates on the stigma, grows through the style, and emerges onto the surface of the medium. in gasteria verrucosa, torenia and arabidopsis, pollen tubes that emerged onto the medium showed an attractive response to the dissected ovules  <cit> . semi-in vitro experiments in which cells in the embryo sac were systematically laser ablated revealed that the synergid cells are essential for this in vitro attraction in torenia  <cit> . both arabidopsis and torenia pollen tubes show less attraction to the ovules of closely-related species than to their own, and the amount of attraction decreases with evolutionary distance between the pollen tube species and the ovule species  <cit> .

here we present a quantitative analysis of newly obtained time-lapse images from such a semi-in vitro assay to investigate the mechanisms that mediate the attraction between pollen tubes and ovules in arabidopsis. our goal is to characterize systematically how pollen tubes sense and respond to the presence of ovules in vitro. to probe the dynamics of the interactions between pollen tubes and ovules, we varied the amount of time that dissected ovules had been incubated on medium relative to when the pollen tubes emerged from the cut style and grew toward the ovules. we found that pollen tubes show more attraction to ovules with longer incubation times, and that pollen tubes are attracted to ovules in vitro at distances of 100- <dig> μm from the micropyle. this range of guidance is considerably longer than previously estimated  <cit> . our analysis also indicates that pollen tubes decrease their rate of growth as they approach an ovule, and that this effect becomes stronger with longer ovule incubation times. furthermore, pollen tubes often turned toward ovules, consistent with pollen tubes following a gradient of an attractant by sensing a change in the concentration of the attractant across their tips.

to explore the implications of these results, we developed a mathematical model of pollen tube response to a gradient of a diffusible attractant that is continuously released by the ovules. because little is known about the receptors and internal signals that drive pollen tube response to such attractants, our model makes no assumptions about the molecular mechanism for sensing this gradient and instead focuses on whole-cell features, an approach which has been used to model algae phototaxis  <cit> , whole-cell motility  <cit> , trajectories of listeria  <cit> , and leukocyte chemotaxis  <cit> . the model successfully captures both the directed and random growth we observe experimentally and suggests that the observed slowing of growth in vitro greatly increases the ability of pollen tubes to target an ovule successfully. the implications that our observations and model have for guidance in vivo are discussed.

RESULTS
incubation time influences pollen tube response
previous semi-in vitro work has shown that pollen tubes approach the micropyle of functional ovules more frequently than heat-treated ovules  <cit>  or ovules with laser-ablated cells  <cit> . more recent approaches have quantified this apparent attraction by assessing how the rate of in vitro fertilization changes when pollen tubes are exposed to ovules dissected from closely-related species  <cit> . here we present a quantitative analysis of how pollen tubes grow and respond to dissected ovules in vitro.

dissected ovules from arabidopsis thaliana plants were arranged around a cut style using a procedure adapted from  <cit>  . the cut styles were pollinated such that between 20- <dig> pollen tubes eventually emerged from the style onto the medium, where the tubes were then allowed to grow  <dig> minutes before imaging was started . confocal stacks were acquired every  <dig> minutes for  <dig> minutes. to assess pollen tube growth quantitatively, we tracked the positions of the pollen tube tips at each time point, and used these positions to construct trajectories of tube growth. these trajectories were combined with the locations of the micropyles of the ovules to give distance and angle data, and data from stigmas with the same incubation time were combined.

starting distance
for various incubation times, these were the relative times that the stigmas were placed on the medium, the ovules were placed on the medium, the stigmas were pollinated, and imaging was started. stigmas were always placed at  <dig> hours. the time for placing the ovules and for pollinating the stigmas was adjusted to give the ovules additional incubation time on the medium. pollen tubes emerged 2- <dig>  hours after pollination. for each incubation time, the total number of stigmas sampled, ovules penetrated and number pollen tubes analyzed is listed. the starting distance reported is the average distance between the center of the transmitting tract and the micropyles. these distances were not significantly different from each other .

to assay the amount of attraction that pollen tubes had toward an ovule, we calculated the fraction of pollen tube tips that were within a certain distance of a micropyle that grew either closer to  or farther from  that micropyle by the next time point . to this end, we measured the distance from the tube tip to the closest micropyle at each pair of adjacent time points t and t + Δt and constructed  <dig> μm bins of these distances . the bin size of  <dig> μm corresponds to the distance an average tube would grow in Δt =  <dig> minutes, based on the previously reported rate of growth of  <dig>  μm/min  <cit> . we counted the number of tubes whose tips were in a bin at time t  and how many of these tips had moved into either a closer bin  or a farther bin  at time t+Δt. to assess the attraction of the pollen tubes over the course of the experiment, we combined these quantities for each bin over all time points into time-averaged frequencies that tips would move closer to or farther from an ovule in the time between confocal acquisitions: fcloser = ncloser/ntotal and ffarther = nfarther/ntotal.

using this approach, we examined these frequencies for ovules that had incubated on the medium for  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hours. as a negative control, we used heat-treated ovules that had been incubated for  <dig> hours. this incubation time was chosen to be consistent with previous experiments in arabidopsis  <cit> . palanivelu and preuss had placed heat-treated control ovules at the same time as pollinating the cut style, which corresponds to an incubation time of  <dig> hours in our assays . in each experiment, the cut end of an ovary was placed a minimum of  <dig> μm  from the micropyle of an ovule; there was no signficant difference  between the average distances from the center of the cut transmitting tract to each micropyle in any of the experimental conditions . we found that at all distances , the frequency with which tips moved farther from a micropyle of an ovule decreased with the incubation time of that ovule . the trends were very consistent: at all distances, the frequency of tips growing farther  from the micropyle of ovules that had been incubated for  <dig> hours was significantly different  from both that of our heat-treated control and ovules that had been incubated for  <dig> hours . compared to the strong effect of incubation time on ffarther, the effects of incubation time on fcloser were less visible . this difference stems from the facts that pollen tubes persist growing in the same direction for long distances, and the direction of the cut style initially orients the tubes to grow toward the ovules in the semi-in vitro assay.

the previous statistics include pollen tube growth that occurs both before and after the pollen tube penetrates the ovule. the points after penetration were included to allow an unbiased comparison with the heat-treated control but may affect the trends in fcloser and ffarther. to prevent polyspermy, the interactions between pollen tubes and ovules change once an ovule is fertilized, which occurs shortly after pollen tube penetration  <cit> . we constructed frequencies  and  for functional ovules that only include points in each pollen tube trajectory that and ffarther correspond to times before the nearest ovule was penetrated. the trends in these frequencies were consistent with those reported above for fcloser and ffarther, although the differences between the three incubation times in  were not significant .

effectively, ffarther quantifies the degree to which ovules cause pollen tubes to deviate from random growth once they come within a certain distance of a micropyle, but this statistic does not address whether growth while approaching this region is directed. to further analyze pollen tube approach, we defined two angles: θmp and θtip. the angle θtip is the angle that a pollen tube turns as it grows, and the angle θmp is the angle that a pollen tube would have to turn to grow directly toward the micropyle . the difference between these two angles, Δθ = θmp - θtip, measures how much pollen tube growth deviates from the most direct path toward the micropyle . owing to the periodic nature of angles, the distribution of Δθ cannot be characterized by the usual descriptive statistics of mean and standard deviation  <cit> . instead, we treat each angle as a unit vector on a circle, and use the average direction and average length of these vectors to compute a circular mean and a circular standard deviation . to characterize how pollen tubes approached ovules, we limited the angles in this characterization to cos θmp ≥  <dig> 

we use these statistics to summarize how different incubation times affected the deviation in guidance represented by the Δθ angle for pollen tubes with tips 0- <dig> μm and 50- <dig> μm from a micropyle . as previously described, care was taken to ensure that conclusions were based on functional ovules . at distances of 0- <dig> μm, the mean angle ⟨Δθ⟩ was not significantly different from 0° under any of the conditions. however, the circular standard deviations . at distances of 50- <dig> μm, the mean angle ⟨Δθ⟩ was only significantly different from 0°  for pollen tubes approaching ovules that had been incubated for  <dig> hours, where ⟨Δθ⟩ =  <dig>  ±  <dig> °. at these distances, there was no significant difference in the circular standard deviations σ <dig> of the functional ovules, but all three were significantly different  from the behavior of pollen tubes approaching heat-treated ovules .

in each experiment, the pollen tubes grew similar distances before reaching the ovules, which indicates that the difference in response results from the ovule incubation time. these data support a model where ovules release a diffusible signal  throughout the experiment, independently of the presence of pollen tubes. the data also suggest a putative range over which the response operates: both the frequency fcloser and the distribution of the angle Δθ shows that pollen tubes that grow within 50- <dig> μm of the micropyle of an ovule show an increased reorientation to that ovule. furthermore, within 0- <dig> μm, pollen tubes appear to be more directly guided to ovules with longer incubation times. although the operative range of attraction in vitro may vary with different experimental conditions, this range of  <dig> μm is larger than the value of  <dig> ±  <dig>  μm, which was based on observing when tubes made sharp turns toward the micropyle under similar agarose preparations  <cit> .

the pollen tube response is consistent with following a gradient
previous studies have focused their analysis on only the sharp, obvious turns that pollen tubes make near the micropyle, both in vivo  <cit>  and in vitro  <cit> . here we define a quantitative metric  that assesses the mean turning behavior of the pollen tubes for both large turns and more subtle turns. to define a turning response, we measure the correlation between the turns that the tube makes and the direction toward the micropyle . because diffusion of a released attractant should be approximately isotropic on the surface of the medium, the direction of the gradient is expected to be along the angle θmp. in dictyostelium discoideum and other eukaryotic cells undergoing chemotaxis, small gtpase proteins are thought to be intermediaries between the receptors that bind to chemokines and events in the cytoskeleton that effect chemotaxis  <cit> . based on studies of rop gtpase, a rho-like gtpase that is localized in pollen tube tips  <cit>  and that marks the site of tube growth  <cit> , we assumed that the receptors involved in pollen tube guidance are primarily localized near the tip of the tube. if gtip is the magnitude of the gradient at a tip, Δl is the width of the tip, and Δc is the difference in concentration across it, Δc/Δl = gtip sin θmp , where gtip is in units of the change of concentration per unit distance. if a pollen tube is following a gradient of attractant, then its turns should be correlated with Δc/Δl, and thus sin θmp.

to test this hypothesis, we looked at the relation between θtip and sinθmp by fitting the line θtip = a sin θmp + ε  for the turns pollen tubes made at different distances from the micropyles of ovules that had been incubated for different times . in each case, there was a significant relation, as measured by the pearson r values and the slopes of the regression lines , at 50- <dig> and 100- <dig> μm from the micropyle of ovules incubated for  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hours. at distances of 150- <dig> μm, there were still significant correlations  for ovules incubated for  <dig> and  <dig> hours. as expected, datasets for the heat-treated ovules did not show significant correlations. in all cases, the intercept ε was not significantly different from zero. these results are consistent with a mechanism where a pollen tube follows a gradient of the attractant by turning in response to sensing a difference in the attractant concentration across its tip.

responses reported are the unitless slope a of the regression line between θtip and sin θmp. the column Δresponse is the standard error of this slope. the significance levels reported are for the pearson r values: p < 5% , p < 1% , p <  <dig> % , p <  <dig> % .

these correlations provide an estimate of the range of response that is consistent with our previous fcloser/ffarther and Δθ analyses. the correlations at 0- <dig> μm, 50- <dig> μm, and 100- <dig> μm are significant: each pearson r has a probability of occurring randomly of p <  <dig> , and often p <  <dig> , and the slopes of the regression lines  are different from zero with similar statistical significance. the correlations at distances of 150- <dig> μm are smaller and less significant, and occur at the largest distances in our analysis. our analysis suggests that pollen tubes respond to ovules at distances at least as far as  <dig> μm, although the response at larger distances was often smaller than the random turns pollen tubes made. in addition to allowing us to infer the range of the response, the slope a of each regression model , is a measure of the pollen tube response at that distance and incubation time, and also provides an estimate of the size of the gradient of the attractant . the data evidence two trends for this response: it increases with longer incubation times and decreases at farther distances from the micropyle .

although pollen tubes are known to turn in response to changes in their internal tip-focused cytoplasmic calcium gradient  <cit> , and gradients of small molecules  affect pollen tube polarity and influence the direction of growth  <cit> , the mechanisms that couple external guidance cues to these intracellular ion gradients remain unknown. both spatial and temporal sensing mechanisms have been suggested in the literature on pollen tube guidance  <cit> . our analysis supports a spatial mechanism in which the pollen tubes effectively measure the concentration of the attractant across their tips and turn accordingly. in the temporal sensing that is characteristic of e. coli chemotaxis, a bacterium displays a series of runs that are separated by isotropic tumbles  <cit> . this mechanism is inconsistent with our findings, and would be hard to reconcile with the smooth growth that pollen tubes undergo. however, our results do not rule out more complex guidance mechanisms that could modulate how pollen tubes follow a gradient based on some memory of previous concentrations or gradients  <cit> .

the turns pollen tubes make are well-described by a model where ovules continuously release an attractant and pollen tubes respond to this attractant by following its gradient
our experimental results show that pollen tubes change their direction of growth in a manner consistent with responding to a change in concentration across their tip, and that this response increases both with longer incubation times and as pollen tubes grow closer to the micropyle. to test and refine the mechanisms suggested by these data, we developed a mathematical model that encompasses both the release of an attractant by the ovules and the subsequent response that pollen tubes have to the attractant. existing models of pollen tube behavior have focused on the physical processes that underlie tube growth, where cell shape, turgor pressure, internal ion gradients, and vesicle trafficking are essential considerations. most models describe general tip growth in plants and fungi  <cit> , although some recent work incorporates specific details of the pollen tube  <cit> . because little is known about the molecular mechanisms that mediate interactions between pollen tubes and ovules, we kept the model minimal. despite the lack of molecular detail, our model captures both the directed and random growth in pollen tube guidance and aids interpretation of the experimental results.

we modeled how pollen tubes change their direction of growth by splitting each turn into a directed and a random component , which we assumed were independent. the directed component specifies the mean angle that a theoretical pollen tube would turn in response to a gradient of the attractant, and the random component adds a random angle chosen from a gaussian distribution to this mean direction. to determine the directed component, we assume that each bound receptor induces a signal that gives the pollen tube some propensity to turn in the direction of the receptor. for a pollen tube to perceive a difference in the concentration across its tip, there must be at least two patches of receptors that are spatially separated on the pollen tube. similar simple considerations have led to several successful models of leukocyte chemotaxis .

an exact model of spatial sensing would depend on both the distribution of receptors in these patches , the kinetics of the receptor-ligand interaction, and the nature of the intracellular response that ultimately results in the pollen tube turning. the distance and time scales in our experiment are large enough that we can assume receptors operate close to steady-state. we simplify the remaining considerations by assuming that the change in concentration across the tip  is much less than the average concentration at the tip , in which case both the concentration along the tip and the difference in bound receptors are approximately linear. the directed component can then be approximated as proportional to the difference in the receptors bound between the left and right ends of the tip. the trends in fig. 3b do not indicate any saturation; furthermore, initial fits of our data to this case further suggested that the directed component was well modeled by receptors far from saturation, where the ligand binding is stoichiometric. in this regime, the directed component of turning is then proportional to the difference in concentration across the tip, making our model of turning   

where Δc is the difference in concentration across the tip, and κ is the proportionality constant.

to relate this model to the data in our experiments, we introduced a model for a relative concentration profile of the attractant . this profile evolves by two processes: release of the attractant at the micropyle and diffusion of the attractant on the artificial medium. because the details of how ovules release the attractant are not known, we model this release in a way that is consistent with our observations of the pollen tube response: the local concentration of the attractant and, more importantly, its gradient should increase both with longer incubation times and as the pollen tubes grow closer to the micropyle. the increase in the gradient at longer incubation times implies ongoing release at the source  <cit> . to simplify the description of diffusion on the medium, we considered only two-dimensional diffusion through the thin fluid film that coats the surface of the medium and not through the agar matrix itself.

modeling the difference in concentration across the tip of the pollen tube requires relating how the concentration at the tip changes as the position of the tip changes. as discussed in section  <dig> , we expect Δc/Δl = gtip sin θmp . consistent with our experimental observations, gtip decreases with distance  and increases with time .

when we combine the model for the direction of pollen tube growth and the attractant gradient, there are four parameters that describe the mean direction that the tubes turn in response to an attractant: the turning constant , the rate of attractant production , the attractant diffusion constant , and an effective distance that accounts for diffusion of the attractant within the micropyle and on the ovule surface before its deposition onto the medium . however, the parameters κ, kp, and d are covariant , and we used an effective turning constant κ' = κ in addition to d, and r <dig> as fitting parameters . the resulting  model shows reasonable agreement with experimental responses both close to and far from the micropyle , although it performs noticeably worse for 0-hour incubation times and at longer distances in 4-hour incubation times.

the fit yields a diffusion constant of  <dig>  μm2/min, or  <dig>  × 10- <dig> cm2/sec . the molecular weights of the attractants identified in torenia  <cit>  are approximately the same as that of ubiquitin, , which has a diffusion constant of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> cm2/sec in aqueous solution  <cit> . comparing the values is complicated by the high sucrose content of the thin film on top of the medium  and the possibility of non-specific interactions between the attractant and the supporting agar. both of these factors would decrease the rate of diffusion of the attractant. given these considerations, the estimated diffusion constant is consistent with the attractant being a small to medium sized peptide. previous in vitro studies have bound the molecular weight to 10- <dig> kda by alternative means  <cit> .

deviations from the mean direction of turning are consistent with how pollen tubes turn in the absence of ovules
up to this point, our analysis has been used to understand the mean response of pollen tubes to the attractant, which is presumed to be released by ovules. we now turn to studying the substantial variation in response that pollen tubes exhibit  <cit> . similar variation has been observed in many eukaryotic systems undergoing chemotaxis  <cit> , and it is thought to be advantageous for cells that are seeking nutrients or other targets but have not yet detected them  <cit> . in our model, the variation is set by a persistence length, which specifies how much a tube would elongate before losing a significant component of its original direction. we assayed this length by analyzing trajectories of  <dig> pollen tubes in semi-in vitro assays where no ovules were added to the medium. the change in direction of a pollen tube was measured by the angle between the direction of growth at some distance along the tube s and a new direction of growth after the tube had grown a distance δs . the correlation between these two points is mathematically equivalent to ⟨cos θtip ⟩. plotting this quantity as a function of δs shows that it is approximately linear, and regression yields an estimate for the persistence length of l =  <dig>  μm. the long persistence length indicates that the probability of making a turn θtip peaks sharply around θtip =  <dig>  such that ⟨cos θtip⟩ ≈  <dig> - ⟨θtip2⟩ and that the probability distribution can be described as a sharply-peaked gaussian with variance ⟨θtip2⟩ =  <dig>  . the standard deviations predicted by this form compared well with the circular standard deviations of the actual angle distributions for Δt =  <dig> to Δt =  <dig> min .

above, we assumed that the random component of growth is independent of the concentration of attractant. to test this idea, we ran simulations of our model that included both directed and random growth, with ovule locations and initial pollen tube locations and directions of growth taken directly from the corresponding experiments. we then treated these simulations as artificial time-lapse data and analyzed them in the same way that we analyzed our experimental data . we found that the mean responses  in the simulations, as measured by the slope of the regression line between θtip and sin θmp, compared well to the data at different distances and for different incubation times . we also assessed whether the random growth seen in our simulations was comparable to that in the experiments by analyzing the residuals, differences between the θtip predicted by the regression and the actual θtip. we compared the standard deviations of the populations of these residuals for both the simulations and the experiments . the standard deviations showed good agreement at distances far from the micropyle , where the effects of an ovule should be small, and also matched at closer distances  where there was a measurable response to the ovules. at even closer distances , the standard deviations compared well for 2-hour incubation times and reasonably well for 4-hour incubation times, but the experimental data had larger standard deviations at 0-hour incubation times than did our simulations. at the closest distances , the standard deviations of the experiments were much larger than those of the simulations. this difference resulted largely from outliers in the distribution, as indicated by the fact that the standard deviations of a data set with points outside twice the inter-quartile range removed showed much better agreement. however, the difference could also indicate that the gradient changes more rapidly at these close distances than can be captured using our linear model for the turning response .

comparison of the circular standard deviations of turns in simulation and experiment. this summarizes the deviations from the mean turning response, which we treat as the random component of growth. this random component was calculated from the residual deviations between the mean response and the individual responses.

incubation time influences the rate of growth near the micropyle
when we measured the persistence length of pollen tubes, we observed that the tubes began growing with an average rate of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min, consistent with previously reported values  <cit> . this rate slowed to  <dig> - <dig>  μm/min after the tubes had grown for  <dig> hours, both with and without ovules. while  <cit>  observed that pollen tubes decreased their rate of growth as they approached the micropyle, they did not distinguish this effect from the gradual slowing that generally occurs in the semi-in vitro assay. consequently, we examined how the average rate of growth changed at different distances to the micropyle for both functional and heat-treated ovules. the growth rates were calculated by dividing the distance between adjacent points in the time-lapse data by the time between those measurements . we considered the distance between the first of these points and the closest micropyle as the distance to the micropyle. average rates of growth were calculated at  <dig> μm intervals for distances of 10- <dig> μm, and points within  <dig> μm of the interval center were included in the average to reduce noise and help visualize the resulting trends. we found that when pollen tubes approached functional ovules, their rate of growth substantially decreased. this decrease was not present when pollen tubes approached heat-treated ovules, and the incubation time of the ovules influenced this decrease by increasing the distance at which this slowing began . specifically, within  <dig> μm of the micropyle of heat-treated ovules, pollen tubes grew at a rate of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min ; this rate of growth decreased with the incubation time of functional ovules, to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min around ovules incubated for  <dig> hours . pollen tubes that approach ovules with 0-hours of incubation did not show a decrease in growth until very close to the micropyle, while the decrease was apparent at a larger distance for ovules with 2- and 4-hour incubation times. the slowing partially explains the difference in observed ffarther frequencies at 0- <dig> μm.

in simulations, reducing the rate of growth increased the ability of pollen tubes to target ovules
to explore how this reduced growth rate would influence the guidance process, we added terms to our simulation to decrease the rate of growth with an increase in the gradient of the attractant . these terms do not assume any particular molecular model for why the pollen tube slows, but their inclusion allowed us to include or exclude either a turning response  or a slowing response . to assess the role that turning and slowing play in guidance, we calculated the fraction of tubes that were successfully able to target ovules in simulations for tubes that included or excluded these terms . about 6-8% of pollen tubes with no turning or slowing  were still able to target the micropyle randomly, and when slowing was enabled , this frequency did not change significantly. when turning was enabled with no slowing , the frequency of tubes that would successfully target more than doubled , and this frequency increased to over 60% when both were enabled . the difference between t+s- and t+s+ was visually striking, in that tubes that reduced their rate of growth showed substantially more guidance to the micropyle than tubes that had a constant rate of growth . because the size of the random turns in our model varies with the growth rate, we also simulated pollen tubes whose rate of growth decreased with larger gradients of the attractant, but whose random turns stayed the same size . in these simulations ), the fraction of tubes that were successfully able to target ovules was close  to those where the random deviations varied with the rate of growth , indicating that the greater guidance we observed in simulations where the growth rate decreases is a result of the growth rate and not of smaller random deviations.

these results assumed the same turning response, which indicates that slower pollen tube growth near the micropyle can increase the ability of the tube to correctly target the micropyle without requiring the mechanisms that drive turning  to increase their sensitivity. this effect can be understood geometrically by calculating how much a pollen tube must turn to prevent the angle θmp from increasing as it grows. consider a pollen tube that grows at a rate v toward the micropyle, but not directly toward it . if the pollen tube does not turn, over short times , the angle θmp increases by δθmp = sinδt, where v is the growth rate and r is the distance from the micropyle. thus the tube must turn toward the micropyle by more than this amount to decrease θmp. for a turning response of a, δθtip = a sinδt, such that the total change in the angle θmp is   

by this reasoning, the angle θmp will only decrease  when the response to the gradient a is larger than v/r. eq.  <dig> shows that the pollen tube can increase its targeting by either increasing its turning response  or keeping a constant turning response and reducing its rate of growth .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
previous semi-in vitro studies  <cit>  have shown that a diffusible attractant plays a role in pollen tube guidance. our quantitative analysis of in vitro pollen tube growth reveals a much longer range of pollen tube response in arabidopsis than previously reported  <cit> . our results suggest that this observed attraction in vitro results from a pollen tube sensing and responding to a difference in the concentration of attractant across its tip. both the strength of the pollen tubes' response and their rate of growth were affected by the incubation time of the ovules and the distance of the pollen tube tips from the micropyle. based on these data, we constructed a mathematical model of pollen tube growth. in the model, we assumed that ovules continually release an attractant and that it then diffuses on the medium. in the model, pollen tubes make turns that, on average, follow the gradient of this attractant, but they deviate from this path consistent with the random growth observed when pollen tubes are grown with no ovules present. this model successfully captures both the directed and random behavior of the pollen tubes growing in vitro and reveals that slowing growth near the micropyle can greatly aid fertilization.

although the recent identification of pollen tube attractants in torenia  <cit>  is a significant step toward understanding the molecular mechanism of guidance, much still remains unknown. in particular, little is known of the molecular mechanisms within the pollen tube that enable sensing and responding to this attractant. recent work on axon guidance identified an optimal means of integrating signals from multiple receptors  <cit> ; in this model and the experiments to validate it, the response depends in a complex way on both the concentration of the attractant and the steepness of the its gradient. the authors suggest a number of possible molecular mechanisms that could give rise to this behavior, and these may also be relevant to pollen tubes. a more complex relation between the response and the concentration and steepness of the gradient could also explain why there is no indication of receptor saturation in our analysis, but more precise control of the attractant gradient would be required to validate this hypothesis.

our model of the turning response did not assume a particular molecular mechanism for the sensing process. some molecular features of pollen tube growth are likely to be important to include in future models as appropriate data become available. pollen tubes have been observed to reorient in response to changes in the tip-focused cytoplasmic calcium gradient  <cit> . in dictyostelium discoideum and other eukaryotic cells that undergo chemotaxis, gtpases are thought to link chemokine reception with the behavior of the cytoskeleton  <cit> . the protein rop, a rho-like gtpase, has been shown to localize to the tip of the growing tube  <cit> , and its dynamics appear to lead the growth of pollen tubes  <cit> . understanding how the attractant influences rop and the tip-focused calcium gradient may provide further insight into the directed and random growth that pollen tubes undergo.

some features of pollen tube growth are unique among studied chemotropic responses. the eukaryotic cells commonly used in studies of chemotaxis, dictyostelium discoideum cells and leukocytes, are large . the pollen tubes of arabidopsis have narrower widths . although they may effectively increase this width with receptors not confined to the tip of the tube, the growth machinery appears to be largely confined to the tip  <cit> . the small size  of e. coli is thought to dictate its use of a temporal sensing mechanism for chemotaxis  <cit> . dictyostelium cells and leukocytes sense a spatial gradient and polarize in response to this gradient before becoming motile  <cit> , which allows the cells to respond to gradients almost isotropically. in contrast, pollen tubes secrete a cell wall as they grow and can only change direction by apical extension at the tip. this mechanism of growth enforces an internal polarity that renders pollen tubes unable to respond isotropically to a gradient, but this natural polarity may decrease the size required to efficiently sense gradients, perhaps by time-averaging of the number of bound receptors.

our results support a long-ranged chemotropic model for pollen tube guidance where pollen tubes respond to stable gradients maintained by ovules continuously releasing an attractant. similar mechanisms have been proposed in genetic studies of the guidance process, but it is unknown how the attraction observed in vitro will manifest in vivo. recent genetic studies have uncovered mutants that suggest a two-stage model for guidance in the ovary  <cit> . in this model, pollen tubes show a short-range of attraction near the micropyle  that is distinct from the longer-range guidance that attracts them to grow along the funiculus   <cit> .

the range of attraction in vitro  is roughly the same as the range of attraction required of funicular guidance in vivo. however, differences between the in vitro and in vivo environments make these distances hard to compare. our results strongly suggest that pollen tubes follow a gradient of the attractant, in which case an understanding of the factors that affect this gradient is essential for relating the in vitro results to studies of guidance in vivo. at longer distances from the source of the attractant, the gradient in our model achieves a steady-state magnitude that approximately varies as the inverse distance to the source: Δc ~ /r. the prefactor kp/d reflects the fact that the gradient is essentially maintained by a competition between the ovules releasing the attractant and the attractant diffusing away. the diffusion constant is likely different in vivo, and this factor indicates how such a change will affect the range of the attraction. the factor 1/r results from the radial symmetry of diffusion on the medium surface, and sets the range at which pollen tubes respond in vitro. in going from the planar geometry of the medium in vitro to the cylindrical geometry to the funiculus in vivo we expect the distance dependence of the concentration to change. in numerical investigations that used a model in vivo geometry , we found that, at steady-state, the concentration decreased linearly along the axis of the funiculus , and then rapidly decreased on the placental surface. this suggests that the cylindrical geometry of the funiculus may extend the effective range of attraction in vivo beyond that in the semi-in vitro assay.

at the same time, a signal that provided funicular guidance need not have a very long range on the ovary placenta. random motility has been shown to provide efficient search strategies in many organisms and would explain the variance in pollen tube growth seen in the ovary chamber  <cit> . our measured persistence length  is qualitatively consistent with in vivo observations that show pollen tubes grow essentially straight for very long distances  <cit> . the distance over which motion remains correlated is unusually long compared with other cellular systems and comparable to the length of the ovary chamber . within the ovary, pollen tubes compete to find an ovule; a long persistence of direction may provide an efficient method to locate an unfertilized ovule for pollen tubes that emerge at the top of the chamber. it would be interesting to determine if a correlation existed between ovary length and pollen tube persistence length in other species of the brassicaceae family.

while it is unclear how the decrease in the rate of growth we observe near the micropyle in vitro manifests in vivo, the dependence of this decrease on the incubation time suggests that the attractant mediates this decrease, and simulations of our model suggest that it is an important feature of guidance. the decrease in the growth rate could be responsible for the sharp turns observed near the micropyle in vivo  <cit> , and the increased turning we observed in our simulations suggests that this is a viable hypothesis. this result does suggest a potentially observable mutant phenotype: elimination of the ability of pollen tubes to decrease their rate of growth would put them at a competitive disadvantage relative to wild-type.

