BACKGROUND
sucking lice  are permanent and obligate ectoparasites of eutherian mammals. these highly specialized blood-sucking insects live in close association with their hosts and complete their entire life cycle on the host  <cit> . anoplurans have modified mouthparts for feeding on host blood and because mammalian blood differs widely among species in terms of its suitability for louse nutrition  <cit> , sucking lice can be highly host specific  <cit> . host specificity could also be reinforced by interactions with the host's immune system. high host specificity can arise from a long history of cospeciation between hosts and their parasites. cospeciation is speciation  in a parasite lineage as a result of, or at the same time as, host cladogenesis  <cit> . the current distribution of parasites on host taxa  can be the result of cospeciation or various historical events  <cit>  such as host switching, sorting events , duplication events , and failure of the parasite to speciate when the host speciates . these historical processes can be detected by comparing the phylogenies of hosts and their parasites using methodologies such as reconciliation analysis  <cit> . previous cophylogenetic studies of lice  have documented each of these historical events in various combinations .

humans  are parasitized by two genera of sucking lice: one shared with chimpanzees  and the other shared with gorillas . human head and body lice, as well as chimpanzee lice, are members of the genus pediculus . there is no pediculus species known to parasitize gorillas. human pubic lice and gorilla lice belong to the genus pthirus , and no pthirus species is known to parasitize chimpanzees. pediculus and pthirus are sister taxa based on morphology and molecular data , and primate lice are known to have cospeciated with their hosts for at least  <dig> million years  <cit> . the curious distribution of these two genera raises an interesting question regarding the evolutionary history of primate lice. why do humans retain both genera, but chimpanzees and gorillas have only one genus each?

given what is already known about the coevolutionary history of the lice and their hosts, we can speculate that there are two mutually exclusive explanations that can account for the current distribution of pediculus and pthirus . the most parsimonious explanation  predicts perfect cospeciation between the primates and lice with the addition of a single host switch. in this scenario, the divergence between pediculus humanus and pediculus schaeffi occurred at the same time as the split between their hosts, humans and chimpanzees, ca.  <dig> million years ago , and the split between pediculus and pthirus occurred contemporaneously with the split between gorillas and the lineage leading to chimpanzees and humans . these events were followed some time later by one host switch of a pthirus species from gorillas to humans . host switching among lice is common in many groups of birds and mammals  <cit> . this 'recent host switch' hypothesis requires one evolutionary step and predicts that the divergence between pthirus pubis and pthirus gorillae is more recent than the chimpanzee/human split . how we might have acquired our pubic lice from gorillas is not immediately apparent, however it would be interesting to know whether the switch was very recent  or whether it was considerably older.

the alternative hypothesis involves an ancient louse duplication event that occurred on the ancestor of gorillas, chimpanzees, and humans, which would have created the lineages leading to the two extant genera, pediculus and pthirus . in this case, the timing of the divergence between pthirus pubis and pthirus gorillae would correspond to that of their hosts . in this scenario, humans would have retained both genera, but chimpanzees would have lost a pthirus species and gorillas would have lost a pediculus species to extinction . such parasite duplications and extinctions are common in the lice of birds and mammals . this parasite extinction or 'pair of lice lost' model is less parsimonious than the 'recent host switch' hypothesis listed above because it requires at least three evolutionary steps . although the 'recent host switch' hypothesis is more parsimonious, it is not necessarily more likely than the 'pair of lice lost' hypothesis. each of the historical events  has some probability of occurrence, the quantification of which is beyond the scope of this paper. there are additional hypotheses that can be postulated that have more evolutionary steps than the two presented above, however there are no other hypotheses that have an equal number of steps or fewer steps. for instance, one might assume that the current distribution of lice resulted from a host switch of pthirus from humans to gorillas . however, this evolutionary scenario would require at least five evolutionary steps.

the two hypotheses of parasite distributions  are based on the premise of maximizing the number of cospeciation events and minimizing the number of events that deviate from cospeciation, which are typical of analyses that attempt to reconcile host and parasite associations that are based on the concept of evolutionary parsimony . however, parsimony-based reconciliation analyses do not take into account branch lengths and divergence times – information that is essential to distinguish between the 'recent host switch' and 'pair of lice lost' hypotheses. in the presence of significant cospeciation we can use the timing of speciation events to differentiate among alternative hypotheses of host-parasite associations  <cit> .

we have performed phylogenetic and cophylogenetic analyses of two genes, the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit i  gene and nuclear gene elongation factor  <dig> alpha  gene, to determine the shared evolutionary history of primate lice and their hosts. we also investigate the use of standard phylogenetic methods for reconstructing coevolutionary histories when standard cophylogenetic methods  cannot always find the solution that best fits the observed data.

RESULTS
phylogenetic and cophylogenetic analyses
the partition homogeneity test determined that the cox <dig> and ef-1α genes did not differ significantly , therefore a combined analysis was performed in addition to analyses based on single genes. the best-fit model for each individual gene and the combined-gene analysis of lice was a transversion model  that permitted two nucleotide substitution rates for transversions, one rate for transitions, unequal base frequencies, a rate heterogeneity parameter , and a parameter for invariant sites . similarly, the best-fit model for the cox <dig> gene from the primate host taxa was also trn+i+Γ. maximum likelihood  analysis of the combined cox <dig> and ef-1α dataset  from lice produced a single, well-supported phylogeny in agreement with results from previous analyses . when the same ml analysis was performed enforcing a molecular clock, the resulting tree topology did not change and the resulting tree score was not significantly different than the unconstrained score . the ml analysis of the host cox <dig> data also resulted in a single phylogeny in agreement with known relationships among these primate taxa .

cophylogenetic analyses using treemap  <cit>  produced two reconciliations of host and parasite phylogenies in agreement with the 'recent host switch' and 'pair of lice lost' hypotheses presented in figure  <dig>  the reconciliation concordant with the 'recent host switch' hypothesis  included five cospeciation events and one host switch for a total cost of  <dig> . the reconstruction concordant with the 'pair of lice lost' hypothesis  was less parsimonious. while this reconstruction included five cospeciation events, there was also a single duplication event and two losses resulting in a total cost of  <dig> . both reconciliations show significantly greater similarity between the host and parasite trees than would be expected based on chance alone .

divergence date estimation
divergence date estimates differed little between r8s and multidivtime analyses and between individual and combined genes . for convenience we will refer to divergence date estimates based on the combined gene tree used in multidivtime . mean divergence date estimates for the split between the chimpanzee and human head/body lice  averaged  <dig>  mya. the divergence date estimates for the gorilla and human pubic lice  averaged  <dig>  mya and are noticeably more recent than the split between the two pediculus species. the estimated divergence date for the most recent common ancestor  of the two genera, pthirus and pediculus, was estimated to be  <dig>  mya , noticeably older than the mrca of chimpanzees, humans, and gorillas.

discussion
reconciliation analysis using treemap corroborates earlier reports of significant cospeciation between primate lice and their hosts  <cit> . these cophylogenetic analyses also result in two reconciliations of the host and parasite phylogenies where the most parsimonious reconstruction favors the 'recent host switch' hypothesis . however, divergence date estimates conflict with the results of the reconciliation analysis because the 'recent host switch' hypothesis predicts that the divergence of pediculus and pthirus would be roughly contemporaneous with the split between gorillas and the lineage leading to humans and chimpanzees. our estimates of the mrca of pediculus and pthirus dates to roughly  <dig> mya, not remotely consistent with the mrca of humans, chimpanzees, and gorillas . given the much older age of our mrca of pediculus and pthirus, it is more appropriate, although less parsimonious, to assume that the origin of the two genera was the result of a parasite duplication event rather than a cospeciation event . it is curious that the estimate of the mrca of pthirus and pediculus  is contemporaneous with the divergence of orangutans from other apes  <cit> , however this is possibly coincidental. lice do not parasitize orangutans; therefore, reconstructing their role in the evolutionary history of primate sucking lice will be difficult.

the 'pair of lice lost' hypothesis is also unsatisfactory when compared to divergence date estimates. for the 'pair of lice lost' hypothesis to be correct we must assume that divergence between pthirus pubis and pthirus gorillae is roughly contemporaneous with the split of gorilla from the lineage leading to chimpanzees and humans . our divergence date estimates of roughly 3– <dig> mya  is much younger than the host divergence of  <dig> mya  <cit>  and is even younger than the divergence between chimpanzees and humans .

the estimates of divergence dates argue for a more complex evolutionary history than estimated by reconciliation analysis. while reconciliation analysis serves to find the most parsimonious reconstruction of host and parasite evolutionary history by maximizing cospeciation events and minimizing the cost of the reconstruction, it can only identify possible scenarios describing the evolutionary history between associated taxa. incorporating branch length data in other analyses is necessary to determine which scenario best fits the observed data. for example, post-hoc mantel tests are commonly used to look for overall correlation in host and parasite data sets  <cit> . however, we have too few taxa to perform such an analysis, and we have instead relied upon ad-hoc phylogenetic tests to determine whether certain nodes of cospeciation were contemporaneous.

to further examine the validity of the 'pair of lice lost' hypothesis, we assessed whether the divergence of the two pthirus species was contemporaneous with the host divergence of roughly  <dig> mya. the branch length between the two pthirus species in the best-fit ml louse tree was artificially lengthened to approximate a branch that is the same age as the branch between pediculus schaeffi and pediculus humanus, thereby representing the split between chimp and human lice. it is widely known that the gorilla, chimpanzees, and human divergence times are very close in age, so if our estimate is contemporaneous with the divergence of chimpanzees and humans , then we cannot rule out true contemporaneous times of divergence between the two pthirus species and their hosts. the likelihood score of this constrained tree  was significantly worse than the true louse tree . we can therefore reject contemporaneous divergence events and we can conclude that the split between the human and gorilla species of pthirus diverged much more recently than the split between humans and gorillas or even humans and chimpanzees. the divergence within pthirus is therefore the result of a host switch from gorillas to humans  roughly 3– <dig> mya, as predicted in the 'recent host switch' hypothesis.

we can similarly examine the divergence date estimation for the branch between pthirus and pediculus, which the 'recent host switch' model would predict to be  <dig> mya. our estimates were much older , and shortening the branch length artificially between pthirus and pediculus to resemble a divergence near  <dig> mya can be easily rejected . these analyses support an ancient duplication at that node, consistent with the 'pair of lice lost' model. therefore, contrary to the results of the reconciliation analysis, the divergence date estimates predict a much less parsimonious explanation of current primate louse distributions: a combination of the 'recent host switch' and 'pair of lice lost' hypotheses.

given our estimates of divergence dates, the most likely evolutionary history is that pthirus and pediculus diverged on an ancestor of chimpanzee, human, and gorilla roughly  <dig> mya , with each genus then having the potential to cospeciate with descendent hosts . however, only the gorillas retained pthirus with an extinction of pthirus on the branch leading to both humans and chimpanzees . pediculus was maintained on the lineage leading to humans and chimpanzees but lost from the gorilla lineage, and the two resulting species  diverged in tandem with their primate hosts roughly six million years ago . approximately 3– <dig> mya, a pthirus species switched from the gorilla lineage to the lineage leading to modern humans. it is important to note that this happened after the divergence of chimpanzees and humans and that these data suggest humans acquired their pubic louse from gorillas not recently, but rather 3– <dig> million years ago. in total, this coevolutionary scenario requires four evolutionary steps , and is a combination of both the 'recent host switch' and the 'pair of lice lost' hypotheses.

CONCLUSIONS
evidence suggests that pthirus pubis has been associated with humans for several million years, and likely arrived on humans via a host switch from gorillas. despite the fact that human pubic lice are primarily transmitted via sexual contact, such contact is not required to explain the host switch. parasites often switch from a given species to a predator of that species  <cit> , and are sometimes found to switch to unrelated hosts in communally used areas, such as roosting or nesting sites  <cit> . the host switch in question could have resulted from any form of contact between archaic humans and gorillas including, but not limited to, feeding on or living among gorillas. regardless of how the transfer occurred, suitable habitat had to be available on the new human host for the host switch to be successful. for example, it is possible that the switch of pthirus from gorillas to humans coincides with a change in available niche space in humans, such as the loss of body hair. further study, however, is required to test such a hypothesis.

because pthirus has been associated with humans for several million years, this taxon can be examined in the same way that pediculus humanus has to study the evolutionary history of its human host  <cit> . pthirus pubis represents an independent, ecological replicate that went through the same evolutionary history on humans as their head/body lice, and can be used to test predictions made from pediculus humanus. pediculus humanus shows genetic evidence of population expansion out of africa roughly  <dig>  years ago, which is concordant with host evolutionary history  <cit> . however, in contrast to the shallow mitochondrial dna  gene history of humans , pediculus humanus has three deeply divergent mtdna lineages that share a mrca ca.  <dig> million years ago, which is far older than the age of their modern human hosts  <cit> . perhaps a worldwide sample of pthirus pubis will mirror that of pediculus humanus, and show both the population expansion  <dig>  years ago and the three deeply divergent mtdna lineages. understanding human evolutionary history from the perspective of its parasites may provide useful insight into a brief period of history that is not fully recorded in the host fossil record or in host dna  <cit> . however, if parasites are to provide much clarity, it will likely be only after many human parasites have been examined.

the advent of parsimony-based reconciliation analysis has permitted many researchers to assess phylogenetic congruence in a wide array of host-parasite assemblages. however, this method is more limited than bayesian approaches  <cit>  to studying cophylogenetics, which evaluate not only topological congruence but also the comparative timing of host and parasite divergences. it is imperative that we continue to put into practice the theoretical work that has propelled systematists forward in recent years. only then can we hope to uncover the more complex interactions between hosts and parasites.

