BACKGROUND
understanding how animal body parts are structured to perform their function is crucial for understanding morphological divergence and adaptation in animal evolution  <cit> . a valuable clue to understanding the diversification of animal structure comes from a comparative morphological perspective showing that new morphology rarely arises from de novo body parts, but rather emerges from preexisting parts with lineage-specific modifications  <cit> . mammalian skeletal limbs are a well-known illustration of this point, wherein diversified skeletal limb structures  are composed of a common set of skeletal parts   <cit> . such divergence is also found in the spectacular diversity of moth and butterfly wing patterns, which are thought to result from a common set of symmetry pattern elements shared across numerous species   <cit>  . recently, the establishment of the ngp was also supported by molecular experimental data showing that some elements of the ngp are regulated by the gene expression of a well-known morphogen, wnt- <dig>  in different families   <cit> . thus, the ngp provides a comprehensive framework for identifying diversified wing patterns as morphological structures composed of a common set of pattern elements.

pattern divergence in moth and butterfly wings has occurred via modifications in the association between pattern elements. previous studies have suggested that each symmetry element of the ngp appears to be genetically and phenotypically autonomous  <cit>  and can become developmentally decoupled  <cit> , thereby allowing separate evolutionary trajectories. several lines of experimental evidence suggest that the high individuality of the ngp allows further decoupling of the pattern elements , and that this characteristic contributes to the evolvability of lepidopteran wing patterns  <cit> . in contrast, recent studies on morphological integration have emphasized the importance of a combination of coupling and decoupling of body part development for adaptation of animal structures  <cit> . the concept of morphological integration postulates that functionally related elements are tightly coupled, whereas unrelated parts are independently decoupled  <cit> . according to this concept, it seems to be hypothesized that a specific integrated nature can be detected in lepidopteran wing patterns, in particular, complex adaptive patterns such as leaf mimicry. thus, to understand how a lepidopteran wing pattern uses its subordinate elements, investigation of the integrated nature  of the ngp symmetry elements for a complex adaptive wing pattern is necessary.

the pre-eminent model of complex adaptive patterns is leaf mimicry in moths, as most of their patterns are composed of multiple parts visually arranged to look like leaves. one of the most striking examples of a leaf moth is the japanese noctuid moth oraesia excavata, whose dorsal forewings exhibit a special resemblance to a leaf with leaf venation patterns  <cit>  . at rest, the moth remains still and sports a leaf-shaped outline of the forewings; such behavior and shape strongly support their mimesis to leaves. additionally, if their morphological integration is indispensable to the leaf mimicry pattern, the specificity of its integrated nature could be highlighted by comparison with the nonmimetic patterns of another moth. to test this approach, we examined the wing pattern of another type of moth, thyas juno, which displays a relatively simple pattern . the leaf venation pattern of o. excavata and the nonmimetic pattern of t. juno are composed of several pigmental elements , providing a suitable model for exploring the integrated nature of wing patterns.

a key feature to characterize the integrated nature of complex wing patterns is provided by modularity, which describes tightly coupled units and individually decoupled units  <cit> . modularity represents developmental and functional aspects of morphological structures, since it arises from developmental interactions  <cit>  and is shaped by the accumulated effects of natural selection  <cit> . although the field of network theory  <cit>  has significantly advanced the ability to detect modules, it has been minimally applied to deciphering the integration and modularity of morphological structures. to achieve this, one must develop a new method to apply a network theoretical approach to multivariate correlation data. a “correlation network”  <cit>  approach has recently been developed whereby the nodes represent constituent elements such as metabolites, neurons, or genes, and the links represent the correlation of a characteristic of the elements such as metabolic flux, neuronal activity, or gene expression above a threshold level. this method has been explicitly, or at least implicitly, employed in various studies on metabolomics  <cit> , neurodynamics  <cit> , and transcriptomes based on gene co-expression  <cit> . likewise, this method can be applied to explore the modules of morphological structures , whereby the nodes represent the constituent parts and the links represent the correlation of the spatial positions among them.

here, we examine whether leaf and nonmimetic wing patterns are subject to the ngp. additionally, we quantified the modules of these wing patterns and investigated how these modules couple and decouple the ngp symmetry elements. based on the comparative morphological analysis, we dissected both the o. excavata leaf pattern and the nonmimetic pattern into a common set of ngp symmetry elements. subsequently, using a morphological correlation network, quantitative analysis showed that the modules of the t. juno wing pattern regularly corresponded to the individuality of the ngp symmetry elements. furthermore, quantitative analysis detected the modules of the leaf pattern, each of which corresponded to a component of the leaf venation pattern . unlike the t. juno wing pattern, the modules of the o. excavata wing pattern were closely associated with leaf mimesis, not to the individuality of the ngp symmetry elements. the results indicate that the modules detected in the leaf mimicry pattern are established by a combination of coupling and decoupling the ngp symmetry elements.

RESULTS
groundplan-based dissection of the leaf wing pattern
it has been proposed that the scheme of the ngp  is established in diversified moth wing patterns in various families . to examine whether the o. excavata and t. juno wing patterns are subject to the ngp, we investigated which pigmental elements of the wing patterns correspond to which symmetry elements  constituting the ngp . comparative morphological analysis dissected the o. excavata leaf venation pattern into a set of ngp symmetry elements : the left lateral vein was composed of the left ends of cd, bop, and bod; the main vein was composed of the central portions of bop and bod; and the right lateral vein was composed of the right extremities of bod and m . according to this analysis, the outward appearance of the leaf pattern is achieved by elaborate modification of the geometrical shapes of the elements. for example, cd, bop, and bod are formed in an acute angle; bod is formed in an obtuse angle; the upper-side parts of cd, bop and bod are arranged in parallel; and the middle parts of bop and bod are present in straight lines arranged in parallel. in summary, the leaf pattern in o. excavata is captured as a derivative of the ngp. for comparison, we examined the wing pattern of t. juno, another noctuid moth from the same family. the wing pattern in t. juno does not display leaf venation patterning, but instead consists of four parts demarcated by almost straight lines . similarly, this wing pattern can be traced as a set of elements: bd, cp, cd, and bop . although their appearances are largely different, the scheme of the ground plan suggests that these two moths are composed of homologous elements inherited from a common ancestor. compared to the t. juno wing pattern, the o. excavata wing pattern seems to have more elaborate modifications .

the modules detected in the o. excavata leaf pattern
quantitative analysis with high-resolution measurements of the variation at a single pigment-cell level  elucidated the correlation network of the o. excavata wing pattern . to draw this network, all possible combinations of pairwise correlations between the measurement-point set on the wing pattern were calculated . correlational relationships above the threshold level  were visualized in the form of a correlation network  <cit> , from which the reichardt-bornholdt  method  <cit>  succeeded in extracting four modules . because this method finds weighted solutions even in the same data set, the resultant modular architectures are represented with occurrence frequencies in repeated trials . although the repeated trials seeking solutions found a different set of modules in each of the trials, each complete module in the most frequent solution was detected with high reproducibility:  <dig> % of the  <dig>  trials for module  <dig>   <dig> % of the trials for module  <dig>   <dig> % of the trials for module  <dig>  and  <dig> % of the trials for module  <dig> . subsequently, we tested whether the modules detected from the correlation network  could be changed with respect to changes in the threshold levels . because the topology of the correlation network largely depends on the choice of the threshold level  <cit> , the modules detected by the rb method have the possibility of being sensitive to the choice of the threshold. despite this possibility, the test analysis confirmed that the modules detected from the standard correlation network were robust regardless of the choice of threshold level . in particular, the most frequent  and the second most frequent  modular architectures were exactly the same as shown in the correlation network , except for the frequencies of the modular architectures . taken together, we conclude that the leaf pattern in o. excavata consists of four modules.

the modules detected in the t. juno nonmimetic pattern
the morphometrical analysis using the rb method quantified the correlation network of the t. juno wing pattern, which was found to be composed of four modules . the repeated trials seeking solutions showed a high reproducibility for all of the modules: module  <dig> ,  <dig> % occurrence frequency in  <dig>  trials; module  <dig> ,  <dig> %; module  <dig> ,  <dig> %; and module  <dig> ,  <dig> %. in addition, we validated that the modules detected in the correlation networks  were robust with respect to changes in the threshold levels . these results suggest that the nonmimetic pattern in t. juno consists of four modules.

module construction of o. excavata wing pattern is associated with leaf mimesis
the identified modules in the o. excavata wing pattern are closely associated with the leaf venation pattern . among the four modules, three correspond approximately with each component of the leaf venation pattern: module  <dig> corresponds to the left lateral vein, module  <dig> corresponds to the main vein, and module  <dig> corresponds to the right lateral vein.

to explore how the modules detected in the leaf pattern are constructed by the ngp symmetry elements, the correlation network of the o. excavata wing pattern was re-plotted on the basis of the ngp . module  <dig> was composed of the measurement points  located on bp and bd. this module regularly corresponded to the b symmetry system in a one-to-one manner, suggesting that the construction of this module is consistent with previous studies  <cit> . in contrast, modules 2- <dig> did not correspond to the symmetry systems in a one-to-one manner, but in a more complex fashion . module  <dig> was composed of the measurement points belonging to two different symmetry systems , thus coupling the upper side of the cd and bop. module  <dig> was composed of the measurement points mp7-mp <dig> and mp12-mp <dig>  and module  <dig> was composed of mp15-mp <dig>  with each module partially corresponding to the bo symmetry system. these results suggest that modules  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> originated by decoupling the bo symmetry elements into separately correlated units, although the elements remained as continuous lines. taken together, the elements constituting the o. excavata wing pattern were modularized as tightly correlated units, regardless of the units in the ngp symmetry systems, although the ngp remained identifiable.

finally, we investigated how the modules in the t. juno wing pattern were associated with the ngp. module  <dig> corresponded to the bd element, module  <dig> corresponded to the cp element, module  <dig> corresponded to the cd element, and module  <dig> corresponded to the bop element . in contrast to the complicated establishment of the modules in the o. excavata wing pattern, all of the modules of the t. juno wing pattern regularly corresponded to the ngp symmetry systems in a one-to-one manner, whereby no module coupled elements derived from a different ngp symmetry system nor decoupled a single element into separately correlated units.

discussion
using quantitative analysis, this study clearly provides the first evidence for modularity in a leaf mimicry pattern. we have shown that the modules detected were established by coupling different symmetry elements and decoupling even a single element into different modules. moreover, the modules of the o. excavata wing pattern were closely associated with leaf mimicry, not to the individuality of the ngp symmetry elements. for comparison, we also investigated the integrated nature of the nonmimetic wing pattern of t. juno. unlike the o. excavata wing pattern, quantitative analysis of the t. juno wing pattern demonstrated that the modules regularly corresponded to the individual ngp symmetry elements. these results suggest that the evolution of the leaf mimicry pattern entails the evolution of new modules, free from the individuality of the ngp symmetry system.

recent attempts to identify developmental modules have advocated that two spatially adjacent measures are likely to have a higher correlation than more distant measures . adjacency within pigmental patterns in butterfly and moth wings seems to reflect actual developmental processes, given that the pigmental elements are more or less directly formed by morphogen diffusion mechanisms  <cit> . therefore, we are confident that our results reflect the underlying biological mechanisms , because spatial autocorrelation cannot account for the entire pattern revealed in our analyses. for example, we found a degree of independence between the adjacent b and c symmetry systems in the o. excavata wing pattern : mp <dig>  and mp <dig>  were adjacently located  but showed no significant correlation, whereas mp <dig>  and mp <dig>  were located at nearly the same distance  and showed high correlation . additionally, we found phenotypic independence within the bo symmetry system; although mp5-mp <dig> were adjacently located , some points were tightly modularized, with some adjacent points decoupled  .

our understanding of conceptual issues  is tightly linked to progress in the quantification methods used to detect such issues. methods of detecting modular architectures in organismal bodies have been well developed  <cit>  and these approaches have been applied to various organismal bodies: for example, cichlid jaws  <cit> , monkey dentition  <cit> , hominoid crania  <cit> , lizard crania  <cit> . in the present study, we added a new dimension to methods for detecting modules, which allows covariance data of morphometric shapes to be analyzed using theoretical frameworks of network analysis. our method consists of three steps:  conversion of variance-covariance matrix of morphometric data into adjacency matrix, which mathematically represents a complete graph, to draw morphological correlation network;  control of a threshold to set the topology level of morphological correlation network;  application of network analysis methods to the morphological correlation network satisfying a threshold. although in this study the reichardt-bornholdt method to detect modules was used, in principle any other methods of network analysis can be applied to investigate covariance architecture of morphological shapes, though such applications to morphometric data seem to require further validation in individual cases. in the field of network theory, methods of identifying the modules from networks have been well developed  <cit> . the implementation of network theoretical approaches to morphometric data will provide further opportunities for understanding the complex adaptive traits of organisms.

in contrast to previous reports showing that ngp symmetry elements have a higher degree of individuality during wing pattern divergence  <cit> , our results show that modularity of ngp symmetry elements was not completely detected, but rather they were reorganized into new modules . this discrepancy could be attributed to the fact that the wing patterns investigated in previous morphometric studies were relatively simple and stereotypical   <cit>  . in fact, consistent with previous studies, our analysis revealed that the simple wing pattern of t. juno has a high degree of modularity in the symmetry elements . these results suggest that evolution toward more complex patterns such as leaf mimicry includes the coupling and decoupling processes of the constituent elements, distinct from the original stereotypical ones . previous studies have focused on the decoupling of pattern divergence; for example, dislocation and individualization of serial homologous eyespots were based on the developmental compartments  <cit> . in addition to these mechanisms, we propose a combination of decoupling and coupling processes that “rewires” the correlation among the common parts. in conceptual studies, vermeij proposed a key concept, the “versatility” of a given body plan, which is evaluated by the number and range of independent parameters controlling form  <cit> . as he pointed out, the more that parameters controlling morphological structures, the greater the diversity of morphological types and the larger the potential adaptive zone. thus, this characteristic seems to be closely associated with evolvability. accordingly, the ngp may have a versatile property, an extraordinary flexible characteristic that allows a high degree of freedom in the modification of common elements. this “rewiring” strategy  of the ground plan provides a new organizing principle for morphological diversification and might be applicable to complex wing patterns that have not yet been investigated .

how is the ngp involved in the developmental process that establishes the modules of the leaf mimicry pattern? clues are provided by the pattern formation of eyespots in the nymphalid butterfly bicyclus anynana <cit> . at the early stage, distal-less  expression patterns are observed in all wing cells; however, as the developmental process progresses, dll expression disappears in the wing cells that do not form the eyespots  <cit> . this observation suggests that the common molecular mechanism remains in the upstream process of the developmental cascade, but also that secondary modifications in the downstream process generate a considerable difference in eyespot formation in each wing cell. recent molecular studies have shown that the pattern elements of the ngp are formed by a common molecular mechanism  in the upstream developmental mechanism  <cit> . these studies suggest the possibility that the common developmental mechanism of the ngp remains during the evolution of the o. excavata leaf pattern, and several modifier alleles responsible for coupling and decoupling have been fixed as secondary modifications. if so, an expression pattern similar to that of wnt- <dig> may be found at the early developmental stages in both the o. excavata leaf pattern and the t. juno nonmimetic pattern, and subsequent expression patterns may become different to establish different modules. testing this hypothesis will require a detailed analysis of the pattern formation processes using well-developed molecular techniques  <cit> .

although one may reasonably conclude that the leaf mimicry pattern establishes the modules, it is important to understand which factors promote the evolution of such modules. quantitative analysis suggested that the evolution of the modules in the leaf pattern originated from the coupling and decoupling of ngp symmetry elements , which leads us to infer that the evolution of the correlations that established the modules is unlikely to have occurred by chance. in this respect, the conceptual idea of modularity postulates functionally related elements that are tightly correlated as modules   <cit> . this idea is consistent with the quantitative genetics perspective that variation and covariation of phenotypic traits are subject to the effects of natural selection  <cit> . one possible scenario in the evolution of the o. excavata modules is that the modules corresponding to the leaf venation components originated in response to the adaptive evolution of leaf mimesis. additionally, this scenario may be plausible from an ecological viewpoint. previous studies suggested that the visual appearance of mimesis appeals to the object recognition of predators, not simply the visual detection of predators  <cit> , an idea that was recently validated by experimental tests using birds  <cit> . if predators are able to discriminate whether the object is edible or inedible through recognition of the morphological patterning, the patterning is hypothesized to realize a specific integration at a phenotypic level. this study cannot completely rule out the possibility that the modules are adaptive products needed for other factors , or merely by-products of responses to other effects . to test this hypothesis in future experiments, quantitative analysis will be useful to determine whether other lepidopteran leaf patterns show modularity corresponding to subordinate leaf-venation components, perhaps together with predation experiments using birds  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
a comparative morphological analysis dissected the leaf mimicry pattern of a noctuid moth, o. excavata, into an evolutionarily common set of pattern elements illustrated by the ngp. we developed a new method, “morphological correlation networks,” to detect the modules of the leaf mimicry pattern of o. excavata and found that the modules were established by coupling different symmetry systems of the ngp and decoupling a single element into separately correlated units. moreover, these modules were closely associated with its leaf-venation pattern, not with the individuality of the ngp. in contrast, the nonmimetic pattern of t. juno had modules that regularly corresponded to the symmetry elements of the ngp. these results suggest that the evolution of the leaf mimicry pattern entails the evolution of new modules, which may be facilitated by a versatile characteristic of the ngp symmetry system.

