BACKGROUND
the entomologist p. rossi  <cit>  described the first subterranean termite species in tuscany in  <dig>  the reticulitermes lucifugus species was first called termes lucifugum and for a long time was the only recognized species in europe. since then, extensive studies of the reticulitermes genus in this region have shown the existence of six sibling species and a tyrrhenian subspecies  <cit> . the precise classification of taxonomic groups is still of current interest and a matter of priority firstly for economic reasons and the need to define urban pests and secondly, of more fundamental importance, to reveal more information about the phylogenetic and biogeographical relationships in the genus  <cit> .

reticulitermes lucifugus corsicus, a subspecies of a european subterranean termite  <cit> , is a species that may help to explain current issues. although it was established that these termites lived exclusively on islands, recent studies have found the species on the mainland, in tuscany  and in provence . the hitherto unsuspected presence of the species on the continent raises certain questions about the characteristics specific to the corsican termite, in particular its actual taxonomic status and the way in which it migrated to the continent. its distribution across tuscany and interaction with italian termites need to be studied.

r. lucifugus corsicus has still not been clearly defined and is known from subsidiary descriptions in general publications  <cit> . as it is closely related to the italian subspecies and as there is no evidence of reproductive isolation between the two taxa, r. lucifugus corsicus has been classified as an endemic subspecies of the islands of corsica and sardinia. biometric data clearly puts the corsican termites closer to continental r. lucifugus and only quantitative differences can be noted from chemical data – defensive secretions of the soldiers  <cit>  and cuticular hydrocarbon proportions  <cit> . only the yellow color of the tibia of reproductives is a significant morphological indicator of their corsican origin, distinguishing them from r. lucifugus  <cit> . the best identification method remains the comparison of dna sequences  <cit> , as mitochondrial or nuclear haplotypes clearly distinguish the two taxa.

these characteristic differences probably developed after isolation on the islands and confirm that the taxon is endemic. however, it is difficult to date accurately at what stage r. lucifugus corsicus diverged from the italian r. lucifugus. the geological history of the area is very complex  <cit> . the main hypothesis put forward by plateaux and clément  <cit> , later supported by uva et al.  <cit>  and luchetti et al.  <cit>  is that the speciation event dates from the last glaciation period with a classic scenario of vicariance and post-glacial colonization. any questions about the biogeographical history of the island subspecies can be answered by studying the development of termite colonies on the continent. this sympatric existence, in which hybridization is possible, can be considered as a real window on evolutionary processes  <cit>  in the reticulitermes genus. this area contains populations of termites that could possibly shed light on the past and recent evolution of the species complex, from the first speciation events to possible hybridization. more than two centuries after rossi's discovery, tuscany could once more be a region that may provide useful information for the study of european termites.

this phylogeographic study in the tyrrhenian area reveals how the island reticulitermes lucifugus corsicus termite evolved, from its origins to its recent appearance in continental coastal areas. an integrative approach was used to clarify the phylogenetic relationship with the italian r. lucifugus termite and to detect any hybrid forms, using various genetic markers  <cit> , such as mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequences, and several microsatellite regions. these markers have different mutation rates and can, therefore, provide information about evolutionary events on different time scales.

RESULTS
phylogeny based on mitochondrial genes
the coii sequences of  <dig> samples  were aligned and no length polymorphism was detected. forty-four of the  <dig> base pairs  were variable and  <dig> were parsimony-informative. phylogenetic analyses performed on  <dig> samples either with maximum parsimony   or with neighbor-joining  methods  gave the same topology. two major clades were supported by high bootstrap values of 95% and 100% respectively. they correspond to the lucifugus  and corsicus  taxa matching sequences already in genbank  <cit>  and used for this study . twenty-one private substitutions distinguished the first two groups . the sicilian sequences  form a third clade  with the same degree of divergence from the l and c clades . twenty-two nucleotides separated the consensus sequence of the l clade,  <dig> compared to rosarno  and  <dig> compared to viareggio .

the haplotype code refers to phylogeny or sequencing alignments obtained according to the different nuclear or mitochondrial markers. c = r. l. corsicus. l = r. lucifugus. s = "sicilian" r. lucifugus.

these results refer to figure  <dig> 

several haplotypes were identified in the two main clades in this study, supported by bootstraps higher than 60%. therefore, with only two subgroups  found in many different localities, clade c had lower genetic variability than clade l . the haplotype c <dig> was the most common. it was found on all the tyrrhenian islands  as well as in several samples from provence and tuscany which, a priori, were geographically non-concordant . similarly, the other corsican haplotype  found in the marseille-c sample could possibly be a continental introduction or introgression. within clade l, termite colonies from bastia were also included in an unexpected group from tuscany  and all the french colonies were linked with colonies from lazio, south rome .

nuclear sequence analysis
the nuclear sequences , which generally evolve more slowly than the organelle genome  <cit> , were far less variable with only  <dig> nucleotides of the  <dig> that differentiate the two taxa . colonies from follonica, gianella, uccelina  and valle d'alesani  were included in the 'lucifugus' clade, which was contrary to their mitochondrial data. this was also the case for the castiglioncello colony , which had a 'corsican' nuclear haplotype. this lack of concordance between nuclear and cytoplasmic genotypes could be an example of the asymmetrical introgression already described by avise et al  <cit> .

the nuclear data shows evidence of hybridization. both taxa  were found in marseille  as well as a colony with a mix of both haplotypes for the same individual . the sequence electropherogram  clearly revealed an overlap of the two peaks corresponding to the private substitution of each taxon at each variable site. the absence of noise in the areas round these peaks excluded the possibility of artefacts  <cit> . this was not an isolated case in provence . other colonies in provence had even more complex forms, either with a crossing-over type mutation on the third diagnostic locus  or the insertion of a microsatellite repeat  .

microsatellite analysis
five microsatellite loci were analyzed. heterozygosis was often low  with a mean of  <dig>  alleles per locus . these microsatellite regions were identified in phylogenetically distant reticulitermes species  <cit>  and seemed to have lower diversity in the transtyrrenian specific complex. however, analysis of this data using structure  <cit>  revealed significant differences between the populations. it can be difficult to determine the population structure of termites in a sample  <cit>  and so the number of populations was estimated using our own biological appreciation  <cit> . using the probable estimated values ln p  and the graphic results , the data could be structured in  <dig> to  <dig> populations. histograms were usually incoherent from k =  <dig>  for k =  <dig>  structure application distinguished both taxa. the corsican termites from valle d'alesani could be classified according to their nuclear sequences  among the r. lucifugus. uccelina- <dig> , and follonica  in tuscany may both originate from an admixture between subspecies. the second run  showed a new population nested in the r. lucifugus population in provence, france. the bastia colony  formed a separate cluster for k =  <dig> and particularly for k =  <dig>  the marseille-c colony was partly assigned to this bastia group . finally, by over-estimating k, the program attributed colonies to populations. this could indicate genetic variability within the r. lucifugus peninsular group. however, this illustrated the homogeneity in the populations in the island samples , colonies that had apparently been introduced  and colonies in provence .

the results obtained using factorial correspondence analysis  also showed a similar distribution into  <dig> populations . axis  <dig>  distinguished r. lucifugus from r. l. corsicus. a hybrid colony  also appeared between the two groups. axes  <dig>  and  <dig>  separated r. lucifugus colonies into two populations: one from italy and one from provence. close to these clusters, the bastia colony formed a separate population which was much more similar to the population in italy. finally, the lucifugus italian group included colonies originating from unexpected geographical regions such as valle d'alesani , vitrolles-a and marseille-o . based on these results, the genetic differentiation between the three populations was calculated using f-statistics . it appears that all the populations are highly distant to each other . the population related to r. l. corsicus is the most differentiated population , but, among r. lucifugus taxon, the provencal population is also highly separated to the italian population .

fst for all population =  <dig> 

discussion
past evolution: origins of endemism
the mitochondrial phylogeny shows that the tyrrhenian, sicilian and mainland populations of reticulitermes form three clearly distinct clades with a high level of divergence. the genetic distances between the island clades  and the mainland clade  are similar . this suggests that the island populations  have a comparable evolutionary history. today, very little is known about sicilian populations of reticulitermes. it would be interesting to investigate the level of endemism of these populations to see whether they could be considered as a subspecies, as has already been suggested  <cit> .

the large number of mutations that have accumulated between the three clades shows a long-term separation without any interbreeding. the different hypotheses suggesting that all present-day european reticulitermes taxa started to diverge from different southern ice age refugia  <cit>  confirmed the postglacial colonization routes described by taberlet et al.  <cit>  and hewitt  <cit> . more recently, luchetti et al. suggested that corsican and sicilian populations differentiated later from the peninsular populations during the last glacial maximum  period   <cit> . this time of divergence seems relatively recent in comparison to species-level differences observed in other taxa from these areas  <cit> . some endemic taxa of the island of corsica would have started to diverge from  <dig>  to  <dig>  myr for mammals  <cit>  and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  myr for insects  <cit> . many corsican taxa may also have originated from the messinian period  and earlier  <cit> . to justify the high rate of substitution seen in european reticulitermes populations, luchetti et al. argued that the social and geographical structure of populations could significantly increase the mtdna substitution rate  <cit> . but the calibration of the molecular clock used by the authors and based on a geological event could also be questionable. indeed, several marine regressions occurred in the early pleistocene  <cit>  which would have led to many junctions-disjunctions between the tyrrhenian islands and the mainland. in our view, it is so possible that the present-day european reticulitermes taxa have older origins than previously thought.

it is, however, difficult to determine whether dispersion or vicariance play a greater role in cladogenic events  <cit> . the geological history of the transtyrrhenian area is highly complex  <cit>  and does not support any particular theory. as mentioned above, many species of the tyrrhenian area have different evolutionary and biogeographical histories. the possibility of an insular colonization from tuscany after post-glacial expansion through the italian peninsula has also been suggested  <cit> . furthermore, the high level of genetic homogeneity  observed in termite populations in corsica could be the result of a founding effect initiated by a migratory and colonizing event. the endemic origin of r. l. corsicus is also a possibility, with ancestral origins from an isolated population in an ice age refugium. thus, each taxon would have been separated from taxa from different refuges . this could explain why the three clades have almost the same number of substitutions  and consequently the same divergence time. as the corsican mitotype is closer to the calabran  than to the tuscan , the populations in corsica and sardinian may have started to diverge before recolonization of italy.

the expansion on the continent is confirmed by mitochondrial and microsatellite data. colonization was slow and may have lasted several thousand years. at the mitotype level, this expansion through the italian peninsula generated a south/north cline, already reported by uva et al.  <cit> . the expansion rate was probably the same as for the iberian reticulitermes, as the divergence times are similar  <cit> . moreover, subterranean termites disperse over short distances in natural conditions. for these reasons, italian recolonization by r. lucifugus could correspond to a 'phalanx' expansion mode  <cit> . the microsatellite data  shows a clear allelic diversity, specific to continental populations . however, with the exception of the provencal area, the colonies form a homogeneous entity. this unusual structure could be attributed to a bottleneck event during the post-glacial colonization, particularly when crossing the ligurian alps. the mitochondrial haplotypes, similar to those in rome could also suggest a more recent introduction, perhaps human-mediated, as this route was used by several civilizations.

recent evolution: introductions, hybridization and introgression
in the more recent past, since  <dig> bc, human civilization developed considerable marine traffic in the tyrrhenian region. it is therefore highly probable that colonies of reticulitermes were introduced into unexpected zones by human transport  <cit> . this kind of event has already been documented – r. lucifugus in bordeaux  , r. grassei in devon  , r. santonensis in hamburg  and santiago   <cit> , and r. urbis in france and italy . three colonies -bastia, viareggio and marseille-c- appear to have been introduced. of these, the colony in bastia is of particular interest as it forms an entity, neither entirely provencal  nor entirely italian . the two other introduced colonies may have crossed with autochtonous populations, as shown by traces of allochtonous genes in the microsatellite data.

more generally, migrations in the tyrrhenian region have created different hybrid zones. they resemble the bimodal zones described by jiggins and mallet  <cit>  and are characteristic of a quasi-absence of direct intermediate forms. only the uccelina-o colony has f1-type hybrids. nevertheless, there are signs of varying degrees of hybridization in colonies such as the presence of unexpected genotypes.

other authors  <cit>  suggested that some hybrid zones were situated in natural areas in the tuscany pine-woods. this study did in fact find some introgressive forms in tuscan colonies – parco del uccelina, reserve of follonica, castiglioncello and gianella – with conflicting mitochondrial and nuclear haplotype data . although most of these tuscan colonies have an allochtonous mitotype, introgression seems to act in both directions. indeed, termites in castiglioncello have corsican nuclear sequences with an italian mitotype. the fixation of allochtonous haplotypes can occur through backcrossing to the parental populations  <cit>  or can be helped by biased sex-ratios already observed in reticulitermes lucifugus  <cit> .

for its <dig> or coii haplotypes, c = r. l. corsicus, l = r. lucifugus, h = mixed forms. for microsatellite genotypes, b = bastia, c = corsica, i = italy, p = provence .

on the opposite shore, the persistence of corsican microsatellite alleles in the follonica sample  and the presence of microsatellite alleles characteristic of tuscany along the east coast of corsica  could also indicate relatively recent hybridizations. in general, these traces of hybridization tend to diminish and even disappear by backcross with local populations.

in southern france, the provence region may be a specific new hybrid zone. among the multiple copies of the its <dig> gene, some colonies  have a mix of haplotypes from the two origins, several forms of which come from dna recombination. however, no signs of hybridization can be detected with microsatellite markers. perhaps a higher number of microsatellite markers is required to improve detection of hybrid individuals  <cit> . the numerous variants in the sample may result from mechanisms such as unequal crossing-over and gene conversion during the concerted evolution, which may have homogenized the number of rdna copies  <cit> . its sequence homogenization by concerted evolution has already been observed in a species of subterranean termites coptotermes gestroi  by jenkins et al  <cit> . the concerted evolution might currently be slow  <cit> , and in the end slower than microsatellite loci homogenization by backcross or by genetic drift. this might explain why no apparent signs of hybridization are found in provence. nevertheless, current results do not exclude the possibility that these different forms come from an ancestral polymorphism, but the presence of both corsican mitotype and italian nuclear haplotypes in the vitrolles a colony  clearly supports the theory of a hybrid origin of its <dig> mixed forms.

the provence region appears quite different from tuscany and corsica. firstly, there is a distinct population entity, which is different from the italian r. lucifugus and r. l. corsicus groups . secondly, most of the colonies sampled were collected from urban areas . thirdly, there are genetic particularities  not found anywhere else in the data . this raises the questions of whether these characteristics are correlated and whether the urban environment influences the termites' adaptation process and the evolution of hybrids.

CONCLUSIONS
reticulitermes lucifugus corsicus is one of the best-described subspecies of termite, defined by its distribution , by various taxonomic criteria  and also by this complex phyletic evolution . its divergence goes back to cladogenic events during the ice age. however, owing to many migratory events, the evolution of transtyrrhenian populations of termites has been more complex. the study carried out in the area revealed the existence of three very different populations : one population on the italian peninsula , a second in the tyrrhenian islands  and a third in provence. with the sicilian phylum, they form strong cladistic units, constituting a complex of species within r. lucifugus. although hybrids occur, it seems that systematic homogenization of the genomes occurs subsequently. with a few intermediate forms and even some introgressive forms, these taxa may maintain an identity signature, and may finally be on the way to speciation.

nevertheless, evidence of introgression in hybrid zones could influence how reticulitermes adapt. allowing horizontal transfers of the genetic material, better adapted forms could appear in some small populations  <cit> . the colonies sampled in this study are small and patchily distributed in pinewood areas, especially in anthropized environments and could, therefore, fulfill the conditions necessary for such adaptation. from this point of view, it is important to consider the reticulitermes as urban pests and study how they are adapting to cities – as for urban colonies in provence. after thousands of years of speciation under paleogeographical constraints, human impact  <cit> -urbanism, maritime transport, and accidental infestations-seems to be the determining element in recent reticulitermes evolution.

