BACKGROUND
riverine ecosystems, characterized with rapid and dramatic environmental changes caused by fluctuating water levels and siltation, harbor a number of plants, including many species of the fast growing, ecological pioneers such as perennial poplar . these species have a dramatic influence on ecosystem cycles. however, we have little understanding of how plants have adapted to such dynamic environments and cope with a variety of continually changing biotic and abiotic stressors while maintaining growth and development.

leaves, stems, and roots in plants form an integrated physiological unit that receives stress signals and produces metabolic responses to control whole plant growth and development. communication within the integrated physiological unit occurs through a continuum of symplast and apoplast  <cit> . intracellular space of the symplast is composed of cellular cytoplasm connected through plasmodesmata. apoplast, on the other hand, constitutes extracellular, aqueous space outside the plasma membrane including cell walls, spaces between cells, and xylem  <cit> . thus, the apoplast represents a highly dynamic compartment serving as a continuum from roots through the stem to leaves and is potentially important as a bridge that perceives and transduces signals from the environment to the symplast.

proteins secreted into apoplast might contribute to biotic and abiotic stress response as a first line of defense. a variety of these proteins have been identified in apoplast of several plants  <cit> . such proteins predominantly represent functional categories associated with cell wall metabolism, defense, and programmed cell death. however, these studies have focused on annual plants that are not native to riverine ecosystems and have been conducted under controlled environments.

a few apoplast studies in perennial plants at the molecular level include xylem sap proteome from apple, peach, pear, poplar, as well as identification of the leaf apoplast antioxidative system in response to pox virus in plum  <cit> . although these studies provide a basic understanding of protein composition in the apoplast of mainly horticultural species, they are limited in scope of the study, genomic resources , protein source of tissues, developmental stages of trees , environmental conditions , and techniques. consequently, there is a lack of a systems level understanding of the apoplast proteome and its function in riverine plant species. thus, our goal was to elucidate a comprehensive and systems level apoplast proteome in riverine p. deltoides under normal conditions in addition to identifying apoplast defense mechanisms poplar has developed to respond to water and pathogen stress, which are among the most important stress factors in riverine ecosystems.

RESULTS
extracting protein-containing poplar apoplast fluid
obtaining a population of representative apoplast proteins from various tissues in poplar without symplastic contamination is technically challenging. we used a pressure-chamber method for leaves and a water-displacement method for stems to extract protein-containing apoplast fluid. to evaluate whether leaf apoplast extracts were contaminated with symplastic contents, we performed the following analyses as credible indicators of contamination. first, thin sections from pressurized and control leaves were examined using a light microscope. no ruptured cells were observed in the vicinity of stomata and within the vasculature . second, the 2-d page protein profiles from leaf apoplast and whole leaf tissue were compared, and no similarity was observed in their protein patterns . for example, the large subunit of ribulose-bisphosphate carboxylase , which is symplast specific  <cit> , was abundant in whole leaf tissues, whereas it was undetectable in the apoplast. third, an immuno blot analysis was conducted for both symplast and apoplast protein samples. using antibodies against the symplast proteins rbcl and malate dehydrogenase  <cit> , both proteins were detected in whole-leaf tissue extracts, but not in apoplast proteome . finally, concentrations of macro and micro nutrients were significantly  lower in leaf apoplast than in whole leaf extract , which is consistent with previous findings  <cit> . we would have expected to observe similar amounts of nutrients in symplast and apoplast if the cell membrane had ruptured due to applied pressure. we can conclude from these observations that the extracted apoplast proteins from poplar leaves were devoid of symplastic contamination, confirming previous observations that pressurization of cotton  and cocklebur  leaves for apoplast fluid extraction did not result in symplast contamination  <cit> . we did not verify whether water-pressure of stems to obtain apoplast proteins caused contamination of the apoplast content from symplast, because the applied water pressure by gravity was considerably less than the pressure applied to leaves via pressure chamber.

systems level protein composition of poplar apoplast
to capture the most representative apoplast proteins in a growing season, we characterized the leaf and stem apoplast proteomes under normal conditions during a period  in which trees experienced active growth, transition, cessation of primary growth, and variation in temperature, precipitation, day length, and pathogen infestation . some of these factors are related and likely synergistic in a natural environment. using both gel-based  and gel-free  proteomic approaches, we identified  <dig> unique proteins in leaf apoplast  and  <dig> unique proteins in stem apoplast , totaling at  <dig> proteins . a previously published poplar root apoplast data  contained  <dig> proteins  <cit> , thus totaling the number of unique proteins in the root-stem-leaf apoplast continuum at  <dig> . leaf apoplast proteins were mainly associated with cell wall metabolism , stress/defense, and proteolysis , whereas stem apoplast proteins were mainly associated with stress/defense , cell wall metabolism, and carbohydrate metabolism . one major difference between the two proteomes was that a substantial portion of stem apoplast proteome , but a small portion  of leaf apoplast, was associated with metabolism of carbohydrates.

the signalp  <cit>  and secretomep  <cit>  algorithms predicted that a substantial number of apoplast proteins  follow a secretory pathway , suggesting that they are secreted to the apoplast. staining with a specific glyco-dye revealed that  <dig> proteins  in leaf apoplast were glycosylated , which perhaps improves protein solubility, enhances thermal stability in hot summers , provides protection from proteolysis, and modulates protein-protein interactions in apoplast  <cit> . staining the gels with specific phospho-dye proq diamond indicated that cysteine-rich repeat secretory protein  <dig>  and thaumatin-like protein  in leaf apoplast were potentially phosphorylated . this was supported with netphos  <dig>   <cit>  predictions that there were six phosphorylation sites on thaumatin-like protein and  <dig> sites on cysteine-rich repeat secretory protein  <dig>  these results indicate that the leaf-stem-root apoplast continuum in poplar contains diverse proteins that appear to be post-translationally modified and involved in important functions such as cell wall metabolism, stress/defense, and carbohydrate metabolism.

apoplast-controlled response to water stress
poplar often experiences flooding and drought stress in riverine ecosystems  <cit> , and our experimental trees went through flooding and drought cycles . to determine whether apoplast is involved in mediating water stress  in poplar, we identified signature proteins associated with flooding and drought. our leaf and previously published root  <cit>  data contained alcohol dehydrogenases in addition to a number of important glycolytic enzymes in stem and root apoplasts . this indicates anaerobic respiration, and therefore some reliance of poplar on glycolysis and ethanolic fermentation for energy production.

although poplar is subject to frequent oxygen deficits  annually due to flooding and sedimentation, they show tolerance with minimal effect on growth and survival  <cit> . to maintain energy generation under flooding, trees switch mitochondrial respiration to alcoholic fermentation in roots and stems, resulting in significantly increased ethanol biosynthesis  <cit> . unlike flood-intolerant tree species, ethanol does not accumulate in roots of flood-tolerant tree species  due to effective transport from roots in the apoplast to leaves where it is efficiently converted to acetyl-coa via alcohol dehydrogenase and used in leaf metabolism  <cit> . consistent with these previous studies, transcripts of alcohol dehydrogenase were abundant year-round in poplar leaves . in contrast, alcohol dehydrogenase gene was induced upon flooding along with the activation of its protein in poplar roots  <cit> . poplar leaves and roots contained different alcohol dehydrogenases , which phylogenetically fall into different clades : poptr_0005s <dig>  and poptr_0002s <dig>  in leaf apoplast, poptr_0008s <dig>  in root apoplast, and poptr_0002s <dig>  in root transcriptome upon flooding. thus, we hypothesize that poplar has evolved alcohol dehydrogenases optimized for ethanol biosynthesis in roots and for ethanol catabolism in leaves.

sucrose and starch constitute the main carbohydrate reserves in poplar roots and stems  <cit> , and a steady supply of carbohydrates from these reserves and leaves to hypoxic roots in poplar maintains alcoholic fermentation  <cit> . carbohydrates appear to be effectively cycled within the leaf-stem-root continuum via symplast and apoplast in flood-tolerant tree species to meet the carbon demands of tissues  <cit> . sucrose synthase , an important regulator of sink strength in poplar  <cit> , is present in stem apoplast , indicating sucrose hydrolysis and a potential channeling into the glycolysis/fermentation pathway. invertase, which is involved in the primary mechanism of aerobic sucrose hydrolysis, is suppressed under flooding, while sucrose synthase is upregulated to catabolize sucrose in poplar  <cit> . supporting this view, a constitutively expressed alpha-amylase is present in leaf apoplast  and is perhaps involved in starch hydrolysis after mobilization of carbohydrate storage reserves. during flooding, flood-tolerant tree species maintain low starch levels in leaves, but high starch levels in roots  <cit> . increased sucrose synthase expression via overexpression in poplar was associated with maintaining height growth and biomass accumulation, as well as elevated levels of cellulose synthesis  and deposition in the xylem secondary cell wall, resulting in thick cell walls and improved wood density  <cit> . indeed, sucrose synthase was among the highly expressed genes in poplar tension wood which is cellulose enriched, suggesting sucrose synthase involvement in stress response  <cit> . anoxic rice plants  <cit>  and hypoxic wheat roots  <cit>  showed a high level of sucrose synthase activity and abundant cellulose deposition in the secondary cell walls of wheat, which was postulated to be important for increasing mechanical stability of roots under hypoxia. when the amount of sucrose synthase was reduced in roots of transgenic potatoes, roots were rapidly damaged by hypoxia and showed slow recovery when plants were returned to aerobic conditions  <cit> . submerged leaves in flood water of tropical tree species that formed thick outer epidermal walls and a thick cuticle did not rot or detach from the plant during submergence  <cit> , suggesting an improved capacity of those leaves to withstand the impact of flooding. expression of sucrose synthase was induced by abscisic acid , and abundant aba was present in poplar leaves in the early growing season . however, a strong relationship between flooding and aba signaling has yet to be established. since flooding exerts stress, carbohydrates are also likely channeled via sucrose synthase to cellulose biosynthesis and its deposition into xylem secondary cell walls of poplar roots and stems for reinforcement.

response to drought stress
as poplar displays an overall sensitivity to drought, it has evolved ways to cope with intensities and frequencies of water limitation in riverine ecosystems during summers  <cit> . to determine whether transcripts of stress-related apoplast proteins respond to water stress , we applied moderate  to severe  cyclical water stress to p. deltoides in a controlled environment. transcripts of apoplast proteins such as pathogenesis-related protein  <dig> , acidic class iii chitinase , cationic peroxidase  <dig> , isoflavone reductase-related protein , and class iv chitinase  accumulated in leaves of poplar upon water stress . our year-round transcript analysis showed that genes encoding for pathogenesis-related protein  <dig> , acidic class iii chitinase , and cationic peroxidase  <dig>  were activated during the growing season  when trees normally experienced drought . these proteins are stress/defense related and appear to be secreted , perhaps suggesting their role in poplar apoplast to decrease the risk of pathogen and insect infestation under drought.

our poplar apoplast data  contained ascorbate peroxidase  <dig> , methionine synthase , mangrin/allene oxide cyclase , heat shock protein 70- <dig> , dnak-type molecular chaperone hsp <dig> , blight associated p <dig> , and cu-zn superoxide dismutase  that are responsive to drought . these proteins fall into the stress/defense functional category, except for methionine synthase which is involved in other metabolic processes. heat shock proteins are considered as molecular chaperons involved in various processes including refolding of damaged proteins and protection against denaturation under drought  <cit> . the presence of methionine synthase and sam synthase  indicates ethylene biosynthesis in poplar stem apoplast. mangrin/allene oxide cyclase is involved in jasmonate biosynthesis  <cit> , and existence of this enzyme in poplar root apoplast indicates the biosynthesis of jasmonate. ethylene and jasmonate are widely involved in signaling biotic and abiotic stress . ethylene likely plays a role in poplar shoot senescence  during hot and dry periods of low stream flow in summer that we often observed in our experimental p. deltoides trees. shoot senescence is a common phenomenon in poplar  <cit>  and perhaps reduces transpirational demand enabling the remaining shoots to maintain a favorable water balance.

apoplast-mediated response to biotic stress
poplar has to cope with biotic stress, particularly the prevalent leaf fungal rust melampsora in riverine ecosystems. melampsora infects leaves via the apoplast  <cit> . to explore whether transcripts of stress-related apoplast proteins respond to pathogen challenges, we infected the poplar clone nm <dig>  with melampsora medusae f. sp. deltoidae  and melampsora larici-populina . mmd infection caused partial pathogen growth with macroscopic leaf necroses, whereas mlp infection resulted in the formation of many uredinias on the leaf epidermis  <cit> , suggesting that nm <dig> is more resistant to mmd. each transcript showed a distinctive profile over time after the infection . the amplitude of gene expression was much higher following the mmd infection, indicating an active defense response resulting in reduced fungal growth. conversely, relatively weak or delayed gene expression occurred following the infection with mlp. the difference perhaps reflects the variation in pathogenicity and host.

transcripts of leaf apoplast proteins such as acidic class iii chitinase, thaumatin-like protein, blight-associated protein p <dig>  cationic peroxidase  <dig>  and cysteine-rich repeat secretory protein  <dig> accumulated following melampsora infection . while the poplar leaf apoplast contained three different acidic class iii chitinases , only a single chitinase  was detected in stem apoplast . three different class iv chitinases  were also detected only in poplar leaf apoplast . transcripts of acidic class iii chitinase  increased in abundance when poplar  was challenged with m. larici-populina . moreover, transcripts encoding acidic class iii chitinase  and pr- <dig>  rapidly increased in abundance when water stress  was applied , suggesting a broader role of these proteins in stress response.

chitinases and β- <dig> -glucanases  were found together in poplar leaf and stem apoplast  and other plant species  <cit> . chitinases are often co-induced with antifungal β-glucanases , acting synergistically to limit fungal growth via degrading chitin and glucan of fungal cell walls  <cit> . these pr proteins likely mediate defense responses via activation of a signaling pathway through released elicitors from fungal cell walls into apoplast  <cit> . furthermore, chitinases and β-glucanases appear to act synergistically with thaumatin-like proteins that can bind to β- <dig> -glucans for hydrolysis  <cit> . the poplar thaumatin-like protein  was present in two abundant isoforms in only leaf apoplast . genes of these thaumatin-like proteins were activated in response to infection of poplar leaves with mlp . while transcripts of blight-associated protein p <dig>  were activated by melampsora infection , another poplar apoplast blight-associated protein p <dig>  was upregulated by drought , suggesting that both family members are involved in stress response. transcripts of these poplar apoplast proteins along with pathogenesis-related protein  <dig> , hevamine , and ntprp <dig>  were abundant during the growing season and showed similar expression patterns , indicating co-regulation by water stress and pathogens. some of these proteins and their homologs  in plants were regulated by ethylene  whose biosynthesis likely occurs in poplar apoplast . thus, we postulate that poplar has developed an apoplast defense mechanism against pathogens by activating pathogenesis-related proteins under abiotic stress in riverine ecosystems.

cell wall modification in apoplast
as plant cell walls are modified in response to stress  <cit> , we determined the extent to which apoplast proteins are involved in stress-induced cell wall modification in poplar. eighteen different peroxidases  were detected in poplar root, stem, and leaf apoplast, and virtually all of them were predicted to be extracellular , indicating an abundant and diverse presence of peroxidases in the poplar apoplast. the poplar leaf apoplast pox gene  was up-regulated in response to water stress  and melampsora infection , implying a broader role in defense. the poplar leaf apoplast peroxidases  closely clustered  with defense-related peroxidases pox <dig> , pox <dig> , poc <dig>  pod <dig>  pod <dig>  po <dig>  pod <dig>  and swpb <dig>  <cit> . cationic peroxidase poc <dig> accumulated in the apoplast and cell walls of xylem vessels where it was involved in pathogen-induced lignification  <cit> . lignin deposition in leaf cell walls was observed at infected sites following the interaction between melampsora and poplar  <cit> . moreover, transcripts of poptr_0016s <dig>  and poptr_0014s <dig>  showed a similar expression pattern and were only abundant during the growing season in poplar leaves . these two peroxidases are likely involved in stress-induced lignification during the growing season in poplar leaf apoplast. their role in defense may include reinforcement of cell walls to restrict pathogen invasion via oxidative cross-linking of monolignols, polysaccharides, and proteins such as proline-rich glycoprotein present in the poplar apoplast .

the majority of the stem apoplast peroxidases  that are all anionic  clustered together in the phylogenetic tree . some of these peroxidases in the same cluster were also detected in leaves  along with two leaf-specific  or root-specific proteins . transcripts of four peroxidases  showed year-round expression . melampsora infection induced transcription of one particular peroxidase  in poplar . the related peroxidases po <dig>  prxa3a, and pxp3- <dig> in poplar have been proposed to serve as key enzymes for lignifications  <cit> . other poplar peroxidases in the same cluster  are suberization-specific  <cit> , and wound-inducible peroxidases are involved in suberization to help tissue healing  <cit> . thus, we anticipate that these apoplast peroxidases are involved in lignification and suberization in poplar stems.

four poplar apoplast peroxidases  closely clustered  with a poplar peroxidase  that is proposed to play a role in lignification  <cit> . cwpo-c, whose transcripts are constitutively expressed in the developing leaf and shoot xylem, oxidizes sinapyl alcohol, a component of poplar lignin along with coniferyl alcohol. transcripts of three peroxidases  were expressed during leaf development . one peroxidase  appears to be responsive to drought and pathogens, as well as auxin and abscisic acid . as this particular peroxidase is an important hub, we predict that it plays an important role in mediating biotic and abiotic stress in poplar. consequently, these four poplar apoplast peroxidases are probably involved in lignin polymerization in the apoplast of developing roots, leaves, or stems. taken together, these observations indicate that poplar possesses a large number of peroxidases in the root-stem-leaf apoplast continuum to modify cell wall structure in response to stress.

antioxidative capacity of poplar apoplast
metabolic reactions, stress-induced processes, and oxygen presence are expected to produce reactive oxygen species  such as superoxides and h2o <dig> in apoplast. actively lignifying xylem tissues, particularly in stems during the growing season, sustain h2o <dig> production for cross-linking of lignin precursors by peroxidase involvement, increasing the apoplast oxidative load  <cit> . ros were also increased in response to pathogen attack, leading not only to enhanced signal circulation that activates downstream antimicrobial proteins and phenolic compounds, but also to peroxidase-dependent cell-wall lignification, preventing pathogen penetration  <cit> . however, we do not have an understanding of how poplar counters oxidative stress in the apoplast.

superoxide dismutase , ascorbate peroxidase , monodehydroascorbate reductase , and peroxiredoxin  were present in poplar stem apoplast . two superoxide dismutases  were the only antioxidant enzymes present in leaf apoplast . transcripts of one superoxide dismutase  showed a year-round expression in leaves . these specialized antioxidant enzymes and low-molecular weight antioxidants such as ascorbate and glutathione are particularly involved in buffering oxidation  <cit> . although none of these enzymes were detected in the poplar root apoplast  <cit> , thioredoxin  in the root apoplast might play a role in the regeneration of peroxiredoxin  <cit> .

we anticipate that superoxide dismutase in poplar apoplast reduces superoxide ions into h2o <dig> which is then reduced to h2o by ascorbate peroxidase  <cit> . one of the superoxide dismutases  was responsive to drought in poplar  <cit> , while the other one  was responsive to melampsora . knockdown of an extracellular high-isoelectric-point superoxide dismutase in poplar accelerated maturation, ros accumulation, and lignification in the secondary cell walls with a number of developmental disturbances such as reduced growth, thinner stems, smaller leaves, and shorter and thinner xylem fibers and vessels  <cit> , indicating the importance of superoxide dismutases in stress response and plant development. the presence of monodehydroascorbate reductase in the poplar apoplast indicates the regeneration of ascorbate for continuous removal of h2o <dig>  other antioxidant enzymes detected in stem apoplast include glyoxalase i  that removes methylglyoxal, a toxic by product of carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism  <cit> , and glutathione s-transferase  that detoxifies xenobiotic compounds  <cit> . these observations suggest poplar has a robust apoplast antioxidative system.

CONCLUSIONS
our study shows that poplar has developed a diverse apoplast proteome in the leaf-stem-root continuum. such a complex proteome appears to play a major role in mediating water, pathogen, and oxidative stress, suggesting that a systems level mechanism has evolved in poplar apoplast allowing encounters of multiple stresses while maintaining growth and development over many years. we anticipate our work to be a starting point for developing a systems level understanding of how the extracellular matrix mediates multistress responses in plant species of riverine ecosystems under fluctuating environmental conditions.

