BACKGROUND
cynara cardunculus l. is a perennial member of the asteraceae family and has been sub-classified into three taxa: globe artichoke , cultivated cardoon , and wild cardoon . molecular, cytogenetic and isozyme evidence suggests that wild cardoon is the ancestor of both cultivated forms  <cit> .

globe artichoke plays an important role in human nutrition, mainly in mediterranean diet: immature inflorescences , commonly referred to as 'heads' or 'buds', are consumed as a fresh, canned or frozen vegetable, while more recently, demand has been driven by its reputation as health food.

the species has interesting applications in pharmacology  <cit> . the roots contain inulin, a natural fibre found to improve the balance of beneficial bacteria in the human gut, while the leaves and heads represent natural sources of bioactives such as luteolin and mono- and di-caffeoylquinic acids  <cit> . these compounds have been implicated in  the protection of proteins, lipids and dna from oxidative damage caused by free radicals  <cit> ,  the inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis, contributing to the prevention of arteriosclerosis and other vascular disorders  <cit> ,  hepatoprotective, choleretic, diuretic and bile-expelling activities  <cit> ,  the inhibition of hiv integrase, a key player in hiv replication and its insertion into host dna  <cit> , and  antibacterial and antifungal activities  <cit> . all of these bioactivities have been attributed to the phenolics in the phenylpropanoid pathway  <cit> , which is plant-specific  <cit> . the pathway catalyses the conversion of phenylalanine into a variety of hydroxycinnamic acids, which are the precursors for flavonoids, hydroxycinnamic acid conjugates and lignins  <cit> . among phenolics, mono- and di-caffeoylquinic acids play a key-role in the overall anti-oxidant/health value of globe artichoke  <cit> . however, no information is available yet about the synthesis of these compounds in c. cardunculus.

this paper describes the cloning and biochemical characterization of an acyltransferase cdna from globe artichoke. we explore the relationship between acyltransferases transcription and polyphenolic content in leaves, and establish a positive correlation between acyltransferase expression in various c. cardunculus accessions and polyphenolic content, especially cga. our observations suggest this acyltransferase is implicated in the biosynthesis of cga and its derivatives.

RESULTS
isolation of acyltransferase gene in globe artichoke
using codehop, targeting conserved regions of acyl transferase proteins , a  <dig> bp incomplete globe artichoke acyltransferase sequence was amplified. this sequence was extended towards both the 3'- and 5'-ends of the gene by race-pcr and a  <dig> bp sequence was isolated. the resulting  <dig> bp orf  encodes a 436-residue protein  with a predicted molecular weight of ~ <dig> kda. its closest in silico match is with a tobacco shikimate/quinate hct  <cit> , with which it shares 84% identity and 92% similarity; both proteins belong to a multifunctional superfamily of plant acyltransferases  <cit> . the globe artichoke acyltransferase has a histidine-containing motif  identical to the highly conserved motif hxxxd which is characteristic for acyl transfer catalysis. a second consensus sequence, the dfgwg block found in other acyltransferases  <cit> , is present from aa  <dig> to  <dig> . the next most closely related sequence to the globe artichoke acyltransferase is an arabidopsis thaliana hct  . more distantly related acyltransferases are those annotated as hydroxycinnamoyl-coa quinate: hydroxycinnamoyl transferase  from tobacco and tomato  <cit> .

heterologous expression of the identified acyltransferase
to assess the activity of the globe artichoke isolated acyltransferase, the cdna was cloned and heterologously expressed in e. coli, through the expression vector pet3a. the recombinant plasmid or the void pet3a vector  were introduced into e. coli bl <dig>  plyse cells, and expression of soluble acyltransferase was first tested at standard induction temperature . sds-page analysis indicated that the pellet fraction of recombinant bacteria contained an overexpressed protein with an apparent molecular mass of approximately  <dig> kda, consistent with the expected mass for the translation product of the acyltransferase cdna . no acyltransferase protein could be detected by sds-page in the supernatant fraction of lysed recombinant cells. reducing the temperature to 28°c during iptg induction for  <dig> hours allows to increase the amount of soluble recombinant enzyme produced  which can be detected in both fraction: pellet and supernatant. no corresponding protein is observed in samples prepared from bacteria carrying the control void vector.

enzyme assay
the recombinant acyltransferase was used for substrate specificity studies. hplc profiles were generated after incubation of the substrates caffeoyl-coa or p-coumaroyl-coa, with quinate or shikimate in the presence of recombinant bacteria crude extract carrying the pet-hct or the void control vector. both caffeoyl-coa and p-coumaroyl-coa were accepted as substrates, with either quinate and shikimate, to synthesize caffeoylquinate , p-coumaroyl quinate, caffeoylshikimate or p-coumaroyl shikimate, depending on the substrates supplied. in presence of the recombinant proteins, a new product was detected in all cases ; new peaks could not be detected when the reaction was performed with the control crude extract . the reaction product was identified by comparing its retention time and its absorbance spectrum . we also successfully investigated the ability of the isolated acyltransferases to catalyse the reverse reaction , as described in other species  <cit> : caffeoyl-coa was detected when the chlorogenate was incubated with coenzyme a in presence of the recombinant protein .

determination of kinetic parameters
kinetic parameters of the hct enzyme were evaluated for the different substrates . the affinity of the enzyme for quinate as acceptor was higher than for shikimate. moreover p-coumaroyl-coa was the most efficient donor, with a vmax/km of  <dig> , followed by caffeoyl-coa, with a value of  <dig> .

identification and quantification of polyphenolics
six compounds belonging to quinic acid esters were quantified . 'violet margot' and wild cardoon leaves presented a high mean content of total caffeoylquinic acid  while the cultivated cardoon and 'romanesco c3' leaves showed lower contents . chlorogenic acid was the most abundant compound among quinic acid esters in globe artichoke  and cultivated cardoon, but was less represented than di-caffeoylquinic acids in wild cardoon. all samples contained very low levels of p-coumaroylquinic acid.

northern blot analysis
a northern blot approach was taken to identify a possible correlation between hct expression and polyphenolics/chlorogenic acid content. as the different plant species probably not exhibit exactly the same hct sequence, pcr was performed on each genomic dna in order to isolate a highly specific hct probe . a sequence alignment established a high level of similarity  between probe  <dig> and  <dig> , but a rather lower level  between probes  <dig>  and probe  <dig>  from globe artichoke . when 'romanesco c3' and 'violet margot' rna were probed with the globe artichoke hct sequence , the latter showed a higher transcript abundance in its leaves than the former . moreover, northern blot on cultivated and wild cardoon rnas challenged with either probe  <dig> and  <dig>  showing that a higher level of hct transcript was present in the wild form . results are summarized in table  <dig> 

discussion
phenolic compounds are by far the commonest of plant therapeutic molecules  <cit> , and the major species present in globe artichoke leaves are the di-caffeoylquinic acids , and their precursor cga, a soluble phenolic which is widespread throughout the plant kingdom. the definition of the cga biosynthetic pathway remains controversial, with three alternative routes  under current consideration  <cit> . these are  cga synthesis using a caffeoyl-glucoside as the active intermediate;  synthesis of cga from caffeoyl-coa and quinic acid by means of hqt , which differs from hct in its preference for quinate over shikimate as a substrate; and  synthesis of p-coumaroyl-quinate by hct or hqt and its subsequent hydroxylation by p-coumarate-3'-hydroxylase  to form cga. the first route has been identified in sweet potato by villegas and kojima  <cit> , who were able to purify hydroxycinnamoyl d-glucose:quinate hct and show that caffeoyl d-glucose and quinic acid are the substrates for the biosynthesis of cga. routes  and  were unequivocally established by ulbrich and zenk in several differentiated plants and undifferentiated cell suspension cultures  <cit> .

recently, both the second and third cga synthesis routes have received experimental support. the biochemical characterization of c3'h  <cit>  and hydroxycinnamoyl-coa transferase hct  <cit>  suggests that cga can be synthesized via the third route. however, since both hct and c3'h are active in a. thaliana, a species which does not accumulate cga, it is unlikely that this route can be generally exploited by plants which accumulate significant amounts of cga  <cit> . in tomato, it was difficult to establish whether hqt acts directly on caffeoyl-coa and quinic acid to produce cga, or whether it synthesizes p-coumaroyl quinate from p-coumaroyl-coa and quinic acid, which is subsequently converted to cga by the activity of c3'h  <cit> . the second route was assumed to be dependent on the relative sizes of the caffeoyl-coa and p-coumaroyl-coa pools present. nevertheless, strong support for the prevalence of the second route, at least in tomato, was provided by experiments in which the silencing of hqt caused the level of leaf cga to fall by 98%, and to rise by 85% when it was over-expressed.

in a study of the phenolic content in various globe artichoke tissues and organs, total phenol concentration was shown to be greatest in the leaves, and declined in the heads during their development  <cit> . the variation in antioxidant activity  in globe artichoke extracts may, therefore, be attributed to the choice of plant tissue used as the source of extract, rather than to any variation in genotype or environment. thus we used leaf as our source of mrna in order to generate the necessary cdna, and exploited codehop to isolate globe artichoke hct. the heterologous  expression product of the cloned hct sequence was a ~ <dig> kda recombinant protein, which was active when provided with either p-coumaroyl-coa or caffeoyl-coa ester as acyl donors, at comparable km values of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm, respectively. moreover, the artichoke hct showed a preference for quinic acid over shikimic acid as an acceptor . this behaviour contrasts with that of tobacco hct  <cit> , but is consistent with the activity of hqt isolated from tobacco and tomato  <cit> . interestingly, although the globe artichoke hct sequence is closely related to that of its tobacco ortholog, its activity appears to be more similar to that of tobacco and tomato hqt.

in order to evaluate the role of hct in the biosynthetic pathway of cga in globe artichoke, the purified enzyme was provided in vitro with quinic acid and either p-coumaroyl-coa or caffeoyl-coa. since the enzyme was active with both p-coumaroyl-coa and caffeoyl-coa, it is clear that this hct can act either before and/or after 3'-hydroxylation step. other experiments have demonstrated that the heterologously expressed hct, in the presence of quinic acid as the acyl donor, is four times more efficient when provided with p-coumaroyl-coa rather than with caffeoyl-coa . however, these observations do not constitute an absolute proof that the third biosynthetic route is preferred over the second, since the level of hct is not necessarily limiting in vivo. note that cga synthesis is also regulated by its interaction with c3'h, a p <dig> whose enzymatic turnover was found to be low  <cit> .

globe artichoke hct belongs to a versatile plant acyltransferase family that shares certain structural motifs , including several plant members involved in a number of secondary metabolism pathways. when the sequence alignment of the acyltransferase family was used to construct a phylogenetic tree , the globe artichoke hct was found to cluster with the major anthranilate n-hydroxycinnamoyl/benzoyltransferase group defined by burhenne et al.  <cit> . it is clearly closely related to its tobacco and a. thaliana orthologs.

c. cardunculus includes two crop species, the globe artichoke and the cultivated cardoon, along with the ancestral wild cardoon. in our samples, p-coumaroylquinic acid was ubiquitously detected at a low concentration , presumably because this quinate ester is a transient intermediate, unlike chlorogenic acid, which is considered to be an accumulation product in several plant species  <cit> . di-caffeoylquinic acid synthesis remains unknown in higher plants. however, due to their close structural relationship with cga, it is reasonable to suppose that the di-caffeoylquinic acids are derived from simple quinic acid monoesters. cga and di-caffeoylquinic acid quantification studies on the leaves of four plant accessions were carried out to identify any correlations between these two families of molecule . the globe artichoke 'violet margot' and the cultivated cardoon contained comparable levels of cga and di-caffeoylquinic acids. on the other hand, in the globe artichoke 'romanesco c3' there was ten fold more cga than di-caffeoylquinic acids, while in the wild cardoon, this difference was about two fold. therefore, the regulation of the synthesis of di-caffeoylquinic acids should be, possibly, genotype-dependent.

northern blots, using cdna from the same three c. cardunculus subspecies analysed above, were performed to study patterns of hct expression. as these diverse genotypes could carry distinct allelic forms of hct, we developed three species-specific probes [probes  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> . a positive relationship between the quantity of hct transcript and the content of caffeoylquinic acids was observed in all accessions. since hct silencing induces an increase  in the amount of caffeoylquinic compounds in tobacco  <cit> , whereas hqt silencing  results in a decrease in cga content  <cit> , hqt transcripts may well play a pivotal role in determining the make-up of the cga pool, and the behaviour of hct in globe artichoke is fully consistent with this model.

CONCLUSIONS
cga is particularly abundant in species belonging to the asteracaeae, solanaceae and rubiaceae families  <cit> , but its mode of biosynthesis is still unclear in many plants. we have described the cloning and expression of hct, an acyltransferase acting both upstream and downstream of the 3'-hydroxylation step. in addition, for both wild and cultivated forms of c. cardunculus, the expression of hct appears to be correlated with leaf polyphenolic content, especially with respect to caffeoylquinic acid derivatives, suggesting that this hct has an essential role in the synthesis of cga and related esters.

in a recent report  <cit> , caffeoyl-coa has been firmly established as a major substrate for the acylation of quinic acid and the synthesis of cga in solanaceous plants. our future research activity will be focused in analysing the in vivo expression of hct, as well as on the isolation of other acyltransferases, such as hqt, which may be involved in the phenylpropanoid pathway of c. cardunculus

