BACKGROUND
enzymes have been successfully employed to catalyze a number of transformations and chiral resolutions of biological and industrial importance in organic solvents  <cit> ] it is well documented that enzyme catalysis in these non-natural media offers some advantages over that in natural-aqueous environment, such as: prevention of autolysis  and increased thermostability  <cit> . in fact, it has been shown that enzymes can perform catalysis in organic solvents at temperatures far above those temperatures that denature enzymes in aqueous systems  <cit> . despite this, enzyme inactivation in organic solvents has been reported, and studies have addressed this issue. for example, fagain et al.  have recently reviewed bioreactor stability, shelf life and operational stability of a variety of enzymes suspended in neat organic solvents and aqueous-organic solvent mixtures  <cit> .

we have previously reported that the activity of the serine protease subtilisin carlsberg is significantly reduced upon storage in several organic solvents, irrespective of its preparation, hydration, hydrophobicity of the solvent, the reaction temperature and of the substrates used  <cit> . a subsequent study using various lipases, an esterase, and α-chymotrypsin showed that for these enzymes most of their initial high activity also plunges upon exposure to organic solvents  <cit> . it was found that some additives and modes of enzyme preparation  were able to reduce activity loss of the enzymes in various organic solvents. the other variables studied  were not found to affect the rapid loss of activity observed. furthermore, experiments using structurally defined cross-linked enzyme crystals   <cit>  suggested that the mechanism of inactivation might not involve large structural changes of the enzyme catalyst. the activity loss was reversible upon re-lyophilizing the enzyme from an aqueous buffer, indicating that inactivation did not involve autolysis or irreversible denaturation of the enzyme  <cit> .

those findings outline a clear drawback in the use of biocatalysts for applications that require prolonged exposure to organic solvents, and showed the need for understanding the mechanism of enzyme inactivation during storage in these media. herein we study this detrimental effect in detail using two different preparations of the model enzyme subtilisin carlsberg.

RESULTS
the results previously reported from this and other laboratories demonstrated that most enzymes lose their initial high activity exponentially during the first hours of incubation in a variety of organic solvents until a constant activity value is reached. so far, all of the enzymes studied show some residual activity after a long incubation period , which appears to persist indefinitely  <cit> . however, no mechanistic explanation for this phenomenon has been provided so far. herein we examine the structure, the flexibility, the number of active sites remaining, the powder morphology, and the ph profile of subtilisin carlsberg as some of the possible causes that could contribute to the observed decrease in enzyme activity after prolonged exposure to organic media. we had previously demonstrated that subtilisin carlsberg instability was independent of:  the mode of enzyme preparation ;  the physicochemical properties of the solvents used; and  the substrates  <cit> . subsequent studies involving different preparations of α-chymotrypsin, pig-liver esterase and several lipases showed that this was not unique to subtilisin, but rather a common effect shared by several enzymes  <cit> .

first, we decided to study the enzyme-powder morphology after suspension in  <dig> -dioxane since it has been suggested that incubation could result in larger and more compact aggregates, which could reduce the enzyme activity.

enzyme morphology
since most of the enzyme preparations studied were suspensions, and therefore the substrates would have to diffuse through solution and through the pores of solid particles to reach their corresponding active sites, it is conceivable that particle aggregation or morphology changes  could have an adverse effect on the substrate's diffusion to the enzyme's active site. scanning electron microscopy  of the suspended particles of the co-lyophilized enzyme in  <dig> -dioxane showed that no apparent morphological changes or aggregation occurred during incubation . the typical flaky suspended particles remained nearly of the same size, shape, and morphology, suggesting that this is probably not the cause for the activity drop. in agreement with these results, a soluble preparation of the same enzyme, for which its activity should not be compromised by aggregation or morphological changes, also showed a decrease in activity during incubation, similar to what was observed with their suspended counterparts  <cit> . from these results we can rule out substrate diffusion limitations as a possible cause for the observed decrease in enzyme activity.

active-site titration and michaelis constant
next, as a likely cause for this effect, we decided to determine if the fraction of active enzyme molecules decreases during incubation. active-site titration, employing the method described by wangikar et al.,  <cit>  of the lyophilized powder before and after incubation in  <dig> -dioxane, at 45°c, showed no change in the number of competent active-sites:  <dig> ± 2% before incubation and  <dig> ± 2% after incubation. the apparent vmax calculated for the co-lyophilized preparation in  <dig> -dioxane was substantially reduced after a 4-day incubation period. the apparent michaelis constant  calculated for the co-lyophilized preparation increased substantially after the incubation period . furthermore, the vmax/km showed a substantial decrease after incubation . for ping-pong kinetics, a true value of vmax/km is obtained even when only one substrate concentration is varied , so it seems that the observed drop in activity is due to a deficiency in the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme. the increase in the km value could indicate subtle structural changes of surface amino groups involved in the substrate binding process. such subtle  structural changes of active site residues could also explain decreased catalytic efficiency of the catalyst.

structural analysis
it is well documented that the dehydration step, required before introducing an enzyme to the organic medium , induces structural perturbation in the enzyme's secondary structure  <cit> . it has also been shown that subsequent introduction to organic media  does not induce additional structural perturbations in an enzyme   <cit> . however, it is possible that structural perturbations or partial denaturation resulting from water removal, solvent insertion, or protein relaxation could take place over a prolonged exposure to neat organic solvents, and this might explain our observed-reduced enzyme activity after incubation. secondary structure analysis of the lyophilized and the co-lyophilized powders before and after incubation in  <dig> -dioxane by fourier transform infrared spectroscopy  revealed no significant secondary structural changes. the scc of the lyophilized powder before incubation was found to be  <dig>   and  <dig>  after incubation . similarly, the scc of the co-lyophilized enzyme before and after incubation were nearly identical . furthermore, the inverted second derivative absorbance spectra in dry state and in a different solvent, thf, are also nearly identical. these results suggest that no secondary changes or extensive autolysis occurs during incubation in these solvent, in agreement with our active-site titration results and previous findings  <cit> .

to further probe changes in structure, including the tertiary structure, we used circular dichroism spectroscopy . spectra were recorded for both the lyophilized and the co-lyophilized powders before and after incubation in  <dig> -dioxane for  <dig> days . the near uv cd of neither enzyme preparation was influenced by incubation, illustrating that the enzyme tertiary structure in both preparations remains unaffected. the far uv cd of the co-lyophilized enzyme is also unaffected, but the lyophilized powder shows a reduction in ellipticity, which was reproducible. it is unusual for a protein to show spectral changes in the far uv but not in the near uv regions, because this implies a change in secondary structure without change in tertiary structure. however, far uv cd of particulate samples is significantly affected by absorption flattening, for which a semi-empirical correction may be made  <cit> . the correction involves one adjustable parameter per sample, and it is possible to choose values such that the spectra for the fresh and incubated samples are the same within experimental error. however, this must remain tentative, because here we have no independent method to estimate the correction parameters. a change in absorption flattening would also be most likely to result from a change in particle structure, and none was observed in the sem imaging studies. the spectra of the colyophilized preparation shows higher ellipticity than the lyophilized powder . this is most likely due to a difference in absorption flattening because the particles are different in nature. the co-lyophilized preparation was observed to disperse in dioxane better than the lyophilized powder did. it is also possible that association with chiral β-methyl cyclodextrin  induces increased cd from the protein peptide bonds.

enzyme ph profile
hydrolases have been shown to exhibit optimum catalytic activity at a specific ph, where the enzyme-catalytic triad residues acquire the most favorable ionization state for catalysis. this "tuning up" of an enzyme's ph is a particularly important step in non aqueous enzymology, and it is often accomplished while the enzyme is dissolved in a buffer prior to dehydration  before suspension in the organic solvent of choice  <cit> . it is also well documented that, once in an organic solvent, most enzymes "remember" their ionization state from the aqueous solution they were dissolved in prior to dehydration  <cit> . this is often referred to as "the enzyme's ph memory"  <cit> . we decided to verify if the decrease in activity observed after an incubation period could be related to the loss or to a "shift" of this ph memory optimum . both preparations showed a lyophilization ph optimum of  <dig> , which persists after a five-day incubation period. the activity vs ph profiles  show that the effect of lyophilization ph is still strong after incubation , suggesting that the activity loss is not due to a shift or loss of the enzyme's ph memory. the enantioselectivities of both preparations obtained at different ph and incubation times remained essentially constant  over a wide ph range , but it decreased slightly at the extreme ph's.

active site spin labeling
it is believed that enzyme flexibility and dynamics are directly related to its activity  in a given solvent. therefore, it is possible that the reduced activity observed after incubation is due to changes of the enzyme's dynamics, occurring either by solvent insertion into the enzyme, water removal or over relaxation of the active-site. site directed spin labeling  is emerging as a new tool for determination of structure and conformational dynamics of proteins  <cit> . the basic strategy of sdsl is to introduce a paramagnetic nitroxide side chain at a specific site in a protein sequence and to analyze the epr spectrum of the spin labeled protein in terms of environmental parameters that characterize the site in protein fold. changes of macromolecular configuration influencing the surroundings of a covalently attached spin label are reflected in the label's degree of immobilization, which can be given a quantitative expression in terms of its rotational correlation time   <cit> . when the label is freely tumbling in solution, its spectrum consists of three narrow lines of equal intensity. as the rate of tumbling slows from that in free solution, the three lines broaden unequally and the spectrum becomes asymmetric. from such a spectrum the rotational correlation time  can be calculated. tau is related to the time required for the label to rotate an average of 40° and is a measure of the rotational freedom of the label's "side chain" . a large value of τ indicates slow rotation, while rapid tumbling is associated with low values of τ. for fast isotropic motions of spin labels  the apparent rotational correlation time of spin labels can be obtained from line width and the line amplitude measured from the epr spectra , using equation  <dig>  <cit> .

equation 1: τ =  <dig>  × 10- <dig> Δh <dig> 

for slow molecular motions , the line positions depend on the rate as well as the amplitude of motion. hence, the parameter Δh <dig> can be used as a convenient empirical measure of dynamics, including both amplitude and rate of motion . in addition, the parameters hi and ha  can also be used to determine the freedom of rotation of the spin label  indicates higher degree of freedom). for our studies, lyophilized subtilisin carlsberg was spin-labeled at the active site with a classic inhibitor for serine proteases: 4-ethoxyfluorophosphinyloxy-tempo . after labeling, activity and active site titrations were performed to ensure the enzyme was in fact labeled at the active-site . our results, summarized on , indicate that the degree of freedom  of the spin label, bound to the enzyme's active site, increases during the five days of incubation. although tau could not be measured at day  <dig> , Δh <dig> and hi/ show that the mobility of the spin label increases after a 4-day incubation, suggesting increased flexibility of the enzyme or "over relaxation" of the active site. besides the activity loss observed, increased mobility of the spin label seems to be the only consequence of incubation in  <dig> -dioxane, and it could therefore be interpreted as the cause for the low enzyme stability. if, however, one argues that increased mobility of the spin-label relates to increased enzyme flexibility, then these results seem to be contradictory to the general belief that increasing the flexibility should increase the enzyme's activity, unless the enzyme's flexibility was already at its optimum before incubation, and increased flexibility would only cause a decrease in activity. but perhaps the most plausible explanation is that the enzyme's active-site is becoming distorted or "over relaxed" during incubation, and this results in a decrease in vmax/km, in initial activity and an increase in apparent flexibility of the spin label is observed. since added water has been reported to increase an enzyme's flexibility  <cit> , changes of hydration water from the enzyme  could explain the increased flexibility observed after the 5-day incubation period. to determine this, we conducted a series of incubation and epr measurements in  <dig> -dioxane +  <dig> % of added water and controlling its water activity using hydrated babr <dig> salts.

epr studies of subtilisin c. in  <dig> -dioxane with  <dig>  % water and controlling the water activity
spin-labeled lyophilized subtilisin c. was suspended in  <dig> -dioxane, water  was added, and the epr spectra were recorded at day  <dig>  and day  <dig> of storage in this solvent. the results show that in the presence of water, at day zero , the spin label has a higher degree of mobility than that of the enzyme suspended in the neat solvent  is larger – consistent with increased mobility of the spin label, ). incubation of the hydrated enzyme for  <dig> days in this solvent shows only a moderate increase in the spin label mobility, as determined from the values of tau, Δh <dig> and hi/. however, when these experiments were repeated controlling the water activity, no increase in enzyme flexibility was observed . since hydration has a clear effect on the enzyme flexibility, and it has been well documented that added water can alter the enzyme activity, we decided to look at the effect of hydration on enzyme storage stability further.

enzyme storage stability in the presence of  <dig> % water and controlling the water activity
to address the issue of changes of the enzyme's hydration level as a possible cause for the observed low solvent storage stability, we incubated the lyophilized and the colyophilized powders in  <dig> -dioxane with  <dig> %  water added to the solvent and controlling the water activity using pre-hydrated babr <dig> salts directly added to the solvent. the results show that regardless of the water content, both preparations lose their initial high activity during incubation. the lyophilized powder is initially activated , but its activity decreases rapidly after  <dig> h, and a similar behaviour is observed when the water activity is controlled . however the activity of the colyophilized enzyme is diminished with the addition of water   <cit> , and it decreases further with incubation . controlling the water activity actually results in an initial increase in enzyme activity, but it also declines to approximately the same value after incubation . these results suggest  that the low enzyme storage stability is not due to a hydration/dehydration effect. the fast enzyme inactivation observed when water is added should not be due to denaturation of the protein because its activity is preserved after the incubation period . this could be due to a general effect that is also observed with other enzyme formulations, such as colyophilized and pegylated, where the initial enzyme activity is high but the stability in the solvent is lower than the lyophilized powder  <cit> .

discussion
it is clear that loss of activity is not due to any major change in structure. other possible mechanisms include changes in the ionization state of critical residues in the enzyme, changes in the enzyme flexibility, or in the enzyme's hydration level which could also have an effect on its flexibility. our stability data obtained with  <dig> % water and with controlled water activity rules out hydration of the enzyme as the cause. change in hydration is one factor that may affect both activity and flexibility without significant change in protein structure. our experiments varying the water content of the organic solvent in which the enzyme is incubated are informative here. the quite different changes in flexibility seen with different water levels suggest that hydration is a major contributor to these effects.

in contrast, the much smaller effects of water level on inactivation over time suggest that this process is not so closely related to hydration . however, we certainly cannot exclude processes involving protein-bound water molecules. activity could be affected by the loss or movement of just one or two water molecules close to the active site. such changes might even be opposite to those in the total amount of enzyme-bound water.

the ph memory experiments tend to exclude changes in the ionization state as the cause, but the increase in km observed could be the result of small but critical changes in the structure around the active-site. it is also interesting to compare these findings with the inactivation of subtilisin carlsberg, in silica immobilised or clec form, during continuous operation in acetonitrile based media  <cit> . in this case no activity can be recovered on returning the catalyst to aqueous media  <cit> , and cd, infrared and fluorescence measurements reveal extensive structural changes , and further unpublished work). clearly the mechanisms involved here are quite different than the storage stability studied in the present paper, perhaps the immobilized enzyme used in that study is more susceptible to structural or flexibility changes than the "native" enzyme?

CONCLUSIONS
our studies of secondary and tertiary structure show that the enzyme remains structurally defined during prolonged incubation in organic solvents. changes in the enzyme hydration or aggregation do not seem to be responsible for the observed poor storage stability, although it is possible that in the presence of water, we could be observing two competing effects  which prevent us from clearly separating the two effects . the flexibility of the active-site spin label increases with increased water concentration, but it remains constant during the storage period when the water activity is controlled by added hydrated salts. the observed decrease in activity is also accompanied by an increase in km and a decrease in vmax, showing loss of the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme.

these results exclude structural changes, flexibility, hydration, and changes of the enzyme ionization state as possible mechanism for the observed low storage stability, but do not exclude possible depletion or rearrangement of water molecules around the active site, or small structural perturbations around the active site or movements of counter ions. further comprehensive studies will be required to ascertain this.

