BACKGROUND
african trypanosomes, also known as salivaria , are the causative agents of disease in humans, domestic and wild mammals. some sub-species of trypanosoma brucei species complex are responsible for producing the so called sleeping sickness in humans that affects thousands of persons each year in sub-saharan african countries. t. brucei, along with other species of salivarian trypanosomes are the aetiological agents of a variety of livestock diseases not only in africa, but also south america and asia are affected by some species  <cit> . these cattle diseases, generally referred to as nagana, are accountable for important economic losses in the affected countries. salivarian trypanosomes also infect wild animals , which may operate as natural reservoirs.

apart from their african origin, other two distinguishing features of this group of trypanosomes are that they are mammalian parasites only and that their vectors are several species of the genus glossina . while in africa salivaria trypanosomes are transmitted both cyclically by tsetse flies and mechanically , in america only mechanical transmission by tabanids  <cit> , other hematophagous fly species and even vampire bats has been observed  <cit> . it is not clear whether the ability to be transmitted mechanically by blood sucking insects other than tsetse flies is the ancestral transmission mode or a secondary adaptation to the particular environments that these parasites were exposed when they invaded african regions where glossina was not present or new continents such as america or asia. in this regard it is worth mentioning that early branching salivarians  complete their cycle entirely in the proboscis of the fly . this has been interpreted by hoare   <cit>  as a relict form, representing an intermediary stage in the evolutionary pathway from the ancestral mechanical transmission to full adaption to the salivary glands of tsetse fly.

however, the most remarkable adaptation of salivaria trypanosomes is related to the fact that they remain exclusively extracellular in the mammalian host , and hence permanently exposed to the immune system during infection. in all likelihood, such adverse condition is the reason  why in these parasites has evolved their most distinctive trait: a sophisticated strategy, called antigenic variation, to evade the host immune response. this strategy consists in periodically changing a dense protective coat composed by an extremely abundant  and immunogenic protein, the so-termed variant surface glycoprotein . these parasites express only one vsg gene at a time, from a repertoire of silent copies that in the case of t. b. brucei contains more than  <dig> different genes  <cit> . this mechanism allows transient immune evasion, since after changing the variable glycoprotein that was being expressed, an entirely new parasite population arises that is not recognized by the host's immune system which has developed an antibody response directed against the previous vsg. by repeating this cycle, the parasites are able to maintain the infection.

reconstructions of evolutionary relationships using sequence data have shown that salivaria trypanosomes are an indisputable monophyletic clade composed by three main groups  <cit> . these groups are basically in agreement with the traditional classification based on morphological and life cycle data proposed by hoare   <cit> . the first group; which is fully coincident with trypanozoon subgenus, contains the model species t. brucei brucei, the human pathogens t. brucei gambiense and t. brucei rhodesiense and two species of veterinary importance, trypanosoma evansi and trypanosoma equiperdum. a second group, the subgenus nanomonas, includes two small sized nagana causing species, trypanosoma congolense and trypanosoma simiae . finally, the dutonella subgenus contains trypanosoma vivax, another nagana causing species with economic importance, both in africa and america. the use of suitable molecular markers on samples taken from the wild have recently disclosed that t. vivax also exhibits substantial intragroup diversity, comparable to that observed in t. congolense <cit> . a relevant biological/evolutionary aspect of this last group, is that it occupies a crucial phylogenetic position because besides being the earliest branching salivaria, its divergence predates that of the remaining ones by a big amount. this key evolutionary position, sometimes incorrectly referred to as being “the most primitive”, makes t. vivax a fascinating model to study fundamental questions concerning the origin and evolution of several features that characterize african trypanosomes. indeed, the availability of data from t. vivax brings the possibility of making evolutionary inferences concerning the ancestral or derived state of relevant biological features by means of comparisons with t. brucei  and consequently provides the opportunity of analyzing these traits in different stages of their evolution .

a recent evolutionary genomic analysis has been conducted in t. vivax and other representative species of african trypanosomes, comparing their repertoires of silent vsg genes, how they are organized and diverge aiming to understand the evolution of these proteins and how they gave rise to novel functions  <cit> . it was found that species differ in the organization of their silent vsg archive, something that may result in different mechanisms for generating antigenic diversity. besides, these authors suggest that while in t. brucei and t. congolense there is a high rate of recombination between silent vsg copies, this phenomenon is much less pronounced in t. vivax. this analysis, however, barely addresses the topic of the expression of this fundamental group of proteins. in fact no previous genome wide studies on gene expression have been published on t. vivax. to tackle this and other important questions, we have conducted rna-seq analyses of the bloodstream stage in t. vivax using different and complementary ultra-high throughput sequencing technologies. deep sequencing in trypanosome species other than t. brucei may contribute to understand several topics concerning the biology of trypanosomatids  by giving the possibility of conducting comparative analyses and providing an evolutionary perspective. surprisingly, this technology has been scarcely used in trypanosomatids, being restricted to the model species t. b. brucei and more recently rnaseq has been used in leishmania tarentolae to explore the role of the nucleotide j  in transcription regulation  <cit> .

methods
parasites
experimental infection and parasite purification
t. vivax from the bovine venezuelan isolate  were used in this work.

purification of trypanosomes was done as follows: immunosupressed six-months-old cross-bred sheep were inoculated intravenously with cryopreserved blood containing t. vivax. when parasitemia reached values of 2 x  <dig> trypanosomes/ml, blood was extracted and mixed with an equal amount of percoll  containing  <dig> % sucrose,  <dig> % glucose, ph  <dig>  and then centrifuged at 17000 g, 20 minutes at 4°c. parasites were recovered from top and middle layer of percoll gradient, resuspended in pbs  containing 1% glucose  and subsequently centrifuged at 6000 g for 15 minutes at 4°c. the pellet containing parasites was washed twice with pbsg to remove residual percoll. partial purified parasites were resuspended in pbsg and applied to a dead-cellulose anion exchange column. purified parasites were eluted free from red cells, examined by microscopy and counted in a neubauer chamber. further details can be found in  <cit> . t. vivax y <dig> was grown on mice as described by chamond et al.  <cit> . briefly,  <dig> to 10-weeks-old male c57bl/ <dig> mice were used. rna and dna samples for downstream analysis were obtained from 101– <dig> bloodstream forms obtained at the peak of parasitemia . parasites were maintained by weekly passages in mice and new stabilates were appropriately and regularly frozen. all animal work was conducted in accordance with relevant national and international guidelines. mice were housed in the animal care facilities from institut pasteur of montevideo . animal housing conditions and protocols used in the present work were previously approved by the ceua  under the number 013– <dig> according to the ethics chart of animal experimentation which includes appropriate procedures to minimize pain and animal suffering. infections in sheep were conducted under veterinary supervision with daily control of temperature and hematocrit which never descended below 30%.

rna purification and quality control
total rna was isolated from  <dig> parasites using illustra rnaspin mini kit  according to manufacturer’s protocol. obtained rna was quantified in a nanodrop  and its integrity was checked by bioanalyzer .

library construction and sequencing
double-stranded cdna was generated from 25 μg of total rna using a superscript ii double-stranded cdna synthesis kit  according to the manufacturer’s instructions, except for oligonucleotide used for first strand synthesis and 5-methyl-dctp  instead of dctp. the primer used was 5′ ctggag16vn 3′, the 5′ end of the primer contain the restriction site for the enzyme gsui. after the synthesis of the second strand, the cdna was precipitated with 1/ <dig> volumes of sodium acetate , 2 μl of glycogen  and  <dig> volumes of absolute ethanol and resuspended in 70 μl of rnasefree water. 65 μl of cdna was digested with gsui  for 4 hours at 30°c to cleave the polia tails. the digested cdna was used to prepare the  <dig> and illumina libraries.

 <dig> library preparation and sequencing
library was prepared using the gs titanium dna library preparation kit  according to the manufacturer’s protocol starting with  <dig>  μg of cdna. the empcr was done with gs titanium sv emppcr kit  according to manufacturer’s instructions. we used gs titanium sequencing kit xlr <dig>  to sequence 1/ <dig> gs titanium picotiterplate kit 70 ×  <dig> in  <dig> genome sequencer flx system . illumina sequencing was carried out in a gaiix on the same cdna library which was re-fragmented and universal illumina adaptors were added. raw data were deposited in the ncbi database under submission number sra <dig> 

bioinformatics and data analysis
data quality analysis
the details of sequence data obtained by  <dig> and illumina sequencing are presented in additional file 1: table s <dig>  for the first technology  <dig> reads, with an average length of  <dig> nt. were obtained. this corresponds to 54 mb of sequence data. for the second technology,  <dig> million of reads , corresponding to  <dig> megabases were obtained. several quality tests were carried out. in the first place, the percentage of contaminating reads present in the sample  was determined. for this purpose the reads were mapped into the sheep genome using blastn. by doing this it was possible to establish that only  <dig> reads  were of host origin. a similar figure was obtained for illumina reads . the same procedure was followed for other possible contaminating sources  and only traces were detected . this indicates that the quality of the starting material was high.

in the second place the number of artificially repeated reads  were identified. this distortion  is introduced during the emulsion pcr step because a single cdna molecule, but multiple beads are located in the same micro reactor. for genomic sequences these are customary identified as “same-start reads” provided that it is unlikely that by chance alone multiple dna segments obtained by random fragmentation of a genome start at exactly the same position. however, it is obvious that for rna derived dna , sharing the “same-start” is not uncommon. for this reason the candidates of artificially duplicated reads were identified as those ones that start and end at exactly the same nucleotide. about  <dig> reads  fall in this category , such proportion of repetitions is low when compared with other studies, where this kind of reads can be as abundant as 25%. these repeated reads were collapsed for further analysis.

in the next step, reads corresponding to ribosomal rna were identified, totaling  <dig>  in the case of  <dig> flx. the percentage of rrna reads was significantly higher for illumina . such a small number is unusual considering that this type of rna normally represents more than 70% of the rna population, thus indicating that the filtering strategy of using an oligo-dt containing primer turned out to be very effective in order to get rid of ribosomal rna. in addition, this methodology does not restrict the isolated rna to mature mrna either, as it can be inferred from the fact that other types of rna molecules are quite abundant in the sample. in effect, transcripts derived from the kinetoplast genome are relatively abundant . for the case of maxicircle, it was possible to identify them using simple homology search, given that these genomes are relatively conserved among trypanosomatids. but, such strategy was not suitable for minicircle derived rna identification because of their lack significant conservation. therefore the incidence of this latter group was not determined.

to evaluate the genome coverage of rna-seq data produced in this work,  <dig> and illumina reads were mapped to genomic sequences  in order to estimate the sequencing depths of the top, middle and botton  <dig> expressed genes. this was done using rna-seqc program  <cit> , detailed results are presented in additional file 2: figure s <dig> 

assembling and functional annotation
assembling of  <dig> reads was conducted using two different computer programs mira  <cit>  and newbler . the two resulting assemblies were compared to each other, in order to assess their qualities and determine which one was more appropriate for subsequent analyses. the quality of the assembly was assessed by comparing the assembled contigs with a reference set containing well defined mrna sequences. to assess quality, two variables were measured, the proportion of the reference mrna that is well reconstructed  and the number of contigs falling in each mrna reconstruction fraction , so that the overall quality of the assembly is given by: q=∑inipi. this comparison was done using a reference set consisting of protein coding sequences available in genbank that are putatively expressed in the bloodstream stage. these were identified on the basis that their t. brucei orthologs are unambiguously expressed in this stage. in turn, the latter condition was determined by testing which t. brucei protein coding genes are observed in the bloodstream est collection. it should be noted that this collection was built using traditional sanger sequencing from poly a + rna, which due to the low sensitivity of the method, contains mainly unequivocally transcribed genes. the results obtained allowed us to draw two useful conclusions. in the first place mira outperforms newbler, yet by a narrow margin; provided that the contigs built by mira reconstruct better the mrna . secondly, more than 92% of the putatively expressed mrnas are tagged , hence indicating the  <dig> derived sequence dataset is a good picture of the transcriptional state of the parasite .

functional annotation of rna derived contigs was carried out using a set of complementary tools: estscan  <cit> , blast2go  <cit> , interproscan  <cit>  and anenpi  <cit> . in the first place, to identify t. vivax genes encoding proteins with a known or unknown function, it was necessary to obtain high quality virtual translation of contigs. this translation is not always the straightforward exercise of mechanically applying the genetic code to possible orfs. instead, contigs often contain serious translation problems derived from sequencing errors that may change the reading frame . to handle this complication the estscan program was used. this application employs a hidden markov model  to restore the correct frame by introducing indels. the program needs to be calibrated  in such a way that it recognizes possible alteration in the orfs on the basis of their statistical properties  <cit> . for training the estscan hmm, t. vivax coding and intergenic sequences were retrieved from public databases. after this step, functional annotation of the translated contigs was done combining the results of blastp against nr ncbi  and a domain analysis based on interproscan. results of both sources were integrated using blast2go, which allows assigning go terms to the entries by using simple annotation rules. because b2g is quite conservative to assign ontology terms, the analysis was complemented with a simple blastp search against translated nr ncbi. besides the anenpi pipeline  <cit>  was used on kegg in order to predict possible metabolic pathway that are active in the bloodstream stage of trypanosoma vivax.

determination of transcription levels
to determine the transcription levels we decided to use erange  <cit>  software on illumina data. after cleaning low quality reads, the remaining reads were mapped to the t. vivax genome  using bowtie  <cit>  and allowing up to  <dig> multimatches and up to  <dig> mismatch. rna-seq erange pipeline was used with minor modifications. it is important to take into account that in genomes like this one, which contain several related paralogous genes, the use of computer applications that consider the unique regions of the genes to re-normalize the assignment of multimatching reads , is essential. this approach permits also determining which ones of the paralogous genes from a multigene family are really expressed at a given time. for  <dig> data  transcription levels were computed using in house bash and perl scripts to parse blast or bowtie outputs. rpkm estimates are presented on additional file 4: table s <dig> 

we note that in these analyses it was not possible to use biological replicates. because of the limited amounts of rna isolated in each individual infection, it was necessary to pool all samples together. although this is not optimal because variability is not assessed, for a couple of reasons such limitation is not critical for this study. first, the main focus of our study is not compare different moments of the parasite life cycle aiming to determine which genes are up or down regulated. moreover, since our starting material is a pool of different biological independent samples, large variance that might especially affect low expression genes  is largely alleviated. transcript levels for t. brucei genes were also estimated as described above using published rna-seq data  <cit>  retrieved from the sra archive.

identification of splice-acceptor sites
cdna sequence tags  that contained terminal spliced leader sequence  were extracted from the illumina output. the sl sequence was found in a  <dig> %  of the reads and in the majority  of them in the sense direction, as expected because of constraints imposed by the cdna size-fractionation and sequencing protocols. the spliced leader segment was trimmed from these sequence tags with a homemade python script. sequences greater than  <dig> bases were used in downstream pipeline. genomic matches were identified by mapping these reads with bowtie against the t. vivax genome sequence. no mismatches were allowed.

we used output of bowtie , genomic information as given by the gff files and blockbuster software  <cit>  to cluster the mapped reads in order to detect trans-splicing sites in the chromosomes and other genomic sequences from t. vivax. cluster information was parsed with gff information with homemade perl script and a final table with gene information and trans-splicing sites associated were obtained. a similar pipeline was used to analyze trans-splicing patterns in t. brucei and trypanosoma cruzi.

in the case of t. cruzi, the rnaseq data from three stages of the life cycle of the parasite  were obtained in our laboratory . due to the sequencing strategy used in t. cruzi  the number of spliced leader containing reads was modest; this restricted the type comparisons that could be conducted in this species to only the determination the splicing motifs.

RESULTS
assembling  <dig> reads and functional annotation of resulting contigs
because  <dig> flx sequencer yields long reads, it is possible conduct “de novo” assembling to obtain good quality contigs. this was done with two different computer programs, mira and newbler  using optimized parameters for rna-seq assembling.

the results obtained allowed us to conclude that mira outperforms newbler, since the contigs obtained represent better reconstructions of full length mrna . besides, more than 92% of the putatively expressed mrnas are tagged , hence indicating that the  <dig> derived sequence dataset is a good picture of the transcriptional state of the parasite .

as mentioned before high quality virtual translations of contigs were obtained using estscan. a total of  <dig> translatable sequences were identified by estscan among which  <dig> contained more than one read. functional annotation, carried out using blast2go, enabled us to identify  <dig> contigs for which it was possible to assign one or more gene ontology terms. however, the number of contigs whose virtual translation have homologs in other species  was  <dig> times as much , and hence it was possible to make a relatively reliable primary functional assignment for these contigs as well. in addition, we could determine a tentative enzymatic function using kegg search for a substantial number of virtual translations totalizing  <dig> ec numbers assigned to  <dig> contigs. additional results on the functional annotation are available in the web page .

finally, it is worth mentioning that more than  <dig> contigs that are transcribed at different levels and unequivocally correspond to protein coding genes, do not have homologs in other species, including other trypanosomatids such as leishmania sp, t. cruzi and the african trypanosomes for which genome sequence is available . this means that in all likelihood they are species specific. among these t. vivax specific contigs, around  <dig> genes have not even been reported in the t. vivax genome available in genbank, indicating that very probably they are specific of the strain liem- <dig>   <dig> species specific contigs for which it was possible to build a full cdna were chosen for additional analysis. a preliminary characterization of these genes was carried out using a battery of informatics tools such as those that identify signals for sub-cellular localization and domain analysis. these results are presented in additional file 5: table s <dig>  database web interface.

a relational database  was built to store and browse the data and results produced in this work. in fact the database contains raw as well as processed and annotated data as described in the previous section. a pyhton web application was developed using the django programming framework. this application provides user-friendly data querying, browsing and visualization through a web interface . in this web interface it is possible to search for, and retrieve reads, contigs as well as virtual translations. besides, the database can be searched using different criteria such as length, depth of the contigs , go terms, enzyme commission numbers, blast e-values, keywords, etc. or a combination of these criteria. moreover any sequence can be blasted against the dataset. the annotated entries are linked to the reference databases used for their annotation, namely amigo gene ontology  <cit> , kegg repository at ebi and ncbi. in addition the database offers the possibility to highlight on-the-fly the enzymes in the pathway image files downloaded from the kegg ftp site. expression of variant surface glycoproteins in t. vivax, and the protein composition of the cellular surface.

because of the strategic evolutionary position of t. vivax, as the earliest branching african trypanosome, it is important to analyze in this species the expression patterns of variant surface glycoproteins, as well as the organization of this gene family to help shedding light on diverse questions concerning the origin and evolution of antigenic variation.

to this aim we first tried to identify the vsgs that were present in our rna sample by using a simple strategy, which consisted in searching putative candidates among the most abundant mrnas , provided the high expression levels that these proteins exhibit. by doing this, only one candidate vsg was found. surprisingly, the mrna identified was highly similar  to the only vsg sequence already reported for t. vivax that was derived from a west africa isolate called ildat  <dig>   <cit> . even if this finding confirms previous reports that suggest that the american t. vivax  is closely related to west african strains  <cit>  some remarks should be made. it should be taken into account that t. vivax was introduced in america around  <dig>  in the french guiana, by infected zebus imported from africa  <cit> . since its introduction, t. vivax has been disseminated by horse flies   <cit>  and stable flies   <cit> , and it was rapidly dispersed throughout south america. however, the degree of sequence similarity seems to be much higher than what we would have expected if account is taken to the fact that these genes normally diverges extremely fast. indeed, the comparison of vsg genes among t. brucei strains reveals that even closely related subspecies  have very divergent silent repertoires  <cit> . in addition, it should be noted that this vsg gene was not identified in the draft genome deposited in genbank corresponding to the y <dig> strain. we tested this absence by pcr using two sets of primers specifically designed to amplify this gene. both primers sets failed to amplify, thus confirming that this vsg copy is really not present in the y <dig> strain . conversely, the gene encoding the vsg protein expressed by y <dig>  is not detected in liem- <dig> transcriptome. considering that y <dig> also belongs to the same group of west african t.vivax-like strains  <cit> , these two results seem to be conflicting. alternatively they indicate that the two processes of genetic differentiation of their silent archives, sequence divergence  and genome plasticity  are not necessarily correlated, especially in this initial phase of taxa differentiation.

as far as the expression level of the main vsg is concerned, it is interesting to note that although its transcript abundance is very high , the number of illumina reads mapping on this contig corresponding to the vsg gene, is not nearly as high as those reported for vsgs in t. brucei, where they represent between 5% and 11% of all sequenced reads  <cit> . this is an interesting aspect and raises several questions concerning the membrane protein composition and diversity  in this and other african trypanosomes.

these questions can be answered by assessing the expression levels  of genes encoding proteins predicted to have surface location, thus allowing us to compare the surface protein composition from both african parasites. as it emerges from figure  <dig>  it is evident that while in t. brucei the vsg is absolutely predominant , in t. vivax it only represents about 55%. other very common trypanosomatidae membrane proteins, like gp <dig>  are almost absent in t. brucei, while they exhibit appreciable frequencies in t. vivax. these results thus indicate that the cellular surface of t. vivax is substantially different from that of t. brucei . in turn, these results concerning the much lower membrane concentration of vsg proteins are in keeping with previous ones from electron microscopy  <cit> , which indicate that in t. vixax the vsg surface coat is noticeably less dense than in t. brucei. in addition, these results taken together raise the question of what would be the role of vsgs in t. vivax  in immune system evasion, provided that such relative lower concentrations cast some doubts on how efficiently it could act as a fully protective coat as it happens in t. brucei. needless to say, proteomic analysis will provide more substantial data to help gaining additional insight on this fundamental point. in particular it would be important to analyze the efficiency of antibodies targeted against invariant membrane epitopes. assessing transcription levels.

one of most useful features of rna-seq analysis is that it allows direct and quite accurate estimations of transcript levels. given that the number of reads matching with the transcripts of a given gene is expected to be proportional with the concentration of the mrna molecule as well as with its length. then the normalized  numbers of  <dig> reads used for assembling of a given contig, or the number of illumina reads mapping on the same contig  can be used as a measure of expression level.

in the first place we compared how congruent are the two sequencing technologies used in this work for estimating transcript levels. specifically, we compared the number of  <dig> flx reads used in the assembly of a given contig versus the number of illumina reads mapping on the same contig. as it can be observed in figure  <dig>  even though for some points  the estimation differs, the agreement is quite remarkable . the genes  exhibiting estimations that are inconsistent between the two technologies were further analyzed to understand the reasons why these two technologies yield contradictory estimations. indeed, for several genes very few  <dig> reads contributed to their assembly, while many of the same genes were tagged by considerable number of illumina reads. even if it is reasonable that many low expression genes that are tagged by illumina reads will be not detected by  <dig> flx sequencing technology, given the comparatively small number of reads the latter technology yields, in few cases the disagreement between the two technologies goes far beyond than what would be expected by random variability. in effect, since the ratio in the numbers of reads between the two technologies is  <dig> , which is close to the regression coefficient in figure 2a, it follows that several genes on which map many thousands of illumina reads  are not expected to be tagged by none or so few  <dig> reads. the visual inspection of these troublesome points shows that they correspond to dna segments having extreme compositional biases. on the other hand the comparison between the two technologies was also conducted by mapping their reads on genomic regions to assess the variability in sequencing depths estimated by each method. again it is possible to observe that there is a good agreement between both methods .

estimation of transcription levels for  <dig> cds annotated in genbank was done using the erange software that corrects multiple matching reads considering unique parts of genes for their assignation. the gene expression levels  are available in additional file 4: table s <dig> 

an unexpected observation is that several genes and genomic regions appear to be non-transcribed at all in the bloodstream stage of t. vivax, as it can be appreciated in figure  <dig> panels a and c, which shows that some of these regions are devoid of reads. we note that this result could be attributed to the fact that the reference genome used to map reads and the rna used in this work come from different t. vivax strains , thus the absence of reads in some regions could be simply the result that the regions in question are not present in liem- <dig>  to control this possibility, we decided to test if the genomic dna segments without reads mapping on them are also present in the genome of the strain from where the rna comes. primers specific for these regions were designed . the pcr results presented in figure 3c indicate that the regions with no reads are definitively present in the liem- <dig> strain, and hence the absence of reads mapping on them is in all likelihood the result of their lack of transcription. these results have implications on the long standing questions concerning the mechanisms of gene expression regulation in trypanosomatids. indeed, the current accepted view is that in trypanosomatids everything  is promiscuously transcribed, and they regulate their gene expression mainly post-transcriptionally, either by differential rna maturation and degradation, or by controlling translation initiation or even post-translationally  <cit> . hence, the results presented in figure  <dig> showing that certain genes and genomic regions are not transcribed, strongly suggest that regulation of transcription initiation might also play an important role in gene regulation. gene expression levels and codon biases in trypanosomes.

it is well established that in most organisms synonymous codons are not randomly used  <cit> . biased codon usage may result from a diversity of factors, among which translational efficiency  is one of the most important, being related to the fact that the preferred codons in highly expressed genes are recognized by the most abundant trnas. more than fifteen years ago, we have shown that in trypanosomatids there is enormous intragenomic variability in codon biases, and this was essentially the result of the interplay between mutational biases and translational selection. in this analysis it was also shown that, in the african trypanosome t. brucei, the putatively highly expressed genes exhibit essentially the same kind, but with lesser strength, of codon biases as in t. cruzi   <cit> . one of the main drawbacks of these analyses, is that the data on expression levels were very fragmentary or simply assumptions . interestingly, some of these results were confirmed more recently, yet no analysis was carried out so far comparing codon preferences using robust data on gene expression  <cit> . the availability of ngs data gives the opportunity to re-address this topic from a more reliable perspective.

an interesting observation is that in both african trypanosoma species there is a group of genes that exhibit an atypical behavior in the sense that they are expressed at high or very high levels, yet they display weak or none gc <dig> biases. furthermore, in both species the respective groups of unusually behaving genes include many species specific proteins and also proteins like many ribosomal proteins and translation factor 5a . in addition, the two groups contain many genes that are coincident  between t. vivax and t. brucei . it should be noted that the very existence of several orthologous that are highly expressed and lack codon biases in both species suggests that this unusual behavior cannot be attributed to natural variability in codon preferences that could eventually display high expression genes. instead, this very likely reflects genuine functional requirements. we note that this peculiar observation had been pointed out before for the case of vsg genes in t. brucei, the highest expressed gene, yet the different genes encoding vsg proteins have very weak codon bias  <cit> . the puzzling aspect of this observation is why and how is it possible that these organisms do not optimize the codon preferences in genes that represent such a substantial proportion of the protein mass. two different explanations  can be put forward. one of these is that these genes belong to multigene families that have emerged, or became highly expressed, only recently . hence selection did not have enough time to optimize their codon biases. this can be the case of leucine-rich repeat protein in t. vivax, procyclins in t. brucei  in t. cruzi), that are very highly expressed yet have at or weak gc biases . the second explanation is that translational selection is not effective enough for these genes because they are seldom expressed, namely they behave most of the time as silent orfs , during which time natural selection does not have any effect on them. this second explanation applies to vsg coding genes. some additional analyses give support to these proposals. indeed, when the analysis of the relationship between codon biases and gene expression levels is restricted to those coding sequences that have bona fide  orthologs in other trypanosome species , most genes are “well-behaved”, that is the differences in gc codon biases between highly and lowly expressed genes become sharper in both species .

finally, we would like to mention that in spite of the fact that these explanations may account in part for this atypical behavior displayed by trypanosomes, it is also evident that they do not apply to the case of ribosomal and other conserved proteins that exhibit low o none gc <dig> biases and very high expression. mapping trans-splice sites.

to identify trans-splice sites, we mapped  <dig> miniexon containing illumina reads onto the t. vivax draft genome that has been recently made available in genbank. this allowed us to identify the trans-splice sites in  <dig> genes. among these genes,  <dig> had only one bloodstream splice site and  <dig> genes had two or more. the distribution of splicing sites per gene is presented in figure 5a. the maximum number of sites per gene was  <dig> and the average  <dig> . this figure is considerably lower than that described for t. brucei . using the splice site location, the distribution of 5′ utr lengths was also determined . the mean sizes for the first and second splice sites were  <dig> and  <dig> nts, respectively. these are in the same range as it has been described for t. brucei <cit> .

next we analyzed the consensus sequences around the splice site. figure 6a, shows the logo representation of the major site, which is virtually identical to that described for t. brucei, basically consisting in a long  poly-pyrimidine rich track. the consensus for the second and the remaining minor sites are also very similar yet the signal is not as strong as for the major site  furthermore, the canonical ag dinucleotide was found at 98% of the major splice sites , whereas minor sites had an ag dinucleotide in progressively decreasing proportions, 94% for the second, 90% for the third and 80% for the fourth site. therefore, the frequency of ag at secondary splice sites is considerable higher than that observed in t. brucei . as it has been also observed in t. brucei, the second most frequent dinucleotide at splice site is gg . a similar analysis was carried out also in t. cruzi; the logo illustration presented in figure 6b shows that also in the american parasite the overall pattern is very similar to that of salivarians.

these results indicate that both the trans-splicing machinery, and the signals that this machinery recognizes, have been conserved not only in african trypanosomes, but also in t. cruzi, and therefore in all likelihood in all trypanosomes.

along the same line, we also compared orthologous genes between t. brucei and t. vivax to investigate whether the spatial pattern of trans-splicing sites, namely their number and distances to the initiation codon, was similar between these two african parasites. interestingly enough, the pattern exhibited considerably agreement in spite of the fact that the dna sequences in the 5' utr located between the sites of splicing and the initiation codon were poorly conserved .

as it has been already reported for t. brucei, a large number of t. vivax genes contain one or more  trans-splicing sites inside the coding region  <cit> . moreover, we also found that a significant number of genes contain their main, or unique, splice site very close  the start codon . we decided to investigate this peculiar aspect further by determining if this feature is characteristic of some groups of genes or functions. a gene ontology enrichment analysis was carried out to explore this aspect, namely if the genes exhibiting this feature encode proteins belonging to some particular categories. interestingly enough, this group contains a much higher than expected frequency of ribosomal proteins, elongation factors and other proteins related with the translation machinery. other type of proteins over-represented in this group are heat shock proteins and proteins that interact with rna .

because the annotation of t. vivax genes available in genbank is not precise in relation to the correct identification of start codons, and considering that this trouble can introduce serious biases in this analysis, the same ontology analyses were also conducted in t. brucei, whose annotation is expected to be much more depurated. as it can be observed in figures 8c and d, the same pattern is also present in t. brucei, and hence allows us to conclude that it cannot be attributed to an artifact due to low quality annotation.

for these genes with splice site very close to the start codon, we identified the orthologs between t. vivax and t. brucei, and in many cases the splice sites were located upstream of the annotated start codon in one of the species but downstream in the other. we suspected that in all likelihood this was caused by the above mentioned trouble of misidentified start codons. therefore their sequences were aligned to determine, on the basis of dna and amino acid conservation, the most probable start codon. for these comparisons sequences from t. congolense  were also included. the rationale for this approach for detecting more accurately aug start codons is simple, and it is based on the fact that inside the coding part of the genes there are higher functional constraints and hence higher conservation. the approach allowed us to detect that many aug codons were incorrectly annotated as the starting ones not only in t. vivax but also  in t. brucei. after correcting the annotation using conservation information, it was possible to determine that almost all downstream splice sites have in fact an upstream location . in addition when the orthologs between these two species are compared in relation to this feature, it is possible to observe that there is a very good agreement, namely the number of splice sites and their distances to the initiation codon is roughly the same . noteworthy, while these distances remain, there is very little sequence conservation between the two species in the 5' utr, which strongly suggests that what it is important is indeed the distance and not the sequence. regretfully this analysis could not be extended to t. cruzi due to the limited number of reads that spanned the trans splicing junctions and retained a big enough sequence  after the spliced leader was removed.

although the biological significance of these observations is not fully clear, some hypotheses could be advanced on why this particular group of genes contain so short 5' utr. it has been proposed that highly expressed genes tend to be more compact, shortening their 5' and 3' utrs and introns to reduce energetic cost of protein synthesis  <cit> . at a first glance this explanation appears to fit the results presented herein provided that ribosomal proteins are normally highly expressed. however, the average expression level  of short 5'utr containing genes is not significantly different to the average expression level of the genome .

alternatively this feature could be related to genes that are constitutively expressed. this hypothesis becomes clearer if two aspects are taken into consideration; first translation initiation plays a key role in trypanosomatid expression regulation, and second it has been demonstrated in leishmania that the sole presence of a spliced leader ensures the recruitment of the 40s ribosome complex to the mrna 5′   <cit> . therefore the lack of a segment between the spliced leader and the start codon , would imply that once the ribosomal initiation complex is assembled, there is almost no chance of blocking translation initiation. in this regard it is worth mentioning that it has been recently proposed that trypanosomes may contain posttranscriptional cis-regulatory elements located in the 5′ utrs, which would be part of a mechanism to sense environmental changes  in a way reminiscent to bacterial rna thermometers  <cit> . at any rate, the results presented here give initial hints that would require additional experiments  to test this or alternative hypotheses.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we conducted a rna-seq analysis in t. vivax, a species of great importance for comparative purposes owing to its evolutionary location as the earliest branching african trypanosome. to this aim we sequenced the bloodstream stage of its life cycle using two complementary sequencing technologies. the first of these technologies allowed us to obtain a high quality assembly without the restriction of a reference set. the annotation of the contigs thus obtained  permitted the identification of about  <dig> protein coding genes and other non-coding rnas. noteworthy, more than  <dig> genes were found to be species specific and about  <dig> exclusive of t.vivax liem- <dig>  this information and the partial reconstruction of metabolic pathways, is publicly available through a searchable online database.

the use of illumina technology in combination with the above mentioned assembly and genomic information was used to analyze several aspects in this species which in turn allowed us to draw relevant conclusions by means of comparative analysis with t. brucei.

one first aspect to be emphasized concerns the variable surface glycoproteins, that exhibit levels of expression considerably lower than those observed in t. brucei; an observation that is consistent with previous indications obtained from microscopy. this denotes not only that the proteins composition of cellular surfaces is notably different between the two species; but also implies that in all likelihood the way vsg proteins accomplish their shielding role did not remain exactly the same since their emergence. in this regards it is worth reminding that in t. brucei, the vsg coat is a dense physical barrier around the parasite, which does largely modulate the ability of immunoglobulins to recognize other surface  proteins. this point, which is of chief importance to understand the primordial function of vsgs, requires further investigation on diverse aspects such as assessing the level of exposure to the immune system of t. vivax invariant surface proteins or determining their efficiency in antibody clearing and the vsg switching rate.

as long as the expression patterns is concerned, we would like to stress that we present in this work evidence that some regions of t. vivax genome  have no transcriptional activity. in fact, a detailed study shows that vast genomic regions encompassing about one third of the repertoire of variant genes and other regions containing other protein coding sequences are transcriptionally inactive . this strongly suggests, in contrast to the generally accepted view, that in trypanosomatids the regulation of transcription initiation might also play an important role in gene expression regulation. this works perhaps by switching off and on entire genome segments, something that might be accomplished by different mechanisms like condensation or loosening of chromatin in specific regions.

finally, we would like to address the topic of trans-splicing patterns exhibited by t. vivax. a first conclusion that can be drawn in relation to this topic, is that the signals recognized by the trans-splicing enzymatic machinery  are substantially conserved not only in african trypanosomes but also in most distant species like t. cruzi. another significant aspect is that the distance distribution of trans-splice sites, but not the sequence, is conserved for an important proportion of genes. the last important point regarding trans-splicing, is that a group of genes related to translation and interaction with rnas, contain very short 5'utr . this observation cannot be attributed to any technical  or bioinformatic  artifact provided that the same pattern is found in both t. brucei and t.vivax. although here we suggest some possible explanations and hypotheses that are in line with the regulatory role already proposed for the 5′utrs in trypanosomatid rnas, additional data from other trypanosomatid species will allow to determine the phylogenetic extent of this feature; and experiments  would help shed light on its possible functional role.

competing interests
authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
gg and gl performed library preparation and sequencing. mpl and gl conducted the assembling of  <dig> contigs. mpl worked in the de annotation contigs. mpl and mr developed the online database and several perl and python scripts. mr took care of codon usage analysis and perl and python scripting. gg, mpl, mr, fav were in charge of bioinformatic analysis . gg, dp, ltm and arb were in charge of experimental infection, parasite purification and rna isolation. arb was the veterinary that took care of sheep health condition. cr and fav conceived the work. gg and fav wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1: table s1
details of sequence data obtained from  <dig> flx and illumina.

click here for file

 additional file 2: figure s1
coverage metrics for top-middle-lowest  <dig> expressed transcripts.

click here for file

 additional file 3: table s2
quality of assembly. excel table containing q values obtained by mira and newbler assemblers.

click here for file

 additional file 4: table s3
expression levels. excel table containing expression levels  obtained with erange. comparison between  <dig> and illumina quantification.

click here for file

 additional file 5: table s4
species specific proteins. sheet  <dig>  list and features of the contigs. sheet  <dig>  summary table.

click here for file

 additional file 6: figure s2
sequence alignment of vsg from american and african isolates.

click here for file

 additional file 7: figure s3
pcr of vsg. genomic amplification with vsg specific primers in american and african isolates.

click here for file

 additional file 8: table s5
rpkm and percentage of total sequence reads corresponding to vsg and tubulin genes in t. vivax and t. brucei.

click here for file

 additional file 9: figure s4
gc <dig> content discriminated by amino acid.

click here for file

 additional file 10: table s6
group of genes having high expression levels  and low gc <dig> frequency. masp and ribosomal genes in t. cruzi.

click here for file

 additional file 11: figure s5
comparison of frequencies of g + c ending codons in the most and least expressed genes in t. vivax and t. brucei. the comparison was done between conserved and non conserved orthologous genes .

click here for file

 additional file 12: figure s6
sequence logo representation of 2nd to 4th trans-splicing sites.

click here for file

 additional file 13: figure s7
examples of trans-splicing sites in t. brucei and t. vivax and annotation correction.

click here for file

 additional file 14: table s7
t. vivax and t. brucei orthologs genes and trans splicing sites.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
t. vivax bovine venezuelan isolate  was a kindly provided by laura morón and glenda moreno, from universidad de los andes, núcleo táchira, venezuela. cryostabilites of trypanosoma vivax  were kindly provided by philippe büscher .

we thank paula tucci for critical reading of the manuscript and daniel ramón and laia pedrola  for technical assistance and helpful experimental suggestions on  <dig> sequencing. this work was supported by grants from fondo clemente estable  and csic . dp, cr. and fav are researchers from the sistema nacional de investigadores , montevideo uruguay.
