BACKGROUND
staphylococcus aureus is one of the leading causes for nosocomial infections. it has been the subject of intensive research for many years and there is a large amount of data available concerning the regulation, function, and structure of various virulence factors. recent studies suggest that basic physiology determines not only growth and survival but also pathogenicity and adaptation to environmental conditions. therefore, more knowledge about cell physiology and molecular processes involved in infection is necessary to better understand staphylococcal pathogenicity.

one of the important and highly conserved regulators of carbon catabolite regulation in low-gc gram-positive bacteria is the catabolite control protein a, ccpa, which has been intensively studied in bacillus subtilis  <cit> . in the presence of glucose or other rapidly metabolized carbon sources, ccpa is activated by complex formation with the corepressor hpr that has been phosphorylated on residue ser <dig>  hpr has dual functions; it can be phosphorylated either at ser <dig> or at his <dig>  in the latter form, it acts in the sugar phosphotransferase system  for sugar uptake. the ccpa complex has an increased affinity for particular cis-acting sequences, termed cre-sites , and thereby represses or enhances gene expression, depending on the position of the cre in relation to the operator sequence  <cit> . these cis-acting dna sequences have been extensively studied through mutagenesis  <cit> , however, the consensus sequences differ slightly from study to study. in b. subtilis, a second corepressor, crh, which is highly homologous to hpr, but can only be phosphorylated at ser <dig>  can also form a complex and thus activate ccpa  <cit> . while s. aureus possesses a hpr-homologue, no crh-homologue can be found in this organism  <cit> .

ccpa has been shown to play a similar role in controlling metabolism in other bacteria, such as bacillus cereus  <cit> , staphylococcus xylosus  <cit> , lactococcus lactis  <cit> , streptococcus pneumoniae  <cit> , streptococcus mutans  <cit> , and listeria monocytogenes  <cit> . in addition to its role in metabolism, ccpa was reported to regulate the expression of several virulence factors and to be involved in antibiotic resistance  <cit> .

the aim of this study was to gain a genome wide overview of the genes and proteins subject to ccpa-control in s. aureus during exponential growth in a ph-controlled environment, in the absence of additional glucose and  <dig> min after glucose addition.

RESULTS
physiological characteristics of the newman wild-type and its Δccpa mutant
the transcriptomes of strain newman and its isogenic Δccpa mutant mst <dig> were analyzed in lb, a complex medium essentially free of glucose and other rapidly catabolizable sugars  <cit> , under controlled ph conditions in exponential growth , and  <dig> min after the addition of  <dig> mm glucose. in the absence of glucose, the wild-type had a slightly lower doubling time than the mutant . the addition of  <dig> mm glucose at od <dig> of  <dig> increased the growth rate of the wild-type but had only a minor effect on that of the mutant .  <dig> min after glucose addition, glucose was depleted from the medium down to  <dig>  mm by the wild-type, while still  <dig> mm of glucose were left in the culture of the mutant . despite increased growth and glucose consumption rates in the wild-type culture, acetate production was only slightly enhanced compared to the mutant, in line with previous findings  <cit> . no lactate was excreted under these conditions at any time point sampled, confirming the aerobic growth conditions. acidification of the medium upon glucose metabolism was prevented by hepes-buffering, which allowed maintaining the ph of the growth media at  <dig>  for both strains and under both growth conditions for at least  <dig> h past glucose addition.

transcriptome analysis
the total number of genes, which were expressed at a sufficient level to give meaningful data, was  <dig>   <dig> of these genes had no homologues in strain newman, and were therefore excluded from the analysis. of the  <dig> remaining genes, a total of  <dig> were found to be affected upon glucose addition in a ccpa-dependent manner, while  <dig> genes seemed to be controlled by ccpa and other regulatory proteins at the same time in the presence of glucose, and  <dig> genes exhibited ccpa-independent glucose effects. the largest group, comprising  <dig> genes, however, was affected by ccpa inactivation even without glucose addition to the lb medium . while regulatory classes partly overlapped, the overall range of differential gene expression was only narrow, peaking around 2- to 3-fold induction or repression.

aa gene was considered to be regulated if transcription was induced or repressed at least two fold

bclasses partly overlap

in order to support our microarray findings, we analyzed the expression of five genes showing differential expression in the Δccpa mutant compared to the parent strain in lb in the absence of glucose, and of four ccpa- and glucose-dependent genes by northern blot analyses . the tested genes showed the same trend in expression by northern as in the microarray.

ccpa-dependent differential gene expression without glucose addition
genes showing an altered expression in the Δccpa mutant compared to the wild-type when growing in lb alone, without glucose addition, are listed in additional files 1: genes with lower expression in wild-type versus Δccpa mutant, and 2: genes with higher expression in wild-type versus Δccpa mutant. these genes made up the largest regulatory group found in our study . only a minor part of this group of genes  contained putative cre-sites in their promoter regions or were part of operons with putative cre-sites, suggesting that ccpa may affect the expression of the majority of these genes indirectly. such indirect effects may reflect differences in the generation of metabolites due to ccpa inactivation, which might serve as cofactors for the regulation of further genes, and/or to a ccpa-dependent control of regulatory proteins or rnas. our findings suggest that glucose-independent effects due to ccpa might play a particularly important role in s. aureus. for a better understanding, the genes of this category were grouped into functional classes . while unknown proteins represented the largest group , this group was followed by proteins of carbon metabolism , transport/binding proteins and lipoproteins , and proteins of amino acid metabolism .

glucose-dependent, ccpa-dependent genes
all genes found to be subject to regulation by glucose in a ccpa-dependent way are depicted in the additional files 3: ccpa dependent down-regulation by glucose, and 4: ccpa-dependent up-regulation by glucose. for consistency reasons, a few genes which were not meeting the arbitrary threshold, such as sa <dig> or sa <dig> , were included, since these genes are part of putative operons and showed a tendency towards regulation. as before, only a minor part of the affected genes/operons  contained putative cre-sites in their promoter regions, indicating a direct control by ccpa, while the majority of genes seemed to be controlled by ccpa in a way that did not involve the interaction with an apparent cre-site.

grouping the regulated genes into functional categories according to the dogan annotation  <cit>  and/or kegg database  <cit>  showed that unknown proteins represented again the largest regulated category , followed by transport/binding proteins and lipoproteins , metabolism of amino acids , and metabolism of carbohydrates  .

ccpa-independent regulation by glucose
we found a small group of genes, encoding the 6-phospho-betaglucosidase, the putative ascorbate transport- and the lactose-operon, to be regulated by glucose in an apparently ccpa-independent way . the lactose operon, reported to be controlled by catabolite repression  <cit>  requires intracellular galactose-6-phosphate for induction  <cit> . the lack of specific inducer under the conditions used here may have obscured the ccpa-dependent regulatory effects on the lac- and other operons, or mechanisms accounting for ccpa-independent catabolite control may be active  <cit> . again, the table includes a few genes not meeting the arbitrary threshold , which were nevertheless listed, since they are likely to form part of putative operons and showed a tendency towards regulation that was consistent with the other member of these operons.

a cellular main roles are in accordance with the n <dig> annotation of the dogan website  <cit>  and/or the kegg website  <cit> .

b comparison of gene expression with  and without  glucose, genes with a +/- glucose ratio of ≤  <dig>  or ≥ <dig> in the wild-type were considered to be regulated

§ genes with regulation above threshold, which were included in the list because they were part of a putative operon.

glucose-dependent genes regulated by ccpa and additional factors
one group of genes showed markedly different regulatory patterns upon glucose addition . these patterns might reflect the interplay of two or several regulators acting on the genes/operons, indicating the presence of further glucose-responsive regulatory elements in addition to ccpa. one pattern was characterized by a parallel up- or down-regulation by glucose in wild-type and mutant, but with different ratios, exemplified by trepcr and alsds. another set of genes  showed a divergent glucose-regulation in wild-type and mutant. a third set, represented by the gntrkp operon, the ribhabd operon, sa <dig> and sa2434-sa <dig>  differed in expression in response to glucose in the mutant but not in the wild-type.

1genes with parallel glucose-mediated regulation in wild-type and mutant but with different ratios, genes with divergent glucose-mediated regulation in wild-type and mutant, and genes with glucose-mediated regulation in the mutant but not in the wild-type

a cellular main roles are in accordance with the n <dig> annotation of the dogan website  <cit> and/or the kegg website  <cit> .

b comparison of gene expression with  and without  glucose, genes with a +/- ratio of ≤  <dig>  or ≥ <dig> in the wild-type and the mutant were considered to be regulated)

* genes containing putative cre-sites

metabolic pathways under the control of ccpa
in s. aureus, glucose is mainly catabolized to pyruvate via glycolysis  <cit>  . the enzymes catalyzing the central parts of glycolysis of s. aureus are encoded by five genes: a glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , phosphoglycerate kinase , triosephosphate isomerase , phosphoglyceromutase , and enolase . we found that in the presence of glucose, only tpi and pgk were up-regulated by a factor of more than two in a ccpa-dependent manner . the absence of putative cre-sites indicated indirect control by ccpa. the other glycolytic genes also tended to show an up-regulation in transcription in response to glucose, however, below the threshold-level, and this tendency was also observed for the mutant .

our microarrays confirmed previous findings  <cit> , reporting a glucose-induced ccpa-mediated repression of pep carboxykinase  , which is involved in gluconeogenesis. the presence of a putative cre-site in the promoter region of this gene indicated a direct regulation by ccpa  <cit> , which contrasts with findings made in b. subtilis, where pcka was shown to be under indirect control of ccpa  <cit> .

the pentose phosphate pathway, an alternative glucose degradation pathway in s. aureus  <cit> , provides the cell with nadph and precursors for biomass, which are needed in many anabolic reactions. gntrkp was the only operon of the pentose phosphate pathway we found to be regulated at least partially by ccpa .

when glucose is depleted from the medium, s. aureus reintroduces products of carbon overflow, such as acetate or acetoin, into central metabolism  <cit> . the genes for acetolactate synthase  and acetolactate decarboxylase , both involved in acetoin production, were up-regulated by glucose . although up-regulation was found in wild-type and Δccpa mutant, it was three times higher in the wild-type, indicating a substantial contribution of ccpa in alsd and alss transcription in response to glucose. while the amount of acetate in the medium increased upon glucose addition in both, wild-type and mutant , we neither observed an increase in transcription of genes encoding proteins being involved in acetate formation , nor of genes with products responsible for acetate and acetoin utilization .

in the presence of glucose, ccpa repressed several genes of the tca cycle, including aconitate hydratase , isocitrate dehydrogenase , and citrate synthase , confirming previous findings  <cit> . also succinate dehydrogenase , succinyl-coa synthetase , and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase  were repressed by glucose in a ccpa-dependent manner . the majority of promoter regions of these genes contained a putative cre-site , indicating that the tca cycle is under direct control of ccpa.

the pdhabcd operon, coding for the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, which links glycolysis to the tca cycle by converting pyruvate to acetyl-coa, was not found to be regulated by ccpa in s. aureus.

s. aureus is able to use amino acids as secondary carbon sources. however, this is not necessary in the presence of high amounts of glucose. accordingly, we found that several genes coding for enzymes of amino acid degradation  were repressed by glucose in a ccpa-dependent fashion . the genes coding for alanine dehydrogenase , aldehyde dehydrogenase , arginase , and delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase  contained putative cre-sites in their promoter regions  and might therefore be under the direct control of ccpa. according to our northern blot findings and previously published microarray data  <cit> , gudb, encoding glutamate dehydrogenase, and rocd, encoding ornithine aminotransferase, seemed to be co-transcribed. interestingly, this operon contains three putative cre-sites , suggesting a complex transcriptional regulation by ccpa, which could be confirmed by our northern blot analyses, showing that rocd/gudb-transcription is largely affected by ccpa in response to glucose. similarly, alda, arg, and roca transcription patterns determined by northern analyses showed the same tendency as our microarray data .

a cellular main roles are in accordance with the n <dig> annotation of the dogan website  <cit>  and/or the kegg website  <cit> .

bcomparison of gene expression with  and without  glucose, genes with a +/- glucose ratio of ≤  <dig>  or ≥ <dig> in the wild-type were considered to be regulated

*genes containing putative cre-sites

selected ccpa-affected genes involved in virulence, pathogenicity, stress response and resistance
urease is considered to be a virulence factor contributing to pathogenesis in many bacteria  <cit> . it hydrolyses urea into ammonia and carbon dioxide, supplying nitrogen and helping to maintain the ph stable by the formation of ammonium, allowing the adaptation to environmental changes. we noticed that irrespective of whether glucose was present in the medium or not, the urease-operon expression was higher in the wild-type than in the Δccpa mutant . urease activity assays confirmed the transcriptional findings by showing an increased urease production by the wild-type strain in urea-containing medium compared to the Δccpa mutant .

we previously observed a ccpa-dependent down-regulation of the protein a encoding gene spa in response to glucose  <cit> , which was confirmed here by our transcriptional analyses . moreover, further genes known or thought to encode proteins being involved in immunomodulating processes, such as the immunodominant antigen a , the staphylococcal secretory antigen ssaa and its homologue sa <dig>  and the eap domain homologue sa <dig> where found to be down-regulated by glucose in the wild-type as well . similarly, the atl gene, coding for the bifunctional autolysin, important in primary attachment to glass and polystyrene surfaces  <cit>  and reduced in intermediate glycopeptide resistant strains  <cit> , was down-regulated by glucose in the wild-type strain. this is partially in contrast to previous findings, in which we observed a trend towards stronger atl expression in glucose containing tsb medium in the wild-type in comparison to a Δccpa mutant  <cit> . however, growth conditions and strains differed between these two studies.

a cellular main roles are in accordance with the n <dig> annotation of the dogan website  <cit>  and/or the kegg website  <cit> .

b comparison of gene expression with  and without  glucose, genes with a +/- glucose ratio of ≤  <dig>  or ≥ <dig> in the wild-type were considered to be regulated

c comparison of gene expression of wild-type  and Δccpa mutant  at od <dig>  <dig>  and  <dig> min later . genes with a wt/mut ratio of ≤  <dig>  or ≥ <dig> were considered to be regulated.

* genes containing putative cre-sites

the genes coding for the two-component-system vrasr were found to be up-regulated by glucose in a ccpa-dependent manner. this system was reported to regulate the so-called cell wall stress stimulon, a set of genes that is induced in the presence of cell wall damaging agents  <cit> . indeed, some of the genes, which were reported to belong to the cell wall stress stimulon of strain newman  <cit>  were found to be regulated by glucose in a ccpa-dependent manner as well. however, there was no specific correlation between up- and down-regulation in response to glucose and vancomycin.

surprisingly, rsbw, coding for the anti-σb factor, which forms part of a polycistronic transcript that includes at least the genes rsbuvw and sigb  <cit> , was found to be up-regulated two-fold by glucose in the wild-type in a ccpa-dependent manner, while none of the other co-transcribed genes of the sigb operon showed changes in expression that were above the threshold . interestingly, similar findings have been made by others as well  <cit> , indicating that the rsbuvw-sigb transcripts might be subject to post-transcriptional processes or that further, yet unidentified promoters within the sigb operon might exist, which would lead to increased rsbw transcription.

the gene coding for the fibronectin binding protein b , was up-regulated in the wild-type by glucose. although this protein is truncated and not functional in strain newman  <cit> , it might be regulated by ccpa in strains where it is functional, suggesting, that ccpa may affect also adherence and host cell invasion  <cit> .

the microarray data confirmed previously published data, in which we found cida transcription to be higher in the wild-type than in the Δccpa mutant in the presence of glucose  <cit> . cida, controlling cell lysis and the release of extracellular dna , was shown to contribute to biofilm formation  <cit> , which is strongly induced in the presence of glucose  <cit> .

differential analysis of the cytoplasmic proteome of wild-type and Δccpa mutant
to complement our transcriptional data, we also compared the cytoplasmic proteome of the wild-type  and its isogenic Δccpa mutant grown in buffered lb medium in the presence and absence of glucose. the protein patterns under both conditions were compared and proteins, whose amounts were affected by the addition of glucose, were identified by mass spectrometry.

in the presence of glucose, increased amounts of components of the glycolytic pathway such as pfk, tpi, pgk, pgm, eno, gap and pyka were observed in the wild-type . proteins of gluconeogenesis, namely the gluconeogenic glyceraldehyde-3p-dehydrogenase , fructose bisphosphatase , and pep carboxykinase  were present at lower levels in the presence of glucose in the wild-type, while in the mutant, the amounts were not altered in response to glucose . also the production of acetyl-coa-synthetase  was clearly down-regulated by glucose in a ccpa-dependent manner .

in line with the transcriptional findings, the level of tca cycle enzymes detetctable on 2d gels  was found to be clearly reduced in the wild-type after addition of glucose .

s. aureus encodes two malate:quinone oxidoreductases: mqo <dig> and sa <dig>  while the amount of mqo <dig> was not affected by glucose, the amount of sa <dig> as the other tca cycle enzymes was strongly reduced . interestingly, pyruvate carboxylase , which is needed to replenish the pool of tca intermediates, was found to be increased by glucose in the wild-type but not in the mutant .

in contrast to b. subtilis  <cit> , the expression of acka and pta, being involved in the overflow metabolism, was not affected by ccpa and/or glucose . neither could we detect an effect of ccpa or glucose on the amount of the pentose phosphate pathway-enzymes, suggesting that considerable differences between s. aureus and b. subtilis exist in the ccpa-dependent regulation of the pentose phosphate pathway and carbon overflow  <cit> .

in accordance with our microarray data, several enzymes of amino acid degradation  were repressed by glucose in a ccpa-dependent manner .

CONCLUSIONS
the catabolite control protein a is likely to regulate transcription either directly, by binding to catabolite responsive elements , or indirectly by affecting the expression of regulatory molecules which in turn alter the transcription of their target genes. we previously observed that ccpa of s. aureus affects the expression of rnaiii  <cit> , the effector molecule of the agr locus, and one of the major regulators of virulence determinant production of this organism  <cit> . aiming at the identification of genes that are directly affected by ccpa in response to glucose, we chose an experimental setup in which we gave a glucose-impulse to exponentially growing wild-type and Δccpa mutant cells and analyzed the effect  <dig> min  and  <dig> min  after the glucose addition. while this strategy was likely to reduce putative side-effects, such as the ccpa-dependent regulation of rnaiii expression or ph-effects, which in turn would have a significant effect on the transcriptional and proteomic profiles, it also limited this study to detect only short-term effects of ccpa in response to glucose. it did neither allow the identification of the glucose-induced long-term effects of ccpa on the transcriptome, nor the effect of ccpa on the transcription of genes that are predominantly expressed during the later stages of growth. thus, one particular consequence of our strategy might have been the overrepresentation of genes/operons found to be affected by the ccpa inactivation in the absence of glucose, which contrasts with findings made in b. subtilis  <cit> , where the glucose-induced effect of ccpa on the transcriptome clearly exceeded the number of genes that were affected by ccpa in a glucose-independent manner  <cit> . it is feasible that the number of genes being affected by ccpa in s. aureus in response to glucose would be higher if a later time-point for the glucose-impulse and/or the analysis would have been chosen, or if appropriate inducers of regulated operons had been present under the conditions analyzed. another surprising observation that we encountered was the high degree of genes found to be affected by ccpa in a glucose-dependent manner that lacked an apparent cre-site . this suggests to us that the s. aureus ccpa might regulate transcription on a significant level in a way that does not require binding to cre. changes in the metabolite content and secondary regulatory elements in the Δccpa mutant may be possible explanations. further, ccpa might bind to a cre consensus, which is composed much broader than the one used by us in this study for the identification of putative cre-sites.

in general, overall induction or repression levels of ccpa were low, showing mostly values around the threshold level of  <dig> and  <dig> , respectively. however, inactivation of ccpa still leads to drastic alteration in the transcriptome and the proteome of the bacterium, affecting not only major metabolic pathways, but also resistance, virulence and biofilm formation  <cit> , which are properties contributing to the adaptation to environmental stress. however, the impact of catabolite repression on staphylococcal virulence in the host can not be predicted by the in vitro data and needs to be assessed experimentally. environmental conditions, carbon sources, ph etc. differ strongly upon the site of infection and underlying diseases, such as diabetes.

although overall regulation of central carbon metabolism mediated by ccpa was found to be similar to the one in the model organism b. subtilis, the extent to which this control was exerted seemed to differ in some aspects between these two bacteria. ccpa regulation of s. aureus seemed to differ in terms of overflow metabolism from b. subtilis, since in addition to alss, pta and acka where found to be regulated by glucose in a ccpa-dependent way in b. subtilis  <cit> , but not in s. aureus. also the genes responsible for acetoin utilization , where regulated in a ccpa-dependent manner in b. subtilis  <cit> , but not in s. aureus. these genes may however be regulated at a later time point during growth. another difference was the regulation of the pdhabcd genes, coding for pyruvate dehydrogenase, which were activated by glucose in b. subtilis but not in s. aureus  <cit> . moreover, we found no ccpa-dependent regulation of glutamate synthase , which catalyses the conversion of glutamate to 2-oxoglutarate, again in contrast to the findings in b. subtilis, in which the transcription of these genes is induced in response to glucose by ccpa  <cit> . also different to b. subtilis was the finding that none of the genes devoted to branched-chain amino acids where induced by the presence of glucose in s. aureus  <cit> . however, in a transcriptome analysis over time, lulko et al.  <cit>  only observed ccpa-mediated regulation of these genes in the late-exponential growth  phase in b. subtilis. thus, it is possible, that also in s. aureus these genes might be regulated by glucose in a ccpa-dependent manner at a later growth phase.

