BACKGROUND
herbivory induces dramatic changes in the volatile emission of plants. this phenomenon has been reported for many plant species from different orders, and possibly originated in photosynthetic bacteria long before the appearance of eukaryotic cells, leading to the belief that this is an ancestral feature of plants  <cit> . herbivore-induced plant volatiles are well known to attract predators and parasitoids of herbivores and so have been frequently termed a “cry for help” from the plant to reduce herbivore pressure  <cit> . however, it is still unclear if herbivore enemy recruitment has a real fitness benefit for the plant or if plant volatiles are reliable cues for natural enemies of herbivores  <cit> . major limitations in understanding the ecological roles of plant volatiles are the complexity of the emitted blends and our lack of knowledge on how insects perceive and process olfactory information  <cit> .

one interesting aspect about volatile emission upon herbivory is its dynamic nature. volatile emission patterns change during the course of herbivory with variation in how soon compounds are emitted after the start of herbivory  <cit> , how soon emission decreases after herbivory stops  <cit>  and changes in day and night cycles  <cit> . the emission patterns of abundant herbivore-induced volatiles, such as green leaf volatiles  and terpenoids, are well described in the literature. however, much less is known about compounds emitted in lower amounts, such as aromatic compounds and amino acid derivatives   <cit> , although there is evidence that such minor compounds could have a high ecological value for both herbivores and their natural enemies  <cit> .

herbivore enemies have been shown to use differences in plant volatile emission to successfully discriminate between host plant species or cultivars  <cit>  and between plants under different physiological stress conditions  <cit> . herbivore parasitoids and predators can also obtain detailed information from volatile cues about the nature of the attacking herbivore species, and its developmental stage or parasitization status  <cit> . the presence of multiple herbivores adds another level of complexity to volatile emission causing increased attraction of herbivore enemies in some cases  <cit> .

understanding how herbivore enemies respond to volatiles emitted by different plant-herbivore combinations will increase our understanding about the ecological roles of specific compounds, but there are many gaps in our knowledge of what affects volatile emission in such circumstances. for example, how the spectrum of volatiles is altered by different herbivore species or different feeding stages is seldom taken into account . additionally, most studies on herbivore enemy recruitment focus on volatiles present at just one time point after herbivory starts .

despite the long history of research on plant volatiles, most research has concentrated on herbaceous species and relatively few studies have explored the emission of herbivore-induced volatiles from woody perennial species and their ecological roles .

among woody plants, poplar has become a model organism because of its ecological and economic importance. in addition, since the completion of the genome of populus trichocarpa  <cit> , many genetic, genomic, biochemical and molecular tools are now available and a growing amount of information is accumulating that has opened the doors to studying many aspects of poplar biology, including direct and indirect defense  <cit> .

in a previous study, we documented the enormous diversity of volatile compounds emitted by black poplar  upon herbivore attack and established that the parasitoid glyptapanteles liparidis, which preferentially parasitizes second instar gypsy moth  caterpillars on black poplar, is attracted to minor nitrogen-containing volatiles emitted by poplar locally at the sites of herbivory. parasitoid wasps were also attracted to these minor volatiles and green leaf volatiles when compounds were presented individually under field conditions, indicating that these substances might be important cues for a broad range of natural enemies of herbivores feeding on poplar trees  <cit> . however, in this earlier study, we did not explore the reasons why these compounds might be preferred by parasitoids over other more abundant poplar volatiles such as terpenoids.

we hypothesize that compounds which are important cues for herbivore enemies should possess certain traits. they should a) indicate the actual presence of the herbivore , b) be emitted independently of light and dark conditions at times when herbivore enemies are foraging, and c) provide information about the identity, age and abundance of the herbivore. the aim of this study was to investigate the temporal dynamics of herbivore-induced volatile emission of black poplar  during and after herbivory, and to investigate the differences in volatile emission in response to different herbivore species, developmental stages of a herbivore and amount of feeding. these data should help establish which compounds could be most useful sources of information for herbivore enemies.

RESULTS
temporal dynamics of volatile emission in black poplar after gypsy moth herbivory
to investigate the diurnal patterns of black poplar  volatile emission, we selected  <dig> compounds as representatives of each of the major classes of volatiles found in this species: green leaf volatiles , monoterpenes , homoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, nitrogen-containing compounds and aromatic compounds. the volatile blend from undamaged trees was dominated by glvs and cyclic monoterpenes, and these volatiles were almost exclusively emitted during light periods . feeding by 4th instar larvae of the generalist herbivore lymantria dispar caused an increased emission of all volatiles measured, although the extent of increase varied with the compound class, diurnal cycle, and the timing of herbivory.figure  <dig> 
emission patterns representing the major chemical classes released by young trees upon herbivory by 4th instar larvae of
lymantria dispar
 or from undamaged controls over a 4-day experiment. the graphs depict the rates of emission for individual compounds over the course of herbivory  as well as after herbivore removal. volatiles were continuously sampled day and night in 6 h intervals. means and ± sem are given.



glvs such as -3-hexenyl acetate were emitted rapidly upon the onset of herbivory, and emission declined after herbivore removal. they were released both day and night, with a greater emission during the day. the emission of terpenoids was also greater during the day than at night, but the increase in emission after herbivory did not coincide with the onset of herbivory, but occurred only several hours after caterpillar damage had begun. furthermore, terpenoids continued to be emitted several hours after herbivore removal and in some cases even until the end of the experiment 48 hours later . among the terpenes, cyclic monoterpenes showed only a modest increase in emission after induction . by contrast, acyclic monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, and the homoterpene dmnt, which were only present in minute amounts in the headspace of uninfested plants, showed a many-fold increase -β-ocimene, 4000-fold for dmnt and 250-fold for -β-caryophyllene) after herbivory .

of the nitrogen-containing compounds, the emission of 2-methylbutyraldoxime was induced immediately by herbivory and increased to its highest levels during the first full light period. the rate of emission was not influenced by the light or dark period, and it declined to baseline levels after herbivory ended . the emission patterns of two other nitrogen-containing compounds, benzyl cyanide and indole, were different in displaying significant diurnal rhythms  and a less rapid decline after caterpillars were removed .

among the aromatic compounds, salicyl aldehyde was emitted almost from the onset of herbivory in substantial rates, both day and night, ceasing abruptly after herbivore removal . two other aromatic compounds, benzyl alcohol and benzene ethanol, showed much more of a biphasic emission pattern, elevated during the day and reduced at night . emission was induced by herbivory more slowly than for salicyl aldehyde and stayed at significantly higher emission levels than in controls until almost the end of the experiment rather than declining rapidly after herbivory stopped as for salicyl aldehyde.

effect of herbivore species, its developmental stage, and feeding intensity on volatile emission
in comparing the herbivory of 5th instar l. dispar larvae to that of 2nd instar l. dispar and larvae of another lepidopteran, the specialist laothoe populi, we observed that the three treatments had very characteristic damage patterns . for example, 5th instar l. populi larvae caused few, but very extensive lesions in a few leaves, often completely consuming the whole leaf blade. fifth instar l. dispar caterpillars also caused extensive lesions on a few leaves, but mostly avoided the leaf venation and only rarely consumed whole leaf blades . furthermore 5th instar l. dispar caterpillars moved more often from one leaf to another thus damaging more leaves overall than l. populi. in contrast, second instar l. dispar caterpillars caused numerous small lesions and frequently changed feeding position causing minor to moderate damage on a larger number of leaves. when fifth instar l. dispar and l. populi were combined, there was an intermediate damage pattern between that of both herbivores measured separately .figure  <dig> 
differences in insect feeding patterns and effect on volatile emission. a. pictures of the characteristic feeding damage caused by second instar lymantria dispar, fifth instar l. dispar and fifth instar laothoe populi on populus nigra leaves. b. correlation between two insect feeding parameters  and total volatile emission of p. nigra leaves  in relation to the amount of leaf area eaten. correlation between the two feeding parameters is also shown. herbivory treatments are depicted by different symbols.



to quantify the feeding differences among herbivore treatments in relation to volatile emission, we calculated the number of damaged leaves and number of lesions as observed in each treatment. we found a significant positive correlation between total volatile emission and the two parameters: number of damaged leaves and number of lesions , as well as a significant correlation between these two damage parameters  . therefore we used principal component analysis as a factor reduction technique to combine these two parameters into a single component which we termed feeding intensity. then we applied a generalized least square model  to calculate the effect of the herbivory treatment , the feeding intensity , and their interaction on the rate of emission of each of the  <dig> studied compounds . emission was calculated relative to total leaf area consumed in each treatment to control for variation in the extent of herbivory among treatments.table  <dig> 
effect of herbivore identity, feeding intensity and their interaction on black poplar volatile emission



compound
interaction 
herbivory treatment
feeding intensity
variance structure
likelihood ratio
p. value
likelihood ratio
p. value
likelihood ratio
p. value

monoterpenes

homoterpene

sesquiterpenes

green leaf volatiles

n-containing comp.

aromatic compounds
for each parameter the f and p values are given. asterisks indicate significant differences, p <  <dig>  = ***, p <  <dig>  = **, p <  <dig>  = *, no asterisk = not significant. compounds are grouped according to their chemical classes, the second column shows the variance structure with the lowest akaike information criterion , which was used in the generalized least square model . variance structures tested were as follows:  <dig>  varfixed variance for feeding intensity,  <dig>  varident variance for herbivory treatment,  <dig>  varpower variance for herbivory treatment,  <dig>  varexp variance for feeding intensity,  <dig>  varconstpower for feeding intensity,  <dig>  varconstpower for feeding intensity and herbivory treatment,  <dig>  combined variance  and  <dig>  combined variance . a detailed description of the variance structures is given by  <cit> .



in comparing p. nigra volatiles among treatments, only four compounds differed significantly in emission upon feeding by the two caterpillar species tested : -β-caryophyllene, 3-methylbutyraldoxime, myrcene and nerolidol , all emitted in greater abundance after damage by l. dispar. four compounds were also different between combined damage by the two herbivore species vs. damage by the generalist herbivore alone: -β-caryophyllene, 3-methylbutyraldoxime, -3-hexenol and nerolidol . these compounds were emitted in higher amounts by l. dispar than by the two species combined. the emission in the combined damage treatment did not differ significantly from that induced by the specialist herbivore  alone . herbivore instar had very strong effect on volatile emission caused by l. dispar: early instar l. dispar induced significantly more emission of nitrogen-containing volatiles and most terpenoids than late instar l. dispar and l. populi .figure  <dig> 
effect of herbivore identity and developmental stage on volatile emission of
populua nigra
. four treatments include lymantria dispar , l. dispar , laothoe populi , and a mixture of l. dispar  and l. populi . box-plots showing the same letter are not statistically significant from one another after a tukey test performed on the fitted values after applying a gls model, excluding the effect of the feeding intensity. p values are given in table  <dig>  plots showing no letters indicate that there was no effect of the treatment on volatile emission.



the feeding intensity had also a significant direct effect on the emission of the majority of black poplar volatiles tested: all monoterpenes, the sesquiterpenes nerolidol and -β-caryophyllene, all nitrogen containing volatiles excluding indole and the glv -3-hexenyl acetate . interestingly the emission of dmnt, which is one of the most abundant herbivore induced volatiles, was shown not to be influenced by feeding intensity or the identity and developmental stage of the herbivore, which is also the case for the aromatic compounds benzyl alcohol and benzene ethanol . for the interaction between herbivory treatment  and feeding intensity, we only observed a significant effect for two aromatic compounds, salicyl aldehyde and benzene ethanol.figure  <dig> 
effect of feeding intensity during various herbivory treatments on volatile emission of
populus nigra
compounds. p values indicate significant differences after applying a gls model . p <  <dig>  = ***, p <  <dig>  = *, n.s. = not significant. herbivory treatments are depicted by different symbols.



discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
major groups of herbivore-induced volatiles in poplar show different temporal emission patterns
the value of herbivore-induced plant volatiles as cues for herbivore enemies depends on how closely their emission correlates with the presence of herbivores. while some compounds were emitted almost immediately after the onset of herbivory and ceased emission soon after herbivory had stopped, others, especially terpenes, were first emitted only 12 hours after the beginning of herbivory and continued being emitted for a day or more after herbivory had stopped. these differences suggest very divergent mechanisms triggering and controlling the biosynthesis of these compounds  <cit> . there are also differences for the same compound class among different plant species. for instance, glv emission is often considered to be restricted to the time when actual leaf damage occurs  <cit> , but here -3-hexenol emission continued for 24 hours after herbivory had stopped . the volatiles that are the most diagnostic cues for herbivore enemies, should be emitted as long as herbivores are present.

variation of emission with day-night rhythm may also affect the value of volatiles as herbivore enemy attractants. the emission of most herbivore-induced and constitutive volatiles was found to vary strongly in a diurnal fashion. the terpenoids followed this trend especially well with emission being much higher in light vs. dark periods for all compounds measured. previous work with herbaceous plants also found the emission of monoterpenes , sesquiterpenes  and homoterpenes  to be much higher in the day than the night  <cit> . a correlation with light may arise because much of the substrate for the biosynthesis of volatile terpenes arises from the methylerythritol phosphate pathway  <cit> , which is closely connected with photosynthesis  <cit> .

other groups of compounds showed less clear trends in day-night emission patterns. certain green leaf volatiles  , nitrogen-containing compounds  and aromatic compounds  displayed a strong diurnal rhythm with more emission in the light, but other members of these groups showed weaker rhythms or none at all. glvs are sometimes reported to be emitted independently of any diurnal rhythm  <cit>  or only at night  <cit> . diurnal variation in volatile emission has been reported for many compounds in a range of plant species, both herbaceous and woody, induced by herbivores or pathogens  <cit> , including poplar  <cit> , but the regulatory mechanisms are not known.

the significance of day-night variation for herbivore enemy attraction depends on the activity rhythms of enemies. if enemies are active throughout the 24 hr cycle, an emission pattern independent of light and dark, such as that of 2-methylbutyraldoxime, salicyl aldehyde or some glvs, may be most advantageous. for enemies that are only active at specific periods, emission during those times is most critical.

emission varies in response to herbivore developmental stage, but not to herbivore species
in our study we found very few differences in volatile emission among black poplar fed upon by two different herbivore species, lymantria dispar and laothoe populi. possible explanations for this lack of species-specificity are that the two lepidopteran species tested feed in the same manner and share similar elicitors in their saliva. in previous studies, feeding by leaf-chewing lepidopteran larvae and grasshoppers has induced similar blends of volatiles  <cit>  suggesting that these volatiles are a general response to attack by chewing insects. in support of this suggestion is the fact that, despite the great diversity of herbivores, only a few elicitors triggering defense responses in plants have been identified in herbivore oral secretions so far  <cit> .

in contrast to arthropod herbivores from a single feeding guild, such as leaf chewers or phloem feeders, it is likely that arthropods from different feeding guilds induce different patterns of plant volatile emission  <cit> , although there are exceptions in the literature that challenge this idea  <cit> . if there are differences in feeding mode between younger and older larvae of a single species, these might also lead to differences in emission. in our study, we found that “feeding intensity”  differed between early and late instar lymantria dispar. in fact, there was more similarity in feeding intensity between late instar l. dispar and late instar laothoe populi than between early and late instar l. dispar which led to corresponding differences in volatile emission. nitrogen-containing volatiles and most terpenes were emitted at greater rates from early vs. late instar l. dispar. thus volatile emission profiles were more influenced by instar and damage intensity than the identity of the herbivore species. alterations in emission profiles induced by feeding of different instars of a single herbivore have also been reported in previous studies  <cit> , and may aid herbivore enemies in finding their favored prey or host stage. the differences between instars in our study may also be due to the fact that, although we controlled for herbivore weight, the number of feeding caterpillars was much higher in the second instar herbivory treatment than in the 5th instar treatments. however, under natural conditions, many moth and butterfly caterpillars are gregarious early in development, and become solitary in late instars  <cit> . thus the differences in our treatments reflect natural conditions.

when young black poplar trees were simultaneously attacked by late instar l. dispar and l. populi caterpillars the emission of a few compounds decreased in comparison to trees infested by late instar l. dispar alone. previous studies have already documented attenuation in volatile emission upon multiple herbivore species attack, however, examples for enhanced volatile emission in response to simultaneous feeding by different species also exist  <cit> .

further studies on the effects of larval stage and simultaneous attack by different herbivore species on volatile emission are necessary to better define these differences and survey their impact on herbivore enemies.

the potential role of black poplar volatiles in attraction of herbivore enemies
our initial hypothesis was that plant volatile compounds employed as cues by herbivore enemies should: a) reliably indicate the actual presence of herbivores, b) be emitted independently of light or dark cycles as long as herbivore enemies are active, and c) provide specific information about the identity, developmental stage and abundance of the herbivore. although no individual compound released from p. nigra meets all the requirements, 2-methylbutyraldoxime and salicyl aldehyde fulfill the first two requirements best, whereas a number of compounds are informative regarding herbivore identity -β-caryophyllene and nerolidol), herbivore instar  and herbivore abundance .

the list of volatiles that best meet the criteria to serve as good signals for enemies of p. nigra herbivores shows a remarkable correspondence with those compounds found previously to be attractive to the braconid koinobiont parasitoid glyptapanteles liparidis, which is a specialist on early instar l. dispar caterpillars. the aldoximes, 2- and 3-methylbutyraldoxime, were the only compounds showing attraction in laboratory bioassays, while 2-methylbutyraldoxime , benzyl cyanide, -3-hexenol, -3-hexenyl acetate and linalool were attractive to a community of different parasitoid species in a natural p. nigra stand  <cit> . it would be interesting to know the major attractive cues for other enemies of l. dispar. the importance of individual herbivore-induced volatiles to herbivore enemies may also depend on their degree of host or prey specificity  <cit> . generalist parasitoids and predators might orient towards abundant widespread compounds which generally signal herbivory , whereas specialists may benefit from responding only to more specific compounds . even though the differences in black poplar volatile emission upon damage by late instar l. populi and l. dispar are minor, parasitoids may still be able to locate their prey under natural conditions, as they possess very sensitive olfactory systems to detect slight changes in volatile cues that we cannot detect with our analytical devices.

in the case of koinobiont parasitoids which develop inside a living host, there is a preference to oviposit in early instar larvae to prevent the risk of encapsulation as well as to allow the completion of the endoparasitic larval stage which would not be possible if the host entered pupation  <cit> . in this sense, compounds signaling early instar damage should be of great importance for koinobiont parasitoids.

the emission patterns of herbivore-induced volatiles may also reflect other roles of these substances in the plant. plant volatiles have been implicated in direct defense against herbivores  <cit> , communication within and among plants  <cit> , and resistance to abiotic stresses, such as high light and temperature  <cit> . the importance of some of these roles could vary during the diurnal cycle. for example, since light and high temperature stresses would occur during the day, volatiles such as isoprene and monoterpenes involved in resistance to these stresses might be emitted in greater amounts during the day.

critical 
