BACKGROUND
the hematopoietic system is a privileged observatory for the study of the highly coordinated process leading to differentiated cells. hematopoietic proliferation and differentiation is sustained by a pool of multipotent self-renewing hematopoietic stem cells , which give rise to a hierarchy of progenitor populations  with more restricted lineage potential, ultimately leading to the production of all types of mature blood cells. hscs/primitive hpcs give rise to a hierarchy of committed hpcs, functionally defined as burst-forming units  or colony-forming units . the earliest hpcs are multipotent and generate mixed colonies . multipotent hpcs differentiate and become gradually committed to specific lineages, i.e., hpcs of the erythroid series  the megakaryocytic lineage  and the granulo-monocytic lineage   <cit> . hscs/hpcs differentiation is controlled by the combined effects of hematopoietic growth factors , chromatin modifiers, transcription factors and micrornas . mirnas are a new class of small non coding rnas , playing a key role in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression  <cit> . this occurs through degradation or translational repression of target mrnas, by binding to their 3'-untranslated regions  <cit> . the human genome encodes ~ <dig> mirnas http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk, located in introns, exons or intergenic regions  <cit> . several studies have demonstrated that mirnas have unique developmental-specific expression or signature, since each tissue/cell type produces a specific set of mirnas  <cit> .

beside the enumeration of the different actors playing in the differentiation act, we have not to forget that the differentiation process can be considered as a trajectory towards an attractor , interesting the cell as a whole with a coordinated change in metabolism, gene expression, shape, general responsiveness to environmental stimuli. in this view, the attention is no more focused on a single 'average' cell behavior with a sequential differential gene activation/repression program, but on a mutually interacting ensemble of cells in which the entire transcriptome pattern moves from the initial unstable attractor state  towards another stable, end attractor, state   <cit> . by analyzing both protein coding genes  and mirnas expression during hematopoiesis, we gave a proof-of-concept of this attractor-like dynamics and were able to characterize the coordinated and scalable character of cell population behaviour in both mrnas and mirnas spaces. these results allow to envisage a sort of biological statistical mechanics along the lines described by bar-yam and colleagues  <cit> , in which the traditional "master genes" driven approach may be substituted by a global motion of the system as a whole.

we will also discuss the complementary role of transcriptome and mirnome and describe the mirnome as a sort of continuously adjusting control device of the cell population  <cit> .

RESULTS
to investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying haematopoiesis, serum-free culture systems were developed for unilineage differentiation and maturation of cord blood cd34+hpcs through the erythroid , megakaryocytic , granulocytic  or monocytic  pathways. the cd34+hpcs population is an heterogeneous population containing: i) very few hscs , ii) minority of pluripotent hpcs  and iii) majority  of committed progenitors . in these cultures, hpcs are stimulated by specific unilineage growth factors  at a saturating level combined with appropriate dosages of multilineage or early acting hgfs . it has to be considered and is currently accepted that hgfs are permissive and not instructive molecule, thus addition of hgfs mainly induce proliferation, differentiation and maturation of unilineage committed progenitors. therefore this type of culture allows to analyze 'pure' unilineage precursors at discrete sequential stages of differentiation/maturation process starting from committed progenitors, but do not allow to investigate early stages of hematopoiesis, such as cell fate decision and/or commitment of pluripotent hpcs.

specifically, unilineage cultures of cord blood cd34+hpcs are derived by culturing purified hpcs, separated by positive selection immunomagnetic system for cd34+, in serum-free liquid suspension and induced to a) selective e growth by very low dosages of il- <dig>  gm-csf, and a saturating erythropoietin  level, b) unilineage mk growth by saturating dosage of thrombopoietin , c) unilineage g growth by low dose of il- <dig> and gm-csf combined with plateau level of g-csf, and d) unilineage mo by low dose of il- <dig> and saturating dosage of flt- <dig> and m-csf.

the purity and the differentiation process of each type of these cultures was assessed by flow-cytometry: a gradual decrease of cd34+ marker during the first days of culture, followed by a progressively increasing expression of specific membrane markers   was observed. consistently, cell morphological analysis showed a gradual wave of maturation along the diverse differentiative pathways to terminal mature cells .

these culture systems, moving from committed progenitors to mature cells state, allow to analyze the existence, if any, of developmental trajectories during hematopoietic differentiation. to this end, we decided to selectively analyze the expression profiles of pcgs and mirnas in unilineage culture of cord blood  cd34+ cells  through the erythroid, megakaryocytic, granulocytic and monocytic differentiation/maturation. total rna was extracted from cd34+ hpcs and at different days of culture, corresponding to discrete sequential stages of differentiation/maturation process, from each type of culture.

microarray analysis was performed using the genechip human genome u <dig> plus  <dig>  oligonucleotide microarrays  for gene expression profiling, and a custom in-house manufactured mirna microarray platform  to profile the expression of mirnas .

the reliability of gene microarray results was inspected by comparing the variations in signal of well-known lineage-specific genes and the corresponding antigens/proteins as reported in current literature  <cit> . in particular, the expression trend was evaluated for the above specific markers, plus other specific proteins such as erythropoietin receptor , β-hemoglobin  and gata <dig> for e unilineage  <cit> , spi <dig>  mafb and cebpe for g and mo cultures  <cit> , gata <dig> and fli <dig> for mk lineage  <cit> . variation in the rna expression of these markers as reported by microarray was always concordant with the expected protein modulation during differentiation .

to validate mirnas expression profile, six randomly chosen differentially expressed mirnas were analyzed by real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction  . moreover, several mirnas showed comparable expression with previously reported trends . regarding mirnas expression profile during megakaryopoiesis, we noticed an incomplete overlap between our and previously published results  <cit>  possibly due to the different cd34+hpcs source .

in order to understand how pcgs and mirnas expression patterns correlate with hematopoietic cell differentiation, both genome and mirnas expression profiles were analyzed as global patterns by using the gene expression dynamics inspector  software  <cit> . gedi displays a global picture of the state vector relative to both transcriptome and mirnome monitoring the cell population while it moves towards its differentiation fate.

genome-wide expression profile of pcgs was representative of a redundant set of  <dig> human sequences, with expression signal linear values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> 

for gedi analysis we used a subset of  <dig> sequences  having signal values > <dig>  in at least a sample . resulting representations revealed that after the first step of unilineage differentiation  a distinctive lineage-specific gene expression profile was already recognizable. after this time minor changes occurred along the maturation processes to further define the differentiated expression profile . earliness of definition of recognizable lineage-specific patterns supports the idea that the mature differentiated cells can be considered as multidimensional attractors in the global expression space  <cit> .

in dynamical terms, the stem/progenitor cells can be considered as an unstable state  from where the system exits following perturbations , and migrates along the different trajectories in the multidimensional transcript profile space  until reaching the stable ones , corresponding to the mature phenotypes. the transcript profile space is defined by the gene expression pattern; changes of the transcript profile results in changing the position of the cell population in the multidimesional space.

we then calculated the global similarity between samples on the entire expressed genome  in terms of pearson correlation . as expected, given we are dealing with samples of the same general cell-type, genome-wide correlations are extremely high , indicating a strong common order parameter influencing the expression level of the entire genome . interestingly, we observed a monotonically decreasing correlation coefficient between cd34+hpcs and different lineages at increasing time, consistent with the increasing distance from the initial unstable stem/progenitor cell attractor. to further analyze the attractor like properties of the differentiation dynamics we calculated the first derivative of the trajectory change in terms of corr - corr/, being t <dig> and t <dig> two different times of observations and corr  the relative correlation with initial state. as evident in figure  <dig>  the decrease in correlation from unit value is concentrated on the first time step, being the subsequent decrease in time much less pronounced consistently with a progressive decreasing of the derivative . this flattening of the differentiation rate appears to be particularly pronounced in the case of erythroid differentiation, in which the major part of total displacement from initial state is accomplished in the first time step.

in order to demonstrate the scalability of gene expression dynamics  different gene sets were selected. the  <dig> expressed sequences were divided in  <dig> medium expressed ,  <dig> high expressed  and  <dig> changed  sequences subsets .

the expressed sequences set gave exactly the same results in terms of monotonic linear decrease of correlation with cd34+hpcs pattern of all the other choices . the same progressive displacement from unstable cd34+hpcs attractor is highlighted with the changed sequences and with a random  <dig> genes extraction .

the same invariant character of displacement from progenitor cell line was observed in further subdivided sets  .

another proof-of-concept of the scalable character of differentiation process came from gedi analysis performed on multiple subsets of  <dig> or  <dig> sequences randomly picked up from the expressed sequence set . the smallest subsets  too showed stable, lineage-specific expression patterns, even if with a less monotonically decreasing correlation trend from cd <dig> with respect to bigger sets.

these results demonstrate the scalable character of the progressive displacement of the different lineages from their common stem/progenitor cells. therefore, we can consider these analyzed cell populations as strongly connected dynamical systems in which the expression of different genes is highly correlated  <cit> .

having stated that all the diverse differentiation trajectories monotonously move from their progenitors, we asked whether the mutual relations between different cell populations during the trajectory towards their fates are conserved. this corresponds to check for the maintaining of a stable differentiation rate across cell lines, so that their mutual distances , even if increasing during differentiation process, maintain their relative proportions. in order to answer this question, we used a multidimensional scaling  technique , that allows for the construction of a bi-dimensional plot where the relative distances of the objects mirror the effective distances of the same objects computed over the multidimensional space, constituted by their expression levels over the entire genome   <cit> . we computed such distances  in three distinct temporal windows denominated step  <dig>  step  <dig> and step  <dig> corresponding to 5- <dig>  9- <dig> and 14- <dig> differentiative days, respectively . as shown, the relative position of the lineages remains strongly invariant during the entire time span analyzed so pointing to: i) the existence of distinct attractors towards which the gene expression dynamics of the cells are directed starting from day 5; ii) the progressive enlargement of the phase space spanned by the different cell kinds with the progression of the differentiation process, as marked by the increasing average radius correspondent to the increase of the between lineages distances as for expression patterns along an already decided and fixed direction. thus, the distance between cell kinds increases as a consequence of the progression of differentiation process, but the relative positions of the different cell kinds are maintained. this indicates that the system continues along the same kind of trajectory, maintaining the overall shape that can be considered as the phase space of the hematopoietic differentiation process. the topological invariance of mds space, even if not a conclusive proof, strongly points to the existence of a specific attractor for each cell kind in the transcriptome space. the distance space has a very important characteristic: the ability to detect the change of 'shape' of the studied object without the need of making any unjustified assumption. a linear trajectory maintaining its end-point  implies the increasing of size of the object  without any modification in shape and thus maintaining the relation between different cell kinds positions linearly invariant. the distances between cell kinds monotonically increase in time but maintain invariant their relative proportions and thus the relative positions. as a consequence the distances between the trajectories are correlated in time .

having stated the genome-wide expression is a suitable space for describing the differentiation trajectories of blood cell lineages, we turned our attention to the mirna space.

the gedi analysis of  <dig> mirnas exhibits clear distinct expression patterns associated with different hematopoietic lineages, revealing distinctive signatures for each hematopoietic differentiative pathway . moreover defined, correlated and lineage-specific expression profiles were also obtained using subsets including  <dig> and  <dig> mirna having in at least a sample signal > <dig> or >4% respectively of maximum signal.

in analogy with the transcriptome space, we observed a progressive linear displacement of mirna patterns from the hpcs , as shown by the trend of pearson correlation coefficient of the four different lineages with cd34+hpcs population. these results were confirmed by analyzing a replicate microarray .

the scalability feature, observed in the transcriptome, is present in the mirnas space as well: the analysis of a randomly extracted sample of  <dig> mirna sequences  gave us exactly the same results of the full-rank space . the analysis performed with less than  <dig> randomly picked-up elements do not anymore constitute a reliable sampling giving rise to widely varying results from sample to sample. the scalability of microrna regulation tells us that even this system 'acts as a whole' being a connected system with several mutual correlations between its elements.

the mds reveals a profound difference with the transcriptome based picture , showing that the topology of the mirna space is much less invariant than the correspondent transcriptome space. the lack of invariance is mirrored by the absence of any linear relation between the mutual distances among lineages at different steps  in the mirna space. the difference between micro rna and transcriptome spaces in terms of topological invariance of the mutual relations between cell kinds profiles is not due to the smaller number of variables considered for mirnome. as a matter of fact, the mds based portraits computed over six different  <dig> genes random extractions gave completely coincident results with the ones obtained on the whole set . the mutual distances between the cell lineages computed at different steps along the development trajectory  where remarkably invariant between the whole set and random extractions with an average correlation between distance matrices r =  <dig> . this gave rise to completely coincident mds portraits. this result indicates that, while, in terms of transcriptome state, a cell population can be considered already committed to its fate at five days of differentiation and consequently following a differentiation trajectory with a fixed orientation as described by mds, the mirna pattern shows a still not finally committed shape until the end of the studied period.

we can speculate on this lack of 'orientation invariance' of mirna space, stressing the fact that while genome wide expression profile marks the 'average state' of the cell population at a given instant of time, the mirna pattern can be equated to the 'fine controls' acting on the system to drive the trajectory towards its differentiation fate and actively maintaining the population on the attractor  <cit> . in other words while the transcriptome is the 'location in space' of the system, the mirna machinery, for its regulative role, can be considered as its 'instantaneous velocity vector'.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the hematopoietic differentiation process permits to follow the dynamic of a system when moving from a common unstable progenitor state to different stable attractors correspondent to the distinct cell types, each characterized by a clearly distinguished profile in the multidimensional transcript profile space.

our study showed that both transcriptome and mirnome gene expression profiles map cells into a multidimensional space, where the positions of differentiating cells progress along trajectories starting from undifferentiated cd34+ cells towards specific differentiation fates, in line to the existence of the attractor-like dynamics during hematopoiesis.

the transcriptome and mirnome spaces derive from the expression patterns of protein coding genes and mirnas respectively, and coordinated changes in their expression patterns can be interpreted as trajectories of cell populations in a multidimensional space. the analysis of gene and mirnas expression profiles gave a proof-of-concept of the scalable character of biological regulation circuits. while the increasing distance  representing the increasing differences between the various differentiating cell types and the progenitor cells appears as an almost trivial result, it is important to highlight that the same behaviour is observed with widely different choices of gene subsets, including those genes that are routinely considered as 'noisy and unreliable information'. this implies the strong connectivity of the gene regulation network that can be considered as a unitary system so casting doubts about classical concepts like the existence of 'housekeeping genes' whose expression is largely invariant and decoupled from specific cell activity. as a matter of fact scalability  is a very important consequence of the statistical-mechanics like behaviour of cell populations that until now was only marginally taken into account  <cit> . under this paradigm the principal actor of the biologically relevant process is no more the single cell, but a cell ensemble which different sources of noise shape as a distribution of elements  slightly differing between them in analogy with maxwell-boltzmann distribution of kinetic energy over an ensemble of particles. the energy landscapes typical of physical systems are mirrored, in the case of cell populations, by the so called epigenetic landscapes  <cit> .

the proportionality of the mutual distances between different cell populations during the trajectory toward their fates was observed for embryonic stem cells by aiba and colleagues  <cit> , by using the epigenetic landscape model proposed by conrad waddington  <cit> . during development, the epigenetic landscape is intended as a physical landscape made of hills and valleys in which a development trajectory is like a marble rolling according to the landscape shapes it encounters. in this model, the unstable stem cell population occupies the top of an hill, from which the system can escape following the different faces of the hill. in this case, two trajectories going along two different directions and remaining with the same bearing  while being progressively set apart between them, will maintain the same relative mutual orientation during all the process. we observed a similar dynamics by analysing unilineage hpcs differentiation using a multidimensional scaling technique: the distances between different cell lines, while increasing in time, maintain their mutual correlation/orientation in the transcriptome space. this correlation is no more present in the mirna space. the dynamics of differentiation/maturation in the gene expression space has many features consistent with an attractor-like behaviour. our experimental conditions do not allow for the ultimate proof of the existence of a proper attractor, i.e. the robustness of the differentiated cells to external perturbations, but the obtained results globally support the idea of attractor.

both transcriptome and mirnome dynamics showed a scalable character and progressive displacement from stem/progenitor cells of the four different lineages during the differentiation process, but while the transcriptome trajectories conserved the relative relations between cell kinds distances this was not the case in the mirna space.

this behaviour is consistent with the view of the transcriptome as a state space of a cell and mirna space as a sort of "continuously adjusting" tuning system, affecting cell lineage evolution to reach the attractor.

the reconciliation of transcriptome and mirnome findings is not an easy task. we tried and look for a simple transcriptome-mirnome relation by computing the enrichment in hematopoietic related genes in the targets of mirnas that vary significantly during the differentiation process. the enrichment level did not differ from a purely random choice of mirnas , thus not allowing for a single mirnome-transcriptome relation to be drawn. this lack of a simple correspondence between regulated genes and mirna profile is consistent with the holistic character of attractor-like dynamics described. moreover, these results are in line with the results of liu and kohane  <cit>  and with the observation of seitz h.  <cit>  which propose that many computationally identified mirna targets may actually be competitive inhibitors of mirna function, preventing mirnas from binding their authentic targets by sequestering them. thus we must limit ourselves to the registration of a different dynamics of global mirnome with respect to transcriptome without going further into unjustified speculations.

furthermore, our data do not allow to analyze whether or not cell population arrives at a more or less stable mirna profile, anyway we believe that a relevant and continuously on-going tuning of the system by the mirnas is needed to actively maintain the differentiated state. moreover, considering that mirnas represent a fundamental epigenetic regulatory mechanism, their behaviours suggest the possibility of their involvement in reprogramming or reversing differentiated cells. reprogramming is the activation of a pre-existing gene expression program caused by stimulating a transition into the attractor that encodes such a program. mirnas modulation may be a reasonable way connecting the attractors according to huang model  <cit> .

the discovery of these dynamics in mirna space should be of great relevance not only for the promise of reversing the differentiated state, but even for tumor biology. as a matter of fact while the differentiation process is the approaching to a stable attractor from an unstable one, the process of tumor formation can be considered as the escaping from the stable attractor correspondent to the normal tissue shifting to a less differentiated, embryonic-like mode correspondent to the tumor state. this consideration opens another important research avenue in cell system dynamics.

our findings may have implications in the interpretative analysis of gene expression signature and possibly in the choice of future therapeutic options for cancer diseases. the consideration of gene expression as a whole was already applied for diagnosis purpose  <cit> , but never on mirna expression. another important implication of this way to consider hematopoietic process is that the locations of cells in the multidimensional transcriptome and mirnome space can be used to identify cells of unknown origin, to determine the differentiation status of cells and to assess their multi-differentiative potency.

