BACKGROUND
real-time pcr or semiquantitative pcr is widely used to detect and quantify specific target sequences. the exponential amplification of a sequence is monitored in real time by fluorescence. commonly, a nonspecific fluorescent dye is used, such as sybr green i or lcgreen, which only reports the presence of double-stranded dna. these dyes do not distinguish sequences and can thus report the amplification of undesired targets. undesired sequences are normally detected during a dissociation step after thermocycling is complete. during dissociation, the double-stranded pcr products melt into single strands, so fluorescence is diminished. a curve can be produced by plotting the loss of fluorescence against a gradual increase in temperature. the temperature at which the rate of signal loss is the greatest can be defined as the melting temperature  of the pcr product. although the tm is sequence dependent, different sequences do not necessarily have different tm. however, the converse is true. the detection of different tm does imply the presence of different sequences. therefore, by monitoring tm, we can distinguish different targets for one set of primers. this technique has been used for the detection of single-nucleotide polymorphisms  <cit> , allelic discrimination  <cit> , and strain typing of microorganisms  <cit> . we previously reported the use of tm analysis to detect the expression patterns of transcripts containing different members of the w family of human endogenous retrovirus  elements in vitro and in vivo  <cit> .

the precision of the tm measurements determines the sensitivity with which different sequences can be distinguished. the instrument used to obtain the tm recordings is the principal factor limiting the amount of information that can be extracted from the data. we recently reported a method that allows improved resolution, reduced spatial bias, and automated data collection for tm detection in an abi prism  <dig> sequence detection system   <cit> . using a temperature indicator probe  and an algorithm  to interpolate more-precise tm measurements from multiple data points, the standard deviation of the measurement error  of the tm recordings was improved from  <dig> °c to  <dig> °c  <cit> .

however, there is no convention on how to analyze tm data to objectively distinguish sequences by tm. the need for such a tool becomes apparent when the tm data are: i) not easily stratified because of overlapping clusters of tm observations, and/or ii) if the number of different sequences and possible tm categories are unknown. in this report, we use mixture model analysis to construct a model for a particular set of primer targets, to classify tm data, and to calculate the mixing proportions of the amplicons within these categories. the mixture model technique allows tm analysis to be applied to any set of primers to determine the minimum number of tm categories  and the mixing proportions  of the detected categories. thus, mixture model analysis of tm data is an objective method with which more refined tm assays can be established.

RESULTS
in a tm analysis using the tmprobe and gctm program, described previously  <cit> , we demonstrated, using plasmids containing known sequences, that it was possible to distinguish some but not all sequences based on their tm. in the present report, we applied the mixture models and the ρ established in the previous publication  <cit>  to determine the tm categories and mixing proportions of these data . akaike's information criterion , a measure of how well a model explains the data, with a penalty for the number of parameters estimated, determined that the tm of the four sequences were best represented by a three-category mixture model. this model precisely estimated the mixing proportions of the tm into the categories, attributing the correct number of tm recordings to each of the four sequences . for an overview of the procedure for using mixture models to analyze tm data, see the methods section.

we next assessed the performance of the mixture model analysis in constructing models for categories of tm with varying separations. therefore, we generated simulated data points mimicking the tm of four sequences separated by multiples of σ. these data were used to identify the model that best explained the data according to aic  for a range of tm separations and numbers of data points . a large separation of tm,  <dig> × σ , allow the mixture model analysis to close in on four separate categories with only  <dig> data points. smaller separations of tm require larger numbers of data points to determine the correct number of tm categories. the distinction of categories with a separation of  <dig> × σ required approximately  <dig> data points to model the correct number of tm categories.

next, we evaluated the fit of the data points to preestablished models. for this purpose, we generated data points corresponding to a sample containing three of four possible tm represented in a model. we compared the mixing proportions reported by the mixture model analysis with the mixing proportions in which all four tm were present at equal frequencies. in figure  <dig>  the p values obtained from χ <dig> analyses for various separations of the tm are plotted against the numbers of data points used. the p values for the χ <dig> test drop rapidly with increasing sample numbers for any tm separation of more than  <dig> × σ. with smaller separations of the tm categories, the mixture model analysis is unable to reliably establish the differences in the mixing proportions.

discussion
we report the application of mixture models to the analysis of high-resolution tm data. whereas the plasmid tm data reported are sufficiently separated to be stratified manually, we use these data to demonstrate the principle that can be applied to analyze more complex tm data.

mixture model analysis of tm data entails the construction of a model based on the tm data for a set of primers. with such a model established, it is possible to fit smaller subsets of data to calculate the mixing proportions of the tm categories of the model. this gives a proxy marker for the frequency distributions of different amplicon sequences in the analyzed data. this approach requires no prior knowledge of how many different amplicons are present and there is no limit to the number of different tm that can be distinguished. however, the tm analysis method with mixture models only reports the minimum number of different sequences required to explain the tm data because different sequences can have the same tm.

mixture model analysis is a modern type of cluster analysis. the purpose of cluster analysis is to group data that have properties in common. when constructing the mixture model for a set of primers, the number of categories in the model that most appropriately explains the tm data is determined by aic. other information criteria exist, such as the bayesian information criterion, but this penalizes free parameters more harshly than does the aic.

by empirical testing with simulated data, we found that smaller separations of tm require exponentially larger numbers of data points to distinguish the correct number of categories in a mixture model. insufficient numbers of observations yield an underestimation of the numbers of unique tm represented by the data, erring on the side of safety. in other words, with insufficient data, the number of unique sequences in the data is underestimated by the optimal model.

in an established model, based on a large number of tm observations, a smaller number of observations can be fitted to calculate the mixing proportions in the tm categories. these proportions can then be compared between sets of tm data as frequency distributions of sequences and analyzed with χ <dig> tests. we observed that, whereas a large number of tm observations are required to establish a model with a small separation between categories , far fewer are sufficient for comparisons once the model is established . a separation of the tm categories in the model of less than  <dig> × σ results in unreliable mixing proportions. however, this should rarely be a problem in practice, because constructing the models puts a larger constraint on tm separation by aic. in other words, models constructed with mixture model analysis will consist of tm categories separated by more than  <dig> × σ.

not all dissociation curves are easily defined by a single tm, as in the case of multiple domain transitions in longer sequences  <cit>   and for heterodimers. using the gctm approach to curve fitting and sybr green i chemistry, such melting profiles will be assigned a single tm value. although some additional information is therefore lost, mixture model analysis still validly identifies clusters of tm and sequences. there is an established high-resolution amplicon melting analysis  using lcgreen, primarily based on differences in the profiles of melting curves rather than on absolute tm  <cit> . although this method is superior to mixture model analysis in identifying heterodimers, absolute tm values are required to identify homodimers. recently, a method with sufficient resolution to distinguish base-pair neutral homozygotes was reported  <cit> . mixture model analysis of tm can be used in all cases where the tm can be denoted as a single value, but primarily for homodimer discrimination.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the mixture model analysis of tm presented here allows the unbiased analysis of high-resolution tm data. this analysis is applicable to the identification of sequences in tm data regardless of the method by which the tm are acquired, provided the measurement error is known. mixture models allow tm analyses to be performed on more complex and varied sequence targets than hitherto possible. possible applications include typing microbial strains and their relative abundances in a population and the analysis of transcripts containing repetitive elements  <cit> .

