BACKGROUND
simple sequence proteins  are composed of various types of amino acid repeats such as amino acid runs  <cit> , regular repeats and cryptic repeats  <cit> . ssps can be recognized by their compositional bias. early work by wootton and federhen  <cit>  showed that simple sequence segments are either part of non-globular regions or of linkers between structural or functional domains. following this work, simple sequence segments were usually masked during database searches and therefore they did not receive wide attention for a long time. the observation that expansion of polyglutamine tracts in proteins cause several human neurological diseases led to a surge in interest in investigating the function, distribution and evolution of reiterated sequences in proteins  <cit> . recent observations suggest that compositionally biased sequences in many proteins are structurally disordered, and these disordered segments participate in important functional roles such as signaling and post-translational modifications  <cit> . sequence segments such as polyglutamine tracts and proline rich sequences could mediate protein-protein interactions  <cit>  and charged segments such as arginine-rich regions are often involved in protein-rna interactions  <cit> . investigation of functional associations of ssps in yeast revealed that they were preferentially associated with transcription factors and signaling proteins  <cit> . analysis of the ratio of non-synonymous  to synonymous  divergences of gene sequences encoding ssps orthologously conserved between human and mouse revealed that these proteins are under strong purifying selection  <cit> . however, the extent of operation of selective forces may vary depending on the functional role. for example, ssps functioning in cellular processes display higher degree of conservation that parallels taxonomic divergence patterns compared to those functioning at the interface between the organism and its niche  or those that carryout species specific specialized functions  <cit> . these results strongly suggest that reiterated sequence motifs in proteins are involved in important biological processes and the tempo and mode of their evolution are constrained by their functional roles.

another major interest in simple sequences stems from the observation that they constitute an important source of genetic  variation  <cit> . sequences composed of simple sequence repeats undergo expansion/contraction polymorphisms due to slippage during replication and also in some cases insertion/deletion polymorphisms due to intra-chromosomal or unequal crossing-over recombinogenic events  <cit> . these molecular events occur in the genomic dna and therefore early efforts in identifying simple sequences were focused on analyzing nucleic acid sequences. it has now become clear that correlations between simple sequence regions in proteins and the encoding dna are not always observed  <cit> . this in principle is due to the codon degeneracy. ssps encoded by scrambled mixtures of codons are likely to be missed if analysis was restricted to dna sequence alone. nonetheless these ssps are still interesting because their evolution is likely due to selection on protein structure or function.

previously, we developed a measure to analyze protein sequences and classify proteomes in a binary mode into two categories: ssps and non-ssps. this measure considers the entire protein sequence and ssps are identified according to the proportion of simple sequences carried in them  <cit> . our approach using whole protein sequence to identify ssps is general in that, all forms of repeats are identified, and suited for comparative analysis in the same framework as described recently by sim and creamer,  <cit> . in this work we present the analysis of ssps from  <dig> prokaryotes.

RESULTS
growth of ssps: proteome size, genomic gc bias and duplications
a proteome of a given species can be considered as a collection of protein sequences of that species  <cit> . from this point of view, proteome size refers to the number of proteins in a given collection. the term effective proteome size  in this work refers to the number of proteins of length greater than  <dig> amino acids. because the number of such small proteins is very low, it is unlikely to affect the general analysis. the relationship between the number of ssps and the effective proteome size from  <dig> proteomes is shown in figure  <dig>  it is apparent that this relationship follows a proportionate relation in a log-log scale . on an average, the number of ssps in a proteome is approximately proportional to 1/30th of the proteome size although there is considerable variation in the dataset and ranges from  <dig> % in thermoplasma acidophilum to as high as  <dig> % in thermus thermophilus. these observations show that although ssps are a minority, they tend to grow with proteome size. this relationship is exhibited across species varying in genomic gc content, mutational bias, life style and pathogenicity .

although a general growth trend is apparent, a significant variability can be noticed. two potential factors contributing to this variability are genomic base composition bias and gene duplications. in order to assess the base bias effect, we determined the relationship between the proportion of ssps in each species and its genomic gc . it is evident that in species with low or high genomic gc, the proportion of ssps is higher compared to the species with mid-range gc. these results show that biased genomic base composition results in a higher proportion of ssps. we examined the relationship between the number of ssps and the effective proteome size  in species varying in gc in three ranges:  <dig> %–32%, 32%–60% and 60%–72%. the correlation coefficients varied from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and were all highly statistically significant . these results show that, while there is a general trend of ssps to grow with proteome size across all types of species, genomic gc bias can strongly influence this trend.

according to the model of qian et al.  <cit> , genomes evolve from their initial small size using two basic operations:  duplication of existing genes to expand the size of existing families, and  introduction of new genes by either lateral transfer from other organisms or ab initio creation. an approach to examine the role of duplicative processes is by following the growth of the number of paralogous pairs among the ssps of each species with increasing number of ssps.

the relationship between the number of paralogous pairs among the ssps and the total numbers of ssps of each species is displayed in figure  <dig>  this method enables ready differentiation of simple duplications from large duplications. simple duplications result in clusters of small size, usually  <dig> members per cluster. large duplications on the other hand yield clusters of large size comprising of more than  <dig> members per cluster. large clusters with high number of pairs can be easily separated from small ones by computing the number of pairs of paralogs in each cluster. it is evident that, most species have small sized clusters with low pairs of paralogs indicating that simple duplications is the generally favoured trend. the summit in the path of simple duplications  belongs to that of streptomyces coelicolor a <dig> with  <dig> paralogs.

a few species deviate from this general trend and follow a vertical path . these species have large sized clusters of paralogs resulting in large sized families of ssps. it is to be noted that, while all of these species are pathogens and most of them have highly skewed base composition in their genomes, these factors do not appear to be sole contributors to large duplications because several other pathogens with skewed genomic base composition do not display this trend. the large duplications in these selected pathogens, particularly mycobacteria, is perhaps more related to specific host-pathogen interactions, tropisms and lineage specific duplications. indeed, a large number of these proteins in mycobacteria belong to pe_pgrs and ppe families with potential role in host-pathogen interactions  <cit> . many of these proteins are adhesin-like proteins with pad ≥  <dig>  . furthermore, the reiterated sequence parts display similarity to antigens from other species. these results, taken together support the surface characteristics of these proteins.

ssps grow with proteome size and their proportion in each proteome is strongly influenced by genomic base compositional bias. in most species, simple duplications is the main player. in a few species, ssps arise from genomic forces of large duplications dedicated to specific host-pathogen interactions.

amino acids in ssps and non-ssps: similarities and differences
the comparison of amino acid content between the ssps and non-ssps is shown in figure  <dig>  ssps have higher content of the amino acids alanine, leucine, glycine and proline whereas the non-ssps have elevated content in many other amino acids, most strikingly in glutamic acid, isoleucine and lysine. these observations suggest that ssps prefer amino acids with low biosynthetic cost  <cit> . in order to examine the relationship between amino acid abundance and genomic gc, we compared the top ranking amino acids of ssps with the genomic gc bias. the relationships between the top ranking three amino acids in ssps and non-ssps and the genomic gc content from various organisms are displayed in table  <dig> 

it is apparent that the aliphatic amino acids alanine, glycine, leucine and valine display similar abundance patterns in ssps and non-ssps of organisms varying widely in genomic gc content. interestingly, the abundance of glycine in ssps persists even in low gc  species, whereas its abundance in non-ssps is restricted to the lowest limit gc content of 45%. the abundance of amino acids isoleucine and lysine are restricted to organisms with low genomic gc content in both ssps and non-ssps. asparagine is abundant only in ssps of species of low gc. arginine is abundant in ssps of two species and in the non-ssps of xanthomonas oryzae. aspartic acid was abundant only in the non-ssps of halobacterium sp nrc <dig> . on the other hand, glutamic acid displays similarity in abundance in ssps and non-ssps with respect to genomic gc content. the abundance of serine in ssps of  <dig> species extends to an upper limit of 60% gc whereas it is restricted to 50% gc in non-ssps of  <dig> species. threonine is abundant only in ssps of a couple of species.

the restricted abundance of isoleucine and lysine in species of low genomic gc content and of arginine in species of high genomic gc content correlates positively with the at rich and gc rich base composition of their respective codons. on the other hand, the abundance of alanine, glycine, leucine and valine in species varying widely in genomic gc content suggests that this phenomenon relates to the evolutionary age of these amino acids instead of base compositional bias of the genomic dna. the codons of alanine  belong to the family of gct triplets and those of glycine  belong to a point change derivative of the gct family. it has been proposed that the gct triplets may have expanded during ancient period of evolution of nucleic acids  <cit> .

it is therefore likely that the observed abundance of alanine, glycine, and valine emerges from the abundance of their respective codons as a consequence of the earliest expansions since glycine and alanine co-rank 1st in the consensus chronological order of amino acids  <cit> . persistence of abundance of glycine in the ssps of low gc suggests a preference for glycine in simple sequence regions and likely relates to its conformational flexibility, simple chemical structure and low biosynthetic cost.

the abundance of leucine presents itself as an interesting case. majority of the codons  for leucine are at rich and leucine co-ranks with glutamic acid at the 5th position in chronological order. interestingly glutamic acid displays similar patterns of abundance in ssps and non-ssps as does leucine. miller's imitation experiment of primordial mixture contained leucine  <cit> . although, this observation points to an old age of leucine, the preference towards abundance of leucine over other similarly aged amino acids v, d, p, s, e and t is perhaps due to its wide usage such as its high propensity to be in α-helix, could also be in the core, participates in homo-dimerization and is used in many motifs  <cit> .

the dominance of asparagine in ssps of species of low gc mirrors the trend observed in the low complexity sequences of plasmodium falciparum, an at rich species  <cit>  and points to an early tendency of abundance of asparagine in simple sequences. serine is preferred in the ssps of many species varying in gc content in a broader range compared to the non-ssps. these features most likely relate to their early history and their characteristic ability to participate in post-translational modifications in regions of compositional bias  <cit> .

functional associations of ssps
in order to examine the preferential association of ssps towards a specific functional class, the ssps from all the organisms were classified into seven broad functional classes namely, c: cell wall, cell membrane and transporters, d: cell division, i: information , l: translocation and secretion, r: stress, s: signaling and communication and m: metabolism . the statistical significance of positive association of ssps to a functional class in a species was tested against the expected association for the same species computed from its entire proteome. we applied a stringent criterion of p <=  <dig>  to avoid potential erroneous conclusions that may arise from small sample sizes.

the number of organisms falling into different functional classes with significant positive association of ssps is shown in table  <dig> . it is evident that in a large number of species, ssps tend to preferentially associate with the functional class of cell wall, cell membrane and transporters. in a few species, ssps associate positively with other functional classes. in the case of metabolism, we observed that ssps tend to be underrepresented with respect to expected patterns in all species. these observations show that ssps in general have a preference to be associated or over represented in the class of cell wall, cell membrane and transporters. one factor contributing to this trend is the association of simple sequences with membrane spanning segments in transporters and membrane proteins  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the number of simple sequence proteins tends to grow with proteome size and their proportion in each proteome is strongly influenced by genomic base compositional bias. in most species, simple duplications is favoured. in a few species such as mycobacteria, several ssps are organized into large sized families with role in host-pathogen interactions. amino acids with low biosynthetic cost are preferred in ssps. the abundance of amino acids is controlled by multiple factors including biosynthetic cost, base composition of their respective codons, evolutionary age, wide usage in many biological processes and post-translational modifications. ssps preferentially associate with cell wall, cell membrane and transporters. the proportion of ssps in a given species does not appear to be governed by its growth temperature  and is in agreement with other observations  <cit> .

ssps either adopt well structured non-globular shapes or may have a propensity to exhibit disordered conformation  <cit> . the great majority of proteins in any prokaryotic proteome are, however, non-ssps. this observation suggests that most proteins are likely globular. in this regard, it is interesting to note the preferential association of ssps with cell surface and concomitant negative association of ssps with metabolism. since proteins functioning in metabolic pathways are mostly globular, the negative association of ssps with metabolism is in agreement with this phenomenon. on the other hand, proteins at the surface have several segments of regular structures such as helices or sheets or disordered regions and with bias in amino acid composition to suit their local environment  <cit> .

