BACKGROUND
brown algae  are multi-cellular marine organisms that grow along temperate, tropical and polar coasts. many of them are subject to frequent changes in their local environment, because they are uncovered at low tide, and are hence exposed to desiccation, and to variations in osmotic pressure due to rain or evaporation. in addition, pollution of the coasts, due to human activities, constitutes an additional source of abiotic stress, to which they must develop adaptive mechanisms. expression analyses of genes involved in the perception of the stress, and in the establishment of the appropriate responses, provide a means to decipher the molecular mechanisms potentially involved in such adaptations. despite the availability of medium scale cdnas libraries for several different species of the brown algae , this task has been hindered by the lack of genome-scale resources. in  <dig>  peters et al.  <cit>  have compared a range of features in several species of phaeophyceae and concluded that ectocarpus siliculosus was the best candidate to consider for such developments. recently, the genome of this alga has been sequenced, offering a unique opportunity to survey the expression of gene families in brown algae . e. siliculosus is a small filamentous alga, extensively studied over the last two centuries for its complex life cycle and its physiological features . the genome is currently being annotated, allowing the initiation of both large scale and targeted surveys of the ectocarpus genes, such as microarrays or real-time rt-pcr respectively.

compared to high-throughput microarray techniques, real-time quantitative rt-pcr only allows assays of gene expression to be carried out at relatively low throughput . nonetheless, this technique has been adopted by a large community as a standard method for gene expression studies, because of its high reliability, and its rapidity of execution  <cit> . this technique is now widely used for a large number of animal and plant organisms, as well as for bacteria and viruses.

a few years after the emergence of this technique, a need for a reliable normalisation method became insistent. different methods of identifying normalisation genes, such as genorm  <cit> , normfinder  <cit>  and bestkeeper  <cit> , were then developed. this was followed by a wave of reports on the identification of the best normalisation genes from a broad range of species and specific tissues. these biological materials included human tissues  <cit>  and viruses  <cit> , as well as tissues from a variety of animals such as cow  <cit> , pig  <cit> , horse  <cit> , dolphin  <cit> , fishes  <cit> , worm  <cit>  and others. in parallel, a similar extension of the use of this technique was observed in plant research, for rice  <cit> , poplar  <cit> , potato  <cit> , grapevine  <cit> , and for plant pathogens  <cit> .

in the brown alga e. siliculosus, the expression level of  <dig> genes specific to the two generations in the life-cycle of this alga was recently reported in a mutant impaired in development  <cit> . additional developmental and physiological studies are underway, including studies aimed at assessing the resistance of this alga to environmental changes. hence, the availability of a set of housekeeping genes for normalising the expression levels of genes of interest is a pre-requisite to any valuable conclusion, especially since this organism lives in a frequently changing environment.

in this paper, we propose optimal normalisation genes for expression analyses in e. siliculosus. thirteen housekeeping genes that have been reported to be good potential candidates in the previously cited literature, were chosen for this task. their expression was examined by q-rt-pcr in a diversity of algal samples corresponding to growth kinetic series, osmotic stress experiments, and chemical treatments. namely, the candidate genes are involved in the synthesis and the dynamics of the cytoskeleton, in the synthesis, folding and degradation of proteins, and in the metabolism of carbon, all of these processes being known to be only moderately affected by the fluctuation of growth conditions.

RESULTS
treatments applied to e. siliculosus and choice of housekeeping genes
several different stresses were tested in this study. chemical agents tested included h2o <dig>  a reactive oxygen species produced by many organisms, including seaweeds, under conditions of abiotic and biotic stresses  <cit> . we also tested heavy metals such as copper, which are among the most significant pollution actors in marine environments worldwide. diuron and atrazine are herbicides that inhibit photosynthesis by blocking the d <dig> protein of photosystem ii  <cit> . diuron is also an additive of antifouling paints, which prevent growth of organisms on ships' hulls. in addition pathogen or grazer attacks were mimicked by wounding e. siliculosus tissues with a razor blade. we also tested the effect of oxylipins. these are oxygenated derivatives of polyunsaturated fatty acids which play a major role in inflammatory processes, allergies, and, in a wide sense, defensive stress responses to infection, drugs, and xenobiotics  <cit> . in land plants, c <dig> derived jasmonates play a pivotal role in defense induced mechanisms  <cit> . in mammals, oxidation of the c <dig> arachidonic acid produces derivatives such as leukotriens and prostaglandins. as brown algae are able to produce oxylipins typical of both land plants and animals  <cit> , their putative action on the induction of stress signalling pathways is of particular interest. finally, as the metabolism and the physiology of brown algae are regulated to a large extent by diurnal rhythms, a time series of samples taken over a single day was also analysed.

rna was extracted from biological triplicates of algae that had received the above treatments resulting in a total of  <dig> samples for  <dig> different treatments . single strand cdna was synthesised simultaneously from each of the  <dig> extracts in order to minimize any variation during this step of the process. the abundance of the transcripts of  <dig> potential housekeeping genes was then assayed on these cdnas. the genes tested included commonly used genes such as a ribosomal protein and translation initiation or elongation factors , cytoskeleton proteins , and proteins involved in the protein degradation process . in addition, cyclophylin, two actin-related proteins, a tubulin molecular motor  and an enzyme involved in the pentose phosphate pathway  were included in this study. the genes tested are listed in table  <dig> 

treatments were applied under light . asw: artificial sea water; dmso: dimethyl sulfoxide; 13-hotre: 13-hydroxyoctadecatrienoic acid; 15-hepe: 15-hydroxyeicosapentaenoic acid.

the identity of the sequences  is indicated in the left part of the table. the trace corresponds to trace archive at ncbi . parameters on the corresponding amplified product  are indicated in the right part.

quantification and data analysis
in order to assess whether the transcripts of these  <dig> genes remained at comparable levels in the different samples tested, we calculated the variation in the ct value for each gene. figure 1a shows that the transcripts of these genes exhibited different levels of abundance, with cyc being expressed at the lowest level, and ubq being expressed the most strongly. variation in transcript accumulation across the  <dig> culture conditions was not the same for all the genes tested. ef1a showed the weakest variation, while g6pd expression seemed to be strongly influenced by the treatments, its range of expression level exceeding  <dig> ct .

in order to test the robustness of these data, we performed the genorm pairwise analysis, which was first described by vandesompele et al.  <cit> , and has since been widely used to evaluate the stability of expression of genes from many organisms. the results of this analysis  were slightly different from those obtained with the ct value calculation. the two calculation methods identified the same least and most stably expressed genes , but the intermediate genes were ordered differently. this was particularly striking for arp <dig>  and ubce, which the genorm analysis indicated were the most stably expressed genes, and which the ct value analysis indicated to be among the least stably expressed. in order to test whether averaging the biological triplicates had an effect on the final result, we performed the genorm analysis using the transcript abundances measured in the  <dig> individual cdna samples, as previously described  <cit> . this analysis identified the same genes as having either highly variable  or very stable  transcript abundances, but the order of the six remaining genes was again different . thus, averaging the biological replicates modified the results of the analysis for the intermediate genes, but not for the most and the least stable genes. a one-way anova test showed that for most of the genes considered individually, the variance between the different culture conditions is significantly higher than the variance between the biological replicates for a given condition . therefore, averaging on the three biological replicates should not introduce any significant distortion.

normfinder is another approach that has been used to assess the stability of expression of housekeeping genes  <cit> . when normfinder was applied to the data obtained in this study, it indicated that the genes with the most stable levels of transcript abundance were tua, arp <dig> , ef1a and dyn . these were almost the same genes as the ones identified by genorm, with the exception that dyn performed better than ubce. therefore, there was a very good correlation between the results obtained from genorm and normfinder, despite the fact that the methods of calculation are fundamentally different.

the stability of expression of the  <dig> genes was calculated using the normfinder method designed by andersen et al. <cit> 

in order to test whether the normalisation genes identified above were also the best choices for specific conditions, we performed expression stability measurements on distinct series of treatments i.e. osmotic stresses, chemical treatments and diurnal rhythm. figure  <dig> shows that with both the genorm and normfinder calculation methods  the optimal choice of normalisation gene depended on the type of experiments. thus, although ef1a remained among the most stable genes, variations in the identity of the other very stable genes were observed depending on the treatment. this was particularly striking for the act gene, the abundance of its transcript showing a high level of variability following all the treatments except osmotic stresses. the transcript of the tua gene varied significantly in abundance in the diurnal sample series , but remained at a stable level in the abiotic stress treatments. note that cyc and g6pd, which showed the greatest variability in transcript abundance in the global analyses, were also highly variable in each of the different classes of experiment.

to calculate the number of normalisation genes necessary to obtain the normalisation factor we determined, using genorm, the pairwise variation between sets of normalisation factors obtained when using two, three or more genes for normalisation. figure  <dig> shows that the normalisation factors are only modified slightly when a third  gene is added . vandesompele et al.  <cit>  recommended that additional normalisation genes be included if the pairwise variation between the normalisation factors is higher than  <dig> . according to genorm, measuring the expression levels of arp <dig>  and ubce is sufficient to normalise the expression of genes of interest in these samples.

discussion
in this study, the three methods used to identify the best normalisation genes were concordant, as previously reported in other studies  <cit> . comparison of the three methods indicates that ef1a is the most reliable gene to normalise gene expression in experiments aiming at quantitatively measuring the transcriptional response to abiotic stresses and chemical treatments. the v pairwise analysis shows that two genes are sufficient for a proper expression normalisation. the choice of the second gene, however, will depend on the type of experiment that is being carried out. for osmotic stresses and chemical treatments, tua can be used reliably, while for the diurnal cycle arp <dig>  is more relevant.

as a brown alga, e. siliculosus is member of the kingdom of the heterokonta, which is phylogenetically very distant from animals and land plants  <cit> . interestingly, and despite this evolutionary distance, a consensus seems to emerge from similar analyses performed in organisms belonging to distant lineages. the gene coding for the elongation factor of protein translation ef1a was shown to be the best reference genes in salmon  <cit>  and in several plants such as in rice  <cit> , grapevine  <cit>  and potato  <cit> . the alpha tubulin encoding gene was also reported to be one of the best reference genes for horse tissues  <cit>  and in poplar  <cit> . on the other hand, actin genes have been very often reported as exhibiting highly variable levels of expression in both human and animals tissues  <cit> , and in plants  <cit> . in this study, we have shown that this is also true for e. siliculosus.

despite the fact that ubiquitin and related enzymes  are not commonly used as normalisation genes, in this study, they were found to be quite suitable. interestingly, czechowski et al.  <cit>  showed, using microarray analysis, that genes of the ubiquitin complex, comprising an ubiquitin conjugating enzyme such as ubce, and several e3-ubiquitin protein ligases, were very stably expressed. they also pointed out that genes with fairly low levels of expression such as ubce may be of particular interest for normalising expression levels of genes that are expressed at moderate to low levels, such as transcription factors. this latter example illustrates how microarray analyses may be useful to find additional normalisation genes, which can be then tested by q-pcr for their suitability.

CONCLUSIONS
e. siliculosus is recognised as the genomic and genetic model of brown macroalgae  <cit> . as the genome sequence is currently in the phase of expert annotation, the community interested in e. siliculosus is likely to grow in the near future. the results presented in this paper pave the way for further studies on different aspects of e. siliculosus biology including development/morphogenesis and abiotic/biotic stress responses. in addition, they will be helpful for comparison with results from microarray hybridizations, which are currently in progress.

