BACKGROUND
a challenge facing molecular biology is to develop quantitative, predictive models of gene regulation. the advance of high-throughput microarray technique makes it possible to measure the expression profiles of thousands of genes, and genome-wide microarray datasets are collected, providing a way to reveal the complex regulatory mechanism among cells. there are two broad classes of gene regulatory interactions: one based on the 'physical interaction' that aim at identifying relationships among transcription factors and their target genes  and another based on the 'influence interaction' that try to relate the expression of a gene to the expression of the other genes in the cell .

in recent years, researchers have proposed many different computational approaches to reconstruct gene regulatory networks from high-throughput data, e.g. see reviews by bansal et al. and markowetz and spang  <cit> . these approaches fall roughly into two categories: qualitative and quantitative aspects. inferring qualitative regulatory networks from microarray data has been well studied, and a number of effective approaches have been developed  <cit> . however, these methods are based on coarse grained qualitative models  <cit> , and cannot provide a realistic and quantitative view of regulatory systems. on the other hand, quantitative modelling for gene regulatory network is in its infancy. research on quantitative models for genetic regulation has arisen only in recent years, and most of them are based on classical statistical techniques. liebermeister et al.  <cit>  proposed a linear model for cell cycle-related gene expression in yeast based on independent component analysis. holter et al.  <cit>  employ singular value decomposition to uncover the fundamental patterns underlying gene expression profiles. pournara et al.  <cit>  and yu et al.  <cit>  proposed the factor analysis model to describe a larger number of observed variables. however, these approaches are based on linear regression, and are not always being consistent with the observations in biochemical experiments which are nonlinear. imoto et al.  <cit>  proposed a nonlinear model with heterogeneous error variances. this model matches the microarray data well but it is not satisfying enough in revealing more biological sense. segal et al.  <cit>  proposed a transcription control network based model and apply their model to the segmentation gene network of drosophila melanogaster. they reveal that positional information is encoded in the regulatory sequence and input factor distribution. however, there is still a little bit of dilemma in the model: the activity level of transcription factors is difficult to be measured or to be identified. actually, assaying the transcription factors' activity state in a dynamic fashion is a major obstacle to the wider application of the kinetic modeling. tfs' activity levels are difficult to measure mainly due to two technical limitations: tfs are often present at low intercellular concentrations and the changes in their activity state can occur rapidly due to post-translational modifications.

based on the above description, this paper aims to describe the transcriptional regulatory network quantitatively. in this work, a bayesian inference based regulatory model is proposed to quantify the transcriptional dynamics. multiple quantities, including binding energy, binding affinity and the activity level of transcription factor are incorporated into a general learning model. the sequence features of the promoter and the occupancy of nucleosomes are exploited to derive the binding energy. compared with the previous models, the proposed model can reveal more biological sense.

RESULTS
case Ι: circadian patterns in rat liver
circadian rhythm is a daily time-keeping mechanism fundamental to a wide range of species. the basic molecular mechanism of circadian rhythm has been studied extensively. as a real example to test our approach, we considered the dynamics of the circadian patterns in rat liver. we employ the datasets from almon et al  <cit> . this experiment was designed to examine fluctuations in gene expression in liver within the  <dig> hour circadian cycle in normal animals. fifty-four male normal wistar rats were housed in a strictly controlled stress free environment with light: dark cycles of  <dig> hr:  <dig> hr. three animals were sacrificed at each of  <dig> selected time points within the  <dig> hour cycle. rna was prepared from livers for gene arrays. time point designations reflect time after lights on in hours. for details, please refer to table s <dig> in additional file  <dig> 

analysis of the predicted activity levels of transcription factors
to test the proposed model on the above dataset, we employ two important transcriptional regulators of which activity levels indicate the variation of heat signals in a subset of gene circadian network, hsf <dig> and ppara. in total, we selected  <dig> genes to perform posterior inference of tf activities. to ensure identifiability, we included three genes that are regulated solely by hsf <dig> , and two genes that are regulated solely by ppara . the remaining two genes are jointly regulated by hsf <dig> and ppara. these genes were chosen since they exhibit the largest variance in the microarray time course, and hence are likely to provide a cleaner representation of the output of the system.

the inferred tfs' activity levels are shown in figure  <dig> and  <dig>  both inferred tf profiles show a noisy periodic behaviour  <cit> . figure  <dig> gives the values of the parameters ki for the four selected circadian genes . the green column represents the response k <dig> to hsf <dig> alone, the red column is the response k <dig> to ppara alone and the black column represents the joint response k <dig>  it can be seen that, for gene, hspa <dig>  the model predicts a clear activation by hsfl alone, which is consistent with the experimental conclusion from yan et al  <cit> . the black columns of hsp90aa <dig> and hspa1b demonstrate that the model predicts a significant combinatorial activation which can be verified by mutagenetic techniques, i.e. by knocking out one of the tfs.

the biological sense of kinetic parameters
case ii: a yeast synthetic network for in vivo assessment
validation of gene regulation network  inference methods has traditionally been done using in silico networks. however, depending on how realistic the choice of an in silico model is, this kind of validation approach has obvious limitations. to our knowledge, rarely the underlying model from which artificial/simulated data is generated is realistic enough. real biological networks are fairly complex chemical reaction network models. in simulation setting one typically adds noise on top of a hypothetical simulation model, but the noise characteristics may not be realistic enough. also, simulation models tend to be overly simplistic when compared to e.g. real gene regulatory networks. data measured from a real biological system is, real. to overcome these problems, we use the irma network to evaluate out model. the irma network is a synthetically constructed grn in the saccharomyces cerevisiae genome  <cit> , which is designed to be maximally independent in such a way that genes in the network are not regulated by genes outside of the network . however, genes in the irma network may regulate other genes in the genome. the network consists of five genes and there are positive and negative feedback loops and one protein to protein interaction, shown as figure  <dig>  although the irma network contains only five genes, there are studies suggesting that the performance on smaller networks typically generalize to larger networks  <cit> . the data samples were collected every  <dig> min up to  <dig> hr in five independent experiments for the switch-on state, and every  <dig> min up to  <dig> hr in four independent experiments for the switch-off state. for details on the construction of the network and experimental procedures, we refer to  <cit> . one of the purposes of the irma network is to provide a realistic benchmark set for computational studies by providing mrna-level measurements from a known grn. to our knowledge, the irma network and dataset are the first of a kind that are meant for validation purposes. besides, we assume that mrna decay rates may be gene-specific, but remain constant in time  <cit> . the sequences of all promoters are retrieved from scpd and sgd database. the scanning region ranges from - <dig> to + <dig> bp of each target gene.

analysis of the predicted activity levels of transcription factors
to evaluate whether the proposed model can effectively learn the tfs' activity level and the regulation type, we first evaluate the model using the switch-on time series data. the inferred tfs' activity levels are shown in figure  <dig> and  <dig>  both inferred tf profiles show a noisy switch-on behavior. figure  <dig> gives the values of the parameters ki for the five target genes. the green column represents the response to the first regulator alone, the red column is the response to the second regulator alone and the black column represents the joint response, k <dig>  it can be seen that, for gene, gal <dig>  the model predicts a clear activation by swi <dig> which is consistent with the experimental conclusion  <cit> . for gene cbf <dig>  the red downward column indicates that ash <dig> behaves as a repressor, which is verified in  <cit> . the black column of cbf <dig> demonstrates that the model predicts a significant combinatorial regulation  <cit> .

analysis of the kinetic parameters
for comparison, we also evaluate the model using the switch-off data. figure  <dig> shows the fit of the model to the observed data at each time-point for both the switch-on case and switch-off case.

discussion
in this study, two real-world microarray datasets were exploited two evaluate the efficiency of the proposed model. comparison shows that the kinetic parameters obtained by our method have smaller variance than that of barenco et al.  <cit> . one reason is that the proposed model provides a principled method for the incorporation of prior biological knowledge. this may be in the form of suitable ranges for kinetic parameters, known kinetic parameter values and suitable distributions on measurement noise. besides, it is possible for the proposed model to circumvent the need for expensive sampling-based inference and a tfa profile can be inferred over all time, rather than just at the discrete time-points at which expression was measured.

the bayesian inference based model of transcription rates and regulator activity levels allows us to handle these biologically relevant quantities despite the indirect measurement of the former and the lack of measurements of the latter. it also allows us to handle the inherently noisy measurement in a principled way. however, the proposed model still abstracts away some of the explicit processes that generate the actual observed expression data. a more explicit modelling of these will provide a more principled treatment of different sources of noise in the data. furthermore, this model does not handle directly the upstream events that affect regulator activity. in fact, the current model is an open loop system, such that the regulation of regulator activity is itself viewed as exogenous to the system. by developing a richer modeling language we may capture more complex reaction models, model the upstream regulation of activity levels, and identify systems that involve feedback mechanisms and signalling networks.

post-transcriptional modification model  have been previously used to model tf activities  <cit> ; in that work, further dependencies were included between tf mrna expression levels and their predicted activities, which enabled to predict possible post-transcriptional modifications in tfs. naturally, it should be possible to combine both our approach and their approach to give a model capable of simultaneously inferring tf activities, combinatorial interactions and post transcriptional regulations.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we have proposed a computational model to reverse engineer simultaneously both the activity of tfs and the logical structure of promoters by integrating multiple sources of knowledge, including time-series gene expression data, tfs' binding information and sequence features of promoters. the approach relies on a detailed model of transcription, which is an approximation to the michaelis-menten model from classical enzyme kinetics, and therefore should be able to capture accurately the effects that changes in tf activity have on gene expression dynamics. we testify the proposed approach on two real-world microarray datasets. experimental results show that the proposed model can effectively identify the parameters and the activity level of tf. moreover, the kinetic parameters introduced in the proposed model can reveal more biological sense than previous models can do.

