BACKGROUND
it is clear that sporadic colorectal cancer - as well as other cancers - is largely the product of acquired somatic mutations  <cit> . though many of these mutations are functionally relevant to the tumor , the most well-studied cancer driver gene remains apc , thought to be the first hit in the majority of nonhereditary colon cancers  <cit> . while apc is commonly known as an antagonist to β-catenin and wnt signaling, a growing body of evidence points to the importance of apc in a variety of other cellular contexts - from microtubule polymerization  <cit>  to cell migration  <cit> . apc also plays important roles in chromosome segregation and stability, localizing to spindles, kinetochores, and centrosomes in mitosis  <cit> . the myriad aspects of apc signaling may not be relevant in all cellular contexts, however, as signaling depends upon the background gene expression program and, in cancer biology, is often the result of multiple mutations. in fact, mouse models mutated at two driver genes simultaneously have shown a synergistic  increase in tumor burden, such as in pten-apc  <cit> , kras-tgfb  <cit> , and apc-trp <dig>  <cit>  double mutants. such genetic synergy suggests that the pathways emanating from the two genes intersect downstream, supporting the idea that only a subset of all possible pathways are involved in a tumor harboring a mutation in apc. we hypothesize that these mutations have distinct synergistic effects on the cancer phenotype, such that the activities of these networks are greatly associated with the measured downstream changes in the proteome of the intestine. we argue that these measured molecular changes can be leveraged to elucidate which pathways are most relevant to the disease model at hand.

in order to prioritize the various pathways associated with a cancer driver gene, we have developed a computational framework to first predict the set of pathways functionally related to apc signaling in mouse models . our algorithm mines chains of proteins  from a protein-protein interaction  network; these paths are then filtered by tissue-specific mrna coexpression and gene ontology   <cit>  annotation rule mining  <cit> . to identify biologically relevant paths, we constrain our search space to pathways connected to previously identified cancer driver genes   <cit> , as many of these pairings are expected to be simultaneously mutated. the set of paths linking apc to each can-gene comprises a subnetwork, which we refer to as a petal in the apc blossom. as each petal is based on in silico predictions, we then use publicly available functional genomic and proteomic data from the intestine of the apc1638n+/- mouse to assess the biological relevance of each petal in this mouse model. as proteins themselves are the mediators of cellular functions, we mapped proteome-level measurements identified through  <dig> d differential in gel electrophoresis  to each petal, using mrna-level coexpression to quantify the strength of the relationship. we chose to use 2d-dige - a widely used  <dig> d gel electrophoresis based method - to illustrate our approach. however, our methods can utilize a variety of proteomics data , protein antibody chips etc.). though transcriptional activity  does not strictly correlate with translational activity   <cit> , coexpression information can still be helpful in uncovering regulatory hot spots in protein networks  <cit> . testing each petal against such functional data correlates gene and protein expression readouts with specific driver gene relationships, thereby allowing the experimenter to identify the petal most likely to be operative in this particular mouse model.

RESULTS
in this paper, we present a method to capture the likely signaling pathways of a cancer driver gene, focusing on the signaling related to apc as an example. the initial set of pathway predictions are mined from protein-protein interaction networks, coupled to mrna coexpression data and gene ontology association rules. we refer to this data-mining process as the blossom algorithm , as it produces a network connecting a driver gene  to a set of putative signaling partners, referred to as the apc blossom . the apc blossom is then pruned using biological evidence  to identify a candidate petal, or subnetwork, most likely to be involved in apc signaling .

the apc blossom: a petals network
to study can-gene pathways operative in the apc1638n+/- mouse model, we used the blossom algorithm to identify pathways connecting apc to  <dig> other can-genes  <cit> . in summary, the blossom algorithm mines publicly available protein-protein interaction networks to uncover paths - i.e. chains of proteins - likely to be "functional." as evidence of a path's functionality, we use mrna coexpression and gene ontology association rules. as our current knowledge of molecular networks is incomplete  <cit> , we use sequence homology to infer these missing data. the details of the blossom algorithm follow below . first, likely false positives from the underlying ppi network are filtered out. next, using this filtered ppi network, we were able to find paths linking apc to  <dig> of the can-genes, forming subnetworks, which we refer to as petals. after imputing interaction edges using sequence homology  <cit> , this number was increased to  <dig>  however, filtering out paths whose  average mrna coexpression was low  and  support of go annotation association rules based on known signaling pathways and functional annotations  <cit>  was weak , the number of apc-can-gene petals was reduced to  <dig> . the petals identified vary in the number of nodes  and edges  they contain, with some nodes beings shared among multiple petals.

a blossom can be constructed for a wide variety of genes, with the stipulation that corresponding microarray data is available. in our case study of apc, we employ mrna expression data from intestinal tumors harvested from apcmin/+ mice. as multiple mutations are present in these samples, coexpression measurements calculated for this dataset are representative of the tumor microenvironment; as such, both apc signaling, as well as additional can-gene signaling, are likely to be active simultaneously. while the presence of these multiple, active pathways increases the signal associated with cross-talk within in each petal, it does not allow us to determine which pathways are most strongly associated with apc signaling alone. to answer this question, as outlined in the next section, we used mice with a particular heterozygous mutation in apc - 1638n - that results in a mild intestinal cancer phenotype  <cit> , thereby minimizing the noise arising from the many pathways activated in a full-blown tumor. since we are interested in assessing the systems-level effects of such mutations, we focus on measuring the downstream effects of these genes via 'omic experiments.

plucking petals: testing the bimodality of coexpression
the apc1638n+/- mouse model represents a perturbation of the stamen  in the apc blossom, and such a perturbation is expected to have far-reaching molecular effects. this was supported by the 2d-dige proteomic experiments that identified  <dig> proteins with a variety of cellular functions from the intestinal epithelium of compared to wild-type. we hypothesized that if one of the petals in the blossom truly reveals signaling associated with this mutation of apc, then the nodes of this petal are more likely to associate with the 2d-dige targets than a random group of proteins. to gauge this association, we used a map of coexpression compiled from the corresponding apc1638n+/- intestinal epithelium mrna-expression profile. assuming that the signaling molecules in a petal are upstream of the 2d-dige targets, strong coexpression between a petal and the 2d-dige targets can help to identify the causative signaling events that led to these measured changes in abundance of the proteome. since coexpression is most informative when it relates to differentially expressed nodes , we modulated the coexpression values associated with the nodes in each petal by their respective levels of differential expression. this allows for the identification of nodes where any individual node may have a low level of expression, but the collective level of expression across nodes may be high. we further posited that, if a group of proteins truly is coregulated, then we expect to see deviations in the tails of the coexpression distribution when compared to the expected  distribution. to gauge this deviation, we introduced the bimodality, β, of coexpression: a measure based on the mass  of the cumulative distribution functions' and the distance of the mass from the origin. this allowed us to prioritize the petals by their respective p-values and the top three petals are shown in figure  <dig> . in figure  <dig> the  <dig> 2d-dige targets are shown on the periphery of the petal, ranked by their degree  of absolute coexpression. this representation also facilitates the prioritization of 2d-dige targets, placing emphasis on those targets whose regulation is supported by multiple elements of the candidate petal. much of the coregulation can be explained by a few key signaling intermediates - notably, tgfb <dig>  which has both a high level of differential expression, as well as strong coexpression links. signaling molecules like tgfb <dig> are hypothesized to lie upstream of 'omics measurements, and, thus, the petal at the heart of figure  <dig> represents a potential set of intermediaries by which the signal arising from a mutation in apc blossoms into proteome-level manifestations .

CONCLUSIONS
to understand how a mutation affects information flow in a tumor, one must consider both the proximal and distal signaling effects. proximally, a mutation in a gene may result in a truncated protein product that affects physical interactions, or it may result in a hyperphosphorylated and active state. these small, upstream effects are then amplified and result in distal changes in signaling, affecting mrna and protein levels of tens to hundreds of seemingly unrelated nodes. while the field of cell signaling is adept at dissecting the proximal effects of a mutation - mechanistically mapping out perturbed pathways - it has not yet developed the tools to fully understand the distal effects and, more importantly, their connection with more proximal signaling. indeed, currently available commercial software for network analysis can only associate these distal effects amongst themselves, with no regard to the upstream causative mutation. in this study, we present a method by which the distal effects measured in two 'omics experiments - microarray and proteomics - can be simultaneously leveraged to test network-based hypotheses. after testing the hypotheses  against proteomic evidence, the refined petal subnetworks we present not only reveal the relationship between upstream genetic interference and its downstream effects at the proteomics level, but also allow us to prioritize other cancer-driver genes that are likely to act cooperatively with apc to drive tumorigenesis. this new approach - linking in silico predictions with experimental measurements - provides a way forward in mining context-specific pathways that may prove to be useful in identifying pathways active in individual cancer patients.

