BACKGROUND
natural hybridization has been reported to occur in a variety of organisms  <cit> , and is often associated with areas where previously isolated lineages come into contact and mate, producing offspring of mixed ancestry  <cit> . if hybrids are formed easily, a hybrid zone may develop, which may persist over time  <cit>  or lead to the fusion of parental species into a single interbreeding species  <cit> .

introgression with one or both parental species can ease the progress of genetic swamping  <cit> , which coupled with hybrid heterosis  <cit>  can further enhance the process of homogenization or displacement of parental species. in some cases, introgressed genotypes colonize new habitats or become genetically stabilized, providing a pathway to the evolution of new lineages  <cit> . conversely, strong isolation or strong selection against hybrids can facilitate assortative mating and reinforce reproductive barriers between parental hybridizing species  <cit> .

the frequency and success of interspecific matings therefore influence the dynamics and evolutionary outcomes of hybridization. in some contact zones, intermediate hybrid genotypes predominate , whereas in others, hybrids are rare and populations consist largely of individuals genetically similar to one or other parental genotype . nonetheless, studies in several different organisms demonstrate that genotype frequencies may vary considerably within the same hybrid zone and create a continuum from unimodal to bimodal genotype frequencies  <cit> . finally, species might geographically overlap but never hybridize, mostly because of strong prezygotic isolation  <cit> .

understanding the strength of reproductive barriers might provide important clues concerning the evolution of hybrid zones  <cit> . prezygotic barriers are usually considered to be most important in the process of speciation  <cit> . asymmetries in the flowering period of co-occurring species or specificity of pollinators are among the most important prezygotic barriers  <cit>  and, indeed, might shape the structure of hybrid zones. for instance, bimodal hybrid zones are usually characterized by having strong prezygotic barriers, in contrast to their weakness in unimodal hybrid zones  <cit> . however, postzygotic barriers might also influence the outcome of hybridization, especially in cases where prezygotic barriers are incomplete and allow frequent homogenizing gene flow  <cit> .

polyploid formation, which was formerly expected to promote immediate reproductive isolation between the new incipient species and its progenitors  <cit> , is nowadays considered to be more complex than originally thought  <cit> . for instance, autotetraploids of chamerion angustifolium are not instantly isolated from their diploid progenitors, although isolation might arise in time  <cit> . furthermore, asymmetric gene flow from the diploid parent capsella rubella to its allotetraploid progeny c. bursa-pastoris has been demonstrated and contributes significantly to high genetic variation in the novel polyploid  <cit> . because a single origin of a polyploid represents an extreme bottleneck in this complex pattern of speciation, multiple scenarios might also be invoked to understand polymorphism across ploidy levels such as for instantaneous, recurrent polyploidization or reproductive isolation of polyploids  <cit> .

orchid species  are particularly prone to hybridization most likely because of the high number of sympatric species, in combination with a general lack of complete reproductive barriers  <cit> . many studies, especially those devoted to mediterranean orchids, support this notion, and have provided many examples of how hybridization between orchids is influenced by several prezygotic  <cit>  and postzygotic barriers  <cit> . in addition, vegetative spread and polyploidy may contribute to stabilization of many of these hybrids  <cit> . outside the mediterranean region, one of the best-known examples where hybridization is thought to have a strong influence in diversification is the genus epidendrum. it is the largest orchid genus in the neotropics and comprises about  <dig> species distributed from the united states to argentina  <cit> . plants of intermediate morphology occur in many populations and the existence of many hybrid zones have been reported based on morphological data and geographical overlap between different species of epidendrum <cit> . understanding the process of hybridization in epidendrum based on morphological characters is a challenging task owing to the high variability of species, which often hinders reliable identification of species in the field  <cit> . however, despite the general belief that hybridization is frequent, only one molecular study has reported the consequences of hybridization in epidendrum <cit> .

in this study, we sought to understand the dynamics of gene flow between epidendrum madsenii hágsater and dodson and e. rhopalostele hágsater and dodson, two epiphytic deceptive orchids that co-exist in three hybrid zones in southern ecuador  <cit> . epidendrum madsenii and e. rhopalostele belong to two different taxonomic groups and are well differentiated by their morphological traits  <cit> . the occurrence of hybridization between these species has been postulated on account of the existence of individuals with intermediate morphological traits in some areas of sympatry . most species of epidendrum have low pollinator specificity, which together with a high reproductive compatibility even between unrelated species suggests that hybridization may be common  <cit> . the main question addressed in this study was whether morphologically intermediate individuals were indeed hybrids between e. madsenii and e. rhopalostele, or simply fell within the wide range of morphological variation shown by these species. given that other congeneric species are also present in the same area and these species are pollinated by generalist insects, the possibility that different parental species might give rise to morphologically similar hybrids must also be considered  <cit> .

to answer these questions, we investigated the genetic structure of the three known hybrid zones and the nature of the morphologically intermediate specimens using an approach that combined aflps, cpdna markers, genome size and controlled pollinations in conjunction with climate-based predictive models. the results allowed us to  characterize the genomic composition of hybrid zones and their hybrids ;  determine the presence of asymmetrical hybridization patterns and the dynamics of genome size in different hybrid zones;  investigate the strength of reproductive barriers in different hybrid zones; and  based on the molecular data and niche models, predict the long-term fate of the hybrid zones between these deceptive orchid species.

RESULTS
plastid dna diversity and haplotype network
statistical parsimony analysis yielded a single network containing two major groups with  <dig> cpdna haplotypes: one comprising all sequences for e. madsenii and e. falcisepalum f. lehm. & kraenzl., and the other grouping e. rhopalostele and most putative hybrids in a single haplotype . the highest haplotype diversity was observed in e. madsenii, which had nine haplotypes, whereas the lowest diversity was shown by e. rhopalostele, which only had one haplotype . the predominant haplotype in e. madsenii  was also shared with e. falcisepalum. three additional haplotypes were observed in e. falcisepalum. the majority of hybrids shared the haplotype h <dig> with e. rhopalostele , whereas the remaining hybrids contained a unique haplotype .

genbank accession numbers and sequence statistics are given in additional file 2: table s <dig> and additional file 3: table s <dig>  respectively. hybrids usually showed higher nucleotide diversity than their progenitor species .

genetic composition of hybrid zones
bayesian assignment results obtained with structure confirmed that the allopatric parental populations were exclusively composed of pure genotypes because the assignment results were very high with a threshold q-value ≥  <dig>  . however, in all hybrid zones, more than half of individuals morphologically classified in the field as parental species showed intermediate q-values  with structure .

because genome size  values suggested the involvement of e. falcisepalum and e. madsenii in the origin of hybrids in hz <dig> , bayesian assignment tests of this hybrid zone were run with these species  and hybrids indeed showed intermediate q-values in this population . surprisingly, e. falcisepalum was indicated to be descended from backcrosses with e. madsenii , which is consistent with the phylogenetic proximity of the two species.

the individuals revealed by structure to be admixed were assigned to one of the different hybrid classes with newhybrids, although the genetic composition varied across hybrid zones. individuals morphologically classified as e. madsenii were predominantly assigned as backcrossed hybrids in hz <dig> and f <dig> hybrids in hz <dig> and hz <dig>  in contrast, individuals morphologically classified as e. rhopalostele were assigned as backcrossed hybrids in hz <dig> and as f <dig> hybrids in hz <dig>  whereas individuals morphologically classified as e. falcisepalum was assigned as a pure parental species in hz <dig> .

hybrids were predominantly assigned as f <dig> hybrids, although f <dig> individuals were also present in all populations .

genome size
gs values were significantly different between the three pure parental species and the mean values were  <dig>  pg in e. madsenii,  <dig>  pg in e. rhopalostele and  <dig>  pg in e. falcisepalum . analyzing the individuals according to the genetic groups assigned by newhybrids allowed us to determine that the gs of f <dig> hybrids conformed to expectations  as they usually showed values intermediate to those of the parental species in all hybrid zones . backcrossed individuals were usually grouped with the respective backcrossed parental species, and f <dig> hybrids had gs values higher than those of the remaining genetic groups .

some individuals of e. falcisepalum had a gs of  <dig>  pg, whereas other individuals showed a value of  <dig>  pg, which suggested the occurrence of polyploidy in this species . for the parental species, no significant differences were observed between the gs values of allopatric individuals and those assigned by newhybrids as pure in the three hybrid zones .

postmating prezygotic isolation: formation of fruit
experimental pollinations between the pure parental individuals assigned by newhybrids yielded different results among the three hybrid zones. in hz <dig>  interspecific fruit set was lower than intraspecific fruit set, especially when e. madsenii was the ovule donor . in hz <dig> and hz <dig>  no differences were observed between intra- and interspecific crosses when e. rhopalostele was the ovule donor, whereas interspecific fruit set was slightly lower than intraspecific fruit set when e. madsenii was the ovule donor . no differences were observed between populations in the interaction of population × treatment . the strength of postmating prezygotic isolation  was therefore very low, but variable among species .

f
p
f
p
postmating postzygotic isolation: development of viable seeds
among all species, the percentage of viable seeds was  <dig> % ±  <dig>  . no significant difference was observed between intra- and interspecific crosses or between populations . consequently, the strength of this postmating postzygotic barrier  was null in all populations.

niche models
the present bioclimatic niche climate was consistent with the currently known distribution of e. madsenii and e. rhopalostele . the area under the curve  score for these models was very high . the projection of the future bioclimatically suitable area showed a general shift of the current predicted range because most southern favorable areas will disappear . in addition, a severe reduction in the area predicted to be suitable for the occurrence of e. madsenii and e. rhopalostele was shown .

both species will lose more than half of their current distribution area between the present day and  <dig> . consequently, the future scenario showed a decrease of  <dig> % in the minimal predicted area  intersection of e. madsenii and e. rhopalostele , which suggested a decrease in the geographical area potentially suitable for hybridization. nevertheless, the future scenario reveals the presence of suitable conditions for the occurrence of the three hybrid zones studied here .

discussion
a complex scenario of reticulate evolution in neotropical orchids
this study has shown conclusively that a recurrent series of interspecific hybridization events and backcrosses among closely related taxa has lead to the generation of genetic novelty and to a complex pattern of ongoing reticulate evolution within epidendrum. our molecular, reproductive and genome size data indicate that three different species have given rise to two morphologically similar hybrids in different areas of ecuador. in two of the hybrid zones studied , hybrids were derived from e. madsenii and e. rhopalostele, whereas in a third area , hybrids were instead derived from e. madsenii and e. falcisepalum, of which the latter species is also of hybrid origin. the bayesian tests assigned e. falcisepalum as a backcrossed hybrid with e. madsenii and genome size values are consistent with the presence of chromosome duplication as a result of polyploidy. thus, not only different species were involved in the process of hybridization but in some cases it was also followed by polyploidy. although our preliminary chromosome counts indicate that the three species are diploid , we were unable to count the chromosomes of all individuals studied, and the differences in genome size observed could represent different chromosome numbers.

our data indicate that e. rhopalostele was in most cases the maternal progenitor of the hybrids, except in the population hz <dig> where e. madsenii seemed to have acted as the ovule donor. the fact that most cpdna sequences were shared with these species is consistent with this hypothesis. the predominance of these two species as the maternal progenitor  is also consistent with the results of controlled pollinations because fruit set was significantly higher when these species acted as the ovule donor.

hybridization is therefore highly directional and leads to the asymmetric formation of hybrids in nature, as reported in other studies  <cit> . asymmetric hybrid formation is not unusual in nature  <cit> , and can be caused by complex genotype–environment interactions  <cit>  or complete cytoplasmic incompatibility  <cit> . differences in the flowering period of co-occurring species might also explain the presence of a unidirectional gene flow in hybridizing populations  <cit> . although preliminary, an ongoing study reveals differences in the flowering patterns of these populations .

outcomes of hybridization in epidendrum
although hybridization has been long postulated to be an important evolutionary mechanism in epidendrum, genetic confirmation of the presence of hybrids in this genus has been reported only in the last 3 years and, although results are limited to two examples, hybridization is believed to be a frequent phenomenon  <cit> . for example, the use of nuclear and plastid microsatellites revealed high potential for interspecific gene flow even between species with two different ploidy levels, i.e. e. fulgens  and e. puniceoluteum   <cit> . although results suggested the presence of male sterility in f <dig> hybrids and backcrosses, they also revealed wide ecological amplitude of the hybrids  <cit> , which suggested exogenous selection is of low importance in this study case. furthermore, despite the fact that hybrids were triploids , they were able to backcross and produce viable hybrid lineages  <cit> .

the prevalence of hybridization was also reported in a study comprising  <dig> sympatric populations of e. calanthum, e. cochlidium and e. schistochilum <cit> . these three diploid species  frequently hybridize when they co-occur, although outcomes depend on the species involved. f <dig> hybrids were frequent in the sympatric populations of e. cochlidium and e. schistochilum, whereas in the remaining populations backcrosses with e. calanthum were predominant when this species co-occurred with e. cochlidium, but when it co-occurred with e. schistochilum backcrosses with the latter species prevailed  <cit> .

in contrast to the previous studies, the presence of hybrid genotypes was predominant in all sympatric populations and most parental species were no longer considered as pure species  <cit> . the same results were observed in the current study, especially in the hybrid zones where e. madsenii and e. rhopalostele co-existed. a high number of viable seeds were produced in our experimental crosses and populations were not exclusively composed of f <dig> hybrids, which would be the case if the hybrids were sterile. the existence of one specific haplotype in some hybrids  is also consistent with the fact that populations are not composed only of early-generation hybrid genotypes, which contrasts with most studies of hybrid zones between deceptive orchids  <cit> . rather, populations were also composed of f <dig> hybrids and most likely of backcrossed hybrids.

given that the two hybrids studied here are fertile, they can easily form a bridge for gene flow between the parental species  <cit> . the studied species are deceptive orchids and pollinators usually do not strongly discriminate species  <cit> , thus they contribute to introgressive hybridization through creation of a hybrid swarm and the possible merging of species  <cit> . probably many other examples of hybrid zones among deceptive orchids exist, but molecular studies documenting the genetic structure of these hybrid zones are scarce, especially in the case of neotropical orchids .

evolution of reproductive barriers in epidendrum
the high frequency of hybridization in all populations studied suggests the general absence of strong interspecific reproductive barriers. although not studied here, premating barriers are apparently weak in our sympatric populations owing to the high frequency of hybrid genotypes observed. in accordance with this conclusion, several studies have revealed that epidendrum is usually pollinated by a wide number of species, which do not show any pattern of fidelity to a given flower species . hybridization and late-generation hybrids are frequent in all epidendrum species surveyed, even between species with different ploidy levels, and although some degree of sterility is observed, there is always a proportion of fertile hybrids with high fitness in a broad amplitude of habitats  <cit> . however, some caution is needed when considering the generally low importance of reproductive barriers in epidendrum because our knowledge of the frequency and outcomes of hybridization is still limited, even in the species studied. for instance, we only found three hybrid zones even though the species studied here could apparently co-exist in more sites . furthermore, no studies have evaluated the role of exogenous selection in the establishment of hybrid genotypes or its association with the mycorrhizal community.

the occurrence of polyploidy, which has been previously suggested to occur in this genus  <cit> , was confirmed in our study. besides hybridization, polyploidy offers a good explanation for the high number of epidendrum species described. allopolyploid speciation  may occur in these orchids by several processes, such as somatic chromosome doubling followed by selfing to produce a tetraploid, through fusion of two unreduced gametes, or by backcrossing of triploids with haploid gametes to form tetraploid progeny  <cit> .

can we deal with taxonomic homogenization and blurring of species boundaries?
the widespread hybridization revealed in this species complex raises several taxonomic and conservational concerns, because it may compromise the genetic integrity of the parental species to the point of causing local extinctions. this is exacerbated by the finding that future niche models predict a severe decrease in the area favorable for the occurrence of the parental species.

with the exception of the polyploid e. falcisepalum, which seems to escape the homogenizing effects of gene flow, the remaining parental species can no longer be seen as pure-breeding species because they consist of predominantly backcrossed individuals  or f <dig> hybrids . the virtual absence of pure-bred individuals in these hybrid zones implies that genetic swamping has eliminated the parental species and led to the loss of species identity  <cit> . it also highlights the fact that, besides morphological characters, other taxonomic tools such as molecular markers should be used in order to understand species boundaries in orchids.

previous studies have demonstrated the existence of introgression in plants  <cit> , which in some cases has led to the homogenization of species characteristics and the extinction of parental species in very few generations. for instance, helianthus bolanderi suffered a rapid reduction in its population size owing to genetic swamping by the common invasive h. annuus <cit> . asymmetric introgression also occurs between iris fulva and i. brevicaulis where 72% of the i. brevicaulis-like plants have alleles introgressed from i. fulva <cit> .

understanding if such consequences are derived from natural or anthropogenically mediated hybridization is important for species management and conservation. allendorf et al. <cit>  categorized hybridization into six types based upon the extent of hybridization and the natural or anthropogenic status of the hybridization. however, in the present study and most other cases it is difficult to know whether hybridization was triggered by natural causes or not. in some cases, it can even be argued that human interventions simply amplify the potential for hybridization  or create environments that are more suitable for the new hybrid lineages  <cit> .

in epidendrum, hybridization appears to be mainly the result of natural causes and is frequently caused by the lack of pollinator specificity and the absence of strong reproductive isolation barriers  <cit> . therefore, in biological groups where hybridization is so frequent and creates successful interbreeding lineages, two questions arise concerning what to do with the species involved. can we even consider them as “species”? does it make sense to restore the historical genetic structure if threatened species are involved or should we instead target our efforts to the new genetic novelties?

based on future projection of their ecological niche, and given that conditions suitable for these hybrid zones will exist, the hybrid zones can therefore be seen as a source of raw material for natural adaptive change  <cit> . in this light, the definition of species should better focus on traits that lead to adaptation and conservation efforts should be targeted towards evolutionary processes that generate taxonomic biodiversity instead of preserving the taxonomic entities beyond these processes  <cit> . although this strategy cannot be applied to all organisms, it certainly provides a good framework for determining evolutionarily important units  <cit>  that are worthy of protection and management in species with complex reticulate scenarios, such as those in the present investigation.

CONCLUSIONS
although hybridization is usually invoked as a driving force for the high levels of morphological variation in epidendrum, the existence of hybrid zones and the levels of genomic admixture remain unknown in most cases. here, we demonstrate that hybridization can be frequent whenever two species co-occur, leading to a complex scenario of reticulate evolution and the blurring of species boundaries. given that a high number of viable and fertile hybrid seeds were produced, hybridization generated genetic novelties in all hybrid zones. the high frequency of hybrids and the fact that the parental species were mostly assigned as backcrossed hybrids suggests low efficiency of reproductive barriers, at least in these populations. this conclusion is consistent with the general lack of pre- and postmating barriers reported in this genus and, therefore, the large proportion of backcrosses observed might also be a feature of other neotropical hybrid zones of epidendrum. the high frequency of hidden hybrid genotypes described in this study suggests that more genetic studies are needed to understand the evolution of the genus epidendrum.

