BACKGROUND
the majority of genes implicated in floral development have been identified through characterization of mutants displaying severe phenotypic deviations from wild-type development. an interesting subset of these mutants is the group of homeotic floral phenotypes. in these mutants, the organs of a single whorl of the inflorescence are duplicated within another distinct whorl at the expense of the organs typically present. the premise for these mutations is explained in the classic "abc model" of floral development for arabidopsis  <cit> . according to the abc model, interactions among mads-box transcription factors including, but not limited to apetala  <dig> , agamous , and apetala  <dig>  are required for sepals, petals, stamens, and gynoecia development. functional absence of any of these transcription factors results in the homeotic replacement of floral organs. the "quartet model" of protein interactions explains the genetic abc model  <cit>  and proposes the formation of five distinct whorl-specific tetrameric complexes capable of binding dna and activating downstream genes responsible for organ development through cis-regulation at dual carg boxes  <cit> . in vitro analysis has revealed heterodimeric interactions among mads-box transcription factors  <cit> . furthermore, in vivo interactions of homologous petunia mads-box proteins involved in a putative ovule-defining quaternary complex were also observed  <cit> .

despite structural support for the quartet model, many regulatory aspects of this model have yet to be identified. a number of inflorescence meristem-identity genes such as leafy, unusual floral organ, leunig, and curly leaf have been linked to the upstream regulation of the genes encoding these quaternary complexes. however, few downstream organ-specific genes directly activated by these complexes have been identified  <cit> . moreover, downstream targets such as fruitful, sporocyteless/nozzle and no apical meristem do not obey the single whorl premise of the quartet model.  <cit> . characterization of organ-specific gene expression downstream of the putative quaternary complexes is necessary to validate its functionality and understand the nature of its targets.

genomic approaches have become a valuable tool in characterizing organ-related gene expression and in elucidating the genetic networks of floral development at a global level. genome-wide analyses of transcript enrichment among arabidopsis floral organs have been performed with the aid of hybridization-based approaches such as cdna and oligonucleotide microarrays  <cit>  and represent a strong first step in spatial characterization of the floral transcriptome. however, microarray analyses and other hybridization-based approaches are subject to a number of inherent limitations, including sensitivity to rna quantity, non-specific probe hybridization, and substantial background levels capable of masking transcripts with low expression rates  <cit> . furthermore, quantitative analysis across multiple microarrays requires the standardization and calibration of chips to ensure equivalent hybridization.

although technical improvements are addressing several of these microarray issues, signature sequencing  represents an alternative to microarrays and can overcome a number of limitations inherent to hybridization-based technologies and other conventional methods of large-scale gene expression analysis. developed at what is now illumina, inc. , mpss reactions permit the simultaneous or parallel sequencing of  <dig> or  <dig> nucleotide "signatures" corresponding to distinct cdna molecules from a sample  <cit> . these expression signatures may then be matched to their corresponding sequence in the genome to delineate gene expression. the length of mpss signatures usually permits a single match to the arabidopsis genome and enables highly specific quantification of transcription  <cit> . the background level afforded by this technology is superior to the level of transcript detection permitted by hybridization-based technologies and enables detection of transcriptions with lower expression levels  <cit>  such as many transcription factors. also, the linear normalized nature of mpss data acquisition reduces the importance of signal standardization between cdna libraries. nonetheless, previously described "bad words" in mpss sequencing reactions  <cit> , as well as the absence of the necessary restriction sites within a particular cdna, dilution of transcripts with low expression in diverse transcriptomes, and the cost-prohibitive nature of replicates are shortcomings of the technology. therefore, integration of microarray studies and mpss in future meta-analysis will permit improved genome-wide expression characterization, as will advances in short read dna sequencing technologies, such as illumina's current "sequencing-by-synthesis"  method.

in this study, we have implemented mpss to dissect those genes enriched within the petal, stamen, gynoecium inclusive and exclusive of the ovule, and those of the sepal/sepal-petal, petal-stamen, or stamen-gynoecium. mpss signatures were matched to genomic annotations  and integrated into our publicly available web interface  <cit> . using the interface, expression patterns were cross-analyzed to dissect floral organ of enriched expression. wild-type inflorescences were used to characterize transcript expression from all floral organs. the mutant agamous , was incorporated to delineate a complete loss of stamen and gynoecia, due to the homeotic replacement of reproductive organs by perianth whorls. conversely, a loss of perianth whorls was obtained through the use of apetala 1– <dig> , an apetalous mutant with increased reproductive whorls and secondary apetalous inflorescences homeotically replacing most sepals. a loss of the petals and stamen expression was achieved through use of apetala 3– <dig> , a mutant in which organs of the petal and stamen whorls have been completely replaced by carpels and sepals. although reduced carpel tissue was present, the double mutant superman- <dig> apetala 1– <dig>  was preferentially selected for carpel reduction and used to characterize stamen enrichment at the expense of all other floral organs. in addition to utilizing whole-inflorescence libraries to determine organ-enriched gene expression, dissected differentiated ovules, roots, and leaves were also used to determine the ovule inclusivity of gynoecia-expressed transcripts and enrich for floral expression on a plant-wide basis.

RESULTS
comparison of inflorescence expression profiles
sequence-surveys have become a widely implemented approach to determine expression patterns and further elucidate developmental processes on a genome-wide scale. to further characterize floral development, we have constructed mpss signature libraries from cdna of wild type, ap <dig>  ap <dig>  ag, sup ap <dig> inflorescences during the first twelve stages of development  <cit>  as well as differentiated ovule, root, and leaf tissues. mpss signatures were matched to their respective gene annotations to delineate active expression in a relative manner . the significant expression of  <dig>  genes was characterized within the floral inflorescences of the genotypes examined. to enrich for flower-specific transcripts, mpss leaf and root expression data were compared to inflorescence expression profiles. only  <dig>  to  <dig> % of the inflorescence-expressed genes were not observed  in the leaves or roots . therefore, the majority of genes identified in the inflorescence were not flower specific. nonetheless, with the exception of ap <dig>  the mean expression level of genes with non-floral specific spatial expression was significantly greater in all inflorescences than leaf or root tissue .

a mpss signatures within exons, within  <dig> bp of an annotated gene, in an intron, and overlapping an exon-intron splice boundary were quantified and "insignificant" signatures in only one sequencing library and those signatures corresponding to multiple regions of the genome were removed to demarcate gene expression.

b enrichment within the inflorescence signifies only those genes expressed at > <dig> tpm within the inflorescence. moreover, only those genes whose expression in root or leaf tissue was less than expression within the mutant inflorescence were considered inflorescence-enriched.

c genes with tpm > <dig> in mpss root and leaf libraries were subtracted from each floral library to assess inflorescence-specificity.

the selection of inflorescence-specific expression using a  <dig> tpm threshold in leaves and roots was too stringent and resulted in a high false negative rate of identification when compared to several genes with known expression patterns . therefore, inflorescence-enriched gene selection was accomplished by removing genes with lower expression in inflorescences than root and leaf tissues. furthermore, only those genes expressed in inflorescences at greater than  <dig> tpm were included in our filtering criteria . using even less stringent parameters, many floral organ enriched transcripts are accurately depicted, as evident in our biological validations; however, increasing this threshold reduced the false discovery rate and increased the informatics power to accurately detect floral expression enrichment. trends in transcript diversity across inflorescence genotypes were not significantly impacted by inflorescence enrichment. within both raw data and filtered inflorescence enriched expression data, the highest level of transcript diversity was observed in wild type, ap <dig>  and ap <dig> inflorescences and the lowest in sup ap <dig> and agamous . this is likely due to the increase in reproductive organs associated in the former, and significantly decreased floral organ diversity and strictly vegetative organs in the latter. although differences in transcriptome diversity between these groups were significant, differences in diversity among inflorescences within both groups were not statistically significant .

after enriching for inflorescence expression, the expression profile of each mpss library was characterized to reveal relationships between gene expression and phenotype and delineate possible biases among the data. the conservation of gene expression was determined across all libraries on a library intersection and a library relative basis. in our intersection approach, the conserved genes in two inflorescence enrichment filtered libraries were compared to the number of genes within both libraries. for example, / reveals a normalized correlation based on the presence or absence of genes within our filtering criteria . our library relative approach was based on calculating genes without statistically significant differences  in inflorescence expression levels  within the two libraries. the number of genes not statistically different was normalized by the total distinct genes expressed in the two libraries being compared to develop a proportion . both methods revealed similar results for libraries possessing significantly different correlations.

a intersection analyses was based on the presence or absence of genes within the library / after filtering the libraries for inflorescence enrichment.

b relative analyses was based on normalizing those genes without significant expression differences  by the union of the two libraries under analysis.

the most similar expression patterns were obtained from ap <dig> and wild type inflorescences. the homeotic mutants ap <dig> and ap <dig> as well as ap <dig> and wild type were also highly correlated . the difference between the three correlations was statistically significant  and their relative rank was conserved in both the library intersection and relativity based approaches. therefore, increases in gynoecium biomass at the expense of perianth tissue did not alter gene expression as much as the loss of reproductive organs. moreover, the largest phenotypic differences were mirrored by the most significant differences in gene expression. the increase of stamens within the inflorescence of sup ap <dig> produced the greatest difference when compared to the strictly vegetative agamous inflorescences within both methods of comparison despite similar degrees of transcript diversity within the two libraries.

to identify additional alterations in expression in ap <dig> generated by the addition of the sup mutation and to address possible phenotypic correlations, the expression profile of sup ap <dig> and ap <dig> were compared. although the proportion of conserved genes between sup ap <dig> and ap <dig> was greater than that of sup ap <dig> and wild type inflorescences, this difference was not significant  within the library intersection analysis. in the library relative analysis, the similarity of gene expression among the sup ap <dig> and all other inflorescences was relatively low . this suggests that increases in stamens at the expense of all other tissues altered the inflorescence expression profile more than any other mutation. despite the substantial gene expression differences, ap <dig> revealed the most similar inflorescence expression pattern to sup ap <dig> in the library relative analysis .

identification of organ-enriched gene expression
to identify transcripts highly enriched within a floral organ and reduced in other organs, we analyzed the data using a binary system. the occurrence of a specific organ or group of organs within a single floral strain was characterized as a "1" if present and a "0" if absent. genes with an expression pattern mirroring the organ occurrence profile across the homeotic mutants  were identified as enriched for the respective organ. for example, stamens are present within ap <dig> and sup ap1; however, they are absent in ap <dig> and agamous. therefore, only those genes expressed at greater than  <dig> tpm within ap <dig> and sup ap <dig> and absent  from ap <dig> and ag mpss libraries were deemed "stamen-enriched". to further filter for floral organ-enrichment on a plant-wide basis, only transcripts expressed at a greater rate  within the inflorescence than leaf or root tissue were included in the analyses.

"1" is representative of the respective organ presence within the respective homeotic mutant, and "0" represents the organ absence/diminishment. organ occurrences were matched to transcript expression levels "1" = leaf or root expression < transcript expression and >4tpm, "0" = transcript expression =  <dig> tpm to determine organ enriched gene expression.

the ability to dissect all possible patterns of floral organ expression is limited by the diversity of the mutant libraries employed within this study . enriched expression within an organ or multiple organs may only be recognized if their respective organ occurrence profiles are unique. for example, sepal-enriched transcripts cannot be isolated from sepal and petal expressed transcripts, because transcripts from both spatial enrichment groups are present or up regulated within agamous and apetala <dig> mutants and down regulated within ap <dig> and sup ap <dig>  similar limitations were inherent within previous homeotic microarray analyses and likely led to the characterization of apetala <dig>  a sepal and petal expressed transcript  <cit> , as expressed in a sepal-specific manner within the previous data set  <cit> . in addition, organ specific prediction may be biased by additional alterations in transcription as a result of homeotic transformation. an example of this is the dependence of sepal expression on the co-existence of sepals and petals. putative petal-enriched transcripts may also be expressed within the sepal in wild type inflorescences but not in apetala3; the mutant used to distinguish a lack of expression in the sepal and gynoecium. bearing in mind these limitations, the presence of transcript enrichment within the organ of inflorescence may only be dissected for seven instances within our mpss analysis: sepal/sepals-petals, petals, stamens, petals-stamens, stamens-gynoecia, and gynoecia inclusive and exclusive of the ovules .

a total of  <dig> genes were identified as possessing gynoecium-enriched expression within our analyses. this ranks in close proximity to the  <dig> genes characterized within the stamens and the  <dig> genes identified as expressed throughout both reproductive organs. the level of transcript diversity noted within the gynoecium was similar irrespective of the ovule; both gynoecium expression inclusive of the ovule and exclusive of the ovule identified a total of  <dig> genes. this suggests during the first twelve stages of floral development  <cit> , the ovule does not express from an extensively larger subset of gynoecium-enriched genes than the stigma, style, the placenta, or carpel wall. despite the extensive diversity noted in previous microdissection studies  <cit> , only  <dig> genes with petal-enriched expression were identified in agamous but absent from other mutant inflorescences. nonetheless, this was greater than the  <dig> transcripts identified as expressed within both the stamen and the petals. therefore, fewer transcripts are likely to be enriched across only the petals and stamens than are specifically enriched in each organ. this contrasts with the trend noted across the reproductive organs wherein nearly equivalent numbers of genes were identified as enriched within a single organ as expressed throughout both reproductive tissues. unlike previous comparisons that enabled dissection of enrichment within a single organ or a cluster of two organs, the  <dig> genes enriched within the sepal and throughout the perianth could not be dissected from each other given the mutants employed in this study. therefore, the relative transcriptional complexity of the sepals cannot be compared to the petals. nonetheless, it can be concluded that the number of sepal-enriched genes does not supersede those identified within any of the reproductive organs.

after determining the relative diversity of the predicted organ-enriched gene sets as measured by mpss, gene expression levels were compared. given that homeotic mutants with increased development of a floral organ should express genes enriched within that organ at a significantly higher level than wild type, each organ-enriched gene set was analyzed to identify the proportion of genes showing significant over-expression within the mutant tissue relative to wild type. this approach approximates that method previously employed using microarray data; nonetheless, more significant overlap was noted between previous microarray analysis and our threshold-based mpss methods than mpss data analysis based on expression relativity to wild type. the proportion of organ-enriched genes differentially expressed relative to wild type was determined . the mean proportion of organ-enriched genes showing differential expression  was  <dig> % ±  <dig> % . of the differentially expressed genes, the majority were over-expressed within their expected mutants,  <dig> % ±  <dig> % . therefore, our analysis does not substantially increase the number of genes detected that reveal significant increases relative to wild type inflorescences. however, those floral organ-enriched genes showing differential expression are largely over-expressed in the mutants that accumulate biomass of the respective organ .

to further characterize the expression patterns of our organ-enriched gene sets, the temporal expression of our spatial gene sets was determined. although little commonality was noted between independent microarray analyses of spatial arabidopsis expression and our organ-enriched gene sets, the spatial data accrued from this study was superimposed on cumulative temporal data identified in the genevestigator online microarray database to delineate the temporal expression of our organ-enriched gene sets  <cit> . the majority of genes with mpss determined floral organ-enriched expression were detected in later stages of floral development after 10% of the flower buds have opened . therefore, our organ-enrichment analyses may be skewed to detect more genes expressed near stage twelve of development, after significant biomass for all floral organs has developed.

functional characterization of organ-enriched gene sets
genes possessing predicted organ-enriched expression were further characterized based on gene ontology and cis-element conservation to further understand the nature of those factors underpinning organogenesis and the maintenance of specific floral organs, as well as to identify the relative impact of the quaternary complex in activating organ-enriched genes. regulation and function were determined using several publicly available data mining tools. the abundance of organ-enriched genes with common regulators or function was compared to the mean genome-wide level of expression to identify overrepresented characteristics within genes associated with each floral organ.

delineation of gene function enrichment was achieved using the publicly available analysis tool easygo  <cit> . an enrichment of terms detailing specific molecular functions, as well as associations with cellular components were identified within gene sets. few enriched terms were identified in the majority of organ-enriched gene sets, genes possessing stamen-enriched expression were enriched for lipase activity  as well as presence within the endo-membrane system . the lipase defective anther dehiscence has been shown to catalyze the initial step in the jasmonic acid pathway that regulates flower opening, synchronization of pollen maturation, and anther dehiscence  <cit> . therefore, it is possible additional lipase genes are involved in similar pathways to regulate stamen maturation.

to assess the role of the mads-box proteins involved in the quaternary complex at regulating organ-enriched gene expression, several algorithms were implemented to identify overrepresented cis-elements within each set of genes. the upstream and downstream regions surrounding each gene were scanned for over-expressed motifs at  <dig> and  <dig> bp intervals using the university of toronto's promoter  <dig> program  <cit>  as well as the university of leeds' and the arabidopsis gene regulatory information server's, known cis-element analyzer  <cit> . no significantly overrepresented motifs were characterized within any of the sets of genes with floral organ-enriched expression. this confirms previous microarray functional assessments and reveals no significant enrichment of carg boxes in organ-enriched gene sets. therefore, much of the noted organ-enriched expression is not mediated by a single common cis-regulatory element such as the action of the putative quaternary complex on carg boxes  <cit>  during later stages of floral development. nonetheless, the expression of over  <dig> mirnas has been characterized within wild type floral inflorescence using mpss  <cit>  and it is probable post-transcriptional regulation plays a substantial role in restricting organ-enriched expression in a manner similar to that noted between mir <dig> and ap <dig>  <cit> . future analyses characterizing mirnas in inverse expression patterns to those identified in table  <dig> may enable detection of those mirnas negatively regulating the expression of genes responsible for floral organ maintenance and development.

validation experiments i: mpss correspondence with microarray analyses
the data sets produced using the threshold filtration approach of mpss data were compared to several previous microarray studies to reveal the concurrence of analyses. previous analysis comparing homeotic mutant gene expression relative to wild type revealed significant overlap. approximately 70%  of those genes identified by mpss to be stamen-enriched agreed with this previous microarray analysis; however, the number of putative stamen-enriched genes identified within the previous study was over seven-fold greater than that identified by our analyses. this difference may be due to the difference in filtering stringency and not a discrepancy in the actual number of stamen-enriched genes. mpss analyses were set to identify only the most probable candidates for organ enrichment and likely possess a high false negative rate. relaxed mpss filtration criterion based only on the absence of expression within mutants lacking stamens revealed a similar number of stamen-enriched genes. however, the fraction of organ-enriched genes identified under relaxed parameters that concurred with the previous analyses was greatly reduced to approximately 26% .

microarray analysis from isolated floral organs  <cit>  and pollen  <cit>  revealed an overlap of  <dig> genes within the stamen-enriched data set. moreover, all  <dig> stamen-enriched genes identified through the intersection of mpss and the dissected floral organ microarray results  <cit>  concur with previous microarray analyses based on comparisons of homeotic mutants  <cit> . this is significantly greater than the proportion of stamen-enriched genes identified as common to both microarray studies alone . several known stamen-enriched and apetala <dig> regulated genes, including profilin <dig>  arabinogalactan <dig>  cyp703a <dig>  anther <dig>  callose synthase <dig>  aborted microspore, taptetum <dig>  lipid transfer <dig>  and anther <dig>  were identified across the microarray and mpss analyses. however, nearly half of the stamen-enriched genes identified across all studies have putative or unknown functions including genes related to a putative self-incompatibility gene, at5g <dig>  a putative phospholipase a <dig>  at4g <dig>  involved in the jasmonic acid pathway regulating pollen maturation and several genes within the glycine-rich protein family which is known to possess high expression within the androecium.

much less commonality was noted among organ-enriched gene sets of the gynoecium, petals, and sepal-petals . only 15%  of gynoecium-enriched genes as determined by mpss were identified within previous microarray organ-enrichment studies  <cit> . nonetheless, a few genes with known gynoecium-enriched expression were characterized by mpss that were not identified in previous microarray analyses, including three embryo defective and embryo defective-like genes. mpss-identified petal-expressed gene sets shared only two genes with microarray analyses  <cit> . similarly, among the set of sepal/sepal-petal localized transcripts only five genes were identified as common to microarray analyses and mpss predictions  <cit> .

the significant reduction in similarity among mpss and microarray  <cit>  predicted genes within the gynoecia and vegetative organ-enriched expression suggests comparison of homeotic mutants is less accurate in determining enrichment of genes within these organs than the stamens in one or both analyses. however, previous microarray analysis detected significantly more genes with enriched expression in the stamens than the gynoecia despite the relatively similar levels of reproductive organ transcriptome diversity noted in this study.

validation experiments ii: in situ hybridizations
the previously uncharacterized expression of putative organ-enriched genes identified under our stringent and more relaxed  parameters were empirically validated through in situ hybridization. expression of the galactosyltransferase family protein, at1g <dig>  was correctly assigned by relaxed mpss criteria with expression in the stamen and carpel primordia and strong expression specifically within the tapetum and microspores . our relaxed filtering system of mpss data predicted at1g <dig> to be expressed in both the gynoecia and stamens. however, in situ hybridization has only revealed expression within the carpel  and no expression was noted within the stamens. similarly, at2g <dig> is predicted by relaxed mpss parameters to be localized within the petal-stamen. in situ hybridization patterns revealed its presence within only the tapetum; however, given the low level of mpss predicted expression within the petal-enriched mutants, stringent filtering removed the transcript from the expression set . using relaxed parameters, a putative stamen-enriched gene, at2g <dig>  was found expressed in both carpel and stamen primordium . therefore, some genes enriched for the stamen or gynoecium may be expressed within both reproductive organs; however, it is less likely they are present within vegetative tissue as well.

within the more stringent filtering parameters used to delineate organ-enriched gene sets, the expression of a gene with unknown function, at1g <dig>  was characterized as stamen-enriched. in situ hybridization revealed strong expression within the microspore as well as lesser expression within the stigmatic papillae and septum . this implies increased the filtering parameters may increase the accuracy of analysis for organ enrichment. however, a discrepancy between stringent mpss and in situ data was noted in the putative gynoecium-enriched at5g <dig>  this gene encodes a subtilase family protein and was identified strictly within the stamen in a single microspore of the tetrad by in situ hybridization . nonetheless, previous publications have revealed stigma-enriched expression of at5g <dig> via several microarray analyses, rna gel blots, and in situ analysis.

validation experiments iii: gus histochemical assays
transgenic gus reporter lines were used as another means of assessing the accuracy of floral organ localization analysis. a  <dig>  kb region upstream of several genes with putative organ-enrichment was used to drive the expression of the gus reporter gene. promoter: gus constructs with two or more independent transformation events were characterized via histochemical assay. no differential spatial expression was noted between transformation events of the same construct. the majority of organ-enriched expression predicted by mpss using relaxed filtering parameters was mirrored in the gus-staining activity of the promoters under analysis . putative stamen-enriched expression was evaluated by promoter fusion in three genes. the promoters of at1g <dig>  at2g <dig>  and at3g <dig>  were all found to stain the stamen as predicted . however, in the case of at2g <dig>  in situ analysis revealed additional expression in the carpel primordia. two genes with putative gynoecia enriched expression were assayed as well. after staining, the promoter: gus fusions for at1g <dig> and at1g <dig> were found to stain within the gynoecia as predicted . mpss predicted at1g <dig> to be expressed in both reproductive organs. this result was substantiated through the histochemical assay, with staining occurring in both the stamens and gynoecia . two additional genes predicted with mpss to have expression in both the stamen and petal were also assessed. confirming our previous in situ hybridization results, at2g <dig> was found expressed only in the stamens . despite this discrepancy, expression of at5g <dig>  a gene encoding a glycine-rich oleosin protein  found to regulate the size and character of lipid droplets within the pollen coat  <cit>  was demonstrated within both the stamens and the petals as predicted . expression of this gene in the petal has not previously been documented in the literature and may indicate additional uncharacterized activity; five independent transformation events revealed similar expression patterns . at1g <dig>  was present in all floral mpss libraries and, as expected for the promoter:gus fusions, staining was prevalent throughout all floral organs . similarly, at2g <dig> was assayed and the result confirmed mpss predictions of null expression within the inflorescence tissues,  despite previous microarray characterizations within floral tissues  <cit> .

although not present within our mpss filtration parameters, several genes with expression enriched in a specific mutant relative to the other floral mutants were also characterized as controls for our filter parameters and the mpss methodology. contrary to mpss predictions, at1g <dig>  a gene with very weak expression of  <dig> tpm in the stamen-less ap <dig> mutants and no expression within the stamen-enriched sup ap <dig> mutant was identified within the stamens . expressed in carpel- and stamen-enriched ap <dig> material but absent from all other floral mutants, at1g <dig> was found present within the carpel as expected . the ap <dig> enriched at2g <dig> was found to be expressed in the carpel and petals despite the nearly-undetectable expression level of only  <dig> tpm in the highly petal-enriched agamous mutant . at3g <dig> was identified by mpss as expressed throughout all floral organs except sup ap <dig> at a level higher than  <dig> tpm; experimentally, expression was detected in the petals and gynoecia but not within the stamens . gus staining demonstrated carpel-specific activity for at3g <dig>  and it was also identified as highly expressed within the carpel-enriched ap <dig> by mpss analysis although significant expression  was also noted in the carpel-devoid agamous mutant. these results suggest absence or presence of expression within a single mutant was not as accurate at detecting expression patterns in the organs of enrichment; however analysis across all four mutants improved detection abilities.

in addition to whole gynoecium promoter:gus fusions and mutant enrichment based comparisons, ovule expression was identified in five genes with ovule-inclusive, gynoecium enrichment as predicted by relaxed mpss parameters. a gene of unknown function, at1g <dig>  was identified within the integuments . at5g <dig> was characterized within the funiculus and both integuments of the ovule, confirming mpss-based predictions of ovule expression . expression of at5g <dig> was found in both the integuments and the funiculus; however, it was not expressed within the female gametophyte . transcriptional activity of at3g <dig>  a gene encoding an f-box protein was identified in the anatropous integumentary ridge and a small region of the dorsal outer integuments  but not in other fully differentiated floral organs , confirming the ovule-enriched expression pattern predicted by our mpss analysis. at1g <dig> was identified as expressed within the micropylar pole and integuments of the ovule as well as the chalazal region of the nucellus .

validation experiments iv: reverse transcription pcr validation
validation of mpss organ-enrichment filters was performed in five putative gynoecia expressed genes by reverse transcription pcr . expression patterns were found to correlate with those predicted by mpss. at4g <dig>  a gene encoding atg8b, a microtubule associated protein involved in autophagy demonstrated expression in the ovule as predicted by mpss, without any expression present within sepal or petal organs. this isoform of atg <dig> has been previously characterized by microarray studies  <cit>  which reveal the highest level of floral expression within petal tissue, followed by stamen, with lesser amounts in sepal and carpel tissue; however, mpss analysis reveals gynoecia enriched expression inclusive of the ovule. mpss predictions of gynoecia enrichment were confirmed by reverse transcription pcr. no expression was detected in petal or sepal tissues, suggesting that the distinctive alternative transcript of at4g <dig> is specifically expressed in the ovule . in addition, at4g <dig>  at1g <dig>  and at4g <dig> were also found by reverse transcription pcr to demonstrate ovule expression. no sepal- or petal-expressed transcripts were noted within these analyses. in contrast to mpss predictions, reverse transcription pcr revealed the expression of at2g <dig>  a putative structural constituent of the large ribosomal subunit in both ovule and petal tissues. these many empirical analyses suggest organ enrichment was accurately identified through our analyses; however, to delineate the specificity of expression to a single organ a meta-analysis approach is necessary to further filter transcripts and attain even more robust data sets.

CONCLUSIONS
our mpss floral transcriptome analysis has dissected additional expression data to further corroborate and supplement existing spatial analyses of gene expression performed using microarrays. numerous well-characterized genes with known expression patterns were accurately dissected as organ-enriched within our system of transcript filtration. furthermore, the validation experiments were largely consistent with the mpss expression data for several previously uncharacterized genes. in agreement with previous analysis  <cit> , reproductive structures possess the most diverse and complex transcriptome when compared to vegetative tissue and no significant enrichment of carg boxes was noted upstream or downstream of putative organ-enriched genes, suggesting that floral organogenesis and maintenance requires a multitude of signalling cascades as opposed to extensive direct cis-regulation by the quaternary complex. this spatial dissection of transcript expression will provide a valuable reference for future functional studies, and represents a source for developing floral organ-enriched promoters to drive transgene expression. in addition, these promoters could be coupled to a recently-described system for isolation of specific cell types by fluorescence-activated sorting  <cit> , followed by more advanced methods of gene expression analysis such as illumina's sequencing by synthesis; a tag-sequencing platform with ten-fold higher sensitivity than mpss  <cit> . this will enable even more detailed spatial profiling of gene expression in future floral studies.

