BACKGROUND
nuclear receptors  are ligand dependent transcription factors that regulate a range of different biological processes and they have been identified in all main groups of metazoan animals. the members of the nuclear receptor super family are characterized by a highly conserved dna-binding domain  and a less conserved c-terminal ligand binding domain . after ligand binding the nr dbd domain can interact with dna and activate transcription.

retinoid x receptors , commonly known as ultraspiracle  in insects  <cit> , belong to the nuclear receptor superfamily and targets multiple signaling pathways. rxrs are involved in controlling ontogenetic development as well as processes in adult individuals including reproduction and metabolic pathways. rxrs can activate transcription either as homodimers or as obligate heterodimeric partners with other nuclear receptors. among nuclear receptors the rxrs ability to form both homodimers and heterodimers is unique. a critical element in regulating gene expression is the conformational change in rxrs induced by ligand binding. this change results in increased ligand affinity and transcription machinery assembly. whereas the ligand for rxr is known to be 9-cis retinoic acid  <cit>  the ligands of usps remain unknown.

in insects, usp forms a heterodimer with the ecdysteroid receptor   <cit> . ecdysteroids are a family of arthropod specific steroid hormones with 20-hydroxyecdysone  as the main active form. the ecr and usp heterodimer binds to the hormone response elements present in the promoters of ecdysone response genes and regulate their transcription  <cit> . the ecr-usp heterodimer complex plays an important role in development, growth and molting and reproduction in arthropods. in drosophila, a reduction of maternal and zygotic usp levels results in embryonic lethality  <cit> . by phenotypic analysis of usp mutants in drosophila, oro, et al.  <cit>  showed that usp is needed in many developmental stages in various tissues, somatic as well as germ line. in addition, maternally derived usp is required for embryonic development and usp is necessary during oogenesis.

growth and reproduction are two biological processes that are tightly regulated and linked in all animals. sexual maturation and reproduction takes place after the animal has reached a certain size or age and then the ingested energy is directed towards production and maturation of gametes. steroid hormones play a crucial role in both processes and crosstalk in terms of regulation is crucial. a reproductive hallmark in females is transcription of vitellogenins . vgs are produced in large quantities and requires access to sufficient nutrients. it has been shown that nutrient sensing and hormone regulation are linked to induce and regulate vg production in mosquitoes e.g.  <cit> . in insects like drosophila and aedes 20e-signaling through ecr-usp induce transcription of key yolk proteins like vitellogenins in adult females. in the red flour beetle  it has been shown that juvenile hormone  is required for vitellogenin synthesis and that 20e-influenced oocyte maturation  <cit> . in mosquitoes it has been shown that target of rapamycin  plays a central role in mediating the nutritional signal from amino acids and this signal is required for initiating production of vgs  <cit> .

crustacea is a large group of arthropods containing diverse groups such as malacostraca, brachiopoda and maxillipoda. whereas the endocrine system has been well studied in the large malacostracans  limited knowledge exist for most of the other groups like the copepods. in a recent review by nagaraju  <cit>  the reproductive regulators in decapod crustacean were summarized. ecdysteroids are present in decapods and their main function is related to growth  and gonadal maturation.

the salmon louse  is an economical important parasitic copepod in the salmon aquaculture  <cit> . in addition to direct cost to the farming industry release of lice larva to the environment is an undesired environmental effect of salmon sea ranching  <cit> . the negative effects have spurred molecular research on the salmon louse in the last decade  <cit>  and in recent studies we have examined the sexual maturation in female lice  <cit>  and characterized the major egg-yolk proteins  <cit> .

here, in order to better understand the basic features of female reproduction in copepods, we have characterized an rxr type of nuclear hormone receptor from l. salmonis . five different transcripts encoding an rxr type nr were identified and we have used rnai to knock-down these transcripts in adult female lice to investigate its role in reproduction. knockdown of lsrxr in adult female lice resulted in basically abolished larvae production. to further understand the significance of lsrxr in adult female lice we investigated transcription levels in these knock-down lice on a l. salmonis microarray with app.  <dig> different transcripts. transcription of a large number of genes was affected upon knocking-down lsrxr by rnai demonstrating its crucial role in copepod reproduction. although copepods and insects are distantly related arthropods the present study points to several similarities in rxr  functions.

RESULTS
cloning and sequence analysis of lsrxr
during our est-sequencing effort we identified one clone with significant blast hits with rxr/usp nuclear receptors from invertebrates. this clone was re-sequenced and 5′-race was performed to obtain the full length cdna. the race experiment revealed five different transcripts ranging from  <dig> to 1512 bp . to further validate if there were more than one transcript we conducted a cdna blot using mrna from different developmental stages. the cdna blot showed the presence of at least two different transcripts . the longest sequenced transcript was named lsrxr and contains a single open reading frame encoding a putative protein of  <dig> aa. we identified two introns in the genomic sequence of the lsrxr, but the different cdna lengths obtained in the race experiment could not be linked to these. we performed a southern blot with an lsrxr specific probe and only one band was detected . the lack of additional copies of lsrxr in the salmon louse genome is further strengthened by scrutiny of assemblies of the salmon louse genome that is presently being sequenced.figure  <dig> 
overview over the different forms of lsrxr. the five different cdnas  shown in grey encode for four putative proteins . the two longest forms contains both, the dna binding domain  and a ligand binding domain , while the two shortest transcripts only contain an intact lbd. the positions of the two fragments  used for the rnai  are shown as well as the position of the in situ probe at 3′ end , the position of the cdna blot probe , the two introns  and the two q-pcr assays, assay <dig>  and assay <dig> . the position of the southern blot probe is the same as that for dsrna fr  <dig> 



blastp search with the deduced protein sequence gave very strong hits with members of the nuclear hormone receptor nr <dig> family, particularly usp and rxr receptors from different arthropods species. the lsrxr protein does not contain a signal peptide .

lsrxr has all the typical features found in nuclear hormone receptors, including a well conserved dna binding domain  and a ligand binding domain . the lsrxr has a unique row of  <dig> asp residues just after the t-box  <cit>  which to our knowledge is not present in any other species  except l. salmonis has this asp repeat). according to the predictions made by devarakonda, et al.  <cit>  this region is an α-helix. we compared the predicted structure for the region containing the  <dig> asp residues  using the drosophila usp sequence and lsrxr obtained by psipred application . the drosophila usp showed a similar structure as determined by devarakonda, et al.  <cit>  whereas the predicted structure of lsrxr showed two helixes interrupted by a coil region, created by the asp residues.

our race experiment revealed five different cdnas . the three longest cdnas contains complete dbd and lbd domains upon translation. in contrast, the two shortest cdnas encodes a partial or no dbd and a complete lbd. the cdna blot revealed two distinct bands  and indications of additional bands between these two main bands  that correlate with the length of clones obtained from the race experiment. the dsrna fragments  used in the rnai experiment described below are both located at 3′ end to obtain knock-down of all forms.

phylogenetic analysis
we conducted a phylogenetic analysis to investigate the relationship between lsrxr and other homologous sequences from a diversity of metazoans and the results from the bayesian analysis is shown in figure  <dig>  in addition to usp/rxr sequences we included some ecr and hepatocyte nuclear factor  <dig>  proteins in our initial analysis. like usp/rxr hnf <dig> also belongs to the nuclear subfamily  <dig>  while ecr belongs to the nuclear receptor subfamily  <dig>  the phylogenetic tree construction showed that all included usp/rxr occur within one group with good branch support  with the ecr as a sister group. in the usp/rxr group, vertebrates and mollusks occur as a monophyletic group and a sister group to the arthropods but it was not well supported. the usp/rxr from the included arthropods did not create a monophyletic group and the tree puzzle analysis gave poor/no significant support values for most of the basal nodes. to further asses the phylogenetic relationship between the usp/rxr sequences we removed all the hnf <dig> and ecr sequences and performed a new phylogenetic inference with only these sequences. this gave a significant support for the arthropod usp/rxr but the internal branching pattern did not obtain significant support in the tree puzzle analysis . lsrxr grouped together with a putative rxr from the free living copepod calanus finmarchicus in all our analysis. in none of our analyses did the copepods group together with the other included crustacean rxr sequences. the sequences annotated as usp did not form a monophyletic group in any of our analyses and to what extent usp should be used in initial annotation for this type of arthropod sequences could be questioned.figure  <dig> 
phylogenetic tree obtained after the byesin analysis. the two included copepod species  occur as a sister group to the insects. we did not obtain evidence for monophyly for the arthropods since decapods and cladocera grouped outside the insect/copepod clade.



localization of lsrxr transcription by in situ hybridization
in order to identify where lsrxr is transcribed in adult female lice we used a rna probe for in situ hybridization. the probe was made in the 3-prime end of the transcript and would hybridize with all the different length variants of lsrxr. lsrxr is transcribed in several different tissues and cell types . in the ovarium, lsrxr was detected in the lumen of the ovarium tubules , in the oocytes after they have entered the oviduct  and in the vitellogenic oocytes in the genital segment . the subcuticular tissue also stained positive for lsrxr mrna  and the entire tissue transcribes lsrxr in adult females. lsrxr transcripts were also detected in the intestine  and in some glands . we also tempted to use an in situ probe localized in the 5′-region of lsrxr  but we could not obtain a signal . a likely reason for this would be that the longest transcript was present at an abundance below the detection limit for our in situ assay.figure  <dig> 
localization of
l. salmonis
rxr  transcripts in adult female salmon louse.  light microscopy of mature female indicating where the different tissues in the lice are located . figs. b to g shows hybridization using antisense probe  and sense   of comparable sections.  shows positive hybridization in the ovary. the signal was detected in the lumen of the ovary tube. in c, a positive signal is detected in the cytoplasm of the immature oocytes in the oviduct and the more mature vitellogenic oocytes  in the genital segment are also positive. lsrxr is transcribed in the subcuticular tissue  and in several glands  and the intestine .



transcription of lsrxr in different developmental stages of l. salmonis
we set up quantitative real time pcr to quantify the lsrxr transcription in key developmental stages in the salmon louse. since there are two main types of lsrxr transcripts present, one type with a complete dbd and one type with incomplete  dbd we made two real time pcr assays where assay  <dig> takes up all lsrxr forms and assay  <dig> only takes those with dbd . lsrxr assay <dig> shows expression of all forms, while lsrxr assay <dig> shows the three longest forms only. as expected lsrxr assay <dig> being a sum of all forms of lsrxr, was expressed highest . the longer forms were detected at levels of about 50%  in all developmental stages. the shortest form, which did not include the dna binding domain, was thus expressed about as high as all longer forms put together. comparing all included developmental stages, strongest expression of lsrxr was found in free living copepodids. apart from that it is expressed quite equally in all stages. we also identified ecr in the salmon louse draft genome sequence and developed a real time pcr assay for this key gene for comparative purposes . while lsrxr is only expressed significantly higher in copepodids, ecr is expressed at the same level in nauplia and copepodids and shows more variability in the other stages .figure  <dig> 
transcription of lsrxr in different developmental stages. two real time pcr assays were used where assay  <dig> measures all forms of lsrxr whereas assay  <dig> only measures lsrxr forms containing dbd and lbd . a) lsrxr is highest transcribed in copepodids . the longest forms  comprise about 50% of the total lsrxr in all developmental stages examined. b) expression pattern of ecr in the same samples as measured in a. c) quantitative real time pcr demonstrates significant  knock-down of lsrxr in the salmon louse.
primer- and probe sequences of taqman assays used for q-pcr analysis



transcript
forward primer
reverse primer
probe
the location of the different lsrxr assays  in the gene is shown in figure  <dig> 



functional assessment of lsrxr by rnai in adult female lice
in order to assess the function of lsrxr in adult female salmon louse, we performed an rnai experiment injecting dsrna from two different regions of lsrxr  into newly molted adult female salmon lice  and a control group  receiving dsrna encoding a fragment of trypsin from atlantic cod . when the experiment was terminated a similar number of lice were recovered from each group  indicating that the effect on the adult females in the experiment was at a sub-lethal level. down regulation of lsrxr by rnai affected all variants . down-regulation for both fragments was on average 60% .table  <dig> 
summary of the results from knock down of lsrxr



group
# female on fish at harvest
length of egg strings 
hatching of egg 
# copepodites
dead/deformed larvae 
rel. expression of lsrxr 

control

rnaifr1

rnaifr2
female lice were counted at the time point of harvesting. these are the remaining ones from the  <dig> female lice put on  <dig> fish in each tub after injection of double stranded rna. control group lice were injected with double stranded cod rna , rnai fr <dig> and fr <dig> group lice were injected with double-stranded rna fragment one or two  respectively. the length of egg strings was measured at harvesting and the number of copepodids was reported at day nine after hatching. photographs of harvested adult females and their egg strings are shown in additional file 2: figure s <dig>  the two rnai groups did not differ significantly in all measured parameters  while significant differences between control group and the rnai groups were evident in all measured parameters except number of female lice on fish .



table  <dig> summarizes the overall observations from the rnai experiment with emphasis on egg production and the number of copepodids produced from the three different groups. the rnai experiment clearly demonstrated that lsrxr is crucial for both egg production, embryogenesis and larval development since the number of produced eggs as well as development to copepodids were severely affected in both groups treated with dsrna from lsrxr. egg-string length in the lsrxr rnai-lice was about half of that in control lice. in addition, the lice in both rnai groups produced eggs with significantly decreased hatching success and a high proportion of the larvae that hatched were strongly deformed, resulting in close to zero normal copepodids .

a selection of representative phenotypes from offspring’s observed after the rnai is displayed in figure  <dig>  in the control group, only  <dig> % of the larvae were dead and no deformed larvae were found. in the lsrxr rnai groups around 80% of the larvae that hatched were deformed or dead. a sign of normal molting between the larval stages is presence of normal exuvia . in the lsrxr rnai groups normal exuvia were extremely rare indicating molting and developmental abnormality . in some cases a few apparently normally developed copepodids could be detected.figure  <dig> 
phenotype of salmon lice offsprings obtained after the lsrxr rnai experiment. in the control group  normal developed nauplia ii  and copepodids  are found. at day nine the exuviae from nauplia ii  are found in large amounts. in the rnai groups development is disrupted, either by disrupted hatching , or the nauplia are deformed . we also observed nauplia arrested in their development to copepodids . in a very few cases apparently normal looking copepodids  or exuvia  were observed. the bar in the upper right corner is  <dig>  mm long.



to further assess the effects lsrxr rnai has in adult female lice we sectioned lice to identify histological abnormalities. two typical lice from the two types of rnai lice were selected, type i representing female lice with a filled genital segment that produced eggs which hatched but produced larvae that developed poorly, and type ii representing female lice with a relatively empty genital segment that produced eggs which did not hatch. the histological examination of the type i louse revealed less organized yolk granules in the maturing oocytes in the genital segment and indications of fewer oogonia in the ovary . in the type ii louse the histological examination revealed more severe changes in the ovarium and the maturing oocytes in the genital segment. no oogonia could be observed in the ovarium follicles  and the follicular substance was less dense and filled with vacuoles. the oocytes present in the genital segment were highly atypical and irregularly shaped . the typical vitellin crystals  <cit>  as seen in figure 6a <dig> could not been observed.figure  <dig> 
histological assessment of lsrxr rnai. hes  stained section  through oocytes  and ovary  of control lice  and lsrxr rnai  .  shows the section through a very mature louse  with relatively low rnai effect  while  shows a section through a strongly effected louse . note the less organized oocytes with no distinct vitellin crystals and the ovary did not contain any oogonia. the whole lice corresponding to sections in each row are shown in  .



egg laying cycle
under the given conditions, it takes about nine days for the oocytes to mature inside the genital segment and to be extruded as a new pair of egg strings. as expected the harvested female lice were not synchronous in their egg laying cycle which is visible as differences in the thickness of the immature oocytes. a more precise measure is how many days it takes for the previous egg string pair to hatch, as egg strings are fertilized when they are extruded from the female lice and they are attached to the lice until hatching. by incubating the egg strings from lice to be analyzed, the time to hatching can be used as a measure for how mature the new oocytes in the genital segment of a female louse are. the shorter the time to hatching, the more mature the oocytes are. for further explanation see additional file 3: figure s <dig> 

for the control group, the number of days to hatching for the harvested egg strings was five, six, seven, or eight days. in the rnai group there was more diversity regarding the egg laying cycle and lice were divided into four different groups, depending on hatching time after harvest .

functional assessment of lsrxr by microarray analysis
to further gain information about function to lsrxr we conducted a microarray experiment using a 44k oligo-based microarray where we compared lice injected with dsrna from lsrxr  and lice injected with dsrna from a control gen . the 44k agilent salmon louse oligo-microarray represents approximately  <dig> different transcripts obtained from ests generated from a wide diversity of cdna libraries . correspondence analysis  clearly demonstrated that the control group and the lsrxr rnai group have distinct transcriptomes . as expected, rxr is down regulated in the rnai lice. the oligos representing lsrxr  are strictly correlated to the control lice. the transcriptomes from the two different dsrna fragments for lsrxr were completely overlapping. furthermore, we could not identify any differences in transcription pattern related to egg maturation for the included lice . in general, gene expression is more uniform in the control group than in the rnai group  probably reflecting the variation in down regulation.table  <dig> 
libraries sequenced to yield the estss used to design the 44k oligo array



name
type
stage
sex
# est
% of all est

sb*

fb*

me*

l1t

pu*

lf

lpu/lpa

cc

na

ha*

lno

lnc

nlg
libraries marked with * were used on a former cdna array.  <cit> .
correspondence analysis plot. spots represent individual oligos and vectors represents sample group means. the red spots are the oligos created from the lsrxr sequence. genes represented by oligos located near the plot origin are poorly correlated with any of the sampled groups. oligos located further from the origin are stronger expressed in samples located in same direction and lower expressed in samples located in opposite direction. the distribution of single samples  is shown in the color of the group  the sample belongs to. single samples are grouped according to the fragment injected: fragment one , fragment two , control  and according to position in the reproductive cycle. the control group is divided into co <dig> to co <dig> representing lice with eggs that hatched after five, six, seven, eight days after harvesting respectively. fr1/fr <dig> a, b, c representing lice injected with fragment one or two respectively hatching early  , late  , or did not hatch . for further explanation of the position in egg laying cycle see additional file 3: figure s <dig> 



based on the microarray analysis lsrxr was down regulated  <dig>  times for fragment  <dig>  and  <dig>  times for fragment  <dig> . the knock-down of lsrxr was further confirmed by q-pcr and showed a down regulation of  <dig>  times for fragment  <dig>  and  <dig>  times for fragment  <dig>  . to further validate our microarray data we conducted q-pcr on six regulated genes . these data confirmed the results from the microarray data . expression of these six genes was also shown in other developmental stages to illustrate the effect of down- or up regulation compared to other developmental stages.

differentially expressed genes identified by significance analysis of microarrays 
we conducted a sam analysis of the data derived from microarray analysis to identify differentially expressed genes between the lsrxr rnai and the control group. a total of  <dig> genes were significantly down regulated and  <dig> genes up regulated upon knock-down of lsrxr .

of all  <dig> different transcripts on our salmon louse array only 54% have a hit in uniref and a large proportion of these hits give “unknown functions”, resulting in only 16% with a go annotation. in our two sets of up- or down regulated genes about 60% have a hit in uniref  and about 20% have a go annotation . nevertheless there is a clear enrichment of particular go-groups in the two sets of up- or down regulated transcripts . in the set of down regulated genes, lipid metabolism and lipid transport is a hallmark . in addition, yolk proteins are strongly down regulated . many metabolic processes  were among the up regulated genes and they created a distinct signature. in particular many transcripts encoding ribosomal proteins and cuticle related transcript were up regulated .

since a large number of the regulated transcripts on the microarray have no or poor annotation we conducted an analysis where origin of the probe sequences were considered . if the probes of interest are from one specific library  this may give indications towards function. although many of the regulated transcripts originated from early developmental stages  a clear difference was observed between the up and down regulated gene sets. the down regulated gene set was dominated by transcripts from the copepodid cdna library  and mature adult females . for the up regulated genes an increased frequency of transcripts originating from preadults  was evident. this is also seen when comparing only those transcripts originating from one library only .figure  <dig> 
origin of ests from different libraries . 32% of the ests from the up regulated genes or 36% of the ests from the down regulated genes originated from the normalized library lno, made from different developmental stages. in  origin of ests from other libraries than lno is shown; 1a: early developmental stages; 2a: early developmental stages plus mature adult female; 3a: mature adult female; 4a: young and adult forms with males; 5a: young and adult forms, no male; 6a: immature adult female; 7a: adult female ; 8a: adult . the largest share is the early developmental stages . the early developmental stages are split up in . 1b: copepodid; 2b: egg, copepodid; 3b: copepodid, immature adult female; 4b: preadult; 5b: preadult, immature adult female; 6b: egg, immature adult female; 7b: different young developmental stages.



lsrxr regulates egg yolk protein transcription
knock-down of lsrxr has a strong effect on transcription of the main egg yolk proteins and its regulators in the salmon louse. all three main egg yolk proteins  are strongly down regulated in the present study and this was confirmed by q-pcr . a carboxypeptidase, similar to vitellogenic carboxypeptidase  in mosquitoes  <cit>  is also strongly down regulated in the present study. in insects gata transcription factors are regulators of vitellogenin transcription and it has been shown that the vg-genes have binding sites for gata factors . a putative gata factor is up regulated in the present study pointing towards inhibition/down regulation of vg-transcription. in the soft tick  the vitellogenin gene contains putative binding sites for gata and the transcription factor tramtrack  <cit> . a putative tramtrack is  <dig>  times up regulated in the present study. lysosomes have been shown to be involved in vitellogenin regulation. in the mosquito fat body activity of some lysosomal enzymes are responsible for the termination of vitellogenin secretion by degrading organelles involved in the biosynthesis and secretion of vitellogenin  <cit> . in the present study genes with go annotation lysosomes were in general up regulated . a transcript with significant similarity to neuroparsin was strongly up regulated  after lsrxr knock-down . in desert locust  knock down of neuroparsin resulted in increased vg production  <cit> .

growth related processes are up regulated upon knocking-down of lsrxr
cuticle proteins are up regulated
one of the signatures in the microarray assessment was a relatively large number of up regulated putative cuticle proteins. a total of  <dig> putative cuticle proteins were up regulated in female lice after knock-down of lsrxr . nine of these were strongly up regulated . the transcription pattern for two of these  was confirmed by q-pcr . we also examined the transcription level of these two transcripts in several other developmental stages and for cl333contig <dig> the transcription levels are high in most developmental stages compared to adult female lice receiving ds lsrxr rna . furthermore, three chitin metabolism proteins are also up regulated. one transcript with hit to the barnacle cypris larva-specific gene bcs- <dig>  a structural constituent of cuticle, is down regulated. in barnacle this is a gene expressed early after hatching  <cit> . another structural protein, the collagen α- <dig> chain precursor isoform  <dig> transcript is up regulated .

metabolic processes are up regulated
based on go annotation, metabolic processes are overrepresented among the up regulated transcripts and  <dig> up regulated transcripts are involved in metabolism  or glycolysis/gluconeogenesis.

some peptidases are up regulated
a range of trypsin-like peptidases have been identified in l. salmonis previously  is regulated in the present study. lstryp <dig>  which is transcribed in the intestine, is down regulated  in the present study. however, several other peptidases including serine peptidases are regulated as a result of knocking-down lsrxr. seven of these peptidases are up regulated whereas  <dig> are down regulated. among the strongly down regulated is a carboxypeptidase resembling vitellogenic carboxypeptidase from mosquito . in addition, two transcripts resembling serine type endopeptidase inhibitors are up regulated.

early developmental processes are up regulated upon lsrxr knock-down
many genes involved in development were up regulated in the present study . genes involved in neuronal development are up regulated and among them the transcription factor tramtrack p <dig>  the integrin beta-ps and the hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase  <dig>  nogo-b is a negative regulator of axon-axon adhesion and growth and this gene is weakly down regulated. a cofilin/actin-depolymerizing factor homolog, involved in many developmental processes  is up regulated as well.

genes for regulating various signaling pathways involved in developmental processes are up regulated in the present study. the tumor suppressor protein “lethal  giant larvae” is required for the regulation of notch, a signal protein preventing differentiation which is involved in many developmental processes in drosophila, is up regulated. “moesin/ezrin/radixin”, a regulator of the hippo/swh signaling pathway, restricting proliferation and promoting apoptosis is down regulated. in addition, “sprouty-related evh <dig> domain containing 2” is up regulated and this protein is important for multicellular organismal development by inhibiting growth-factor-mediated activation of map kinase.

several genes involved in regulation of embryonic polarity are regulated as a result of lsrxr rnai. a transcript similar to “longitudinal lacking protein” is up regulated. this protein together with transcription factor gaga are required for maintaining the repressed state of target genes including the homeotic genes sex combs reduced and ultrabithorax . however, in the present study ultrabithorax is not clearly regulated due to lsrxr rnai . in addition, a short gastrulation homologue is up regulated, which is involved in the zygotic determination of anterior/posterior axis. furthermore, twinstar known for affecting several different development processes like establishment of planar polarity and female gonad development is up regulated. the transmembrane protein nessy is a highly conserved gene and is controlled by hox genes during drosophila embryogenesis. a homologue in l. salmonis is strongly down regulated in the lsrxr rnai-lice.

several cellular and molecular processes are affected by lsrxr knock-down
ribosomal proteins are up regulated
knocking-down the lsrxr by means of rnai affected a wide range of molecular and cellular processes. a hallmark was a relatively large number of transcripts encoding ribosomal proteins that were consistently up regulated. in our dataset  <dig> transcripts with significant hit to ribosomal proteins were up regulated  as a result of knock-down of lsrxr. in addition, nine transcripts for translation regulation proteins are two to three times up regulated . four spermine synthase transcripts are about  <dig> times up regulated. spermine, involved in nucleic acid packaging is found in ribosomes.

apoptosis inducer are down regulated
in the present experiment  <dig> of the regulated genes are involved in apoptosis . the six down regulated genes are mainly apoptosis inducer while the eight up regulated genes are  suppressors of apoptosis implying that apoptosis is restrained in the lsrxr rnai lice. an exception is the death inhibitor diap <dig>  which is known to be ecdysone regulated and repressed in drosophila at the onset of histolysis in larval salivary glands  <cit> . apoptosis is often induced through a caspase dependent pathway. one of the enzymes inducing apoptosis by this pathway, the apoptosis-inducing factor  <dig>  is down regulated while the two caspases  are not regulated.

fatty acid metabolism and transport is down regulated
among the down regulated transcripts a large number are associated with lipid/fatty acid metabolism and transport. furthermore, two prosaposin like transcripts, which are involved in lipid metabolism and transport are up regulated, but they probably act by isolating lipid substrate from the membrane, making them more accessible for degradation. a total of  <dig> transcripts involved in lipid metabolism and transport are down regulated . three of these are involved in lipid transport and five in fatty acid synthesis; among these is “elongation of very long chain fatty acids protein”  which is a cholesterol responding acetoacetyl-coa synthase. six others are involved in metabolism and among them the sterol regulatory element binding protein  <dig> involved in regulating the transcription of the ldl receptor gene which is a key regulatory element in the promoter of several genes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. several genes involved in steroid  synthesis or homeostasis are regulated in the present study .

two abc transporter are regulated
many atp-binding cassette  transporters and cytochrome p <dig>  are target genes of rxr. two putative abc transporters are among the regulated transcripts . one is strongly down regulated and this gene is involved in fatty acyl coa transport. the other abc transporter is up regulated and this transcript is a homologue to an abc transporter involved in export of anions and drugs from the cytoplasm.

genes involved in steroid biosynthesis are regulated
cyps are either involved in development  or in the metabolism of toxic compounds . of the eight different cyp which are regulated in the present study all except two are approximately four times up regulated. three of them belong to the cyp <dig> group which is involved in drug and steroid metabolism. the other one is shadow  with ecdysteroid c2-hydroxylase activity. in drosophila this enzyme is known for synthesizing ecdysone from 2-deoxyecdysone.

assessment of known ecdysteroid target genes
based on the preliminary genome assembly we identified and established q-pcr assays for several of the genes known to be involved in the ecdysteroid cascade. we assessed the mrna level of these genes in the lsrxr knock down lice in comparison to the control . of the included genes four of them were significantly down regulated in the lsrxr lice , see figure 9).figure  <dig> 
relative expression of genes not represented on the array in selected control-  and lsrxr knock-down-lice . controls are used as calibrators. confidence intervals  are shown as error bars. lsrxr is down-regulated about three times by rnai. gene expression of genes known to be involved in the ecdysteroid cascade in other arthropods are shown: salmon louse forms of e <dig>  63e, ecr, hr <dig>  hr <dig>  e <dig>  ftz-f <dig>  broad, as well as the lipase brummer, which is involved in the regulation of lipolysis in drosophila  <cit>  and the gap gene krueppel. genes significantly down-regulated  in the knock-down group are marked with *.



comparative transcriptomics
in a previous transcriptomic study on salmon lice  <cit>  gene regulation in immature and mature adult female lice was investigated. we examined the dataset from that study  <cit>  and found that ten of the regulated transcripts are also regulated after rnai knock-down of lsrxr . six of these genes were down regulated in this study while four were up regulated. a putative cellular retinoic acid binding protein  is among the up regulated transcripts. currently there are several sea lice sequences in genebank with high similarity to this regulated transcript. however, to our knowledge no functional studies have been carried out to rule out the function or whether they actually can bind retinoic acid.table  <dig> 
overview over clusters and singletons regulated both by lsrxr knock down and during maturation of adult females [
18
]



contig/singleton
regulation in adult female lice 
regulation in this knock-down study
annotation
lepeophtheirus salmonis clone ls <dig> hypothetical protein mrna, complete cds


arbeitman, et al.  <cit>  examined transcription of drosophila genes during the whole development cycle and identified genes expressed in different developmental stages. we compared the salmon louse genes to those identified by arbeitman, et al.  <cit>  with emphasis on reproduction and early development. we thus identified: early zygotic genes , female germ line genes , maternally rapidly degraded genes , male and female germ line genes , maternal rapidly reinduced genes , maternal core germ line genes , maternal gradual decline genes , genes changing during embryogenesis  and strict maternal genes . genes regulated in the present rnai study are found in additional file 4: table s9). most of these transcripts are only weakly regulated due to lsrxr rnai. an exception is lno <dig> with significant hit to the zinc ion binding; nucleic acid binding protein fbpp <dig> with unknown function found in their table  <dig> , which is over  <dig> times down regulated. lno <dig> has hit with a novel krab box containing protein from mus musculus. among the up regulated transcripts four ribosomal proteins and other proteins involved in translation are present.

discussion
in salmon lice, lsrxr plays a crucial role in female reproduction as knock-down by rnai resulted in close to zero viable offsprings. although the female lice produced and extruded egg strings these eggs were either unable to hatch or produced severely deformed moribund larvae . the lsrxr transcript levels were reduced about  <dig>  times and this reduction had significant effect on transcription levels on a wide range of genes in the female lice. it is evident that these altered transcription levels influences a range of molecular and biological processes in the female lice and the consequences can be seen far into the embryonic and larval stages. the broad significance lsrxr has on gene expression of many functional different genes in l. salmonis could clearly be seen from our microarray assessment.

lsrxr is a homologue of the insect nuclear receptor ultraspiracle
lsrxr belongs to the nuclear hormone receptor family. the putative full length protein sequence contain a highly conserved dna binding domain  and a well conserved ligand binding domain  in a typical context. our phylogenetic analysis place lsrxr in a group of arthropod nuclear hormone receptors . the conserved protein domain composition and the phylogenetic analysis strongly support that lsrxr is a homologue to the insect ultraspiracle  nuclear receptor. sequence analysis of the present l. salmonis rxr protein revealed a unique insertion of  <dig> asp residues not found in any other similar sequences deposited in genbank. these asp residues clearly influence the structure of the predicted protein, but the significance of this is unknown. in insects and other arthropods, an important function for usp is through interaction with ecr to mediate ecdysteroid signaling. in a draft assembly of the salmon louse genome, we identified a putative ecr. another partner for the drosophila usp is dhr <dig>  the homologue of the vertebrate nr4a  <cit> . a putative l. salmonis dhr <dig> homologue was also identified in the draft genome.

we identified five different lsrxr transcripts in our race experiments, which were identical in sequence but truncated resulting in transcripts differing in length . the cdna blot confirmed the presence of at least two distinct forms of lsrxr transcripts . the two major bands  identified in the cdna blot corresponds to lsrxra/b/c containing both dbd and lbd and a short form containing an incomplete or no dbd . our southern blot indicated only one copy of the lsrxr gene, and scrutinizing the draft l. salmonis genome assembly supports that lsrxr is a single copy gene. the lsrxr has two introns but the difference in transcript length was not related to alternative splicing. in other arthropods, rxr/usp can be present as different isoforms separated in time or space  e.g.  <cit> . in several species, multiple mrnas have been detected for rxr/usp. henrich, et al.  <cit>  found two different usp transcripts  in drosophila where the  <dig>  kb transcript is corresponding to the full length usp transcript. kapitskaya, et al.  <cit>  found four different usp transcripts in the mosquito . guo, et al.  <cit>  found a diversity of rxr-transcript in the ixodid tick . the function of most of these transcripts  is not known. our real time quantitative pcr analysis of different developmental stages showed that the shortest transcript  was equally abundant as the large forms . it is obvious that variants lacking the dbd are unable to bind to dna and act as a transcription regulator in that way, but it is possible that these lsrxr variants may modulate ligand levels by binding ligands. recently, montagne, et al.  <cit>  identified a dhr <dig> variant that lacked the dbd in drosophila and they showed that this particular variant was responsible for interaction with s6k.

of the included developmental stages, the highest level of lsrxr  transcription is seen in copepodids. there is a marked increase from naupli ii to copepodids and an equal decrease for the remaining developmental stages. this transcriptional pattern is not reflected in expression of ecr which exhibit equal levels in naupli ii and copepodids followed by a reduction in the remaining developmental stages.

lsrxr is regulating oogonia maintenance and yolk protein production
by knocking-down lsrxr in reproducing female lice effects can be seen directly in the female itself but also indirectly by affecting production of maternally components for incorporation in the oocytes. in addition, it is possible that knock-down could affect ligand levels  incorporated into the oocytes. this means that a range of possible effects could be the consequence of knocking-down lsrxr in reproducing female lice.

we could not discover any macroscopic abnormality or increased mortality in the female lice receiving dsrna from lsrxr during the experimental period. however, histological examination revealed some significant effects at the cellular level both in the ovary and in the oocytes present in the genital segment. in the most severe case the ovarium did not contain any normal oogonia at all . the consequence of this would be no ovulating oogonia and a complete interruption of the egg production. however, most lice produced and extruded fertilized eggs and the reason for this may be that low levels of lsrxr were present during the production of the first egg batches. in drosophila, ecr is required for normal oogenesis  <cit>  and ecr and usp are expressed in nurse and follicle cells throughout oogenesis  <cit> . furthermore, it has been shown in drosophila that oogenesis in ecr mutants are deficient  <cit>  resulting in abnormal egg chambers and loss of vitellogenic egg stages. the present study shows that usp is necessary for oogenesis as well.

the histological examination revealed limited egg yolk deposition in the maturing oocytes . the microarray and subsequent q-pcr analysis confirmed a large reduction in the mrna levels of the three major salmon louse yolk proteins, i.e. lsvit <dig> and lsvit <dig>  and lsyap . it is common that vitellogenins like the lsvit <dig> and lsvit <dig> have binding sites for steroid hormone receptors in the gene promoter  and the present study support that these two l. salmonis vitellogenins and lsyap are under control of lsrxr. lsyap is also a major yolk protein in the salmon louse. the strongly reduced levels of yolk proteins can be a major factor explaining the poor development and survival of eggs produced by female lice receiving dsrna treatment. however, other factors are needed to explain the reduced number of eggs produced by the lice when lsrxr was knocked-down.

there are no detailed studies on regulation of vg-transcription in any copepods so far but many other arthropods have been studied. female reproduction is energetically expensive and access to amino acids and other building blocks is necessary for production and maturation of gametes. this means that nutritional signaling is crucial in addition to hormone regulation . in a. aegypti, vg-transcription is regulated through nutrients  and e <dig>  the nutrient based signaling is signaled through tor whereas e <dig> mediated signals are transmitted through ecr/usp. in a. aegypti at least two gata factors are involved in mediating the signal where one act as a repressor  <cit>  and one as an activator  <cit> . translation of the latter is regulated by the tor signaling pathway following a blood meal  <cit> .in the present study tor and the s <dig> kinase are unregulated but one gata-factor was up regulated pointing towards an inhibitory effect for this particular transcription factor on vitellogenin production. in locusts neuroparsin inhibits vitellogenesis  <cit> . in the present study a neuroparsin homologue is strongly up regulated  in the lsrxr rnai lice. neuroparsin is a multifunctional neuro hormone which is known to inhibit the effects of juvenile hormone in locust and to induce an increase in hemolymph lipid and trehalose levels. hence, it is possible that the strong induction of neuroparsin in the salmon louse could be involved in down regulating yolk protein synthesis. however, further studies are required to rule out the function of neuroparsin and other potential transcription regulators for vitellogenesis in the salmon louse.

although the main impression is that vg synthesis is under direct control of ecdysteroids  in athropods exceptions are known. in the beetle t. castanneum jh induce vg synthesis but not 20e  <cit> . in t. castanneum vitellogenesis is only indirectly regulated by 20e by regulation of ovary growth and oocyte maturation  <cit>  and knock-down of ecr or usp resulted in disruption of egg development  <cit> . this is similar to cockroach where vitellogenesis is jh dependent and independent of e <dig>  <cit> . furthermore, in honeybee down regulation of usp did not influence vg expression  <cit>  and in crayfish  <cit>  vitellogenins were not classified as ecdysteroid responsive.

it is well known that a wide diversity of mrnas are deposited into oocytes during maturation. some of these may be translated in the oocytes or the mature eggs prior to fertilization but a significant proportion are activated and utilized after fertilization. in particular, the period between fertilization and the onset of zygotic transcription, maternal provided mrna and/or proteins are essential for proper early development. our microarray contains  <dig> strictly maternal transcripts identified in drosophila  <cit> . of these two are down regulated and three are up regulated as a result of knocking-down lsrxr . this altered regulation may result in early developmental abnormalities after fertilization prior to the onset of zygotic transcription. from the females that produced eggs that hatched, a range of different phenotypes were evident and it is very difficult to point to abnormalities that could be explained by changed levels of a single transcript. most likely the deformation observed is a combination of altered levels of several different transcripts. in addition, the phenotypes of the developing larvae will also be influenced by altered levels of maternally provided proteins, other than the yolk proteins.

oro, et al.  <cit>  showed that usp has multiple functions throughout the life cycle of drosophila. in adult female drosophila usp function is crucial in both germline as well as somatic tissues. lsrxr is transcribed in the ovarium and transcripts are present in the lumen of the ovarium follicles indicating a function in ovarian maintenance comparable to drosophila. usp-transcripts are also present in oocytes and mature eggs. the maternal derived usp mrna in drosophila is required for production of cuticle in late embryos  <cit> . our rnai results points to similar function as hatching larvae were strongly deformed indicating a dysfunction in the exoskeleton.

lsrxr is a regulator of cuticle production
the heterodimeric nuclear receptor consisting of ecr and usp in insects was originally shown to be key players for molting  <cit> . increase in e <dig> levels precedes molting and the increased hormone level is mediated through the ecr-usp complex by binding directly to promoter of target genes, which includes several early and late response genes. molting is a complex process where the net result is a new cuticle that will allow the animal to grow. a large number of cuticle genes have been identified in different arthropods. a hallmark in the present study was a large number of putative cuticle proteins being up regulated after knocking-down of lsrxr. egg producing adult female lice do not grow post molting maturation  and increased levels of cuticle proteins is unexpected. hence, this points to induction of cuticle protein production when steroid hormone levels decrease. this agrees with results from drosophila studies using usp mutants under pupuration. instead of forming a pupa, usp mutant deposits a supernumerary cuticle similar to larval cuticle rather than a pupal cuticle  <cit> . another characteristic for these usp mutants is that the programmed cell death in larval midgut and the following adult midgut proliferation was disrupted. in our experiment many anti apoptosis genes were up regulated and apoptosis genes were down regulated in the lsrxr rnai lice.

CONCLUSIONS
the lsrxr has a critical function during reproduction in female salmon louse. the sequence analysis revealed unique structural features due to insertion of  <dig> asp residues in the t-box area and the significance of these additional residues should be elucidated in the future. five different lsrxr transcripts different in length and domain composition were identified. the two shortest transcripts had incomplete or lacked the entire dbd. the shortest form showed highest abundance during our q-pcr assessment. our phylogenetic assessment put lsrxr in a group with usp and similar receptors from insects and not with the malacostracans. to further characterize lsrxr we knocked down lsrxr transcript levels by rnai in adult female lice. this resulted in strong effects on female reproduction giving a strong reduction or complete stop in egg production. for those lice that produced eggs that were fertilized, close to zero viable larvae were evident. histological examination of some of these female lice revealed significant effects in the ovary and the maturing oocytes. in the most severe case no oogonia was present in the ovary which would result in no egg-production. for those lice that produced and laid eggs the vitellin crystals were absent or strongly irregular. our microarray assessment showed that by knocking-down lsrxr resulted in large effects on transcription on a diversity of genes. a main impression is that reproduction and lipid metabolism is down-regulated whereas growth related processes are up regulated. we show that lsrxr is crucial for both oogonia production and for providing sufficient building blocks for the oocytes both in terms of mrna and proteins. the significant effects of knocking down lsrxr clearly makes this a target for salmon louse control. chemicals interacting with the function of lsrxr are likely to give similar strong effects that we observed in the rnai experiment. in addition, it is possible that some of the downstream regulated genes could serve as potential targets for lice control.

