BACKGROUND
emphysema affects nearly  <dig> million people and is responsible for nearly  <dig>  deaths per year in the united states  <cit> . pulmonary parenchymal disease may lead to increased pulmonary vascular resistance and elevated pulmonary arterial pressures. the development of pulmonary hypertension and rvh are markers of increased mortality in emphysema  <cit> . the problem of cor pulmonale is quite important since in the united states approximately 20% of hospital admissions for heart failure are caused by right heart failure. however, the precise changes in pulmonary hemodynamics, right ventricular structure and function in emphysema, as well as the underlying cell signaling pathways activated in this condition, remain unknown. we investigated these parameters using a hamster model in which emphysema is produced by intratracheal administration of elastase. this causes a reproducible and progressive form of bulbous emphysema characterized by increased lung volume and pulmonary parenchymal pathology similar to that of humans with emphysema  <cit> .

even though many studies have identified a critical role for many protein kinase c isoforms  and extracellular regulated kinase  1/ <dig> in the pathogenesis of left ventricular hypertrophy, very few studies have examined these kinases in rvh. it has been previously reported that pkc α, βi, and δ activation is increased in rvh due to pulmonary artery constriction <cit> , and pkc α and δ activation increased during rvh induced by volume overload <cit> . in contrast, there have been no studies to our knowledge regarding the role of erk1/ <dig> during rvh.

given the numerous human and animal studies identifying pkc and erk1/ <dig> as critical mediators of left ventricular hypertrophy  <cit> , and the aforementioned studies, we hypothesized that erk1/ <dig> and differential pkc isoforms would be activated in rvh secondary to emphysema. the progression of changes in right ventricular size and function over time using a noninvasive ultrasound approach, as well as pulmonary hemodynamics were also determined. we report here that hamsters developed moderate, well-compensated rvh characterized by an absence of fibrosis, normal contractility, and mildly increased pulmonary pressure after nine months with emphysema. furthermore, hamsters with emphysema had marked translocation of pkc βi and pkc ε to membranous cell fractions, along with increased erk 1/ <dig> phosphorylation.

RESULTS
total heart weights and rv weights were greater in emp animals than con, with the increased total heart weight in emp being entirely due to the increase in rv mass . myocyte cross sectional area was greater in emp right ventricles compared to controls   as was myocyte perimeter length . the presence of lung pathology and air trapping in the emp animals was evidenced by a 75% increase in lung volume .

echocardiographic assessment documented progressive right ventricular enlargement over time in the emp hamsters, with significantly greater right ventricular internal dimension  vs. con after nine months of emphysema . histological examination of heart cross sections showed no differences in fibrosis in either right or left ventricles of emp hamsters compared to con .

there was a significant correlation  between the rvid and lung volume measured . only trivial amounts of tricuspid valve regurgitation were found in any hamster at any time point and there was no detectable pulmonary insufficiency. thus, rv and pulmonary artery pressures could not be estimated from the noninvasive studies. right ventricular outflow tract  doppler profiles were adequate for analysis in all animals. rvot acceleration time progressively shortened in the emp animals and was significantly shorter compared to the con after nine months . there was an inverse correlation between the rvotat and rvid  at nine months .

there was a mild, but statistically significant increase in right ventricular systolic pressure  after nine months of emphysema . there was a strong positive correlation  between rvsp and rvid . emp hamsters also had a slightly greater +dp/dt and similar -dp/dt compared to the con group, implying a mostly normal pattern of rv contraction & relaxation .

no differences were detected in translocation of pkc isoforms α and βii between emp and con hamsters, as evidenced by the unchanged membrane-to-cytosol ratio . there was a shift in distribution of pkc βi to membrane fractions resulting in an increase in translocation . there was also a 95% increase in translocation of pkc ε in the rv of emp hamsters . the increase in pkc ε translocation was characterized by unchanged cytosolic fractions in coordination with a 110% increase in pkc ε found in the membrane fraction . the marked increase in membrane levels of pkc ε indicates that protein expression of ε was also increased, with a greater proportion of that isoform being distributed in the membrane fractions. the average translocation index  was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for con and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for emp animals. levels of phosphorylated pkc ε from whole rv homogenates were quite variable, but means were similar between con and emp animals . increased levels of pkc ε membrane translocation, however, suggest that more of the phosphorylated pkc ε may be in the membrane fraction of emp hamsters rather than the cytosol. pkc βi phosphorylation was not determined in this study since antibodies specific for phosphorylated pkc βi are not commercially available.

rv homogenates from emp hamsters had increased phospho-erk1/ <dig> levels, resulting in a 34% increase in the ratio of phospho erk1/ <dig> to erk1/ <dig> . total jnk levels were similar between con and emp groups . phospho-jnk was not detected in rv homogenates from either con or emp hamsters. this result most likely reflects insensitivity of the antibody used against hamster phospho-jnk and should not be taken as evidence that jnk is unimportant in the development of rvh.

discussion
despite the morbidity and mortality, associated with right heart failure, the pathogenesis of right ventricular hypertrophy has been studied much less than left ventricular disease. evidence from clinical observations and animal studies suggest that the right ventricle does not respond to stress in precisely the same fashion as the left ventricle. most patients with l-transposition of the great arteries, a condition in which the anatomic right ventricle serves as the systemic ventricle from birth, eventually develop severe rv failure. this usually occurs before the age of  <dig>  <cit> . thus, clinical evidence suggests that the genetic program of the right ventricle is not designed to face an increased work load even when the adaptation is very gradual. several animal studies also show different responses of the right and left ventricles to pressure overload  <cit> .

the most commonly studied small animal model of right heart failure is the monocrotaline treated rat. monocrotaline injection produces severe pulmonary hypertension over a period of several weeks  <cit> . the elastase treated hamster may be more closely related to clinical features of rvh secondary to emphysema than other models using pulmonary hypertension/overload for two reasons. first, the lung injury develops much more slowly with different degrees of hypoxia leading to varying levels of pulmonary artery constriction. this is substantiated by only modest echocardiographic changes  found in this study in the first six months after elastase treatment . second, the degree of pulmonary hypertension is less severe than that which is usually seen after monocrotaline injection where pulmonary pressure often exceeds  <dig> mmhg within six weeks  <cit> . clinically, most patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease such as emphysema have mild or moderate pulmonary hypertension at rest  <cit> , perhaps more similar to the mild increases in rv systolic pressure found in emp animals in the present study. there have been several hypotheses to explain the development of pulmonary hypertension in the setting of emphysema, with hypoxic vasoconstriction being the most supported mechanism  <cit> . other factors such as in situ thrombosis and polycythemia may play a role as well  <cit> .

in the present study rv from the emp animals had slightly increased +dp/dt, normal -dp/dt, and lack of fibrosis in histological sections, together indicating presence of compensated rvh. despite these changes, we were unable to detect anything more than trivial degrees of tricuspid regurgitation in the emp hamsters. interestingly, even in the absence of tricuspid regurgitation, the rvot acceleration time showed an inverse correlation with rv size. based on these data it seems likely rvot doppler spectra may be a useful surrogate marker for determining the presence of early or mild forms of pulmonary hypertension in the absence of tricuspic valve regurgitation.

this is the first study to demonstrate pkc βi, pkc ε and erk1/ <dig> activation in rvh secondary to emphysema. in total we evaluated pkc α, βi, βii, δ, and ε in this study as these isoforms have all been implicated in the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy and ventricular dysfunction in cell culture, insult driven, and transgenic animal models <cit> . the unchanged levels of cytosolic pkc ε coupled with a marked increase in membrane pck ε indicate that expression levels were upregulated in emp. thus, it appears right ventricular pkc ε response to emphysema is more complex than a simple re-distribution of basal levels, and involves greater production of pkc ε protein. with specific regard to pkc ε, several lines of evidence support a role for pkc ε in the development of cardiac hypertrophy as reviewed by sabri et al.  <cit> . recent studies using transgenic mice with cardiac specific overexpression of pkc ε now suggest that low to moderate pkc ε activation, characterized by a  <dig> fold increase in translocation  <cit>  or 228% increase in pkc activity  <cit>  result in physiological cardiac hypertrophy with normal cardiac function. in contrast, a high degree of pkc ε activation, characterized by a  <dig> fold increase in translocation  <cit>  or 452% increase in activity  <cit>  result in pathological hypertrophy characterized by poor contractility and heart failure. furthermore, it has also been shown that moderate activation of pkc ε in vivo by it's rack  increases translocation of pkc ε by only 20% and results in mild compensated hypertrophy  <cit> . it is thought that in the case of excessive pkc ε activation, heart failure is mediated by pkc ε induced cross activation of pkc βii, which has been previously demonstrated to cause a heart failure phenotype in transgenic mice  <cit> . the present study found a 95% increase in pkc ε translocation, but no increase in pkc βii in the rv of emp hamsters. this appears to fall in to the range of "moderate" levels of pkc ε translocation that have been associated with compensated/physiological hypertrophy in the aforementioned studies. in contrast with our results, another study using rats subjected to pulmonary artery constriction for  <dig> weeks found greater membrane levels of pkc α and δ, but no change in pkcε  <cit> . it is possible that greater rv systolic pressure after pulmonary constriction  resulted in differential activation of pkc isoforms. other differences that may have contributed to these contrasting results include the duration of the study , the degree of rvh developed , and the species studied.

an analysis of total pkc ε phosphorylation in whole rv homogenates found similar levels in both emp and con hamsters, however, these samples also demonstrated significant variation in phosphorylation state among individual hamsters. this may be due to the phospho specific pkc ε antibody used, which was derived against a human epitope, and may have had reduced specificity against the hamster protein. we used an antibody that recognized pkc ε phosphorylated at ser  <dig>  an amino acid in the c-terminal hydrophobic motif. ser  <dig> is autophosphorylated by pkc ε itself following pdk- <dig> dependent phosphorylation of thr  <dig> <cit> . pkc ε phosphorylated at this site is recognized as mature and catalytically active <cit> .

previous studies using neonatal myocytes, animals models, and transgenic mice indicate that pkc β isoforms, particularly βii, also are key mediators in the pathophysiology of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure  <cit> . while there are no transgenic models that specifically implicate pkc βi in pathogenesis of hypertrophy, other studies have found activation to be present during pressure overload hypertrophy in vivo  <cit> . translocation of pkc βi may also be clinically relevant since increased activity in pkc β  has been reported by bowling et al. in failing human hearts  <cit> . our data is partially consistent with these finding as we found a significant increase in translocation of pkc βi, but no changes in pkc βii in hypertrophied rv of emp hamsters. since previous studies using transgenic mice indicate that pkc βii appears to produce a heart failure phenotype  <cit> , we speculate that the lack of pkc βii translocation in this study may due to the compensated nature of the hypertrophied right ventricle at the time of analysis. taken together, our data on pkc translocation suggest that future studies using pharmacological agents that can selectively inhibit pkc isoforms will help confirm a specific role for pkc in this form of rvh, and give insight into possible therapeutic interventions to limit the progression of rvh secondary to emphysema.

levels of phospho erk1/ <dig> were 22% greater, along with a 34% increase in phospho erk:total erk in emp compared to con. these are mild increases compared to other in vivo studies using pressure overload imposed upon the left ventricle  <cit> . the importance of erk signaling has been established in the hypertrophic response with recent evidence supporting a role for adaptive hypertrophy and survival as opposed to heart failure  <cit> . given that previous studies have reported more vigorous erk activation in response to pressure overload, it is difficult to determine the true physiological relevance of our erk data with regards to the pathogenesis of right ventricular hypertrophy. however, it is possible that the degree of erk activation may fluctuate over time as hypertrophy develops and progresses. however, a potential limitation in our phospho pkc ε and erk1/ <dig> analyses is that whole tissue homogenates were used for experiments. thus we cannot assess the contribution from the non muscle fraction where activation of egf receptor and receptor tyrosine kinases may be operative. another limitation is the analysis of signal kinases after the establishment of rvh. while these data correlate pkc βi and ε translocation, and ekr1/ <dig> activation with rvh, they do not confirm these signal kinases in mediating development rvh.

CONCLUSIONS
this study underscores the integrated nature of the cardio-pulmonary system such that experimentally induced lung disease significantly impacted cardiac physiology. to the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first to have identified activation of pkc and erk/ <dig> in rvh secondary to emphysema, and to describe the progressive nature of alterations in the right ventricle during progression of emphysema. taken in context of previous studies, these data support the hypothesis that pkc and erk may play an important role in the pathophysiology of rvh secondary to emphysema. it is also evident that after nine months of emphysema in this model, the rv is in a compensated pattern of hypertrophy with preserved systolic function. overall, we believe that our data regarding right ventricular structure and function in this model of chronic parenchymal lung disease with mild rv pressure overload complement data from other studies of acute severe pulmonary hypertension induced with monocrotaline. additional studies determining status of pkc and erk immediately prior to the development of rvh in this model would help further define their relevance as critical mediators of rvh secondary to emphysema. data from the present study, as well as future studies, may be useful to identify new diagnostic and treatment paradigms for right ventricular overload.

