BACKGROUND
cryptococcus neoformans is an encapsulated facultative intracellular pathogen and is the etiologic agent of human cryptococcosis. the interaction of cn with alveolar macrophages is vital for containing the infection  <cit> , however, cn overcomes this initial host defense barrier using a unique pathogenic strategy involving intracellular replication and cytoplasmic accumulation of polysaccharide-containing vesicles, leading to the formation of spacious phagosomes where multiple cryptococcal cells are present  <cit> . continued intracellular replication eventually leads to lysis of the host macrophage or to extrusion of the cryptococcal phagosome  <cit> . the cn intracellular pathogenic strategy in macrophages and amoeba is similar, suggesting that the unique mechanism used by this fungus originated for survival strategy against environmental phagocytic predators  <cit> . macrophages are known to fuse with each other  <cit>  and this process of cell-cell fusion has been previously documented and been implicated in host viral spread with viruses such as hiv and vaccinia virus where the host-cell actin plays a crucial role in mediating cell to cell transfer  <cit> . in light of the recent findings reported in our lab and elsewhere, demonstrating extrusion of cn from macrophages  <cit> , in this study we report that under certain conditions, subsequent to phagocytosis, cn can exit the infected macrophage, and without exposing itself to the extracellular milieu it can immediately enter the cytoplasm of an uninfected macrophage, thus allowing cn to be passed from one macrophage to another in an apparently actin-mediated process. this mechanism of pathogen spreading has not been previously documented with yeast cells thus suggesting a novel mechanism for dissemination by cn. in addition, extrusion of a high number of cn cells was followed by the formation of a massive vacuole, implying that macrophages are potentially damaged by their interaction with cn. these phenomena provide additional documentation for the complexity of cn interactions with macrophages.

RESULTS
all cn strains were efficiently internalized  and replicated intracellularly unless heat-killed. following phagocytosis, and using time-lapse microscopy we witnessed an infrequent  but previously unknown event where an infected macrophage transferred a cryptococcal cell to another macrophage . since this event was observed with both macrophage-like cells and primary murine macrophages, we decided to continue the studies in macrophage-like cells. this event was observed with all cn strains used and when using 18b <dig> as the opsonin, but was not observed with hk cn, beads or with macrophage-like cells treated with the actin-depolymerizing agent, cytochalasin d. in addition, the data shows the uninfected cells approaching the infected cell, fusing with it and acquiring the cn cell from the infected cell , . this transfer was often followed by the extrusion of the transferred cryptococcal cell.

the phenomenon of cell to cell transfer of cn appeared to be dependent on the actin cytoskeleton since the uninfected macrophages generated cytoplasmic projections toward the infected cell that were not evident when macrophages were incubated with cytochalasin d. using confocal microscopy to generate 3d images, we have observed that macrophages that contained cn could fuse with one another, and when this occurred the cn cell was surrounded by actin rich regions from both fusing macrophages .

in addition to cell-to-cell transfer of cn cells, we witnessed another striking consequence to phagosome extrusion that involved the formation of a massive vacuole that ranged in sizes up to 10– <dig> μm within the macrophage-like cells that extruded the cn cells . this event was not observed in uninfected macrophages or in macrophages where complement mediated phagocytosis of cn cells or phagocytosis of beads  had occurred. massive vacuole formation generally occurred after complete extrusion of a high number of cn cells ''.

discussion
cell-to-cell spread of intracellular pathogens is known to occur with viruses and bacteria such as hiv and shigella spp., respectively  <cit> . among the fungi, cell-to-cell spread could potentially occur when ingested cells form hyphae that protrude into neighboring cells, in a phenomenon that is associated with damage to both the donor and the host cell, although it is uncertain whether this has been described experimentally. furthermore, we are not aware of any previous reports of cell-to-cell spread of yeast cells. cell-to-cell spread is an important cellular pathogenic strategy because it allows cellular infection directly from the intracellular space and thus avoids exposure of the microbe to antimicrobial compounds in the extracellular space such as specific antibody and complement. cell-to-cell spread can also protect microbes against certain antimicrobial drugs that have limited penetration into cells.

cell-to-cell spread of c. neoformans was a relatively rare event. the phenomenon was observed with murine macrophages and macrophage-like cells under in vitro conditions, thus caution is warranted when extrapolating the relevance and importance of this phenomenon to in vivo situations. nevertheless, the fact that it was observed provides the important precedent that cell-to-cell spread of yeast cells can occur. in this regard we note that in viral and bacterial systems cell-to-cell spread has also been documented only in vitro, yet is assumed to be possible in vivo.

c. neoformans cell-to-cell spread required contact between macrophage cells. the likely involvement of actin in this process was inferred by the observation that cell-to-cell transfer required the accepting cell to make contact with the donor cell through cytoplasmic projections that are abolished by the actin inhibitor cytochalasin d, in addition to confocal images shown in the results demonstrating actin rich regions from both fusing macrophages surrounding the cryptococcal cell. although the mechanism for cell-to-cell transfer is unknown we note that cell membranes of infected cells appeared to be modified as evidenced by the extrusion of cryptococcal vacuoles with survival of the host cell and occasional cell-to-cell fusion events  <cit> . hence, cell-to-cell transfer of c. neoformans may require microbial modification of the donor cell membrane followed by contact with an uninfected cell to create cell-to-cell interactions propitious for yeast transfer. this novel observation of cn transfer from cell-to-cell raises the possibility that a similar mechanism could promote the dissemination of cn during infection. for example, it is conceivable that cell-to-cell spread contributes to cn dissemination in the cns after crossing the blood-brain barrier. in addition to cell-to-cell spread, we report the formation of massive vacuole structures in macrophage-like cells that had previously harbored cryptococcal cells which had been released by the phenomenon of phagosome extrusion. massive vacuole formation suggests that cn intracellular habitation and replication in macrophage-like cells is associated with cellular damage, despite the fact that macrophages still remain alive as evidenced by their movement ''. perhaps longer imaging periods may have been needed to witness any cell death resulting from this event. the mechanism of massive vacuole formation is not known but we surmise that it may arise from the fusion of empty phagosomal remnants and perhaps polysaccharide containing vacuoles. in this regard, cn phagosomal extrusion is associated with the retention of polysaccharide-containing vesicles that may then fuse with themselves or promote the fusion of other cellular membranes. irrespective of the mechanism involved in massive vacuole formation, the presence of large vacuoles in previously infected cells provides evidence for the cytotoxicity of cn intracellular residence. the occurrence of this event during infection could contribute to local tissue pathogenesis and promote cn survival and persistence of infection.

CONCLUSIONS
we describe two new phenomena, cell-to-cell spread of yeast cells and giant vacuole formation following extrusion by macrophages that harbor cn. these observations highlight the dynamic nature of cn interactions with macrophages and suggest the need for additional studies to establish the relevance of these events to the pathogenesis of in vivo cryptococcal infections.

