BACKGROUND
the three major outer membrane proteins of n. gonorrhoeae have been historically denoted as protein i, ii and iii   <cit> , with piii forming a trimer with two molecules of pi  <cit> ; pi and pii have been subsequently described as porin and opa proteins, respectively  <cit> . it is worth noting that, in contrast to porb and opa, which undergo, respectively, antigenic and phase variation, piii is highly conserved and expressed by all pathogenic neisseriae  <cit> . this characteristic inter- and intra-strain homogeneity is unique among all the main outer membrane constituents, which, contrary to piii, evolved a strong variability to escape the immune pressure of the host  <cit> .

piii has been mainly studied for its peculiarity to induce “blocking antibodies” able to prevent the formation of the lytic complement attack complex and blocking the bactericidal activity of antibodies raised against other surface antigens  <cit> .

the ability to construct a viable gonococcal mutant lacking the piii gene was described by wetzler and collaborators in  <dig>  in that study the f <dig> neisseria gonorrhoeae strain knocked-out for the piii gene resulted to be identical to the wild-type strain in terms of competence, porin activity, protease and antibiotic sensitivity. the mutant had minimal differences in colony morphology and was slightly decreased in growth compared to the parent strain  <cit> .

piii is 95% identical to class  <dig> protein of neisseria meningitidis, also named rmpm  for the characteristic migration in sds-page in presence of reducing agents  <cit> . the presence of rmpm in oligomeric complexes of the outer membrane has been extensively described, with rmpm transiently associated to the porins, depending on the specific transport needs during the different stages of meningococcal life cycle  <cit> . moreover, rmpm forms heterooligomeric complexes with iron limitation-inducible omps  <cit>  and associates through the n-terminal domain to the omp <dig> complex  <cit> .

the c-terminal region of piii shows high similarity to the outer membrane protein a  of e. coli and other gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . ompa has been studied in e. coli as a key factor in many pathogenicity processes. the expression of ompa contributes to the structural integrity of the outer membrane  <cit>  and confers a significant selective advantage during the pathogenesis in vivo; an ompa mutant showed indeed an attenuated virulence in two different models of e. coli k <dig> infection and increased sensitivity to serum bactericidal activity  <cit> .

the crystal structure of the ompa-like domain of the meningococcal rmpm has been solved  <cit>  revealing the presence of a c-terminal peptidoglycan-binding domain, which could stabilize the neisserial outer membranes promoting the tight interaction between the outer membrane and the peptidoglycan layer.

to further expand the findings of wetzler et al.  <cit>  and unravel the role of piii in the physiology of gonococci, we applied microscopy and biochemical approaches. although we excluded a direct role of piii in maintaining the structural integrity of gonococcus, we observed that the lack of piii affects the translocation of the ng <dig> protein, with an unknown function, to the outer membrane, opening new insights on the role of this protein in gonococcal physiology and on the significance of piii-ng <dig> interaction.

moreover, to study the biological implication of the presence of the ompa-like domain we tested the ability of piii to mediate adhesion to epithelial cells and we showed that piii facilitates bacterial adhesion to human epithelial cells derived from the female and male genital tracts suggesting a possible role in gonococcal colonization.

RESULTS
lack of piii has no effect on bacterial shape and membrane perturbation
to investigate the role of piii in the physiology of n. gonorrhoeae, an f62Δpiii isogenic mutant was generated by replacing the piii gene with an erythromycin resistance cassette. lack of piii expression in f62Δpiii strain was verified by western blot analysis on whole cell extract  and by confocal microscopy with mouse anti-piii polyclonal antibodies. the results, reported in figure 1a, show that piii is widely distributed on the f <dig> bacterial surface. as expected, no membrane staining was observed in the f62Δpiii mutant strain .

transmission electron microscopy by negative staining of the wild type f <dig> versus the f62Δpiii mutant strain shows that absence of piii protein does not cause any alteration in bacterial size and shape . moreover, sensitivity to detergent like sds, triton x- <dig> and deoxycholate, tested by paper disk diffusion inhibiting assays, was identical for the two strains. the mics  were  <dig> % for sds,  <dig> % for triton x- <dig> and  <dig> % for deoxycholate for both, wild- type and knock-out strains confirming the hypothesis that the loss of piii does not induce any perturbation in membrane resistance and/or membrane structure.

lack of piii does not alter the expression of the main membrane proteins but influences the membrane localization of ng1873
since the meningococcal orthologous of piii, rmpm, is part of heterooligomeric complexes of the outer membrane with a possible stabilizing function on meningococcal membrane  <cit> , we verified whether the deletion of the piii gene causes any alteration on outer membrane composition.

western blot analysis on outer membranes  confirmed the absence of the piii protein in the mutant strain  and showed that the levels of expression of pili, porin 1b, opa proteins and opab variant were unchanged in f62Δpiii strain compared to the wild-type .

to explore in more detail the composition of the outer membrane, om deriving from the wild-type and the Δpiii strains were analyzed by 2d electrophoresis . by comparative analysis of the 2d electrophoresis maps, only two proteins appeared to be differentially expressed in the om deriving from the wild-type  and absent in the om deriving from the Δpiii strain . the two spots  were identified by mass spectrometry and shown to be the protein piii and the protein encoded by the ng <dig> gene. western blot analysis with mouse anti-ng <dig> polyclonal antibodies showed that while the level of expression of ng <dig> in total cell lysates from the wild-type and the Δpiii mutant strains was comparable, the protein was not detected in the om from the Δpiii mutant strain . interestingly, the amount of ng <dig> was significantly higher in the inner membranes deriving from the Δpiii mutant strain  suggesting that the lack of the piii protein causes a defective outer-membrane localization of ng <dig> protein and its accumulation in the inner membrane.

purified piii is able to bind to human immortalized cervical and urethral cell
the c-terminal domain of piii shows significant homology to ompa proteins described in other microorganisms and known to mediate adhesion to eukaryotic cells, with identities and similarities ranging from  <dig> to 45% and from  <dig> to 60%, respectively. to verify whether the sequence similarity to ompa was representative also of a functional homology, we tested the ability of piii to bind epithelial cells. to this aim, the recombinant piii protein  was expressed in e. coli, purified from the cytoplasm in its soluble form and tested in the adhesion assay. as cell models we used three immortalized human epithelial cell lines derived from primary ectocervical, endocervical and urethral cells which maintained all main features of primary cells  <cit> .

cells were incubated with increasing amount of the purified piii protein and binding measured by facs analysis. the piii protein binds all the cell lines tested. as shown in figure 4a, the piii binding to ectocervical cells increased in a dose-dependent manner reaching a plateau at concentration of 1 μm. the affinity of the piii binding was determined by plotting the mean fluorescence intensity versus the protein concentration. the kd value, defined as piii concentration able to saturate 50% of putative receptors, was estimated in the order of  <dig> ×10-7 m . the binding of piii protein to endocervical and urethral cells had a similar trend, showing the higher degree of association at 1 μm . the unrelated hypothetical protein ng <dig> of n. gonorrhoeae, used as negative control in the assay, was unable to bind all the cell lines tested .

piii is involved in adhesion of n. gonorrhoeae to human immortalized cervical and urethral cells
to verify whether the ability of piii to bind epithelial cells as purified protein was relevant also in the context of the viable microorganism, we performed infection assays and compared the ability of the f <dig> wild-type and the f62Δpiii strains to adhere to ectocervical, endocervical and urethral cells previously described. cells were infected with wild-type and f62Δpiii strains for 3 hours and, after cellular lysis, total cell-associated bacteria were counted by plating. since the level of gonococcal invasion is very low in piliated strains, the number of total bacteria collected was considered to be representative of the number of bacteria adhering to the cell surface. results reported in figure 5a, show a decrease in bacterial association to all three epithelial cell lines for the piii-deficient strain with a more pronounced effect on cervical cells  than on urethral cells . these data were confirmed by immunofluorescence confocal microscopy analysis, showing a larger number wild-type bacteria associated to ectocervical cells compared to Δpiii strain .

influence of piii in invasion was evaluated by plating the intracellular bacteria recovered following gentamycin killing of extracellular bacteria. as expected only a low percentage of gonococci were able to invade epithelial cells; levels of invasion were similar for the wild-type f <dig> and Δpiii mutant strains .

to exclude that differences in adhesion could be due to a defect of growth of the Δpiii mutant strain  <cit> , the growth rate of both strains in the cell culture medium was monitored during the time of infection. the growth rate of gonococci in the cell culture medium was very low but identical for the two strains . moreover, expression of phase-variable opa proteins and pili, the structures known to be the main factors involved in the adhesion to epithelial cells, were analyzed by western blot. the wild-type and the Δpiii mutant strains used in this study are piliated and express similar amounts of opa proteins .

the impaired ability of the Δpiii mutant strain to bind to the epithelial cells was not due to the absence of ng <dig> on the outer membrane, since the knock-out Δng <dig> mutant strain had an adhesive phenotype on ectocervical cells comparable to the wild-type strain .

discussion
piii is one of the main components of the outer membrane of neisseria, but its precise function, both in the pathogenesis and in the physiology of the organism, remains unclear. in an effort to better define the role of piii in gonococcus, we generated a knock-out Δpiii f <dig> strain and investigated the impact of this deletion on bacterial cell morphology and adhesion.

a mutant f <dig> strain lacking the piii protein in n. gonorrhoeae was previously described showing no severe defects compared to the wild type strain in terms of competence, porin activity, protease and antibiotic sensitivity. the mutant had minimal differences in colony morphology and was slightly decreased in growth compared to the parent strain  <cit> .

here we have expanded the finding of wetzler’s study showing that the lack of the piii protein in the piii-knock-out strain does not influence the bacterial shape or resistance to detergents corroborating the hypothesis that piii does not play a key role in the organization of the outer membrane. in the piii-mutant strain, the only clear difference in 2d gel analysis was a defective localization for the ng <dig> protein. interestingly, ng <dig> has a lysm domain , with a peptidoglycan binding function  <cit> . we can speculate that ng <dig> is able to reach the outer membrane only when piii is acting as a bridge between the outer membrane and the peptidoglycan layer. further studies will be needed to evaluate the role of this interaction in the context of peptidoglycan and outer membrane architecture and to explore the involvement of other proteins in the ng <dig> bacterial localization.

the crystal structure of the c - terminal domain of the meningococcal rmpm has been solved  <cit> . the authors have identified a number of residues which may participate in the non-covalent binding of peptidoglycan. they envisage a model in which the c-terminal domain rmpm interacts with peptidoglycan stabilizing oligomers of porins in the outer membrane. since the peptidoglycan of gram-negative bacteria is located in the periplasmic space, this model in combination with the evidence that the n-terminal part of rmpm is associated to the omp complexes but is too short to cross the membrane  <cit> , would imply a periplasmic localization for the entire protein. however the proposed periplasmic localization is not supported by the evidence that the rmpm/piii protein is an immuno-dominant antigen with surface-exposed epitopes  <cit> . in this study we confirmed the surface exposure of piii by confocal microscopy analysis.

the similarity between piii and proteins belonging to the ompa family, known to have a role in adhesion in many bacterial species, has driven the investigation on the potential contribution of piii in adhesion process. here we provide evidences that gonococcal piii mediates bacterial adhesion to human epithelial cells, derived from the female and male genital tracts.

the choice of a cellular model to study factors and mechanisms involved in the gonococcal pathogenesis is a crucial topic of debate. the data obtained from in vitro models of infection can lead to conclusions not fully relevant with respect to the natural infection. in fact, whereas by the bacterial side, gonococcus undergoes antigenic and phase variation depending on the particular selective pressure induced by cellular contact, by the cellular side, the cell lines can substantially differ from the parental tissue in terms of membrane receptors and functional responses. although the relevance of any model of infection is not exactly predictable, we limited the possible biases by examining the expression of pili and opa proteins in the wild-type and piii-deficient strains used in the infection assays. moreover, to simulate the female and male infection, we used primary immortalized cell lines obtained from ectocervix, endocervix and urethra. all of three immortalized cells have been characterized to ensure that they maintain the main features of the primary cells  <cit> . these cellular systems allowed to overcome the problems of limited life span and limited number of primary cells deriving from surgical tissues; moreover, it is a better model respect to the cancer-derived cell lines which can strongly differ from in vivo tissues. in our studies we show that the piii-deficient strain has an impaired ability to associate to cervical cells and, to a lesser extent, to urethral cells. these observations, together with the evidence that the purified piii protein is able to specifically bind to all the three cell lines, support the hypothesis that piii could have a role in gonococcal colonization of the genital tract. the impaired adhesive phenotype was not a secondary effect of the outer membrane reorganization since we demonstrated that deletion of the piii gene has no major effects on the expression of the main outer membrane proteins.

we previously described an ompa-like protein in gonococcus, denoted as ng-ompa  <cit>  which plays a significant role in the adhesion and invasion processes into human cervical and endometrial cells. these results suggest that the ompa domain has a redundant function in gonococcus and that it could have a role at different stages of infection; however, additional studies will be needed to explore the respective role of these two proteins in gonococcal pathogenesis.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we demonstrated that piii protein of n. gonorrhoeae does not influence the outer membrane integrity as well as bacterial shape, morphology and strain sensitivity to detergents. however, the loss of expression of piii protein causes a defective membrane localization of ng <dig>  a protein having a lysm domain with a putative peptidoglycan binding function. our study also demonstrated that piii has a role in the interaction with human cervical and urethral cells, suggesting an involvement in the gonococcal adhesion process.

