BACKGROUND
welwitschia mirabilis hook f.  is a morphologically unique gymnosperm  of the namib desert of southwestern africa  and is the only extant member of its genus and family. the species is dioecious, and each adult plant consists of a giant taproot, a very short woody stem, and two permanent 'strap-shaped' leaves  <cit> . welwitschiaceae is one of three families in the gnetophyta , the other two being ephedraceae, comprised of the genus ephedra, and gnetaceae, comprised of gnetum. welwitschiaceae diverged from other gnetophytes prior to the early cretaceous  <cit> .

gnetophytes are of intense interest not only due to their peculiar morphology but also because controversies regarding seed plant phylogeny revolve around their placement . in morphologically based cladistic analyses , gnetophytes are the extant sister to angiosperms . however the anthophyte hypothesis has rarely been recovered in analyses based on molecular data  <cit> . in recent work, multiple outcomes are often supported, even within the same paper, depending on which genes, which sites and which methods are employed . gnetophytes have been placed sister to all other seed plants , sister to conifers  , or nesting within conifers as the sister to pinaceae  .

placement of the gnetophytes based on molecular data has been problematic, apparently due to accelerated rates of evolution in the lineage, which can lead to long branch attraction or lba  <cit> . increased taxon sampling to break up long branches is commonly regarded as an effective approach for overcoming lba, as is adding more sequence data, selecting slower markers, selecting slower positions and representing lineages with slowly evolving exemplars  <cit> . furthermore, using genomic characters, e.g., inversions and gene or intron losses, which are less vulnerable to lba, can also be helpful  <cit> . in plants, the chloroplast genome is the primary target when attempting to generate large amounts of sequence data and genomic characters for phylogenetics, but unfortunately gymnosperms are very poorly represented among currently available chloroplast genome sequences. this paucity of gymnosperm chloroplast genome sequences  currently limits the ability to construct genome level data matrices for seed plant phylogenetics.

the typical seed plant plastid genome  <cit>  contains two copies of a large inverted repeat  separated by large  and small  single copy regions. the genome is usually comprised of  <dig>  to  <dig>  base pairs , includes approximately  <dig> different genes and is highly conserved in both gene order and content  <cit> . this general form  is found in plastomes of cycas  <cit> , early-diverging angiosperms , magnollids  <cit>  and various eudicots  <cit> .

in contrast, some seed plant lineages contain plastid genomes that vary from this typical form  <cit> . some plant groups contain genomes that lack one copy of the large ir  <cit>  or have greatly expanded ir regions  <cit> . gene loss can occur, and the most extreme examples can be found in the plastid genomes of parasitic angiosperms  <cit> . rearrangements have affected the gene order of plastid genomes, in some lineages slightly  but in a few cases greatly  <cit> . and, although the rate of evolutionary change of plastid genes is largely conservative  <cit> , it is elevated in some lineages  <cit> . here, in describing the completely sequenced welwitschia mirabilis plastome, we add to these examples of atypical plastid genomes and discuss phylogenetic implications.

RESULTS
general characteristics of the genome
the  <dig>  bp welwitschia mirabilis plastid genome , similar to other chloroplast genomes, is a+t rich overall and in all compartments except for the rna genes . the plastome consists of a large single copy region  of  <dig>  base pairs  and a small single copy region  of  <dig>  bp, separated by two copies of the large inverted repeat  of  <dig>  bp each . this quadripartite structure is typical among most land plant and some algal chloroplast genomes  <cit> . the small size of the genome is unexpected; welwitschia possesses the smallest plastid genome of any published non-parasitic land plant that still contains the large ir. the genome is similar in size to two other publicly available chloroplast genomes from gymnosperms, pinus koraiensis  and pinus thunbergii . however, both pinus plastomes have lost all but  <dig> or  <dig> bp  of their ir  <cit> . the welwitschia plastome is less than 75% the size of the plastid genome reported for cycas taitungensis  <cit> .

the welwitschia plastome is also unusually compact . coding regions constitute 66% of the welwitschia plastome, making this the most compact of any non-parasitic, land plant chloroplast genome sequenced so far. pinus thunbergii is the most similar, with 61% coding . however, the ncbi value for pinus thunbergii  includes non-conserved orfs and pseudogenes as coding sequence, which we excluded from coding in our calculations for welwitschia. the ncbi coding percentage values are automatically generated based on the submitted annotation. therefore, different methods of annotation  lead to ambiguities. for example, we recalculated compactness for the pinus thunbergii plastid genome, using the same approach we applied to the welwitschia genome, and found p. thunbergii to be  <dig> % coding . thus our conclusions are conservative, and in no instance would the values reported in table  <dig> be increased if calculated using the method applied to welwitschia. therefore, the compactness of our genome may be even more remarkable when taking into account that the genomes in the ncbi database may be less compact, by our methods of calculation, than reported. even so, overall, the average coding percentage of the available land plant genomes, using ncbi values and excluding welwitschia, is only  <dig> % , compared to 66% in welwitschia.

percent coding values for species other than welwitschia were obtained from the ncbi database. the average reported in the table was calculated excluding welwitschia.

the lsc boundary of the ir in welwitschia is located in the 3' end of psba. the lsc-end of the ir includes the genes ycf2-trnh-trni-3'psba, with ycf <dig>  trnh-gug, and psba on one strand and trni-cau on the other. two events are required to explain the expanded ir seen in welwitschia, from the ancestral seed plant condition  proposed by wu et al  <cit> . first, trni-cau was duplicated into the ir via an expansion of irb at the jlb boundary. second, ira expanded at the jla boundary to include a portion of psba. interestingly, the remnant ir found in pinus thunbergii, which includes trni and 3'psba, matches the lsc end of the ir in welwitschia . the duplication of trni in this context and followed by a partial duplication of psba is found in no other completely sequenced chloroplast genome, and other methods  show this "motif" to exist only in plastomes of gnetophytes and conifers  <cit> . presumably the loss of the ir in pines  is a further modification of a welwitschia-like ir.

the gene order in the welwitschia chloroplast genome is rearranged compared to more "typical" seed plant plastomes such as cycas, amborella, or nicotiana. there are  <dig> locations  where gene adjacencies differ in welwitschia compared to cycas taitungensis, excluding differences due to gene losses and ir boundary shifts. a minimum of nine inversions  would be required to convert the cycas  gene order to that of welwitschia , in addition to gene losses and ir extent changes. no gene order changes occur in the ir, but  <dig> inversions  are proposed for the lsc and  <dig> inversions  for the ssc . although both pinus and welwitschia plastomes have undergone inversions, they share none in common. over the entire plastome, there is only one clear instance where both genomes are disrupted at the same general location . however, a shared inversion would require two shared points of disruption. there is a second possible shared disruption in the region of ndhf. however, even if there is truly a shared point of disruption , these two endpoints  could not have been used together in a single inversion; if these two breakpoints flanked one inversion in welwitschia  the ir would have become a direct rather than inverted repeat. since the repeat is still inverted we can be confident that such an inversion did not take place.

gene content
the welwitschia genome contains  <dig> distinct, presumably functional, genes:  <dig> unique trna genes, four rrna gene species, and  <dig> different protein-coding genes . four rrna genes, eight trna genes and four protein-coding genes are fully or in part duplicated in the ir. of the  <dig> genes usually found to contain introns in land plant plastid genomes, only  <dig> are still present in the welwitschia plastome and two, petd and clpp, lack introns. in addition to genes duplicated in the ir, welwitschia also has a duplication of the trnr-ccg gene, as well as a partial duplication of trnf-gaa. of the genes normally present in land plant chloroplast genomes, four  are pseudogenes  and  <dig> are completely absent .

the entire complement of ndh genes  is non-functional, with  <dig> being absent and one, ndhb, being a pseudogene. the ndhb remnant is a small section of the 5' exon , only  <dig> bp long, whereas the fully functional nicotiana tabacum ndhb gene is  <dig>  bp long. the loss of the ndh genes also has been reported in pinus  <cit> , where more of the genes  remain detectable as pseudogenes. in welwitschia elevated rates and selection for compactness could accelerate the loss of detectable gene remnants following the initial loss of function. presumably the remnant ndhb gene is still recognizable because it resides in the ir where rates are reduced  <cit> . within completely sequenced land plant plastomes, the ndh genes have also been lost from the chloroplast genome of the orchid phalaenopsis  <cit>  and the non-photosynthetic parasite epifagus  <cit> . the genes are found in some but not all green algal plastid genomes, and are lacking from plastomes of the red algal lineage and cyanophora  <cit> .

the genes for the three chl subunits, encoding the enzyme protochlorophyllide reductase, are also missing or non-functional, with one gene  being completely absent and the other two  being pseudogenes. the chln and chlb pseudogenes are truncated, to  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp respectively, from a full length  of  <dig>  bp and  <dig>  bp. based on earlier work  <cit> , we expected chll to be missing or highly divergent in welwitschia. however results of that previous study, using southern hybridization, indicated that chll is present in ephedra and gnetum, conflicting with the results of wu et al  <cit>  for gnetum. an examination of the welwitschia plastome suggests that the loss of the chl genes may have been initiated by an inversion. one breakpoint may have been located within the chll gene itself , so that the inversion split the gene apart, disrupting it and causing it to become non-functional. of course, it is also possible that the gene was inactivated by simple base substitution. once the chll  subunit was inactivated, no functional enzyme could be produced, eliminating any selection to retain the other two subunits as intact genes. it seems suggestive that the chll gene is completely missing whereas chln and chlb remain as pseudogenes, consistent with the hypothesis that chll was lost first. these three genes are also missing from all angiosperm plastomes  <cit>  as well as from the psilotum chloroplast genome  <cit> . the product of these chl genes encodes an enzyme that allows chlorophyll to "green in the dark". an alternative, nuclear-encoded protein that requires light can also affect chlorophyll maturation. thus the loss of these genes presumably would not be lethal even if the plastid genes were not successfully transferred to the nuclear genome.

beyond the loss of the ndh and chl gene families, we were also unable to detect the genes accd, psam, rpl <dig>  rps <dig> or trnp-ggg in the welwitschia plastid genome. the gene accd has been lost independently in numerous prokaryote and eukaryote lineages  <cit> . the gene rpl <dig> has been reported missing from the plastome of the angiosperms spinacia  <cit>  and trachelium  <cit> . the gene rps <dig> has experienced numerous independent losses in land plants  <cit> . overall, the gene content of welwitschia appears to be very close to what wu et al  <cit>  report for gnetum, except that rps <dig>  which is reported as absent in gnetum, is present in welwitschia.

divergence for protein-coding genes
in most cases welwitschia plastid genes are more divergent than the genes of other seed plants. we attempted to measure relative divergence with a ratio derived from a simple comparison of pairwise distances, an extension of the approach used by hajibabaei, xia, and drouin  <cit> . for each of  <dig> genes , we calculated the average pairwise distance among non-gnetophyte seed plants and the average pairwise distance between welwitschia and each representative non-gnetophyte seed plant. we then determined the ratio of these two averages to determine a "relative divergence factor" for each gene. if the relative divergence factor is less than one, then that gene in the welwitschia plastome shows less divergence than average, if it is one, the gene is equally divergent, and, if greater than one, the welwitschia gene exhibits above average divergence.

relative divergence factor values indicated in bold are significantly different than  <dig> . detailed information on each set of calculations can be found in additional files  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> 

we selected from among  <dig> taxa to calculate the non-gnetophyte average: ginkgo, cycas, pinus, podocarpus, amborella, nuphar, nymphaea, calycanthus, ranunculus, and acorus. we used a) all  <dig> taxa, as well as b) ginkgo and cycas plus ranunculus and pinus, c) ginkgo and cycas plus amborella and pinus, d) ginkgo and cycas plus amborella and podocarpus, and e) ginkgo and cycas plus amborella, pinus and podocarpus. phylogenetic structure within the non-gnetophyte taxa could confound this approach. for example, in set a, which contains multiple angiosperms, nuphar and nymphaea, especially, are rather closely related. having such "small" distances included in the non-gnetophyte average could bias the result. however, we did not obtain very different results when using single angiosperm exemplars. in terms of the higher-level structure in the non-gnetophytes, internal branches are probably so short  relative to the terminals that this structure would have minimal impact. also, if the true phylogenetic position of welwitschia is anywhere within the other seed plants, then the bias should be against the welwitschia to non-gnetophyte distances. in summary, this seems a reasonable enough way to investigate which genes are more or less divergent.

across all the comparisons and all genes, the relative divergence factor ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  .  for about 20% of the comparisons, the difference between the non-gnetophyte average and the welwitschia to non-gnetophtye average was not significant, either because the averages were basically equal or, more often, because the variation around the average was great enough to make them statistically indistinguishable. about 25% of the genes had an average relative divergence factor above  <dig>  when the relative divergence factor was determined as an average of the five different calculations, only one gene  had a divergence rate about equal to the non-gnetophytes , whereas  <dig> genes had relative divergence factors above  <dig>  and  <dig> above  <dig> 

the average relative divergence factor over all genes for each reference set ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . the average relative divergence factor from all genes, over all calculations, is  <dig> . for all the genes together, we also applied tajima's relative rate test . the welwitschia genes have very significantly  elevated rates based on any of the comparisons conducted, whether the three taxon statement was compatible with commonly produced trees or not. in these tests, the proportion of unique sites identified in welwitschia relative to the comparison taxa suggests that the relative divergence factor method might be conservative.

phylogenetic inference
using the same  <dig> genes  as for our relative divergence factor and relative rate comparisons, we inferred phylogenetic trees using various methods. here, we also included genes from the pteridophytes adiantum and psilotum. the trees shown  include only amborella as the representative angiosperm. however, analyses using other angiosperms  as single exemplars or including all six angiosperm taxa yielded identical topologies . neighbor-joining, minimum evolution  and maximum parsimony  trees yielded topologies with welwitschia diverging first among the seed plants. in contrast, maximum likelihood  and bayesian  analyses resulted in topologies that included a monophyletic gymnosperm clade and a welwitschia-pinus sister group. bootstrap  values and posterior probabilities  indicate that each method, except ml, very strongly supports its particular solution. however, the sh test indicates that, for these data, the three topologies shown in fig  <dig> do not have significantly different likelihoods. in contrast, the best ml topology  is significantly better than the best anthophyte topology .

it is interesting to note that although taxon sampling in our phylogenetic analyses is very limited, the trees obtained are mostly robust  and consistent with expectation. in other studies , based on total evidence from fewer genes but more taxa, distance methods and mp commonly place gnetophytes at the base of all seed plants, whereas ml and bi support a topology including gnetifers or gnepines. here we see exactly the same pattern. by all methods, welwitschia is inferred to represent a long branch, consistent with the relative rate tests and the relative divergence factor analyses. since me and mp are more likely to be confounded by rate heterogeneity, we would guess that the placement of welwitschia in these trees is an artifact. however, when mp analyses were conducted on nucleotide data with the third position excluded or on deduced amino acid data, both of which should reduce the effects of rate heterogeneity, the same mp topology is recovered. as mentioned previously, according to sh test results, these data  cannot discriminate among the three topologies of fig.  <dig>  although the addition of more sequence data allows us  to do no better than earlier work based on better taxon sampling, likewise our results are no worse. this suggests that a significant increase in number of genes  will allow a rather limited taxon sampling to provide important insights into seed plant phylogeny. of course that sampling will need to be less limited that what is available to us and must include at least one conifer ii representative.

discussion
the morphology of welwitschia makes it a very unusual organism. the plastid genome also has unusual features. although the overall organization of the genome is typical of most land plants , the extent of the ir, gene content, gene order, rate of nucleotide divergence, and compactness, all are atypical. the phylogenetic significance of any of these atypical features can, at this point, be interpreted in only a limited manner. until more gnetophyte plastome sequences are available we are uncertain whether features seen in welwitschia are unique to that species or are characteristic of gnetophytes. likewise, traits of the pinus plastid genomes provide little detail about the nature of conifer genomes in general. derived characters shared between pinus and welwitschia are compatible with either the gnetifer or the gne-pine hypotheses; however, they are inconsistent with the anthophyte hypothesis.

there are some differences in gene content that are shared between welwitschia and angiosperms. angiosperms and welwitschia  lack the three chl genes. angiosperms and welwitschia  share the loss of trnp-ggg. these loss events could be shared due to common ancestry only if the gnetophytes were not monophyletic, in conflict with almost all recent work. plastome gene loss has been a common pattern over the history of the plastid as an endosymbiont  <cit> . the same genes are often lost independently in unrelated lineages  <cit> . even within angiosperms, where gene content is largely stable in photosynthetic representatives, some genes have been lost in multiple instances .

the most distinctive structural feature common to both welwitschia and pinus is the shared ir extent. the pinus remnant ir  matches the lsc end of the ir in welwitschia and gnetum  <cit>  suggesting that the pinus ir represents a reduction from a welwitschia/gnetum-like ancestor. welwitschia and pinus plastomes also both lack functional copies of all eleven ndh genes, the rps <dig> gene, and both introns of clpp. however, due to the reasons mentioned above, gene losses must be used cautiously as phylogenetic markers. phylogenetic analyses, using ml and bi, based on  <dig> plastid genes also link welwitschia and pinus . of course, a representative of the second  lineage of conifers  is necessary to distinguish between the gnetifer and gne-pine hypotheses.

based on the welwitschia plastome gene organization, we can speculate  that inversions in the lsc or the ssc  may have initially destroyed some ndh genes leading to the loss of all the subunits, as was also a possible explanation in the case of the chll gene loss. inversion endpoints are located in the areas of the ndhckj cluster in the lsc, as well as ndhf and the ndhhaige cluster in the ssc. if any one of the ndh genes was disabled by an inversion  the remaining subunits would gradually decay to extinction. a gene-disrupting inversion in ndhf also may have initiated ndh gene loss in pinaceae. although an initial disruption of ndhf is a viable hypothesis to explain ndh loss in both pinus and welwitschia, the gene disrupting inversions could not be held in common between the gnetophyte and pinaceae plastomes because, as discussed earlier, none of the inversions can be shared. of course the initial gene disruptions could have been point mutations, not inversions; in which case, the losses of the ndh genes could possibly represent a synapomorphy supporting the gnepine clade . unfortunately gene losses lack complex characteristics to aid in determining homology.

we detected elevated levels of sequence divergence in most welwitschia genes analyzed. earlier work, based on limited numbers of genes  <cit> , has consistently found gnetophytes to have higher rates of sequence evolution in genes from each of the three compartments  and in both ribosomal and protein-coding genes. hajibabaei, xia, and drouin  <cit>  showed, for nine genes , that the average pairwise distances between gnetophytes and non-gnetophyes were significantly higher than average pairwise distances among the non-gnetophytes. here we expanded their approach to  <dig> plastid genes and found that almost all these genes exhibit above average divergence. we also found that, using the relative rate test on the  <dig> genes, rates in welwitschia were significantly higher in a variety of comparisons. rates in gnetum also were analyzed  <cit>  using relative rate tests and, although transition rates in gnetum were not always significantly different, transversion rates were. thus these expanded studies  indicate that plastome-wide rate elevation has probably taken place in the gnetophtyes. rate elevation is also suggested by the phylogenetic analyses, both in the estimated branch lengths and, presumably, in the conflict in outcomes among the different optimization methods.

the welwitschia chloroplast genome was found to be unusually compact. the compactness of the genome can be interpreted in numerous ways, but might suggest that the small compact welwitschia genome is the result of selective pressure to more rapidly replicate the genome by reducing intergenic space and by losing "non-essential" nucleotides. it is interesting to note that increased rate of replication is one factor hypothesized to lead to increased mutation rate  <cit> . the small genome size can be attributed to the high incidence of gene loss in addition to compactness. this suggests that a small, compact genome was more important to the success of welwitschia  than the function of any genes lost.

CONCLUSIONS
here we describe the first completely sequenced plastid genome of a gnetophyte. the welwitschia plastome provides insight into the rates of sequence evolution of this highly divergent group of plants, as well as illustrating the possible gnetophyte pattern of gene loss and rearrangement. the most distinctive, potentially phylogenetically informative, feature of the welwitschia chloroplast genome, the ir extent, supports a relationship of gnetophytes with conifers while being inconsistent with the anthophyte hypothesis. phylogenetic hypotheses supported in analyses of  <dig> plastid genes, but minimal taxonomic representation, also lack any support for an anthophyte clade. the availability of the welwitschia mirabilis plastome will provide important information for use in further phylogenetic studies resolving major questions about the evolution of seed plants. as plastome sequences for gymnosperms accumulate, genome level phylogenetic analyses should contribute to the resolution of controversies of seed plant phylogeny; currently however the number of gymnosperm plastomes is very limited. additionally, further gnetophyte plastomes need to be sequenced in order to determine whether atypical characteristics seen in welwitschia are shared by all gnetophytes, or are unusual genomic features of a very unique plant.

