BACKGROUND
somatic point mutation calling from matched tumor-normal patient samples is a critical step for cancer genome characterization and clinical genotyping  <cit> . over the last few years, next-generation sequencing  has become a popular strategy for genotyping, enabling more precise mutation detection compared to traditional methods due to its high resolution and high throughput  <cit> . nevertheless, detecting somatic mutations is still challenging, especially for low-allelic-fraction variants caused by tumor heterogeneity, copy number alteration, and sample degradation  <cit> . errors in base calling and read alignment present additional challenges for achieving sensitive and specific somatic variant calls. in recent years, several methods have been developed to enhance somatic mutation calling accuracy  <cit> . in general, these methods belong to two families:  independent analysis for tumor and normal datasets from an individual followed by snv type classification using a statistical significance test or simple subtraction ;  simultaneous analysis for matched tumor and normal datasets using joint probability-based statistical approaches, e.g. somaticsniper  <cit>  and strelka  <cit> . in general, agreement among different algorithms is relatively low  <cit> , making selection of candidate snvs for further validation difficult. this disagreement is likely partially due to different error models and prior assumptions underlying each algorithm.

in light of these challenges, there is a need to systematically evaluate the performance of different snv calling algorithms to help guide best practices in the research community. recently, several independent studies compared somatic snv calling tools  <cit> . for example, roberts et al.  <cit>  compared the performance of varscan, somaticsniper, jointsnvmix <dig>  and strelka in detecting snvs from matched cancer-normal illumina exome sequencing of a chronic myeloid leukemia patient. they reported a large difference in called variant sets among algorithms. in a separate study, wang et al.  <cit>  evaluated  <dig> tools  on tumor-normal pairs using both whole-genome sequencing and exome sequencing data. according to their evaluation, mutect achieved the highest sensitivity for calling low-allelic-fraction somatic variants. most of these studies utilized publically available exome data from hybridization capture enrichment, and some used additional validation data from alternative technologies. complimentarily, spencer et al.  <cit>  assessed samtools, genome analysis toolkit , varscan <dig>  and splinter in detecting low-allelic-fraction variants from synthetic mixtures of targeted hybridization capture sequencing reads. they reported that varscan <dig> achieved the highest sensitivity but with a high false positive rate, whereas splinter yielded both high sensitivity and specificity.

exome capture sequencing is typically limited to ~60x read depth , and therefore using exome reads limits the potential to detect low-allelic-fraction snvs in the sample, especially those at less than 5%. detecting low-allelic-fraction snvs in the sample is often important for early diagnosis, prevention of drug resistance, and detection of residual tumors. targeted panel sequencing has been widely used to increase snv detection sensitivity by achieving a much higher median read depth , even on a bench top sequencer  <cit> . among the different enrichment methods available for targeted sequencing, pcr amplicon-based enrichment has been widely popular for small- to medium-sized gene panels due to its low input requirement, simple protocol, fast turnaround time, and good performance on ffpe samples. while there are differences between read properties from pcr amplicon sequencing and exome sequencing, many of which could affect snv calling, there has not yet been a detailed comparison of snv calling algorithms using reads from pcr amplicon sequencing. in addition to higher read depth, reads from pcr amplicons have more uniformly defined ends, more pcr duplication, and may contain more amplification bias. because many variant calling algorithms were developed using whole genome or exome data, the question remains of whether performance differs when these algorithms are applied to amplicon sequencing data.

another challenge in comparing variant calling methods is to identify a set of true positive and true negative variants in the sample, ideally at various allele fractions. this task is not straightforward, due to the lack of sufficient available validation data. one standard assessment method is to check the overlap between variant sets as a way to assess the concordance and discrepancies among different calling methods. alternatively, some researchers have randomly chosen a few candidates for sanger sequencing or used snp arrays for validation. however, sanger sequencing involves high cost and labor, making the generation of large-scale validation data difficult. in addition, some of the low-allelic-fraction snvs are very difficult to validate by sanger sequencing or snp array due to the detection sensitivity of these technologies . to overcome these limitations, the nist-led “genome in a bottle” consortium   <cit>  developed a community resource of high-confidence variants for the reference individual na <dig>  from the july  <dig>   <dig> data release, the nist-giab standard is an integration of  <dig> datasets generated using  <dig> different sequencing platforms, with the reads aligned using  <dig> different aligners, and variants called using  <dig> different variant callers. the availability of the na <dig> reference sample  along with a high-confidence variant set facilitates empirical evaluation of all steps in ngs analysis: enrichment, library preparation, sequencing, alignment, and variant calling. the nist-giab na <dig> variant standard is the basis of emerging tools such as gcat , which provides a community platform for comparing variant calling approaches.

in order to evaluate the performance of popular snv callers on targeted amplicon sequencing reads, especially for low-allelic-fraction snvs, we mixed reference dna from na <dig> with dna from another  <dig>  genomes project sample  at various ratios, thus creating virtual tumor-normal samples with na <dig> “tumor” variant frequencies ranging from 4% to 100%. we then subjected the dilution series samples to multiplex pcr-based enrichment and illumina miseq sequencing. here we present a comparison of  <dig> somatic snv callers using targeted amplicon sequencing from these virtual tumor-normal samples against the nist-giab gold standard variant set. to explore possible performance differences of the snv callers on amplicon versus exome sequencing data, we also did a similar in silico dilution series analysis using publicly available exome data from na <dig>  our results demonstrate the strengths and weaknesses of each method in calling somatic snvs at diverse levels of allelic fraction, and also the value of the newly established nist-giab gold standard in facilitating such comparisons.

RESULTS
comparison of somatic point mutation calling methods in the benchmark amplicon sequencing data
our goal was to evaluate the performance of somatic snv detection methods from matched tumor-normal samples using amplicon sequencing. for this purpose, we generated a dilution series of samples with 0%, 8%, 16%, 36%, and 100% na <dig> mixed in the control na <dig>  to mimic production of artificial tumor sample paired with the 100% na <dig> background as the artificial normal sample. because the majority of variants in the gold standard are heterozygous , the main allele fractions we evaluated are 4%, 8%, 18%, and 50%. therefore, we labelled the samples as c <dig> , c <dig> , c <dig> , and c <dig>  in the following descriptions and results. we used qiagen’s generead dnaseq comprehensive cancer gene panel  for enrichment and library construction in triplicate  <cit> . then we sequenced the samples for the  <dig> ccp genes using an illumina miseq sequencer. the median coverage for each triplicate was between 500x and 700x. first, we examined the observed minor allele fraction of na <dig> “somatic” variants to verify the mixture concentration . generally, both heterozygous and homozygous alternate allele frequencies fell within the expected range. to systematically evaluate variant calling methods, each read set was subjected to the same alignment and preprocessing steps before variant calling . the resulting bam files were then used as input to five somatic mutation calling methods, including  mutect,  gatk unifiedgenotyper  <cit>  followed by simple subtraction ,  somaticsniper,  strelka, and  varscan <dig> . all methods are open-source algorithms except for the “naivesubtract” method, which calls snvs by identifying the variants present in the “tumor” sample vcf file but not in the “normal” sample vcf file. the variants set for “tumor” and “normal” samples were called independently using gatk unifiedgenotyper.

we assessed the sensitivity and specificity of each variant calling algorithm on each virtual tumor sample using the nist-giab gold standard variant set . our analysis region excludes sites where na <dig> is not a homozygous reference , see additional file 1: table s1). we compared somatic snv calling performance at various “tumor purity” levels . at the lowest purity level, the highest sensitivity was achieved by strelka  under the settings recommended by its authors. mutect, with its default setting under hc mode , achieved lower sensitivity than strelka , although this might in part be due to mutect being tuned for higher specificity. in terms of specificity, because we expect that the number of false positives detected does not depend on the fraction of na <dig> in the “tumor” sample, we calculated the false positive rate by treating each single virtual tumor sample as a replicate . mutect produced the lowest false positive rate, whereas the other four methods provided similar levels of specificity . overall, strelka and mutect are capable of detecting candidate somatic snvs at sites of low allelic fraction. this property is of key importance for studying cancer subclones and highly heterogeneous tumor samples. the sensitivity of all methods increased in samples with a larger fraction of na <dig>  as shown in figure 2a, all of the methods perform fairly well for calling sites in the 100% na <dig> sample. the impact of algorithm selection became weaker for high-allelic-fraction somatic snv calling. varscan <dig>  among other traditional approaches, calls variants from each sample independently to estimate the difference between control and disease samples. varscan <dig> did not perform well for calling low-allelic-fraction variants. though varscan <dig> can achieve a higher sensitivity of  <dig>  if its minimum allele fraction threshold is lowered to  <dig> , it then generates a much higher false positive rate . for somaticsniper, examination of the distribution of somatic scores  indicates that a cut-off of  <dig> can reduce false positives without compromising sensitivity. therefore, we added an ad hoc post-calling filtering step with a somatic score cut-off of  <dig>  nevertheless, somaticsniper gave low sensitivity in low-allelic-fraction variant calling, even though it achieves the highest sensitivity for the 100% “pure tumor” sample. as for naivesubtract, our results indicate that gatk unifiedgenotyper can detect very few variants at <8% allelic fraction. therefore, when used with pcr amplicon sequencing data with a median read depth above 500x, strelka and mutect can call variants at all allelic fraction levels, whereas naivesubtract, varscan <dig>  and somaticsniper provide less sensitivity for calling somatic snvs of low allelic fraction, at least when using their default settings. consistent with  <cit> , the statistical model-based methods such as mutect and strelka are more efficient, because they consider the correlations between tumor-normal pairs and calculate the joint probabilities of the genotype pairs.

trade-offs between sensitivity and specificity for mutect and strelka
next we further examined the difference between mutect and strelka. we chose to focus on these two methods out of the five because they achieved significantly higher sensitivity at the lowest snv fraction with similar or lower false positive rates than the other methods. previous studies have compared the performance of mutect and strelka in exome sequencing  <cit> . as shown in figures 2a and 3a for our amplicon sequencing, strelka achieved significantly better sensitivity than mutect under the recommended settings, but at the expense of a much higher false positive rate. the question remains whether this difference would disappear by further tuning the algorithms or it represents a true difference in performance. we examined the performance trade-offs by varying cut-offs for the mutect somatic variant log-likelihood score and the strelka quality score, which reflect the joint probability of a somatic variant and a normal genotype . while differences exist between the two methods when using default settings, we observed that they can achieve very similar sensitivity/specificity trade-offs for lower snv fractions  by tuning the core statistics parameter and/or post-calling filters. however, the disparity between the methods remains at higher snv fractions , where mutect can achieve higher sensitivity with a lower false positive rate. one possible explanation for this continuing difference is the sampling limitation for c <dig> and c <dig>  low-allelic-fraction snvs may not be sampled sufficiently during enrichment and sequenced with adequate read depth, potentially limiting our ability to assess performance differences in c <dig> and c <dig>  alternatively, more sequencing errors and dimers may be called as variants at greater abundance levels. overall, our analysis demonstrated that the algorithms differ in sensitivity and specificity, and users should therefore select their algorithm depending on which performance characteristic is the highest priority.

comparison of somatic point mutation calling methods in exome sequencing data
because most matched tumor-normal variant callers were developed using exome sequencing data, we next assessed whether their respective performance differs between high-read-depth pcr-based amplicon sequencing and low-read-depth hybridization capture-based exome sequencing. the two approaches have different read depths and amplification bias, which could affect variant calling accuracy. therefore, we compared the abilities of the aforementioned five methods to accurately call somatic snvs in exome sequencing data. for exome reads, we chose a different yoruba individual  than we used for amplicon sequencing , because exome sequencing reads for na <dig> were generated using the same capture procedure used for na <dig>  the exome sequencing data of na <dig> and na <dig> are publicly available, as part of the  <dig>  genomes project . we downsampled the preprocessed bam files and, in silico, mixed the resulting subsets of reads to desired “tumor” sample purities. the resulting in silico mixture series is diluted in the same way as the amplicon sequencing experimental dilution series: at na <dig> unique heterozygous  variant positions over the region of interest, the median variant allele fraction is 4% , 8% , 18%  and 50% , respectively . then we applied the five variant calling methods on the in silico matched “tumor-normal” exome sequencing pairs over the region of interest . additionally, we checked performance results from the ccp region of the exome sequencing data and verified that there are no special advantages/disadvantages to the ccp region relative to the exome capture region .

overall, the sensitivity ranking of each method is comparable with what was achieved in targeted amplicon sequencing data . for the exome data, mutect and strelka detected more somatic mutations than the other methods. mutect gave the best sensitivity among lower concentrations and strelka gave the second-best sensitivity. results from the mutect publication  <cit>  show that for variants at 5% abundance, mutect’s sensitivity was between  <dig>  and  <dig>  for sequencing depth between 30x and 60x, whereas strelka, used with standard settings, detected between  <dig>  and  <dig>  in the same sequencing depth range. therefore, our present observations are consistent with this previous study. somaticsniper, varscan <dig>  and naivesubtract still yielded low sensitivity in detecting lower-allelic-fraction somatic snvs. in addition, consistent with what was observed in the targeted sequencing data, all methods achieved high sensitivity in the high-allelic-fraction tumor samples.

we next assessed specificity using only the c <dig> sample in order not to introduce potential artifacts arising from the in silico mixing. mutect and strelka achieved the highest specificity . all methods except naivesubtract showed a lower false positive rate compared to amplicon sequencing. this is could be partially due to the fact that all the methods were primarily designed on genome-wide sequencing data or exome data and therefore better control false positives in that data type. furthermore, since false positive rate is positively correlated with sequencing read depth  <cit> , the greater number of reads generated by amplicon sequencing technology may yield more false positives.

discussion
as the first step in analyzing cancer sequencing data, detecting variants with high sensitivity and specificity is of great importance. our results highlight the differences in performance between five algorithms when used with targeted amplicon versus exome sequencing data. when analyzing different types of data, use of different algorithms may be appropriate. for example, methods using a hypothesis of poisson/binomial distribution of alternate allele read depth would deviate from actual exome sequencing data, which display a notable overdispersion in the distribution of alternate allele read depth  <cit> . in terms of sensitivity, we observed that the five algorithms perform better in calling low-allelic-fraction variants from amplicon sequencing data than from exome data, probably due to the higher sequencing depth in the former. in fact, when the amplicon sequencing data were in silico downsampled to the same sequencing depth as the exome data, the sensitivity from all algorithms dropped and declined more significantly in c <dig> and c <dig>  while the relative performance ranking remained the same . on the other hand, since sequencing read depth is among the factors affecting false positive rate, most algorithms generate more false positives in amplicon sequencing data. however, we also demonstrate through strelka and mutect that further tuning the “joint probability” score away from the default setting can reduce the false positives in amplicon sequencing to levels similar to that for exome sequencing, without substantially compromising sensitivity. in summary, the relative performance ranking among five variant callers examined in hybridization capture-based exome sequencing largely holds true for pcr-based amplicon sequencing. amplicon sequencing can achieve much higher variant detection sensitivity for low-allelic-fraction snvs. at the same time, default variant calling settings should be further tuned to dampen false positive rates when analyzing amplicon sequencing data.

regarding individual algorithms, mutect and strelka show similarly high sensitivity in detecting low-allelic-fraction snvs in amplicon sequencing reads, with good specificity. for high-allelic-fraction somatic snvs, varscan <dig> and somaticsniper perform slightly better than mutect and strelka in terms of sensitivity in both amplicon sequencing and exome sequencing data.

naivesubtract is very straightforward in concept. using naivesubtract, variants detected in the tumor but not the normal sample would be considered putative somatic mutations. early studies applied such a subtraction method in detecting somatic mutations and demonstrated success to some extent  <cit> . one drawback of naivesubtract is that it does not take into account the complexity of germline false positives due to pcr-based enrichment artifacts or sequencing errors, or false negatives due to under-sampling during enrichment. also, naivesubtract is not tailored to handle detection of allele sites with low fraction. in other words, the sensitivity is limited by the actual variant caller used, which, in this case, is gatk unifiedgenotyper.

the performance of varscan <dig> is closely related to the minimum allele fraction threshold, because varscan <dig> will suppress any mutations below this threshold. we could improve varscan <dig> sensitivity after tuning the minimum allele fraction cut-off from the default  <dig>  to a lower value, but at the cost of significantly compromised specificity . in one recent study  <cit> , varscan <dig> achieved a sensitivity of  <dig>  for detecting variants of 5% fraction in targeted sequencing with average coverage of >1000×. however, the false positive rate in this study was  <dig> per mb after the poor quality, low coverage, and germline sites were masked, which is about 3-fold higher than our results. furthermore, prior knowledge about tumor purity is unavailable in real-world applications, so users often use default settings to run varscan <dig>  using the default varscan <dig> settings, we were unable to call somatic snvs of low allelic fraction.

although we set the parameters to maximize sensitivity, somatic sniper’s performance still falls behind other algorithms in calling somatic snvs of low allelic fraction. however, somaticsniper did achieve the highest sensitivity in the 100% ‘pure tumor’-normal match. the low sensitivity of varscan <dig> and somaticsniper in calling low-allelic-fraction somatic snvs is consistent with the results in  <cit> , which showed sensitivity less than  <dig>  for somatic snvs of fraction lower than  <dig> . in contrast, mutect and strelka produce high-confidence somatic snv candidates for any level of allele fraction: mutect and strelka can robustly detect somatic snvs at low allelic fraction, with an average sensitivity of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for sites above  <dig>  allelic fraction, respectively.

the merits of using artificial matched tumor-normal sample mixture series data sets created for calling na <dig> “somatic” snvs are at least two-fold:  the nist-giab gold-standard is a well-defined, high-confidence, large set of snvs for benchmark evaluation, and  this setup allowed us to assess variant calling for somatic snvs of a wide range of allele fractions from real data. the advantages of the nist-giab gold standard lie in the fact that more sites could be assessed as compared to snp arrays, which are normally limited to common variants. however, one limitation of our analysis is that a high-confidence variant list for the background germline variants is not available. therefore, using na <dig> for an artificial “somatic” sample is likely more accurate in evaluating sensitivity than in evaluating specificity. another limitation is that the na <dig> dna purchased from coriell is not exactly the same batch used for the nist-giab variant calls. in addition, one constraint of our artificial matched normal samples is the unmatched error distribution between the “normal” and “tumor” samples. so the virtual tumor-normal matches would potentially reduce the performance of methods relative to performance on real tumor samples that have error distributions more similar to the matched normal sample.

in principle, characterizing how performance of different methods depends on factors such as allele fraction is necessary for designing experiments. the complexity and systematic noise from sequencing from tumor-normal matched samples affect each algorithm, but does so in different ways. for systematic comparison, here we used the same aligned read file for all the methods, whereas impact of aligners on the methods would further distinguish their performance. deeper understanding of the sample properties and the ultimate goals of a cancer research project will make a difference in the choice of algorithms. this work can be extended to address questions regarding detecting variants from small amount of target genome mixed in the control samples. our work provides insights for the community to assist in choosing sensitive and specific methods for somatic snv calling, given a specific set of data type and experimental conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we demonstrated that the five somatic snv calling methods are applicable to both matched tumor-normal targeted amplicon and exome sequencing data. sensitivities vary with allelic fraction of the mutation in the tumor sample. our results show mutect and strelka achieved the highest sensitivities. our analysis can assist researchers in choosing a somatic snv calling method for their specific needs.

