BACKGROUND
classic population genetic models for the evolution of different reproductive modes within populations usually predict bi-modal distributions of predominant outcrossing or selfing  <cit> ; but see, e.g.,  <cit> . selection against deleterious recessive alleles is more effective in populations that reproduce more frequently via selfing than outcrossing because selfing increases segregation of homozygotes, which leads to the evolution of higher selfing rates. in contrast, populations that reproduce predominantly via outcrossing can maintain higher loads of recessive deleterious alleles, which should make those populations resistant to invasion by selfers and keep selfing rates low.

in contrast to theoretical expectations, many natural populations of plants and animals exhibit mixed reproductive systems with partial selfing  <cit> . one means of reconciling empirical observations with theory is to recognize that the fitness components expressed under selfing or outcrossing might tradeoff with one another, e.g.,  <cit> , and thereby add an additional layer of complexity to the population genetic dynamics. in plants, for example, the balance between reproduction via selfing and pollen export for outcrossing can be influenced by flower morphology, relative flower position within the individual, and pollinator availability  <cit> .

there are two causes for tradeoffs between selfing and outcrossing fitness components. first, tradeoffs can be explained by the existence of sexual conflicts that lead to the antagonistic coevolution between individuals of different sexes. for example, in male-hermaphrodite reproduction systems, increased male mating success may be associated with hermaphrodites becoming more resistant to mating if increased male performance is somehow harmful to the hermaphrodite. the hypothesis of a sexual conflict therefore predicts negative genetic correlations between the fitness components of individuals of different sexes. sexual conflict has largely been described for obligate outcrossers, e.g.,  <cit> , but could also be important for partial selfers  <cit> .

second, tradeoffs between fitness components derived from reproduction via selfing and outcrossing may be explained by constraints in the allocation of developmental, physiological or ecological resources between male and female functions, particularly in hermaphrodites  <cit> . this would be the case, for example, if increased proliferation of ovules or oocytes were associated with decreased proliferation of pollen or self-sperm during gametogenesis, and vice-versa. the hypothesis of a sex allocation therefore predicts negative genetic correlations between the sex-specific fitness components in hermaphrodites.

the two hypothesis explaining tradeoffs between selfing and outcrossing fitness components are not mutually exclusive and for this reason empirically determining whether the evolution of a sexual conflict or the evolution of sex allocation underlie the maintenance of partial selfing has been difficult. in this regard, the androdioecious  nematode caenorhabditis elegans may shed light, since over the last decade it has become an experimental model for the evolution of outcrossing and selfing  <cit> . interestingly, although the analysis of molecular variation suggests that outcrossing via males is rare in nature  <cit> , outcrossing rates exceeding those expected under mutation-genetic drift equilibrium are frequently observed when populations are maintained in the laboratory under novel conditions  <cit> .

the androdioecious reproductive system of c. elegans is characterized by the existence of hermaphrodites that are able to cross-fertilize their oocytes only when mated with males  <cit> . it is therefore plausible that partial selfing is maintained within experimental populations via sexual conflict. in fact, mating with males is known to have harmful effects on the longevity of hermaphrodites  <cit> , and, at the species-wide level, hermaphrodites have lost the ancestral female ability to attract males and respond to male mating behaviours  <cit> . in the presence of sexual conflict, the evolution of increased male mating success would thus be expected to be countered by evolutionary responses in hermaphrodite longevity. the experimental populations used here, which maintain partial selfing, have been shown to evolve increased male reproductive success  <cit> , but it is unknown whether or not hermaphrodites responded by increased resistance to mating with males, cf.,  <cit> , a result that would be consistent with the sexual conflict hypothesis.

c. elegans is also characterized by protandrous selfing, since hermaphrodites first produce sperm and then irreversibly switch to oogenesis before maturity  <cit> . depending on the frequency of males and time of reproduction, selfing will generally precede outcrossing  <cit> , though once hermaphrodites are mated male sperm outcompete self-sperm  <cit> . since hermaphrodites cannot mate with each other, it is possible that the common developmental program for sperm and oocytes in hermaphrodites results in negative genetic correlations between selfing and outcrossing fitness components  <cit> . thus, in addition to possible sexual conflict, the maintenance of partial selfing during experimental evolution may also be due to an evolutionary shift in sex allocation towards male function in hermaphrodites.

here, we aim to determine whether the evolution of a sexual conflict or the evolution of sex allocation can explain the maintenance of the 50% outcrossing rate observed during the  <dig> generations of experimental evolution in male-hermaphrodite androdioecious populations with standing genetic diversity, as reported in  <cit> . we compare evolutionary changes in the reproduction and longevity patterns of obligate-selfing hermaphrodites with those of obligate-outcrossing hermaphrodites mated with naïve males with which they have not evolved. the use of naïve  males allows the evolutionary response of hermaphroditic function to be tested directly. as a control, we also measured the reproduction and longevity patterns of females from male–female  populations evolved under the same environmental conditions of the male-hermaphrodite  populations using the same tester males as those employed in assaying outcrossed hermaphrodites. we thus compare the reproduction and longevity patterns of individuals subject to either selfing or outcrossing: selfed hermaphrodites, outcrossed hermaphrodites and outcrossed females. evolutionary response was evaluated by contemporaneously characterizing reproduction and longevity in generation  <dig> and generation  <dig> individuals.

according to life-history theory, adaptation under our experimental evolution conditions of 4-day discrete and non-overlapping generations is expected to shift reproduction schedules towards earlier ages  <cit> . this is because, under selfing or outcrossing, the majority of reproduction in c. elegans hermaphrodites/females occurs after day  <dig>  so a shift towards early life reproduction should be favoured by selection. we use the fact that the evolutionary changes observed for females provide the null expectation for the effects of an on-going sexual conflict in the absence of sex allocation constraints to test the following hypotheses.

first, if a sexual conflict is important for structuring the evolutionary response, then derived generation  <dig> females should evolve to be become better at resisting the effects of male mating than ancestral females, and so female longevity  should also increase with experimental evolution. if a sexual conflict explains partial selfing in the male-hermaphrodite populations, then evolved hermaphrodites and females tested under similar conditions should both show increased resistance to mating .

second, we expect generation  <dig> females to display increased embryo production and/or survivorship early in life than ancestral females. we also expect such an evolutionary response in hermaphrodites when they self and outcross. however, if evolution of sex allocation towards male function explains partial selfing in the male-hermaphrodite populations, the investment made early in life relative to lifetime reproduction should increase only when hermaphrodites self. for outcrossed hermaphrodites, increased allocation of resources towards male function is expected to be neutral or disadvantageous and thus the relative reproductive investment early in life should not respond during experimental evolution.

RESULTS
reproductive schedules
the individual reproductive schedule measurements are summarized in additional file 1: figure s <dig> and additional file 1: table s <dig> . breeding mode influences the lifetime production of embryo and adult progeny. selfing hermaphrodites start reproducing between day  <dig> and day  <dig> of the life-cycle and by day  <dig> have mostly ceased to reproduce. outcrossed hermaphrodites and females on the other hand start reproducing between day  <dig> and  <dig>  but only cease reproduction by day  <dig>  as a consequence, outcrossed individuals have higher total lifetime reproductive output. these reproduction patterns are explained by the fact that c. elegans hermaphrodites are self sperm limited. also as expected, mating with males early in life greatly decreases the average longevity of hermaphrodites and females, when compared with hermaphrodites undergo selfing.

evolution of fecundity
selfed hermaphrodites from male-hermaphrodite populations at g <dig> lay significantly more embryos before day  <dig> than their ancestors . after day  <dig>  however, we measured no evolutionary changes in fecundity. outcrossed hermaphrodites showed no differences whether they came from g <dig> or g <dig> populations, at either period of the life-cycle. outcrossed females from male–female populations at  may lay a significant higher number of embryos before day  <dig> than their ancestrals , but not after day  <dig> 

evolution of fertility
for early life fertility, before day  <dig>  we observed significant evolutionary increases in all treatments : for selfed hermaphrodites t <dig>  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> , for outcrossed hermaphrodites t <dig>  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> , for outcrossed females t <dig>  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> . for late fertility, after day  <dig>  selfed hermaphrodites did not show any changes relative to their ancestors. on the other hand, outcrossed hermaphrodites evolved to be more fertile than their ancestors , and so did outcrossed females . in this later treatment, we found that the linear mixed model’s  residuals did not follow normality , though we confirmed the significance of evolutionary responses with generalized linear mixed models  employing poisson errors.

evolution of relative reproductive investment
in order to compare the evolutionary responses among individuals reproducing under selfing or outcrossing, we calculated the proportion of embryos and adults that were measured before day  <dig> over total lifetime numbers, which we defined as relative reproductive investment early in life. for early life investment in fecundity, we were unable to measure significant evolutionary changes . in contrast, there was a significant evolutionary increase in early life fertility investment in hermaphrodites that selfed . outcrossed hermaphrodites did not show any evolutionary change early life fertility investment. outcrossed females, like selfed hermaphrodites, showed an increase in early life fertility investment . selfed hermaphrodites and outcrossed females therefore showed a shift towards earlier relative reproductive success, when compared to their ancestors.

evolution of longevity
individuals measured for fecundity and fertility in the reproductive schedule assay were also scored for longevity. selfed hermaphrodites from g <dig> populations had a significantly higher longevity than their ancestrals  and although the lmm residuals did not follow normality , we confirmed the significance of this longevity increase with evolution when employing glmm with binomial errors. outcrossed hermaphrodites from g <dig> population did not show any longevity differences from their ancestors. in contrast, outcrossed females from g <dig> populations showed higher longevities than their ancestors 

evolution of longevity in the absence of mating
to test that the evolutionary increase in female longevity was due to an evolutionary increase in their resistance to mating with males, we conducted longevity assays as before but in the absence of mating. analysis of this assay indicated that the survival rates of unmated  females did not show any evolutionary response . confirming the findings from the reproductive schedule assay, we continued to find that the risk of dying with increased age was reduced in evolved unmated  hermaphrodites .

discussion
we have previously shown that male-hermaphrodite populations of c. elegans, characterized by having standing genetic diversity and cultured at high population sizes in a 4-day non-overlapping life-cycle, maintained partial selfing at roughly 50% during the  <dig> generations of experimental evolution  <cit> . such intermediate selfing rates are not expected under classic population genetic models, which posit that the evolution of inbreeding depression generated by deleterious recessive alleles is the cause for the evolution of different reproduction modes  <cit> . a tradeoff between fitness components under selfing and outcrossing is one way of resolving this conundrum  <cit> . what might the nature of these tradeoffs be?

fitness tradeoffs between selfing and outcrossing can result both via antagonistic coevolution between hermaphrodites and males  <cit> , and via constraints on sex allocation between male and female function in hermaphrodites  <cit> . in particular, the existence of sexual conflict predicts negative genetic correlations between the fitness components of different sexes, whereas the existence sex allocation predicts the existence of negative genetic correlations between the fitness components of only one sex, the hermaphrodite. evolution of a sexual conflict and evolution of sex allocation are not mutually exclusive and therefore can both potentially explain the maintenance of partial selfing.

starting first with sexual conflict, we found that outcrossing in c. elegans reduces the longevity of hermaphrodites/females, as in previous studies, cf.,  <cit> . if this cost of mating is maintained in part by antagonistic sexual coevolution, then restricting selection to fitness components expressed early in life  should alter the expected equilibrium between early reproduction and the deleterious impact of mating on longevity  <cit> . consistent with these predictions, evolved females from the male–female populations showed a shift in their relative reproductive investment towards earlier ages and an increase in longevity . this increase in longevity was conditional on the presence of males, as ancestral and derived populations had virgin females with similar longevities. in contrast, hermaphrodites from the male-hermaphrodite experimental evolution populations showed a shift toward earlier selfing but displayed no apparent reduction in the cost of mating with males.

lack of evolutionary response in the longevity of mated hermaphrodites is not due to a reduced mating performance of the males in their populations, since male reproductive success similarly increased during the experimental evolution of androdioecious and dioecious populations despite sex ratio differences  <cit> . the responses in females are therefore consistent with the existence of an underlying sexual conflict and antagonistic coevolution with males. conversely, the lack of longevity responses in mated hermaphrodites suggests that an on-going sexual conflict was not very important for the maintenance of partial selfing.

we also found that the longevity of selfed hermaphrodites greatly increased with experimental evolution. by definition, this result is not due to a reduction in the cost of mating with males and thus it is not related to sexual conflict. because of inbreeding depression observed in the ancestral population, increased longevity of evolved selfed hermaphrodites is instead probably due to the purging of deleterious alleles under natural selection during experimental evolution  <cit> . a reduction in the cost of reproduction and/or an increase in somatic viability could underlie this reduction in inbreeding depression  <cit> . disentangling these alternatives would require further investigation by, for example, genetically eliminating gametogenesis. if a reduction in the cost of reproduction explains the evolution of longevity in hermaphrodites when they self, then eliminating gametogenesis would also eliminate the observed longevity differences between ancestral and evolved populations.

turning to the possibility that partial selfing was maintained because of constraints on sex allocation, general models for the evolution of sex allocation in hermaphrodites indicate that the degree of selfing is inversely correlated to the allocation of reproductive resources to male function  <cit> . similarly, other models, particularly those developed to explain the evolution of plant reproductive systems , predict stable intermediate selfing rates when there is a positive genetic correlation between the numbers of selfed and outcrossed ovules  <cit> .

for the male-hermaphrodite populations examined here, it appears that there was evolution of sex allocation through increased allocation of reproductive resources towards male function. we found increased total lifetime progeny production regardless of treatment, which may indicate that there was evolution of increased proliferation of oocytes . however, we did not find evidence for an increase in the relative allocation of resources towards oogenesis since the relative reproductive investment made in embryos or adults early in life did not change in outcrossed hermaphrodites.

it could be argued that no early life relative reproductive investment responses in outcrossed hermaphrodites is explained by lower offspring viability, when compared to the offspring viability of selfed hermaphrodites. particularly, there could have been outbreeding depression because hermaphrodites were mated with unrelated gfp males. consistent with this idea, wild c. elegans isolates show outbreeding depression when crossed with each other  <cit> . we have previously shown, however, that after  <dig> generations of experimental evolution outbreeding depression is expected to have been mostly resolved by selection  <cit> . in male–female populations, in contrast, residual outbreeding depression could have been maintained to larger extent than in male-hermaphrodite populations, as selfing facilitated the purging of deleterious recessive alleles  <cit> . here, females from the male–female populations increased their relative reproductive investment early in life when outcrossed with similar tester males. together, these findings suggest that the lack of a response in the early life relative reproductive investment of outcrossed hermaphrodites was not due to outbreeding depression.

the relative reproductive investment under conditions of selfing changed in a direction that was adaptive in our 4-day life cycle protocol: a shift towards early life. as oogenesis is a common developmental program to both selfed and outcrossed hermaphrodites, and because a similar response towards early reproduction was not observed in outcrossed hermaphrodites, we can infer that the allocation towards female function did not change during experimental evolution. if the allocation towards female function did not change, the only way to have evolved increased earlier self-reproduction was by the evolution of resource allocation towards male function. because we did not observe significant increases in the number of embryos during early reproduction, but did see an increase in the number of adult progeny, it seems likely that part of this evolutionary response is in sperm viability. it is also likely that there was evolution of increased rates of self-sperm proliferation and/or the evolution of retarded switching between spermatogenesis and oogenesis .

CONCLUSIONS
mixed mating systems are relatively common in natural populations of animals and plants. both sexual conflict and the existence of sex-specific resource allocation constraints in hermaphrodites can mediate the fitness tradeoff between selfing and outcrossing, which in turn can explain the adaptive stability of partial selfing. in our c. elegans populations, despite the fact that males greatly increased their reproductive success during evolution, the existence of a sexual conflict appears to have contributed little to adaptation and to the maintenance of partial selfing. instead, the maintenance of partial selfing was likely due to the evolution of increased allocation towards male function in hermaphrodites.

