BACKGROUND
hybrid zones are excellent model systems for evolutionary studies as they provide a diversity of recombinant genotypes through generations of mutation, recombination, and gene flow  <cit> . growing empirical evidence indicates that natural hybrid zones occur across a range of taxonomic groups at rates greater than previously estimated  <cit>  and that hybridization and introgression are important forces that can shape the evolutionary trajectory of a species . studies of hybridizing taxa that maintain genetic distinction with ongoing gene flow provide insight into the speciation process  <cit>  and offer a direct measure of reproductive isolation. because hybrid zone studies allow for the quantification of differential patterns of introgression of foreign alleles, hybrid zones provide the opportunity to identify the genetic and phenotypic traits influencing species divergence  <cit> .

hybrid zones are thought to be semi-permeable boundaries between genomes as differential fitness of hybrids can result in reduced introgression of those regions important in maintaining reproductive isolation, while introgression of regions free of selection is permitted  <cit> . loci with no influence on hybrid fitness should display uninhibited movement across a hybrid zone, whereas regions underlying local adaptation or that are responsible for genetic incompatibilities remain differentiated, often in the presence of gene flow  <cit> . rates of introgression have been found to vary among genetic and phenotypic markers across a number of natural hybrid zones . these observations have been linked to numerous demographic and selective processes, including genetic incompatibilities  <cit> , ecological divergence  <cit> , differential fitness  <cit> , and variations in mate preference and behavior  <cit> .

sampling a diversity of genetic and phenotypic markers provides an unbiased view of introgression and genetic structure across a hybrid zone  <cit> . understanding these patterns can offer valuable insight into the mechanisms responsible for restricting gene flow across species’ boundaries , as differential introgression may be indicative of ecological or evolutionary dynamics in the focal gene regions  <cit> . for example, neutral microsatellite markers should diffuse freely across the hybrid zone, resulting in widespread movement of alleles. conversely, diagnostic markers  are predicted to be under divergent selection, exhibiting reduced introgression  <cit> , as the elevated divergence typically associated with diagnostic markers suggests association with genomic regions under selection  <cit> . differential introgression of sex-linked and mitochondrial markers relative to autosomal loci is often attributed to haldane’s rule, which predicts greater fitness reductions in hybrids of the heterogametic sex  <cit> . this pattern has been observed in a number of avian  and mammalian systems  <cit> .

morphological traits also provide insight into extrinsic selection and demographic events shaping a hybrid zone  <cit> . bimodal distribution of phenotypes, or an abrupt clinal transition, can be indicative of high dispersal, differential selection, hybrid zone movement  <cit> , or assortative mating  <cit> . assessing introgression of secondary sexual characteristics  can also aid in identifying patterns of asymmetrical introgression  <cit> . divergence in plumage characteristics can be particularly important in driving pre-zygotic isolation in birds  <cit> , as these traits play an important role in mate selection, providing a range of important cues to females including individual and territory quality  <cit>  and offspring attentiveness  <cit> .

here we investigated patterns of introgression in an avian hybrid zone between two recently diverged marsh endemics, the saltmarsh  and nelson’s  sparrow . in the usa and maritime canada, the two species are restricted to a linear ribbon of tidal-marsh habitat along the atlantic seaboard with a subspecies of caudacutus  predominantly inhabiting coastal salt marshes from southern maine to new jersey and a subspecies of nelsoni  predominantly inhabiting brackish and tidal marshes from the canadian maritimes to northern massachusetts  <cit> . current knowledge suggests that the two taxa  overlap and hybridize in tidal marshes along a 210 km stretch of the new england coast between the weskeag river estuary in south thomaston, maine and plum island in newburyport, massachusetts .

recent work in the caudacutus-nelsoni hybrid zone indicates extensive introgression with a high proportion of backcrossed sparrows in sympatric populations  <cit> . despite high rates of admixture, very few individuals are recent generation  hybrids , indicative of an advanced generation hybrid zone characterized by high rates of recombination  <cit> . accordingly, there is no intermediate hybrid phenotype, and complex patterns of morphological variation preclude discrimination of pure and admixed sparrows from morphology alone  <cit> . while backcrossing is extensive between caudacutus and nelsoni, variation in habitat affinity, morphology, and behavior suggest a role for isolating mechanisms in this system. abrupt environmental gradients across the marine-terrestrial ecotone within tidal marshes present adaptive challenges to terrestrial vertebrates . a. caudacutus is a narrow niche specialist, reliant exclusively on salt marshes in both its breeding and wintering habitat; it has been associated with salt marshes over a longer evolutionary time frame  <cit>  compared to a. nelsoni, which, in allopatry, uses a broader range of habitats including brackish and fresh water marshes and hay fields. in the hybrid zone, a mosaic of fine-scale habitat types – coastal, bay, and upriver, tidal marshes – occurs, and the spatial structuring of pure and hybrid individuals follows a patchy distribution consistent with these local habitat differences  <cit> . due to these differences in niche specificity, there may be stronger selection for adaptive traits in pure caudacutus individuals, driving ecological divergence. tidal marsh adaptations may also influence morphology and plumage coloration in pure caudacutus and nelsoni  <cit>  with potential reinforcement of these traits through sexual selection. numerous behavioral differences between caudacutus and nelsoni males, including differences in flight displays, song, aggressiveness, and mating strategy  <cit>  further have the potential to shape asymmetries in mate selection within the hybrid zone.

the aim of this study was to characterize the genetic structure, including patterns of differential introgression and selection, across the caudacutus-nelsoni hybrid zone and to test the hypothesis that adaptive traits are important in maintaining pure species boundaries despite ongoing gene flow. we conducted extensive, systematic sampling across the full extent of the caudacutus-nelsoni hybrid zone, coupled with population genetic analyses and geographic and non-geographic cline analyses to characterize genetic variation, quantify introgression across genetic and morphological markers, and identify the width and center of the hybrid zone. we used plumage features and a diversity of genetic markers, including anonymous  microsatellites, diagnostic  microsatellites, mitochondrial, and sex-linked markers, to compare introgression patterns across potentially variable selective processes. the diagnostic markers used in this study were identified from a genome-wide comparison of microsatellite loci between caudacutus and nelsoni  <cit>  and were selected because they showed elevated divergence between allopatric caudacutus and nelsoni individuals  compared to neutral, anonymous microsatellites . several of the loci are linked to genes of known function, indicative of divergent selection for functional traits that differ between the species  <cit> . the potential influence of selection and introgression patterns for these markers across the geographic extent of the hybrid zone are of yet unknown. we predicted that the gene-associated diagnostic markers would show reduced introgression and more abrupt clines compared to the neutral microsatellite markers. we also predicted selection would occur for sex-linked and mitochondrial markers in accordance with haldane’s rule. in birds, females are the heterogametic sex , and thus haldane’s rule predicts reduced introgression of both sex-linked markers and mitochondrial markers  compared to autosomal markers. lastly, we predicted strong selection for features related to plumage darkness, as increased melanin is thought to be an adaptation to tidal marshes , which we hypothesized to be under stronger selection in caudacutus.

RESULTS
we characterized genotypic data at  <dig> microsatellite loci and dna sequences from two mitochondrial,  <dig> z-linked and one autosomal gene from  <dig> sparrows from  <dig> marshes across the caudacutus-nelsoni hybrid zone and surrounding allopatric populations . we obtained morphological data  from  <dig> of these individuals. microsatellite loci were highly polymorphic with allelic richness ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> alleles per locus . allelic richness was greater in pure caudacutus populations  than in pure nelsoni populations . mean observed heterozygosities ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , with heterozygosity generally increasing from north to south. six of the  <dig> microsatellite markers  were candidates for positive selection, likely a result of their association with coding regions . all other microsatellite markers were within neutral expectations. we detected significant deviations  from hardy-weinberg in  <dig> out of  <dig>  marshes . we did not observe significant linkage disequilibrium in any of our populations.fig.  <dig> the location of  <dig> marshes along the northeastern coast of the united states where a. caudacutus and a. nelsoni individuals were sampled. black circles represent allopatric populations from which putatively pure individuals were used for calculating a hybrid index. white circles represent marshes that are outside of the currently hypothesized overlap zone, yet were treated as sympatric populations due to their close proximity to the hybrid zone and evidence of introgressed individuals  <cit> . gray circles represent marshes within the hybrid zone and the red star represents the approximate center of the zone, based on geographic cline estimates. the boxplot represents the distribution of hybrid index values for each of the sympatric marshes sampled; the center of the hybrid zone is colored in red. to demonstrate phenotypic differences between the parental species, representative photographs are shown for allopatric nelsoni  and caudacutus . hybrids do not exhibit a clear intermediate phenotype, but rather display complex combinations of phenotypic traits that do not vary predictably by genotypic class 
is, average q values, hybrid index, and interspecific heterozygosity for each marsh based on analyses in structure and introgress.

n

f
is significance is indicated by an asterisk



genetic structure of the caudacutus-nelsoni hybrid zone
haplotype distributions among sampling locations varied by marker, with the least mixing observed in nd <dig>  nd <dig>  and slc45a <dig> ; because nd <dig> and nd <dig> were identical for all individuals, they are combined for subsequent descriptions. we detected caudacutus haplotypes in our putatively allopatric nelsoni populations for four out of five genes:  <dig> individuals  for nd2/nd <dig>   <dig> individual  for slc45a <dig>  and  <dig> individuals  for slc30a <dig>  we detected fewer instances of nelsoni haplotypes in putatively pure caudacutus populations, with only  <dig> individual  for nd2/nd <dig>  slc30a <dig>  and rag- <dig>  we assigned hybrid haplotypes for the two markers with rflp banding patterns . in allopatric populations, we identified  <dig> putatively pure nelsoni  and  <dig> putatively pure caudacutus  with mixed haplotypes for rag- <dig>  for slc30a <dig>  we found hybrid haplotypes in the pure nelsoni populations  but no hybrid haplotypes in the pure caudacutus populations. in sympatric marshes, the percentages of nelsoni and caudacutus haplotypes were as follows: 41 % nelsoni and 59 % caudacutus for nd2/nd <dig> and 31 % nelsoni and 69 % caudacutus for slc45a <dig>  for slc30a <dig> and rag- <dig>  the percentages of nelsoni, caudacutus, and hybrid haplotypes were  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>   <dig>  24 %, respectively .fig.  <dig> bar plot showing the distribution of haplotypes by transect point . each panel represents a marker, from top to bottom: nd3/nd <dig> , rag <dig> , slc45a <dig> , and slc30a <dig> . the hybrid zone is located between sampling points  <dig> and 27



structure assigned individuals to one of two genetic clusters  based on Δk , which corresponded to caudacutus and nelsoni populations. consistent with previous findings, we found few intermediate individuals  and pure and backcrossed individuals appeared to be patchily distributed across sympatric populations . individuals sampled from allopatric nelsoni populations had a low probability  of being assigned to the caudacutus cluster, while individuals sampled from allopatric caudacutus populations had a high probability of being assigned to the caudacutus cluster . sympatric populations had intermediate q values and hybrid indices ; however pure caudacutus and pure nelsoni individuals inhabiting the same marshes largely drove this pattern . twelve individuals  had q values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  ; these  <dig> individuals were dispersed across the sampled marshes . there were  <dig> individuals  with a hybrid index ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . mean site-specific interspecific heterozygosity ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  , with the greatest interspecific heterozygosities found on sites near the center of the hybrid zone . we observed significant genetic differentiation among sampled marshes , with values ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  . the largest fst values were generally observed between the allopatric nelsoni populations and all other marshes. we also detected significant fst values between sympatric marshes that were predominantly composed of nelsoni individuals  compared to all other marshes.fig.  <dig> population clusters identified by structure for  <dig> individuals genotyped at  <dig> microsatellite loci. bar plot shows individual membership to two genetic clusters. blue represents nelsoni genotypes and red represent caudacutus genotypes



genomic and geographic analyses of introgression
genomic clines revealed that introgression patterns were variable among markers . sixty-six percent  of the  <dig> markers showed deviations from patterns of neutral introgression . clines were steeper than neutral expectation for  <dig> of these markers, including six of the diagnostic microsatellite loci , three of the anonymous microsatellites , two mitochondrial markers , and slc30a <dig>  six neutral microsatellite markers and rag- <dig> displayed more gradual clines than neutral expectation. comparison of individual loci to multilocus expectation using the logit-logistic model revealed variations in cline slope and position among the  <dig> genetic markers . we detected overall patterns of asymmetrical introgression with 66 %  of the markers shifted toward caudacutus and 34 %  shifted toward nelsoni. five markers  displayed stronger selection ; all five of these markers exhibited asymmetrical introgression toward caudacutus. twenty-four markers displayed more gradual slopes  than multilocus expectation.fig.  <dig> plots showing patterns of genomic and geographic introgression across  <dig> a. caudacutus and a. nelsoni populations . a genomic clines calculated in introgress plotted as the observed frequency of a. caudacutus homozygote genotypes  against the hybrid index . black lines show markers that deviate significantly from neutral introgression and gray lines show markers that do not deviate from neutral patterns of introgression. b geographic clines calculated for  <dig> markers plotted as the frequency of caudacutus alleles across an 800 km sampling transect. neutral markers are in gray, diagnostic markers in black, mitochondrial markers in red, z-linked markers in green, and an autosomal marker in blue. c geographic clines calculated for five morphological traits. weight is in black, wing chord in blue, bill length in gray, plumage amount in green, and plumage definition in red

fig.  <dig> analysis of introgression patterns comparing hybrid index for a focal locus  versus hybrid index for a multilocus expectation . clines were compared using the logit-logistic model of fitzpatrick  <cit> . two loci are presented in each plot; black and gray points represent the raw data points for each marker. line color indicates whether markers are shifted toward nelsoni  or caudacutus  based on estimates of u. line type indicates whether markers show gradual  or abrupt slopes  based on estimates of v


nelsoni
caudacutus


geographic cline analyses revealed variation in estimates for cline width  but more consistent estimates for cline center  across marker types. based on these estimates, cline center was consistently predicted to be around sampling location  <dig> . estimates for cline width were the smallest for mitochondrial  and z-linked markers , followed by diagnostic microsatellite markers . estimates for cline width were largest and most variable for the neutral microsatellite markers . similar to the cline estimates for the genetic markers, cline width was variable for the morphological traits  and more consistent for cline center .table  <dig> parameter estimates for the best fitting clines for  <dig> markers, including :  <dig> diagnostic microsatellites,  <dig> anonymous microsatellites,  <dig> mitochondrial markers,  <dig> z-linked markers, and  <dig> autosomal marker. geographic clines were fit using the r package hzar. for each locus, we present the top model, estimates for cline width , cline center , pmin/pmax , estimates for the shape of the left, right, and mirrored tails, and the aicc



estimates for cline width were narrower for traits related to the darkness and definition of plumage  compared to traits related to the amount of plumage streaking . estimates for cline center were similar  between morphological traits and genetic markers. phenotypic variance fluctuated across sympatric marshes. for the five morphological traits, we observed peaks in phenotypic variance that fell approximately between  <dig> and 450 km along the sampling transect, consistent with cline estimates for the center of the hybrid zone . we observed peaks in phenotypic variance near the estimated center of the hybrid zone for weight and for traits related to definition/darkness of streaking; further, variance in weight exceeded vmax near the approximate zone center . variance in bill length in sympatric populations was greater than the variance observed in allopatric populations for all sampled marshes. the degree of introgression  was higher for wing chord  and for plumage traits related to coloration and amount of streaking  than it was for weight  and plumage traits related to the definition and darkness of streaking .fig.  <dig> variance for five morphological traits plotted for  <dig> sympatric nelsoni and caudacutus marshes along the sampling transect : bill length , plumage coloration , plumage definition , weight , and wing chord . v
max, calculated as the maximum variance expected under a scenario of reproductive isolation, is plotted as a blue line. traits with variance closer to v
max have reduced introgression



discussion
species boundaries can remain distinct in the face of ongoing introgression, even if only a few regions of the genome remain differentiated while other regions become homogenized. within the caudacutus-nelsoni hybrid zone, we found patterns indicative of strong selection  for  <dig> out of  <dig> genetic markers despite extensive introgression in sympatric populations. we identified 42 % of the sampled individuals as admixed . the majority of these admixed individuals were backcrossed, with the very low proportion of recent generation hybrids in this system indicative of an advanced generation hybrid zone  <cit> . the distribution of pure and admixed individuals appeared patchy across sympatric populations, with neighboring marshes exhibiting noticeable differences in genotypic compositions. increased heterozygosity and fis at select marshes across the zone, including weskeag and chapman’s landing  support the idea that certain marshes facilitate mixing more than others.

the evolutionary history of caudacutus and nelsoni is complex; however, the leading hypothesis suggests that the current overlap zone is an area of secondary intergradation following a split during a pleistocene glaciation event  <cit> . consistent with this hypothesis, the results of this study provide evidence for secondary contact and contemporary introgression as opposed to incomplete lineage sorting. we found strong divergence across all markers in allopatric populations and high levels of admixture and a noticeable peak in phenotypic variation in sympatric populations. greater genetic differentiation in allopatry  than in sympatry  suggests geographic structuring of alleles. incomplete lineage sorting, alternatively, would manifest in random geographic distribution of ancestral alleles  <cit> . furthermore, the occurrence of recent generation hybrids in sympatric marshes, although in low frequency, points toward contemporary hybridization events between these species.

estimates for cline width were highly variable among markers, ranging from  <dig> to 970 km, and were, on average, most narrow for mitochondrial and z-linked genes. estimates for cline center, however, were consistent among marker types  falling around yarmouth, maine . previous field surveys identified caudacutus and nelsoni individuals co-occurring from weskeag, maine to newburyport, massachusetts . consistent with the field estimates of the overlap zone, three of the markers analyzed in this study  exhibited cline widths in the  <dig> – 300 km range. the remaining markers had substantially larger cline widths, indicating extensive introgression and recombination within and well outside of the overlap zone.

clines varying in width but constrained to the same center are indicative of differential introgression across the hybrid zone. this is consistent with predictions that hybrid zones act as a semi-permeable barrier for the exchange of genetic material between taxa  <cit> . we found differential introgression consistent with our a priori predictions for each marker type, including comparatively narrow cline estimates for mitochondrial, sex-linked, and select gene-associated, diagnostic markers relative to wide clines for neutral loci. this variable introgression across markers suggests that while most traits exhibit uninhibited movement, there are certain traits that do not freely cross the species’ boundaries and therefore may be important in reproductive isolation. the observed patterns can be explained by both selection against hybrids and adaptive divergence along a tidal marsh gradient as active mechanisms in shaping species boundaries between caudacutus and nelsoni.

consistent with haldane’s rule, we found that on average, mitochondrial and z-linked markers show reduced introgression compared to autosomal markers . haldane’s rule predicts that fitness reductions should occur more often in hybrids of the heterogametic sex  <cit> ; these differential fitness reductions appear to play an important role in speciation  <cit> . reduced introgression of mitochondrial or sex-linked markers in organisms with zw sex determination is an expectation of the dominance theory of the dobzhansky-muller incompatibility model . this theory predicts that fitness reductions arise through the interaction of incompatible alleles, which evolved in allopatry. if these incompatible alleles are recessive, fitness reductions will be greater for the heterogametic sex if these genes are located on the sex chromosomes. in systems where females are the heterogametic sex, haldane’s rule also predicts reduced introgression of mitochondrial markers because they are maternally inherited. there is extensive empirical support for haldane’s rule  <cit> , increasingly so in avian systems, including sterility  and lower survival rates . accordingly, adaptive behavioral differences in pure caudacutus and nelsoni females associated with nesting synchrony in relation to tidal cycles  <cit>  suggest a potentially important influence of differential fitness among pure and admixed females in shaping zone dynamics. evidence for reduced survival in f1/f <dig> females provide further support for haldane’s rule in this system  <cit> . nonetheless, other causes of the observed patterns of restricted introgression of mitochondrial and sex-linked genes cannot be discounted. differences in marker-specific inheritance patterns, effective population sizes, genetic drift, and sex-biased dispersal can generate disparate rates of gene flow across the genome and lead to differential introgression across markers  <cit> .

only one marker  exhibited narrower clines than the z-linked and mitochondrial markers. based on annotation with the zebra finch genome, ammo <dig> was found to be associated with a gene that codes for a mitogen-activated protein kinase . specifically, the mapk superfamily consists of three distinct signaling pathways with roles linked to numerous cellular functions including immune responses, host-parasite interactions, and adaptive responses to thermal, osmotic, and oxygen stresses  <cit> . of particular interest is the response of mapk to osmotic stress, which has been documented in a range of organisms  <cit> , including in mammalian kidney  <cit>  and liver astrocytes  <cit>  and in the osmosensory signaling pathways of fish . mapks therefore may have a critical role in salinity adaptation  <cit>  and may serve an important role in osmoregulatory functions of a. caudacutus. the transition from upland and brackish habitat  to salt marsh  presents major adaptive challenges to terrestrial vertebrates  <cit> , and adaptive divergence across this salinity gradient may thus play an important role in reproductive isolation between the species  <cit> . pathways related to osmotic stress  would arguably be under strong selection in this system. the mapk gene region likely plays an important ecological role for a. caudacutus, which exhibits a pre-pleistocene association with tidal salt marshes  <cit> , and thereby a longer time to evolve adaptations to salt marshes compared to a. nelsoni, which exhibits a broader ecological niche, breeding also in grassland and brackish marshes and a more recent association with tidal marshes  <cit> .

restricted introgression of additional molecular and phenotypic traits provided evidence for selection on increased melanin in a. caudacutus, consistent with the hypothesized adaptive role for melanin in vertebrates that inhabit saltmarsh ecosystems  <cit> . here we present two lines of support for this hypothesis. first, we found narrow cline estimates for the z-linked marker slc45a <dig>  along with a more abrupt transition in slope compared to a multilocus average . slc45a <dig>  is associated with melanin-based pigmentation and has been linked to plumage phenotypes in birds, including silver and cinnamon colored phenotypes  and the gray plumage of hooded crows . similarly, mutations in slc45a <dig> may relate to the differences in plumage coloration between caudacutus and nelsoni. a. caudacutus individuals have dark chestnut streaking patterns on the breast and flanks and dark chestnut backs, while a. nelsoni have gray streaking on the breast and flanks and more gray on the back  <cit> . walsh et al.  <cit>  found that plumage traits related to plumage darkness  are more strongly correlated with genotype. secondly, we found that the introgression of traits related to plumage darkness was reduced  compared to traits related to streaking amount . natural selection for the adaptive benefits of salt marsh melanism  may be reinforced by sexual selection  <cit> . the darkness of streaking in the breast and flanks may offer strong visual cues for individuals during mate selection.

we detected strong patterns of asymmetrical introgression across the  <dig> genetic markers, with  <dig> showing patterns of asymmetrical introgression toward a. caudacutus and  <dig> markers showing patterns of asymmetrical introgression toward a. nelsoni. a majority of these markers, including all of the markers that showed asymmetries toward nelsoni, displayed gradual slopes indicative of weak selection. five markers exhibited abrupt clines and all of them showed patterns of asymmetry toward caudacutus. these findings are consistent with previous work suggesting that backcrossing is asymmetrical and biased toward a. caudacutus  <cit> , possibly due to differences in mating systems  <cit>  or population density.

both species exhibit an unusual mating system among emberizines, characterized by non-territoriality, lack of male parental care, and high levels of promiscuity facilitating intense male-male competition for receptive females  <cit> . the two species differ in their mating tactics, however. nelsoni males spend substantial time mate guarding and have more distinctive song and flight displays for attracting females  <cit> . caudacutus males are highly polygamous and exhibit a scramble competition mating system whereby males search for and attempt to mate with multiple receptive females  <cit> . size differences between nelsoni and caudacutus males  may thus place nelsoni at a substantial competitive disadvantage when competing with caudacutus males to secure mates in sympatric marshes. admixed females are thus more likely to backcross with caudacutus males leading to asymmetries. this is particularly true in sites toward the southern portion of the hybrid zone, where caudacutus males outnumber nelsoni males by approximately 4: <dig>  <cit> . cline estimates for weight coupled with a peak in weight variance near the center of the zone provide supportive evidence that size is an important factor in shaping zone dynamics in this system. the cline for weight was the most abrupt of the five morphological traits analyzed, indicative of strong selection against intermediately sized individuals, which may be ineffective in securing mates using either of the mating tactics . furthermore, variance in weight at the center of the hybrid zone exceeded variance in allopatry, which may be indicative of character displacement with smaller nelsoni and larger caudacutus in sympatric versus allopatric populations.

asymmetrical introgression has been documented in a number of avian contact zones  and may also be indicative of hybrid zone movement or of one species being displaced by the other. moving hybrid zones leave tails of clines of unlinked neutral markers in their wake, giving the appearance of asymmetrical introgression  <cit> . distinguishing hybrid zone expansion from asymmetrical introgression poses a challenge, and is best addressed with temporally replicated sampling. however, multiple alleles introgressing in one direction offers additional support for zone movement  <cit> . previous research has documented a potential southward expansion of nelsoni into the range of caudacutus, with nelsoni alleles documented as far south as rhode island  <cit> . extensive field surveys also suggest a more pronounced decline in caudacutus abundance across their range in comparison to nelsoni ; however, a direct temporal comparison of genetic data is required to test hypotheses of a hybrid zone expansion.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we found support for hybrid zones acting as semi-permeable boundaries to foreign alleles across a tidal marsh gradient. while a majority of the markers used for this analysis showed patterns of weak selection and uninhibited movement across the hybrid zone, we found evidence for strong selection for a few molecular markers and plumage characteristics, consistent with evolutionary processes contributing to reproductive isolation. specifically, we detected reduced introgression of mitochondrial and z-linked markers, providing evidence for haldane’s rule, along with divergent selection for traits conferring adaptive benefits to tidal marshes. despite the overall low genetic differentiation between caudacutus and nelsoni, niche differentiation may be driving ecological speciation between the species, with strong selective pressures for a few critical gene regions playing an important adaptive role. we conclude that adaptive divergence across a tidal marsh ecotone may promote isolating mechanisms and prevent the erosion of pure species boundaries in this system.

