BACKGROUND
the genus lepus  is widespread in africa, europe, asia, and north and central america. the number of lepus species currently recognized ranges from  <dig> to  <dig>  <cit> . in china, hares  are distributed from the qinghai-tibetan plateau to near sea level, and from the mainland to the island of hainan. to date, the evolutionary history of chinese hares  is poorly defined, mainly due to uncertain taxonomic classification  <cit> .

many taxonomic schemes based on morphology have been proposed for chinese hares and classifying them into various numbers of species. the earliest studies divided extant chinese hares into seven species: l. capensis , l. sinensis , l. oiostolus , l. mandshuricus , l. timidus , l. yarkandensis  and l. hainanus   <cit> . subsequent analyses, incorporating a large number of morphometric features  conducted by luo  <cit> , assigned chinese hares into nine species by adding  <dig> species: l. melainus  and l. comus . several recent classifications, however, have reignited the debate. hoffmann & smith  <cit>  divided l. capensis into two species: l. tibetanus and l. tolai, and placed l. melainus into l. mandshuricus. pan et al.  <cit>  also did not support the specific status of l. melainus, and assigned l. tibetanus within l. tolai . wu et al.  <cit> , based on four mitochondrial genes, also suggested that l. mandshuricus and l. melainus should be a single species, but rejected the specific status of l. capensis. liu et al.  <cit> , using skull characters and nuclear gene sequences, supported the synonymy of l. melainus and l. mandshuricus. hence, taxonomic classifications within chinese hares remain uncertain and necessitate further analyses that include additional taxa and discrete sequence data.

hybridization among wild mammalian species may lead to the introgression of genes and genomes across the species barrier yielding a reticulate evolutionary pattern  among these species and thus taxonomic uncertainties. as reviewed by nosil  <cit> , speciation with gene flow could be common; however, the impact of hybridization on the speciation process in animals remains poorly defined. studies have revealed that introgressive hybridization often leads to the complete replacement of mtdna on a regional scale  <cit>  or even throughout a species' distribution  <cit> . such replacements appear to be more common than previously appreciated and can affect the origin and adaptation of organisms  <cit> .

if hybridization occurs between recently diverged species, then morphological intermediates between these species may be produced thus contributing to the taxonomic confusion. such a phenomenon seems to occur within the genus lepus. several previous studies have demonstrated that introgressive hybridization has occurred among some species within lepus. thulin et al.  <cit>  and thulin & tegelström  <cit>  demonstrated the unidirectional introgression of l. timidus mtdna into l. europaeus that was introduced into sweden during the 19th century. morphological intermediates between the two species, believed to be hybrids, have also been observed since the introduction of l. europaeus  <cit> . in addition, hybrids between l. timidus females and l. europaeus males are easily acquired in captivity  <cit>  and the f <dig> hybrids show intermediate characters  <cit> . furthermore, alves et al.  <cit>  and melo-ferreira et al.  <cit>  described an ancient mtdna introgression of l. timidus, which is now extinct from iberia, into l. granatensis and l. europaeus in the iberian peninsula. a reverse direction of mtdna introgression from l. europaeus into l. timidus was also reported in the alps by zachos et al.  <cit>  and in russia by thulin et al.  <cit> . n ear gene sequenceszation and evolution.

in view of these findings, it is possible that introgressive hybridization events may also occur between chinese lepus species, most of which overlap geographically with other species of this genus  <cit> . if introgression among lepus species does indeed occur it may contribute to the current taxonomic confusion of chinese hares  <cit> .

the transfer of genes and genomes across the species barrier can provide novel genetic material for natural selection to work upon and, thus, may change the evolutionary direction of one or both of the intermixing taxa  <cit> . previous studies, however, have revealed that there was a lack of nuclear dna introgression in hares from iberia and sweden. alves  <cit>  used  <dig> autosomal protein loci to assay the genetic variability in l. granatensis populations from iberia and detected no significant differentiation between the populations with introgressed l. timidus mtdna and non-introgressed populations. similar results were also obtained from a microsatellite analysis  <cit> . based on snp analyses of  <dig> autosomal, two x-linked and one y-linked loci, melo-ferreira et al.  <cit>  suggested that autosomal introgression appeared to be mostly sporadic or undetectable and that sex-chromosome introgression was completely absent in hare species of iberia. alves et al.  <cit>  and roca et al.  <cit>  attributed the lack of nuclear introgression to recurrent crossing of hybrid females with males of the invading species, coupled with male hybrid sterility or inviability . this pattern of crossing could eventually lead to the replacement of one nuclear genome within a few generations. this inference was also supported by the results of thulin et al.  <cit> . by analyzing microsatellites, thulin et al.  <cit>  detected a small number of specimens with genotypes consistent with those of f <dig> hybrids in sweden. from this observation it was hypothesized that the transferred nuclear genes from l. timidus had disappeared from the l. europaeus populations during the  <dig> generations since the introduction and initial hybridization. in view of these reports, if introgression among chinese lepus species does indeed occur, what then is the genomic legacy of the introgressed nuclear genes and genomes? at one extreme, they may disappear over subsequent generations. at the other extreme, some hybrid genotypes in the chinese populations may actually possess elevated fitnesses thus leading to continued introgression and the possibility of the fixation of introgressed nuclear dna, and eventually to the formation of novel hybrid lineages .

in the present study, four mtdna genes and one nuclear dna locus from  <dig> chinese hare individuals collected at  <dig> localities in china were analyzed in order to test for the possibility of introgressive hybridization and to help clarify the taxonomy of chinese hares.

RESULTS
mtdna and nuclear sequence characterizations
sequences for four mtdna genes, cytochrome b , cytochrome c oxidase subunit i , nadh dehydrogenase subunit  <dig>  and control region , were obtained successfully from  <dig> chinese hare individuals, with eight museum skin samples failing to yield full-length sequences due to the poor quality of the isolated dna. the mtdna genes appear to be of mitochondrial origin, rather than nuclear copies of mtdna-like pseudogenes, as indicated by the fact that the amino acid sequences of the cyt b, cox i and nd <dig> genes did not possess premature stop codons or frameshifting insertions/deletions. in addition, the phylogenetic analyses based on separate mtdna fragments were generally concordant .

the sequence characteristics of the four mtdna fragments and one nuclear gene, stem cell factor , are summarized in table  <dig>  as seen from table  <dig> 

a total of  <dig> sequences from  <dig> samples with a length of  <dig> base pairs were aligned at the mgf locus. full-length sequences could not be obtained from five museum skin samples. a total of  <dig> haplotypes were defined from the  <dig> polymorphic sites,  <dig> of which were potentially phylogenetically informative.

phylogenetic inference from mtdna
the best fitting model for the bayesian analysis using the combined mtdna data was "gtr+i+g" with the following parameter settings: base = , nst =  <dig>  rmat = , rates = gamma shape =  <dig> , and pinvar =  <dig> . neighbour-joining  and bayesian analyses of the combined mtdna dataset yielded identical tree topologies . the chinese lepus species included eight lineages and were grouped into five major clades. sequence divergence  among the eight mtdna lineages based on the separate mtdna fragments are presented in additional file  <dig> . as seen from figure  <dig>  l. hainanus branched first, followed by the sister-grouping of l. comus and l. oiostolus. in another portion of the phylogeny, l. sinensis was most basal, l. timidus and l. capensis are closely related, and l. yarkandensis and a portion of the l. capensis individuals, which are defined here as l. capensis- <dig>  grouped together. the support for the monophyly of these eight lineages was  <dig>  for bayesian posterior probability  and 93%-100% for nj bootstrap sampling . support for relationships among the five clades was  <dig> - <dig>  for pp and 59%-93% for bs.

as illustrated in figure  <dig>  sequences from l. hainanus, l. comus, l. oiostolus, l. sinensis and l. yarkandensis showed species-specific monophyly;. however, this was not the case for l. capensis, l. timidus and l. mandshuricus. the sequences of l. capensis were mainly divided into two lineages. besides the lineage that included the majority of l. capensis sequences, five sequences of l. capensis from xinjiang province of china formed a separate mtdna clade  , which was a sister clade to l. yarkandensis. in addition, another eight sequences of l. capensis were placed within two other lineages: three  in a l. timidus lineage , and five  in a l. sinensis lineage . similarly, the sequences of l. timidus were also divided into two lineages: one included the majority of the l. timidus sequences, and the other included two sequences of l. timidus  from inner mongolia province of china that grouped within the l. sinensis lineage. remarkably, we found that among the fourteen l. mandshuricus sequences, nine were placed within the l. timidus lineage and the remaining five grouped within the l. sinensis lineage.

phylogenetic inference from nuclear gene
the recombination test with the nuclear gene mgf gene data failed to detect any signal for recombination. the nj tree for the nuclear gene mgf, based on the analyses of  <dig> haplotypes from the  <dig> individuals, is presented in figure  <dig>  the bayesian inference  analysis yielded a result similar to that of the nj analysis.

the mgf gene tree in figure  <dig> divided the chinese lepus species into six lineages  and two complexes . the haplotypes from l. hainanus, l. comus, l. oiostolus, l. yarkandensis, l. timidus and l. mandshuricus formed their own species-specific clades. exceptions to this phylogenetic signal were one l. capensis haplotype  that was included within the l. oiostolus clade, one l. mandshuricus haplotype  that was included within the l. timidus clade, one l. capensis- <dig> haplotype  that fell within the l. yarkandensis clade and one l. yarkandensis haplotype  that was shared with l. capensis- <dig> 

the majority of the l. sinensis and l. capeneis haplotypes were admixed and fell within either group a or group b . group a includes  <dig> haplotypes, of which five were from l. capensis, three  were from l. capensis- <dig>  and hap  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> were from l. yarkandensis, l. sinensis and l. timidus, respectively. for the three remaining haplotypes, hap <dig> and hap <dig> were shared by l. capensis, l. capensis- <dig> and l. timidus, and hap <dig> was shared by l. capensis and l. sinensis. fourteen of the  <dig> haplotypes in group b were from l. capensis. in addition, one l. timidus haplotype , two l. sinensis haplotypes  and two haplotypes  shared between l. sinensis and l. capeneis were also grouped into group b. one l. yarkandensis haplotype  was grouped into group a and hap <dig> was shared between l. capensis- <dig> and l. yarkandensis, suggesting a recent hybridization event between l. yarkandensis and a lineage in group a. the disjunct geographical distributions of l. yarkandensis and l. sinensis  led to the definition of group a as the "l. capensis group" and group b as the "l. sinensis group" .

conflicts between the mitochondrial and nuclear gene trees
three major differences were demonstrated between the mtdna and nuclear gene trees:  no species-specific mtdna lineage was identified for l. mandshuricus. all the mtdna sequences of l. mandshuricus were identified as belonging to either l. timidus or l. sinensis; however, almost all of the mgf sequences from l. mandshuricus clustered together within a single clade;  a new monophyletic lineage, l. capensis- <dig>  was identified in the mtdna analysis, but the mgf haplotypes of l. capensis- <dig> were divided into two portions ; and  the mtdna analysis suggested that the introgression among chinese lepus species was likely unidirectional, while, in contrast, the mgf data indicated the occurrence of bidirectional introgression among these species. for example, from the mtdna analysis, four l. capensis sequences were grouped with l. sinensis, suggesting the unidirectional introgression of mtdna from l. sinensis into l. capensis; however, the mgf tree identified one haplotype  which was nested in the l. capensis group and two haplotypes  which were nested in the l. sinensis group as sharing haplotypes between l. capensis and l. sinensis, consistent with the predicted pattern for bidirectional introgression. in addition, the fact that nine l. capensis and two l. sinensis individuals were identified as heterozygotes at the mgf locus, with alleles belonging to the l. capensis and l. sinensis groups, further supports the hypothesis of bidirectional introgression . details about the discrepancy between the mitochondrial and nuclear genes are summarized in additional file  <dig> 

dating the divergence times
the bayesian tree used for divergence time estimation is presented in additional file  <dig>  in contrast to the mtdna tree shown in figure  <dig>  the mtdna tree in additional file  <dig> included only representative sequences from each major lineage, and excluded sequences that demonstrated only a few base pair differences. the speciation time of chinese hares was estimated at  <dig>  mya . the estimated times of introgressive hybridization events are presented in figure  <dig> 

discussion
introgressive hybridization among chinese lepus species
as seen from the analyses of mtdna and nuclear dna sequences of chinese hares, most of the phylogenetic conflicts between the mtdna and nuclear dna gene trees suggest multiple episodes of introgression. alternatively, incomplete lineage sorting of the nuclear gene may also result in the observed "mixing" of the nuclear gene haplotypes; however, most of the samples with the discrepancy between the mitochondrial and nuclear genotypes have congruence between their morphology and nuclear genotype except for some l. capensis and l. sinensis individuals . although some of the l. capensis and l. sinensis individuals have incongruence between their morphology and nuclear genotype, the "l. capensis group" and the "l. sinensis group" is divergent enough to distinguish each other , therefore, the nuclear mgf gene is informative enough to distinguish chinese hare species and the observed "mixing" of nuclear gene haplotypes likely is due to introgressive hybridization rather than incomplete lineage sorting. in addition, the observation that a large number of the heterozygous genotypes have alleles from divergent clades  is also inconsistent with the alternative hypothesis of incomplete lineage sorting. the evidence suggests that introgression has occurred between seven pairs of the hare species examined here.

l. sinensis × l. capensis, l. sinensis  × l. mandshuricus , l. sinensis × l. timidus
five l. capensis individuals  were placed within the l. sinensis lineage on the mtdna tree . these results likely reflect recent introgression of l. sinensis mtdna into l. capensis; however, results from the nuclear gene analysis suggested bidirectional and recent introgression between these species, as evidenced by the observation that the mgf haplotypes from l. capensis and l. sinensis were admixed and fell within two distantly related groups. furthermore, one haplotype  that nested in the l. capensis group and two haplotypes  that nested in the l. sinensis group were shared between l. capensis and l. sinensis . in addition, ten l. capensis individuals  and two l. sinensis individuals  were identified as heterozygotes at the mgf locus for two alleles from l. capensis and l. sinensis . the available data, however, cannot eliminate the possibility that some of the heterozygotes were produced by ancient hybridization events.

five individuals  of l. mandshuricus were grouped into the l. sinensis lineage on the mtdna tree , while their mgf haplotypes fell within the l. mandshuricus clade . this can be explained by a unidirectional mtdna introgression from l. sinensis into l. mandshuricus. in addition, two individuals of l. mandshuricus  have low sequence divergence relative to the l. sinensis individuals, thus supporting a recent age for the hybridization events. the divergence time estimation indicated that the remaining three l. mandshuricus individuals  shared a most recent ancestor with the l. sinensis samples at ca.  <dig>  mya  . this would suggest that the mitochondrial genome of l. sinensis introgressed into l. mandshuricus no later than  <dig> mya. our estimate of the time of introgression may be biased somewhat if additional extant lineages were not sampled, or if there have been extinction events. indeed, such a bias has been inferred in the case of lepidiolamprologus  <cit> . however, in the present study three ancient hybridization events, involving five species , were detected. this strongly supports the hypothesis of ancient hybridization and not solely recent introgression events.

two individuals of l. timidus, t <dig> and t <dig>  nested within the l. sinensis clade on the mtdna tree , while their mgf haplotypes grouped within the l. timidus clade , once again suggesting mtdna introgression . in addition, the detection of one l. timidus haplotype  within the l. sinensis group on the mgf gene tree  was consistent with the occurrence of nuclear dna introgression from l. timidus into l. sinensis. taken together, the mtdna and nuclear dna analyses supported reciprocal introgression between l. timidus and l. sinensis. an alternative explanation would be that the introgressive hybridization of l. sinensis × l. capensis, l. sinensis  × l. mandshuricus , and l. sinensis  ×l. timidus  resulted from an initial hybridization between l. sinensis and l. capensis, l. mandshuricus or l. timidus, followed by a second hybridization among l. capensis, l. mandshuricus and l. timidus. supporting this latter hypothesis was the inference of hybridization between l. timidus and l. mandshuricus as well as l. timidus and l. capensis .

l. timidus  × l. mandshuricus , l. timidus  × l. capensis 
alves et al.  <cit>  suggested that mtdna introgression from l. timidus might occur in several other regions in addition to iberia and our results confirm this hypothesis. in the l. timidus mtdna lineage, nine l. mandshuricus individuals  and three l. capensis individuals  were included . the mgf haplotypes of the nine l. mandshuricus individuals were grouped with the other l. mandshuricus haplotypes except for hap <dig>  which is nested within the l. timidus clade. the nuclear sequences of the three l. capensis individuals were placed in either the l. capensis group  or the l. sinensis group  . in addition, one l. timidus haplotype  was placed into the l. capensis group and two haplotypes  were shared with l. capensis on the mgf gene tree . our results thus suggest that the l. mandshuricus and l. capensis individuals likely reflect the capture of l. timidus mitochondrial genomes via several hybridization events between females of l. timidus and males of l. mandshuricus or l. capensis. furthermore, the nuclear dna analysis indicated that the hybridization events between l. timidus and l. mandshuricus or l. capensis were recent and a second hybridization event likely occurred between l. capensis and l. sinensis as well. an additional nine cyt b sequences of l. mandshuricus accessed from genbank  were also grouped into the l. timidus lineage on our cyt b tree , further supporting the inference of mtdna introgression from l. timidus into l. mandshuricus. finally, one l. timidus cyt b sequence  collected from genbank was grouped within the l. capensis lineage in the cyt b phylogeny , suggesting the introgression of mtdna from l. capensis into l. timidus. the l. capensis individual, ca <dig>  shared a most recent common ancestor with l. timidus samples at  <dig>  mya  , indicating that the hybridization between l. timidus and l. capensis took place at about this point in time.

l. yarkandensis  × l. capensis, l. capensis × l. oiostolus
several observations suggest the role of recent hybridization between l. capensis and l. yarkandensis. these observations include: one mgf haplotype  of l. yarkandensis nested within the l. capensis group; one mgf haplotype  of l. yarkandensis shared with l. capensis- <dig> ; and two mgf alleles of four l. yarkandensis individuals  were grouped into either the l. yarkandensis and l. capensis groups .

the newly identified l. capensis- <dig> lineage might have originated through ancient hybridization between female l. yarkandensis and male l. capensis at ca  <dig>  mya  . interestingly, one l. capensis haplotype  was grouped into the l. oiostolus clade . this may reflect a recent hybridization event between l. capensis and l. oiostolus. in addition, hybridization between l. oiostolus and l. capensis was also evidenced by the fact that one l. oiostolus cyt b sequence  from genbank was nested within the l. capensis lineage .

the possible forces driving the introgressive hybridization among chinese lepus species
compared with introgression reported previously for other species complexes  <cit> , especially within other lepus species  <cit> , chinese hares demonstrated a previously unreported level of complexity. first, most of the previous studies within the genus lepus reported only the presence of mtdna introgression of l. timidus, in which unidirectional mtdna introgression events from l. timidus into populations of l. europaeus in sweden  <cit>  and into l. granatensis and l. europaeus in iberian peninsula  <cit>  were inferred, with the identification of nuclear introgression lacking or infrequent  <cit> . similar scenarios have also been posited for several other species clades  <cit> . second, although contemporaneous introgression has been reported for several non-hare species  <cit> , most of these cases of introgression involve at the most two or three species. in comparison, the present study demonstrated that introgression among chinese lepus species has most likely been a continuous and recent process involving multiple waves of hybridization among six species.

our results also suggest that introgression has occurred in multiple directions, involving both mitochondrial and nuclear dna. the mtdna of l. mandshuricus was replaced entirely by that of l. timidus and l. sinensis. although several previous studies have provided convincing evidence for complete local or even range-wide replacement of mtdna following hybridization in insects, fishes and reptilia  <cit> , such observations are infrequent for mammals. the hybridization events among chinese hares are possibly driven by species abundance asymmetries, mating preferences, range expansion and low divergence between lepus species.

in the studies of thulin & tegelström  <cit> , hubbs  <cit>  and wirtz  <cit> , they suggested that the females of a rare species  would generally hybridize with the males of a common species . in the present study, the hybridization between females of l. timidus  and males of l. capensis , and between females of l. timidus  and males of l. mandshuricus  are congruent with their conclusion. however, the hybridization between females of l. sinensis  and males of l. capensis  is inconsistent with this hypothesis. in addition, thulin & tegelström  <cit>  and grant & grant  <cit>  indicated that unidirectional hybridization would usually occur between the females of smaller species  and the males of larger-bodied species . among chinese hares, hybridization between females of l. sinensis  and males of l. capensis , l. timidus  or l. mandshuricus  support this hypothesis. in contrast, the hybridizations between female l. timidus  and male l. capensis  or l. mandshuricus  are inconsistent with this hypothesis. species abundance and body size, though, might have been different in ancestral populations. the present study indicates that at least some of the hybridization events are recent, therefore, the forces driving the hybridization among chinese lepus species may include species abundance asymmetries and mating preferences.

the hybridizations among chinese lepus species might be a consequence of range expansion caused by the pleistocene glaciations. melo-ferreira et al.  <cit>  estimated the timing of mtdna introgression from l. timidus into l. granatensis in iberia at  <dig> 000- <dig>  <dig> years and suggested that it might have been favored by the climatic fluctuation during the pleistocene glacial phenomena. our latest study also strongly indicates that one of the chinese lepus species  has undergone repeated population reductions and expansions during the pleistocene glacial and interglacial periods, respectively  <cit> . these population size fluctuations may have contributed to the extensive gene flow among lepus yarkandensis populations. similarly, the alternation of glacial and interglacial periods during the pleistocene likely contributed to the conditions necessary for of the overlapping ranges of different chinese hare species, resulting in the observed introgressive hybridization. morgan et al.  <cit>  and melo-ferreira et al.  <cit>  drew similar inferences for both mosquitoes in southeast asia and european hares, respectively. further support for the effect of glaciation comes from the estimation of some of the introgression events among the chinese hare lineages as occurring during the pleistocene . simulation studies have also suggested that range expansions could lead to asymmetric introgression from the resident species toward the invading species  <cit> .

in addition to the above factors, the widespread and complex patterns of reticulate evolutionary events among the chinese lepus lineages may also reflect the generally low levels of interspecific genetic differentiation. previous studies have suggested that lepus experienced rapid radiation  <cit> . the lack of chromosomal structural changes supports such a model of relatively recent, and rapid, diversification in this clade  <cit> . low levels of genetic diversification between species could result in relatively fertile f <dig> hybrids providing a bridge for further hybridization and thus introgression. alternatively, low levels of genetic diversification between species may indicate that speciation processes of some chinese lepus species are not complete and there have been continuous gene flow among them. for example, the admixture of mgf gene between l. sinensis and l. capensis could be the consequence of an incomplete reproductive isolation between the two species. further definition of the introgressive system characterizing chinese lepus species should provide a clearer resolution of the evolutionary factors that have resulted in this reticulate complex.

taxonomic classification of chinese hares
based on the mtdna and nuclear gene sequence analyses, the present study not only suggests that introgressive hybridization among chinese lepus species contributed to the current taxonomic confusion, but also provides insights into the previously obscure taxonomic classification of chinese hares. our mtdna and nuclear dna analyses supported the specific status of eight hare species, including l. hainanus, l. comus, l. oiostolus, l. yarkandensis, l. timidus, l. mandshuricus, l. capensis and l. sinensis. this finding is consistent with the morphological taxonomy of pan et al.  <cit> . the division of l. capensis into two species , as suggested by hoffmann & smith  <cit> , was not favored in the present study.

in the mtdna analysis of l. mandshuricus, nine specimens were found to harbor l. timidus mtdna haplotypes and three specimens contained l. sinensis mtdna haplotypes, suggesting the absence of a diagnostic l. mandshuricus mtdna lineage ; however, the nuclear gene  analysis supported the monophyly of l. mandshuricus, which is consistent with its specific status . furthermore, liu et al.  <cit> , using skull characters and nuclear gene sequences, also supported the specific status of l. mandshuricus, therefore, the discrepancy between the mtdna and nuclear gene trees is most likely due to mtdna introgression from l. timidus and l. sinensis into l. mandshuricus. this finding reflects the importance of including nuclear markers for systematic studies of hares  <cit> .

on the mtdna tree, l. capensis and l. timidus formed sister taxa and have the lowest cyt b sequence divergence  among the species analyzed in this study . the cyt b sequence divergence of  <dig> % between l. capensis and l. sinensis , and the presence of l. capensis group and l. sinensis group on nuclear gene tree  supported the specific status of l. capensis and l. sinensis. as we discussed above, our analyses led to the inference that l. timidus and l. sinensis mitochondrial genomes had introgressed into l. capensis and that frequent nuclear dna introgression had occurred between l. capensis and l. sinensis. these observations are inconsistent with those of wu et al.  <cit> , who concluded that l. capensis either does not exist in china as a unique taxon or has been replaced by l. timidus. in contrast, our data suggest the occurrence of continuous introgression from l. timidus into l. capensis.

in the present study, our mtdna tree identified a new mtdna lineage that might represent a previously unidentified hare species from xinjiang province. this is evidenced by the fact that the newly identified mtdna lineage  was closely related to l. yarkandensis on the mtdna tree  and the cyt b sequence divergence  between l. capensis- <dig> and l. yarkandensis is higher than that  found between l. capensis and l. timidus . this finding is consistent with the inference of wu et al.  <cit>  that there might be two or more new hare species in this area of china; however, the mgf haplotypes of the l. capensis- <dig> samples were divided into two different groups:  two  were nested in the l. yarkandensis clade, with one  shared with l. yarkandensis;  five  fell into the l. capensis group, with two  shared with l. capensis . in addition, the individuals of l. capensis- <dig> and l. capensis have no significant morphological differences, therefore, the alternative hypothesis, that this newly identified mtdna lineage may reflect ancient mtdna introgression from l. yarkandensis into l. capensis, seems more likely.

CONCLUSIONS
this study has revealed the first evidence of complex, ancient and recent introgressive hybridization among chinese lepus species thus providing a framework for understanding the patterns of speciation and the taxonomy of this clade. frequent introgressive hybridization involving l. timidus l. oiostolus, l. sinensis, l. yarkandensis, l. capensis and l. mandshuricus were detected. both unidirectional mtdna introgression and bidirectional nuclear dna introgression were inferred. in contrast to the previously reported introgression events within the genus lepus, some of the mtdna introgression events among chinese lepus species were estimated to be relatively ancient. we hypothesized that asymmetries in species abundance, mating preferences, range expansion and low levels of genetic divergence between lepus species may have been causal for this reticulate evolutionary process. the existence of morphological intermediates and atypical mtdna genealogies resulting from this reticulation might have contributed to the current taxonomic confusion among chinese lepus species. our analyses supported the classification of chinese lepus into eight species. the present study also demonstrated that nuclear dna could offer a powerful complement to the use of mtdna genes for tracing the evolutionary history of recently diverged species. future studies incorporating broader taxonomic sampling and unlinked genetic markers should provide additional resolution of the reticulate evolutionary patterns and systematic relationships among chinese hares.

