BACKGROUND
european mountain ranges harbor a large number of endemic species and are generally considered as important biodiversity hotspots. concerning diversity in european terrestrial snails, the iucn red list of threatened species lists  <dig> native species from rocky areas,  <dig> species from shrublands and  <dig> from forest habitats. among the first category, rocky areas, the dinarides represent the most diverse european mountain region with about two hundred native gastropods listed, followed by the alps and the carpathians, both with somewhat less than a hundred native species listed  <cit> . obvious reasons favoring the diversity in mountain areas are the strong structuring of habitats with a wide range of ecological niches, and the availability of different geological substrates. as most land snails are calciphilous, mountain regions offering limestone bedrock are particularly rich in species and show high rates of endemism, whereas intermediate areas with siliciclastic bedrock constitute migration barriers for many taxa. the isolation in favorable habitats is therefore an important reason for diversification of alpine land snails  <cit> . moreover, the current distribution and diversity patterns of central european land snails and other biota were affected most strongly by climatic events during the pleistocene. the shifts in temperature and humidity, and the expansion of glaciers, resulted in the fragmentation of populations of many taxa, complete or local extinction, and the loss of genetic variation due to bottlenecks  <cit> . as large parts of the alps were covered by glaciers during the last glacial maximum  and earlier glacial periods, their role as origin center of biodiversity was much discussed in the past decades. reviews of early molecular genetic studies suggest that the central european mountain ranges did not provide refuges during glacial maxima, but were settled recently from more southern regions  <cit> . however, more recent molecular genetic studies support the presence of northern refuges in the periphery of the alps and in the western carpathians for particular organisms like plants and invertebrates  <cit> . populations of former refuge areas were usually characterized by high genetic diversity and the presence of rare  alleles  <cit> .

in the present study we investigate the phylogeny and phylogeography of the calciphilous land snail genus orcula held,  <dig>  orcula species are high-spired snails,  <dig> to 10 mm in height, with internal lamellae extending to the aperture margins. the morphologies of these lamellae serve as the primary characters for species identification. currently,  <dig> species are known, almost all distributed either in the alps, the carpathians or in the dinarides. only a single species, orcula zilchi urbański,  <dig>  was recorded from the western black sea region of bulgaria and western anatolia. sphyradium dobrogicum grossu,  <dig> was also classified within the genus orcula in the fauna europaea checklist  <cit> , but without any published reference. however, based on available information, the species was synonymized with sphyradium doliolum   <cit> . data on type specimens and taxonomic considerations about all orcula taxa are summarized in the type catalogue of  <cit> .

so far, the most comprehensive investigation of the genus was performed by gittenberger  <cit> , who attempted to differentiate the alpine orcula taxa and the dinaric orcula schmidtii  by anatomical and shell morphological traits. schileyko  <cit>  also investigated the genital anatomy and formulated hypotheses about the relatedness of several species. páll-gergely et al.  <cit>  were the first to study the anatomy of orcula jetschini  and o. zilchi and, based on differences in the morphology of the penial caecum, the shell structure and the morphology of the aperture folds, subdivided the genus into three subgenera:  orcula,  illyriobanatica páll-gergely & deli  <dig> and  hausdorfia páll-gergely & irikov  <dig>  the subgenus orcula includes all species distributed in the alps, among them the type species orcula dolium , which has by far the widest distribution including the alps, the western carpathians and surrounding lowlands  <cit> . in contrast, the alpine endemics are almost exclusively restricted to rocky limestone habitats of the northern and the southern calcareous alps. their distribution was mainly investigated by zimmermann  <cit>  and klemm  <cit> . orcula gularis  shows a disjunct distribution in both the northern calcareous alps  and the southern calcareous alps . orcula austriaca zimmermann,  <dig> shows a similar distribution but its main area is situated more easterly in the northern calcareous alps of lower austria. orcula pseudodolium wagner,  <dig> inhabits a few mountains in the northern calcareous alps of upper austria only. a fourth species, orcula fuchsi zimmermann,  <dig>  is restricted to two mountains  in the northern calcareous alps of lower austria. the other four alpine endemics are exclusively found in the southern calcareous alps of austria, slovenia and italy. of these, orcula tolminensis wagner,  <dig> stands out as it resembles conchologically a dwarf form of o. gularis, with similar aperture characteristics; it is known from three sites in southern carinthia and slovenia only. orcula restituta  is mainly distributed in the slovenian alps and orcula spoliata  has an isolated distribution about 200 km west in trentino-alto adige . the fourth orcula species of the southern calcareous alps is orcula conica . it is common in the eastern part of the southern calcareous alps, but was found at a single site in the dinarides around the plitvice lakes  as well. the subgenus illyriobanatica comprises o. schmidtii, orcula wagneri sturany,  <dig> and o. jetschini. o. schmidtii and o. wagneri inhabit high mountain regions of the dinarides, from the republic of serbia to southern greece, and their distribution ranges do greatly overlap  <cit> . a delimitation of the two taxa is problematic, because the shell characters are highly variable and do not allow to clearly distinguish the two species . therefore, the latter two taxa are referred to as o. wagneri/schmidtii complex in the following. o. jetschini was reported from romania and is the only orcula species of the western romanian carpathians. it is distributed in the banat region, western transylvania  and northern oltenia. its shell shows similarities to those of the dinarid species o. wagneri and o. schmidtii, but it is a woodland species of lower elevations, occurring mainly among leaf-litter or decaying dead wood. orcula zilchi represents the monotypic subgenus hausdorfia. it is known from three localities in south-eastern bulgaria and from three sites in western anatolia only. its habitat ranges from leaf litter of alluvial forests in the western black sea region to limestone rocks in western turkey  <cit> .

the present paper addresses the evolutionary history of the genus orcula in general as well as the phylogeographic patterns of the species endemic to the alps in particular. we aimed to answer the following questions: which geographic areas were inhabited by ancestral populations of orcula? what are the causes for the high species diversity in the alpine region? is there a congruency between molecular genetic patterns and morphologically defined groups in the alpine orcula species? are there indications for recent or past hybridizations between any of the species?

we performed the first phylogeographic study of the genus orcula based on comprehensive mitochondrial  and nuclear  data sets including material of all  <dig> species. a molecular clock analysis was performed and combined with a phylogeographic range reconstruction to trace the distribution patterns of the mt lineages throughout time.

in order to test whether the differentiation in shell morphology is congruent with the molecular genetic groupings, morphometric landmark analyses were conducted with the group of orcula species endemic to the alps and the alpine-dinarid o. conica.

RESULTS
phylogenetic trees
a 655 bp fragment of the mitochondrial  cytochrome c oxidase subunit i  was analyzed in  <dig> specimens from  <dig> sites , including samples of all  <dig> extant orcula species . the sequences of the orcula species endemic to the alps and the alpine-dinarid o. conica constituted three quarters of the samples. the nine species were in the focus of the study and we aimed to infer the degree of intraspecific molecular genetic  and morphological variation across the major parts of their distribution areas.figure  <dig> 
collection sites and distribution areas of
orcula
species. the three maps show the distributions of all orcula species. black dots mark the location of sample sites investigated during this study.  distribution ranges o. dolium, o. jetschini, o. wagneri and o. schmidtii, and o. zilchi. the dotted line marks the area enlarged in figures b and c. map modified from  <cit> .  distribution ranges orcula species in the alps.
sampling localities and individuals



locality code
locality
wgs <dig> 
wgs <dig> 
m asl
indid

western romanian carpathians

strandzha mountains

dinarides

northern calcareous alps

southern calcareous alps

western alps

western carpathians

outgroup taxa

dinarides
 <dig>   <dig>  7004
orculella bulgarica

northern calcareous alps
833
sphyradium doliolum

pontic mountains 
 <dig>  6607
orculella bulgarica
7105
orculella bulgarica

baetic system 
7132
orculella aragonica
7133
orculella aragonica
7135
orculella aragonica
7137
orculella aragonica

abbreviations



mountain range: bae, baetic system; ban, banat; bgd, berchtesgaden alps; dac, dachstein mts.; enn, ennstal alps; fob, fischbach alps; gai, gailtal alps; gja, gjallica; gla, glarner alps; gut, gutenstein alps; jul, julian alps; kai, kaiser mts.; kwl, karwendel; kwn, karawanks; lec, lechtal alps; mlf, malá fatra; mrz, mürzsteg alps; oov, upper austrian prealps; osr, eastern styrian alps; pro, prokletje mts.; ptk, paštrik; sml, swiss plateau; snh, rax-schneeberg alps; ste, steiner alps; str, strážovské vrchy; stz, strandza mts.; szk, salzkammergut mts.; ten, tennengebirge; tom, tomor mts.; tot, totes gebirge; vdn, valle di non; vef, veľká fatra; wiw, wienerwald; ybb, ybbstal alps.


country names: al, albania; at, austria; bg, bulgaria; ch, switzerland; de, germany; hr, croatia; it, italy; ko, kosovo; me, montenegro; ro, romania; si, slovenia; sk, slovakia.


federal districts: brn, bern; by, bayern; fvg, friuli-venezia giulia; k, kärnten; kr, kranjska; noe, niederösterreich; ooe, oberösterreich; s, salzburg; sg, st. gallen; st, steiermark; t, tirol; tn, trenčiansky kraj; zi, Žilinský kraj.


list of localities and individuals included in the present study. the first column indicates the geographic region. each locality is defined by a unique locality code, representing a single collection site in one of the geographic  regions investigated. the locality column provides information on the respective localities. the gps coordinates are given according to the world geodetic system  <dig>  alongside the altitude in meters above sea level . the individual ids  of the specimens, together with information on the respective taxon names are provided for each locality. indids in bold letters indicate that the complete marker set  was sequenced in the respective specimens. abbreviations of taxon names: a: austriaca, af: austriaca faueri, ap: austriaca pseudofuchsi, c: conica, d: dolium, f: fuchsi, g: gularis, g*: gularis , j: jetschini, p: pseudodolium, r: restituta, sch: schmidtii, sp: spoliata, t: tolminensis, w: wagneri and z: zilchi.
pictures of the
orcula
taxa investigated. the figure shows type specimens or selected individuals, respectively, of the  <dig> species investigated in the present study. pictures of the three subspecies of o. austriaca are provided as well. modified after harl et al.  <cit> .



in the bayesian inference  and maximum likelihood  trees calculated with the coi data set only, most species clades are well supported , but the relationships between the clades are not resolved. the complete coi data of the seven alpine endemics and o. conica are shown separately as phylogenetic networks.

in order to set up a reliable phylogenetic framework, we additionally analyzed sections of the mt 12s ribosomal rna , 16s ribosomal rna  and the nuclear  histone h <dig> and h <dig> complex  in a selection of  <dig> individuals. we selected a representative sample of the major mt coi lineages and geographic distributions . substitution saturation in the mt coi and the trimmed 12s and 16s alignments was examined with the test of xia et al.  <cit> , implemented in mega v. <dig>   <cit> . the alignments show only little substitution saturation, with iss.c values significantly larger than iss values : 12s , 16s  and coi . however, moderate substitution saturation  is observed in the 3rd codon positions of the coi with iss.c  and iss  values differing only marginally between each other.

the bi and ml phylograms calculated with the concatenated alignments  show congruent, well resolved topologies with high support values for most of the nodes . the topology remains the same when the 3rd codon position of the coi is excluded from the data set, but most nodes show lower posterior probabilities or likelihood values, respectively . the nc trees were calculated with the h4/h <dig> data of the same subset of specimens. the overall topology with a division into three main clades representing the three subgenera orcula, illyriobanatica and hausdorfia is illustrated by the nc tree as well . however, the nc data set is less variable, and support values for most nodes are lower in the nc tree:figure  <dig> 
bi tree of the concatenated mitochondrial sequences . posterior probabilities and ml bootstrap values are provided for all nodes above species level. the scale bar indicates the expected number of substitutions per site according to the models of sequence evolution applied. the black and grey dots indicate nodes with high bi posterior probabilities and ml bootstrap values . the colors of the specimen labels correspond to those used in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 
bi tree of the nc
h4
/
h3
sequences. posterior probabilities and ml bootstrap values are provided for all nodes above species level. the scale bar indicates the expected number of substitutions per site according to the model of sequence evolution applied. the black and grey dots indicate nodes with high bi posterior probabilities and ml bootstrap values . the colors of the specimen labels correspond to those used in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 



the first main clade in the mt and nc trees corresponds to the subgenus orcula, which comprises all orcula species showing distributions in the alps. o. dolium is clearly monophyletic and the sister group to a clade comprising the lineages of the alpine endemics and the alpine-dinarid species o. conica. in the mt trees , o. conica branches off from the basal node, whereas in the nc tree o. spoliata and o. restituta, the two being sister species, split basally . in the mt trees, the most basal nodes are weakly supported, while the relationships between the other alpine endemics are well resolved: o. fuchsi, endemic to the northern calcareous alps, is the sister group of a highly supported clade comprising o. austriaca, o. gularis, o. pseudodolium and o. tolminensis. within this clade, o. gularis is paraphyletic because most specimens of o. gularis and o. pseudodolium show up in the same clade. moreover, three specimens of o. gularis  from three distinct sites  possess different mt haplotypes, being closely related to those of o. tolminensis. o. austriaca forms the sister clade of the latter two clades. differing in a few substitutions or indels only, the h4/h <dig> sequences do not allow resolving the relationships within the group of the latter species . however, this part of the h4/h <dig> tree shows some peculiar patterns. there is a rather deep split between samples of o. austriaca from the northern and the southern calcareous alps, whereas these geographically isolated populations are barely differentiated in the mt sequences. there is also a larger diversity of nc haplotypes within o. pseudodolium when compared to the more widespread o. gularis.

the second main clade corresponds to the subgenus illyriobanatica and includes o. schmidtii and o. wagneri from the dinarides, and o. jetschini from the western romanian carpathians. the sequences of o. schmidtii and o. wagneri form a highly supported clade in both the mt and the nc trees, but the two species are not monophyletic. consequently, they are referred to as o. schmidtii/wagneri complex in the present study. o. jetschini is clearly separated from the o. schmidtii/wagneri clade, but the monophyly of the subgenus illyriobanatica is well supported . apart from other patterns of sequence similarity, all taxa of the subgenus illyriobanatica lack a section of approximately 230 bp in the non-coding spacer region of the h4/h <dig> sequences.

a third major lineage is constituted by o. zilchi, representing the monotypic subgenus hausdorfia. it inhabits the western black sea region and is not closely related to any other species in the trees. similarly as the taxa of the subgenus illyriobanatica, o. zilchi features a very short branch in the h4/h <dig> tree , but not in the mt trees .

molecular clock analysis and reconstruction of geographic range history
molecular clock analyses and reconstructions of the geographic range histories were performed to analyze the temporal and geographic patterns of divergence of the mt lineages. the molecular clock dated trees were calculated in beast v <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  with the three mt markers , using sphyradium doliolum, orculella bulgarica  and orculella aragonica  as outgroups. since the inclusion of the sequences of the two orculella species as additional outgroups affected the patterns in the 12s and 16s alignments, the resulting maximum clade credibility trees differ in their topology from the phylograms: the clade of the subgenus illyriobanatica branches off from the basal node in the molecular clock trees , whereas the subgenus hausdorfia takes this position in the mt phylograms . however, the node marking the first split within the genus orcula obtained rather low support in all  trees, and the relation between the three subgenera can still be considered as unresolved.figure  <dig> 
reconstruction of the historic geographic ranges. the map shows the distribution areas of the genus orcula in seven geographic areas: western alps, northern calcareous alps, southern calcareous alps, western carpathians, western romanian carpathians, dinarides and western black sea region. the sampling localities are indicated by black dots. the collection sites of the outgroup specimens o. aragonica in spain  and o. bulgarica in turkey  are not shown in the map. the linearized molecular clock dated maximum-clade-credibility tree shows the relationships of selected mt lineages . black dots indicate nodes with high posterior probabilities . the colored symbols at the branch tips indicate the geographic origin of each haplotype. at the cladogenesis events , all alternative ancestral subdivision/inheritance scenarios with likelihoods of 10% or more are indicated, separated by an “or”, together with the respective likelihoods in%. when scenarios for cladogenesis events involve two ancestral areas, the symbol for the likely ancestral area/-s is/are provided left to each of the two branches. for nodes representing major splits, node ages and 95% posterior hpd intervals are indicated . a time scale in mya is given below the tree. abbreviations of the geological epochs: c: chattian, a: aquitanian, b: burdigalian, l: langhian, s: serravallian, t: tortonian, m: messinian, z: zanclean, p: piacenzian, g: gelasian and c: calabrian.



three different approaches were performed to estimate the divergence times:  in the first approach , the root of the tree  was calibrated to the age of the fossil nordsieckula falkneri , the presumed most recent common ancestor of orcula, sphyradium and orculella. the mean age of the node marking the split of illyriobanatica from the subgenera orcula and hausdorfia  was estimated to  <dig>  mya . the split between the subgenera orcula and hausdorfia  was estimated to  <dig>  mya , and the date of divergence of o. dolium from the other eight alpine species  was estimated to  <dig>  mya .  in the second approach , the divergence date of the outgroup taxa o. bulgarica and o. aragonica  was calibrated to the time of the first occurrence of ancestral o. aragonica in the fossil record of the iberian peninsula. the resulting estimated mean node ages were  <dig>  mya  for node i,  <dig>  mya  for node ii, and  <dig>  mya  for node iii, respectively.  the third approach  was a combination of the first two and included the calibration of two nodes . the estimated mean node ages were  <dig>  mya  for node i,  <dig>  mya  for node ii, and  <dig>  mya  for node iii, respectively.

the node ages are largely congruent in approaches  <dig> and  <dig>  suggesting that the two different calibration points did not produce conflicting results. however, the resulting 95% hpd intervals are extremely large when only the split between the outgroup taxa o. bulgarica and o. aragonica  is calibrated . in approach  <dig>  , ranges are similar as in approach  <dig> , indicating that the 95% hpd ranges are mainly influenced by placing a prior on the stem of the tree.

the reconstruction of geographic ranges was performed with lagrange  <cit> , using the linearized maximum clade credibility tree inferred with approach  <dig> . the distribution area of the genus orcula was classified into seven geographic mountain areas, and the ancestral lineages were allowed to occupy a maximum of two ranges at the same time: in the constrained model , migration was prohibited between very distant areas, because some ancestral ranges were biogeographically extremely unlikely, and different migration probabilities were assigned between adjacent and not immediately adjacent areas . in the unconstrained model , migration was permitted between all areas and with the same dispersal probabilities .

the results are largely congruent at the outer branches of the trees, but the ancestral ranges and likelihoods estimated for the basal nodes/branches differ strongly between the two approaches. in the constrained model, the most recent common ancestor of the genus orcula  was likely distributed in the dinarids , and the ancestor of the subgenera orcula and hausdorfia  was most likely distributed in the dinarids  or in an area additionally including the bulgarian strandzha mts  . the ancestor of the subgenus orcula  was most likely distributed in the western carpathians and the dinarids , the western carpathians and the southern calcareous alps , or in the dinarids . in the unconstrained model, a dinarid ancestry of the genus is the most likely scenario as well, but with a lower probability ; an alternative range additionally includes the northern calcareous alps . accordingly, the common ancestor of the subgenera orcula and hausdorfia  was most likely distributed in either the northern calcareous alps  or in the dinarids . the unconstrained model also predicts different ranges for the common ancestor of the subgenus orcula : northern calcareous alps , western carpathians and the southern calcareous alps , or western carpathians and the dinarids .

the reconstruction of the geographic range history indicates that migrations to geographically distant mountain ranges represented rare events - the western black sea area, the western alps and the western romanian carpathians were probably colonized only once. the dinarides were probably re-colonized only once from the southern calcareous alps during the late pleistocene or holocene, namely by o. conica. however, in the subgenus orcula migrations between southern and northern calcareous alps seem to have happened several times. most complex patterns were found in o. dolium, which probably originated in the western carpathians and is now found in most limestone areas of the alps. the results suggest that the species migrated repeatedly between the western carpathians and the alps, and colonized the western alps probably only once.

genetic distances
in the mt data set, distances measured between the subgenera and species are extremely high . the uncorrected mean p-distances between the subgenera orcula and illyriobanatica are  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig> % , respectively. the mean distances between orcula and hausdorfia are  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig> % , whereas mean distances between illyriobanatica and hausdorfia are  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig> % , respectively. surprisingly, the latter distances are even higher than the average distances between the genus orcula and the outgroup s. doliolum, which are  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig> % . the species providing the largest intraspecific distances in the mt genes is o. dolium with  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig> % , followed by the o. wagneri/schmidtii complex with  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig> % . within the group of alpine endemics, highest intraspecific distances are observed in o. tolminensis with  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig> % , in the clade comprising o. gularis and o. pseudodolium with  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig> % , and in o. austriaca with  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig> % , respectively. haplotype and nucleotide diversities calculated for the separate species clades with the complete coi data set are high in all groups . the sequence divergences are also high within the set of h4/h <dig> sequences . the mean p-distances are  <dig> %  between orcula and illyriobanatica, and  <dig> %  between orcula and hausdorfia. contrary to the pattern in the combined mt trees, the branch lengths of illyriobanatica and hausdorfia are shorter in the tree calculated with the nc sequences , resulting in a considerably lower mean distance of  <dig> %  between the two subgenera. mean distances of the three orcula subgenera towards the outgroup s. doliolum are  <dig> % .table  <dig> 
primer sets



region
primer 
origin
fragment size
t°c rochetaq

coi
fwd

coi
rev

12s
fwd

12s
rev

16s
fwd

16s
rev

h4
/
h3
fwd

h4
/
h3
rev

intern fwd

intern rev
primer sequences for amplification and sequencing of the coi, 12s, 16s and h4/h <dig> fragments. the h4/h <dig> fragments were amplified with finnzymes phusion polymerase, wherefore the respective annealing temperatures are provided in addition.
genetic diversity and
p
-distances in the
coi
data set



species
sequence no.
haplotype no. 
haplotype div. 
nucleotide div. 
mean dist.
max dist.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

o. dolium

o. gularis/pseudodolium

o. gularis


o. tolminensis

o. austriaca

o. fuchsi

o. restituta

o. spoliata

o. conica

o. schmidtii
/
wagneri

o. jetschini

o. zilchi

s. doliolum


mitochondrial diversity in the subgenus orcula
the orcula species endemic to the alps and the alpine-dinarid o. conica constituted more than three quarters of the samples analyzed and were in the focus of the present study. in order to display distributional patterns of the mt coi haplotypes, median joining networks were calculated . the coi network corresponding to the o. gularis/o. pseudodolium clade in the mt trees  comprises the majority of sequences  . three specimens of o. gularis from the northern calcareous alps , clustering with o. tolminensis in the mt trees, are shown as a separate small network  because they are too diverged. alternative scenarios explaining the relation of o. gularis and o. pseudodolium are discussed in detail in the following section. the main network of o. gularis/o. pseudodolium  is roughly divided into two clusters of haplotypes: the first includes samples of o. gularis from the southern calcareous alps  and the northern calcareous alps , and of a single specimen of o. pseudodolium . the second cluster includes all samples of o. pseudodolium , as well as a few haplotypes of o. gularis specimens from both the northern  and the southern calcareous alps . the existence of southern calcareous alpine haplotypes in both clusters indicates at least two independent migration events between the southern calcareous alps and the northern calcareous alpine populations. since the southern calcareous alpine haplotypes in the second cluster are highly derived, it can be assumed that o. gularis was already present in that area for a longer period, probably before the lgm . however, the similarity of the southern and northern calcareous alpine haplotypes in the first cluster implies a second, recent migration event from the latter area to the southern calcareous alps. a second clade, shown in a separate network, is formed by three specimens of o. gularis from the northern calcareous alps .figure  <dig> 
median joining networks with
coi
sequences of the
orcula
species endemic to the alps. the map shows the mountain regions inhabited by the species with colors corresponding to those used in the networks. the clades inferred from the phylogenetic tree analysis are shown in separated networks, numbered from a–f. the node colors correspond to the mountain regions shown on the map . the full names of the mountain regions are provided in the appendix of table  <dig>  the areas of the northern  and the southern calcareous alps  are shaded and encircled by black lines. the size of the circles in the networks corresponds to the number of sequences providing the same haplotype. bars indicate the number of substitutions between nodes.



a further network  comprises all  <dig> samples of o. austriaca, including sequences of the three subspecies o. a. pseudofuchsi klemm,  <dig>  o. a. faueri klemm,  <dig> and o. a. goelleri gittenberger,  <dig>  the haplotypes of o. a. faueri  are embedded within a larger variety of haplotypes of the northern calcareous alpine populations of o. austriaca. they are separated only by a single mutational step from haplotypes present in the gutenstein alps. the haplotypes of o. a pseudofuchsi  are located in two different clusters of the network, one with haplotypes of the southern calcareous alpine o. a. faueri, the second with haplotypes of a neighboring northern calcareous alpine mountain area . the haplotypes of o. a. goelleri  also show up in two different clusters of the network. concluding, none of the three subspecies of o. austriaca is clearly delimited from the nominate form in its mt coi sequences.

the networks representing o. fuchsi  and the southern calcareous alpine endemics o. conica , o. spoliata and o. restituta  are less complex. the sequences of the latter two species are shown in a combined network because we found only one haplotype in o. spoliata. noticeable is that the dinarid  specimens of o. conica feature a haplotype which was found also in the southern calcareous alps , more than 200 km south-east, indicating a recent long distance migration event. the network of o. tolminensis  shows two highly diverged sequence clusters, separated by  <dig> mutational steps. the pattern might be the result of a long evolutionary history in the southern calcareous alps.

morphological variation in the subgenus orcula
the morphometric analysis was performed with the landmark data of the alpine orcula species  to evaluate the amount of morphological differentiation between the species and subspecies, respectively. the high intraspecific variability of shell morphs, even from the same localities, complicates a clear separation of the different species based on data of single specimens only. however, a higher resolution is obtained when mean shapes of several specimens per locality are compared with each other . in the linear discriminant analysis  including the mean shapes of all eight species,  <dig> % of the total variance were explained by the first three discriminants . in the lda, shell shapes of o. conica, o. fuchsi and o. tolminensis are clearly differentiated. a distinct cluster is formed by o. restituta and o. spoliata, whose shells strongly resemble each other. the shell shapes of o. a. pseudofuchsi are unique and differ clearly from those of the nominate form o. a. austriaca, while o. a. faueri is hardly differentiated. the shape clusters of o. gularis, o. austriaca and o. pseudodolium are slightly overlapping . however, when only the landmark data of the latter taxa  are compared, the species form well-defined clusters . in the respective lda ,  <dig> % of the total variance is explained by the first three discriminants .figure  <dig> 
morphometric landmark plots.
 linear discriminant analysis  with morphometric landmark data of all orcula species endemic to the alps.  linear discriminant analysis with morphometric landmark data of the closely related orcula species o. austriaca , o. gularis, o. pseudodolium and o. tolminensis. each symbol in the plot represents the consensus shape of conspecifics from the same locality.  mean shapes calculated with all individuals of each taxon. the plots are corrected for size and therefore only reflect differences in the shell shape. the symbols represent the landmark points, set on the pictures of the shells photographed in frontal position.  position of the morphometric landmarks on the projection of a shell in frontal position.



discussion
phylogeny and phylogeography of the genus orcula
one of the main aims of this study was to clarify the phylogenetic relationships among orcula species and to test whether the alpine orcula species represented a monophyletic group. based on a comprehensive phylogenetic data set including samples of all  <dig> orcula species there is clear evidence that the nine species distributed in the alps represent a monophyletic group corresponding to the subgenus orcula as proposed by páll-gergely et al.  <cit> . similarly, illyriobanatica and hausdorfia are each monophyletic in the mt and nc trees . previous considerations about the relationships of the orcula species were made in particular by gittenberger  <cit>  and schileyko  <cit> , based on shell morphological and anatomical traits. gittenberger’s  <cit>  suggestion that o. gularis, o. tolminensis, o. pseudodolium and o. austriaca are close relatives, demarcated from species representing rather independent lineages , was confirmed in the present study. in contrast, the phylogenetic scheme proposed by schileyko  <cit>  is not consistent with our results and would result in paraphyletic species complexes.

the reconstruction of the geographic range history supports a scenario in which the genus orcula originated in the dinarides during the middle miocene . thus, despite the fact that nine of  <dig> extant orcula species are distributed in the alps, the area was most likely not the center of origin, but was colonized from the dinarids. the lineages of the three subgenera most likely split during the middle and late miocene - during that time period, alps, dinarides and carpathians were partly separated by a lateral branch of the mediterranean sea  <cit> . the separation of o. dolium from the group including the eight alpine endemics  was dated in the late miocene and could be explained with the formation of lake pannon, which separated eastern alps and western carpathians during the tortonian and reached its maximum extent about  <dig> mya  <cit> . the results suggest that o. dolium originated in the western carpathians and colonized the eastern alps first during the pliocene. the radiation into numerous mt lineages during the pleistocene can be explained with divergence in separated glacial refuges as suggested by harl et al.   <cit> . the diversification of the other orcula species endemic to the alps  probably started shortly after the split from o. dolium, during the late miocene or the lower pliocene. accordingly, the diversification of most alpine orcula species pre-dated the pleistocene and their speciation cannot plausibly be explained solely by divergence in separate glacial refuges as proposed by zimmermann   <cit>  - only the split of the closely related o. austriaca, o. tolminensis and o. gularis is dated in the pleistocene .

the species of the subgenus illyriobanatica are distributed in the dinarides and the western romanian carpathians. several other land snail taxa share similar distribution patterns and inhabit both mountain ranges, for instance the hygromiid xerocampylaea zelebori , the aciculid platyla wilhelmi  and the clausiliid genus herilla adams & adams,  <dig>  <cit> . our data suggest that the dinarid o. wagneri/schmidtii complex and the western romanian o. jetschini split during the late miocene. the formation of lake pannon could have influenced their separation as well - parts of the western romanian carpathians  formed islands during the middle tortonian  <cit> .

summarizing, the reconstruction of the geographic range history indicates that the separation of the major groups within the genus orcula was linked to palaeogeographic events which shaped europe during the miocene. the patchy distribution of limestone rock certainly constituted an important factor in the diversification of lineages because all orcula species are more or less calciphilous. since lowland areas like the pannonian basin featured almost no limestone rock, active migration between mountain ranges was probably hampered. the pleistocene glaciations obviously had a strong impact on the current distributions of the alpine endemics because their areas are all located near the eastern margins of the lgm glacier line. however, most of the latter species presumably diverged from each other in the late miocene and the pliocene already, and not during the pleistocene .

hybridization within the subgenus orcula
in most of the species of the subgenus orcula, coherent mt and nc sequence patterns  as well as common morphological traits  were found. thus, these species seem to be reproductively isolated from each other. moreover, several species were found to occur sympatrically without indication for hybridizations: o. austriaca and o. tolminensis, o. fuchsi and o. austriaca, o. gularis and o. conica, o. dolium with o. austriaca, and o. gularis with o. conica and o. fuchsi. nonetheless, our data strongly support that hybridization happened between o. gularis and o. pseudodolium. although these two species could be discriminated by their shell forms in the morphometric analyses  and provided different h4/h <dig> sequences  , a clear assignment to one or the other species was not possible based on the mt sequences. most mt haplotypes of o. gularis cluster with o. pseudodolium , and only three single specimens of o. gularis  from the ennstal alps  show distinct mt variants, which form a sister clade of o. tolminensis. specimens from four sites  even show transitional states in the expression of the palatal folds  , indicating recent hybridization.figure  <dig> 
pictures of
o. gularis
and
o. pseudodolium
specimens.




potential causes of non-monophyly of species in mt trees theoretically can be inferred from the depth of the coalescences in gene trees, geographical distribution of shared genetic markers, and concordance with results of admixture analyses of nuclear multilocus markers.  <cit> . in land snail species, incomplete lineage is discussed in species of the hygromiid genus xerocrassa monterosato,  <dig>  <cit>  and the helicid cornu aspersum  <cit> , whereas mt introgression is assumed to have happened in other xerocrassa species  <cit>  and in the camaenid genus euhadra pilsbry,  <dig>  <cit> .

the non-monophyly of o. gularis and o. pseudodolium in the mt trees might be explained by three different scenarios at least:  o. gularis acquired its mitochondria from o. pseudodolium by mt introgression, but genuine mt variants of o. gularis still exist in the population of the ennstal alps.  o. pseudodolium acquired its mitochondria from o. gularis by mt introgression, and the aberrant mt variants in the three o. gularis specimens of the ennstal alps were acquired from o. tolminensis by mt introgression.  the mixed mt patterns in the mt o. gularis/o. pseudodolium clade resulted from incomplete lineage sorting. scenario  <dig> would require hybridization between o. gularis and o. pseudodolium only and, thus, provide a more parsimonious explanation than scenario  <dig>  a close relationship between o. austriaca, o. gularis and o. tolminensis is also supported by similarities in the genital anatomy, whereas o. pseudodolium shows quite distinct traits  <cit> . furthermore, o. gularis and o. tolminensis strongly resemble each other in their aperture traits by the unique presence of a palatal tooth. incomplete lineage sorting  would not explain the relation between o. pseudodolium and o. gularis sufficiently. the mt sequence patterns in the network  rather indicate that hybridization occurred at different points of time - some haplotypes of o. gularis are highly diverged from those of o. pseudodolium whereas others are identical or differ only by a few substitutions from each other. moreover, the existence of the second o. gularis clade in the ennstal alps virtually cannot be explained by incomplete lineage sorting . shedding more light on this topic would require additional sampling the potential hybridization area and analyzing  nc markers from a larger number of specimens.

another issue addressed in our study is the morphological variability within o. austriaca. apart from the common form, three subspecies were described for o. austriaca. among those, orcula a. pseudofuchsi is of special interest because its shells are more elongated than those of the nominate form of o. austriaca. klemm  <cit>  hypothesized that o. a. pseudofuchsi represents an ‘intermediate’ between o. a. austriaca and o. fuchsi, or descended from the same common ancestor at least. despite unequivocal shell morphological differences between specimens of o. a. austriaca and o. a. pseudofuchsi , the two taxa could not be delimitated by the mt and nc markers analyzed . moreover, no intermediates between o. austriaca and o. fuchsi were found at mt. göller  where both species co-occur and, in contrast to the assumption of klemm  <cit> , the two species were not even sister species . hence, the aberrant shell shape of o. a. pseudofuchsi is most likely not the result of hybridization but rather evolved uniquely in the population of o. austriaca from mt. gösing . similarly as in o. austriaca, conspecific populations strongly differing in shell morphology but not in their mtdna were observed in the western carpathian populations of o. dolium. orcula dolium brancsikii clessin,  <dig>  exhibiting strongly elongated shells, was found next to populations with specimens featuring rather globulous shells, but a distinction of the two forms was not possible with the nc and mt markers used  <cit> . another subspecies, o. a. faueri, inhabits the southern calcareous alps, geographically separated from the nominate form of the northern calcareous alps. despite the geographic distance, the mt haplotypes of o. a. faueri are embedded within the diversity of the northern calcareous alpine population, suggesting that o. austriaca colonized the southern calcareous alps very recently . in contrast o. a. faueri could not be differentiated from the common form by its shell morphology . only in the nc h4/h <dig> trees there is a comparably strong bifurcation between the lineages of the northern calcareous alps and the southern calcareous alps, indicating that the evolutionary history of the species is probably more complex . a possible explanation could be that the populations of the northern calcareous alps and the southern calcareous alps diverged in allopatry, but intermixed recently, leading to mt capture and the loss of the genuine mt variants of o. a. faueri.

glacial refuges of the orcula species endemic to the alps
although the diversification of the orcula species endemic to the alps probably started already in the late miocene and can only partly be attributed to speciation in glacial refuges, the pleistocene lgm  and earlier glacial maxima obviously affected the current distribution to a great extent. since all of the latter species are strictly calciphilous, they probably could not survive the lgm in lowland areas surrounding the alps like the closely related o. dolium  <cit> . however, most of the alpine endemics show wide altitudinal ranges from the valleys up to high mountain areas  and are adapted to cold climates. even though the lgm climatic snowline was  <dig> to  <dig> meters below the current level in peripheral ranges of the eastern alps  <cit> , lower mountain ranges potentially provided suitable conditions during glacial periods. moreover, the current distributions of all alpine endemic orcula species include areas not covered by ice during the lgm . the existence of eastern alpine refuges is also supported by several recent molecular genetic studies dealing with mountain plants  <cit>  and invertebrates  <cit> . besides, the eastern alpine margins harbor several endemic species with low active dispersal capabilities, among those blind troglobiotic beetles  <cit>  and endemic land snail species restricted to high altitudes  <cit> . the genetic diversity within orcula allows to conclude that the alpine endemics outlasted the lgm and earlier pleistocene cold stages probably in several smaller refuges at the periphery of both the northern and the southern calcareous alps and did not suffer from genetic bottlenecks.figure  <dig> 
distribution of mt clades of the
orcula
species endemic to the alps. as the distribution areas of five of the species overlap in the southern calcareous alps, the data are displayed in two separate maps . the colored symbols indicate the distribution of the mt clades, the color shaded areas represent the distribution areas of the respective orcula species. in case that two species or species clades, respectively, were found at the same localities, the symbols are shown in ovals pointing towards the locality. the white shaded areas represent the glacier extent during the lgm . the data on the maximum extent of glaciers during the lgm was published by  <cit> , and modified by  <cit> .



CONCLUSIONS
the results of the present study indicate that the evolutionary history of the genus orcula dates back to the middle miocene. the three subgenera most likely derived from an ancestor that was distributed in the dinarides, and their separation can be explained by palaeogeographic events preventing migration between the mountain ranges populated. although the alps were probably not the origin center of the genus, they gave birth to the majority of species. the structuring of the alps, with two geographically separated major limestone areas , was of great importance for the diversification of the local orcula species, most of them being strictly calciphilous. within the group of alpine endemics, most speciation events seem to predate the pleistocene. their current distribution patterns, however, were strongly shaped by the lgm glacier extent. most taxa could be differentiated well by both morphologic and genetic traits, with the exception of o. gularis and o. pseudodolium. the latter two species differ in their shell morphology and nc dna but cannot be distinguished by their mt dna sequences, indicating mt introgression.

