BACKGROUND
the effect of invasion history on genetic diversity has been documented for numerous species e.g.  <cit> . many successful invasions are characterized by high genetic diversity – the result of multiple introductions or high propagule pressure from a single source  <cit> , but other invasions are founded by genetically bottlenecked populations which harbour only a small proportion of the total genetic diversity found in their native ranges  <cit> . intuitively, high genetic diversity is likely to be beneficial to any species introduced into a new environment. multiple introductions from distinct native source populations can cause an immediate breakdown of natural gene flow barriers, often leading to admixture , increased population genetic diversity  <cit>  hybridization  <cit>  and even genetic novelty  <cit>  in the invaded range. high propagule pressure may also simply enhance the likelihood of introducing suitable genotypes to the new environment  <cit> . however, a dramatic reduction in genetic diversity, and therefore evolutionary potential, need not limit an invasion, as release from natural enemies  <cit>  and competitors  <cit> , broad environmental tolerance  <cit> , and pre-adaptations  <cit>  may contribute to the success of an invasion.

disentangling the deterministic and stochastic processes that underlie the genetic diversity and structure of successful invaders is problematic  <cit> , but has important implications for the effectiveness of management interventions, particularly biological control . while introduction and post-introduction dynamics have important roles, the genetic structure in the native range population can also influence the way in which introduction histories impact on genetic diversity found in the invasive range. for example, for highly structured populations multiple introduction events from a single population may lead to lower overall diversity than a single introduction sourced from numerous structured native range populations  <cit> .

tree species introduced for forestry represent a particularly interesting case to explore genetic diversity and structure. these species are typically sampled over large parts of the native range and in large numbers prior to introduction in order to maximize genetic diversity, environmental sampling, and thus evolutionary/breeding potential  <cit> . extensive breeding programmes in both the native and introduced range might also ‘pre-adapt’ introduced entities to local environmental conditions  <cit> . consequently, the selection, introduction, and establishment of forestry species is often associated with traits linked to successful invasions: high propagule pressure, short generation times, high growth rates  <cit> , as well as high adaptability as mediated through high genetic diversity  <cit> .

given the complex introduction histories often associated with forestry species, elucidating the processes that shape genetic diversity in the invasive ranges requires accurate and detailed introduction records  <cit> . such records are available for the introduction of acacia pycnantha  to south africa  <cit> . acacia pycnantha, commonly known as the golden wattle, is native to south eastern australia and was introduced to south africa on two separate occasions in  <dig> and  <dig> as a potential source of tanbark and for dune reclamation purposes  <cit> . experimental plantings of a. pycnantha showed the species to be a promising candidate for tanbark production. while the exact size of both introduction events is unknown, the redistribution of ca. 22– <dig> million seeds sourced within south africa throughout the coastal regions of the country is documented  <cit> . like many other australian acacias, a. pycnantha is now invasive in parts of south africa  <cit> .

in its native range, a. pycnantha is structured into two distinct ecotypes  which show a propensity for hybridization  <cit> . south african populations are genetically less diverse than australian populations and most closely resemble the wetland form from southern australia  <cit> . however, revegetation and roadside plantings from cultivated plants have led to established populations of a. pycnantha in southern australia and this may obscure phylogeographic signatures in the native range. given the known impacts of cultivation on the genetic makeup of invasive species, including australian acacias  <cit> , our overall aim was to use population genetics approaches to better understand the native source, genetic diversity, structure, and dynamics of invasive a. pycnantha populations in south africa. specifically, we asked: 1) what is the genetic structure in the native range of a. pycnantha? 2) how much of the genetic diversity in a. pycnantha’s native range has been introduced to south africa? 3) can source populations of a. pycnantha invading south africa be identified? 4) does admixture of geographically isolated genotypes from australia occur in south africa?

RESULTS
genetic diversity
there was evidence of null alleles at one locus  in eight of the populations and so this locus was excluded in further analyses. tests for hardy weinberg equilibrium  carried out on the remaining seven microsatellites showed that  <dig> out of  <dig> locus-by-site comparisons met expectations under hwe. fifteen locus-by-site comparisons showed an excess of homozygotes. of these, only three populations out of the  <dig> sampled populations showed more than one locus deviating from hwe. three loci  were out of hwe for at least three sampled populations. however, in these cases homozygote excess was not attributed to the presence of null alleles in the dataset.

overall, the number of alleles , unbiased genetic diversity , and allelic richness  were not significantly different in the native range  than in the invasive range . furthermore, populations in the native range were slightly more structured than populations in the invasive range . overall, a. pycnantha showed very little to no inbreeding in both its native and introduced ranges .

abbreviations: rs allelic richness, hs unbiased gene diversity, ho observed heterozygosity, fis inbreeding coefficient, fst among-population differentiation. none of the comparisons were significantly different between south african and australian populations.

abbreviations: n number of individuals per population, na number of alleles, ho observed heterozygosity, he expected heterozygosity, fis inbreeding coefficient and np number of private alleles.

for levels of intra-population genetic diversities, the mean number of alleles was slightly higher in the introduced populations than in the native range . similarly, expected heterozygosity  was slightly higher in the invaded range than in the native range . fewer private alleles  were found in the invaded ranges in south africa than in the native range .

genetic structure
bayesian assignment analyses in structure revealed three different genetic clusters as the optimal number among native range populations while four genetic clusters were identified for the combined native and invasive range datasets . for the native range data the three identified genetic clusters only roughly corresponded to three distinct regions from east to west across a. pycnantha’s natural range, including south australia and flinders range , the drier parts of victoria , and new south wales and some wetter parts of victoria . however, the majority of native range populations could not be confidently assigned to any single cluster , indicative of extensive admixture. our results also indicate that south african invasive populations probably originated from seeds collected from the entire native range distribution in australia . although the invasive a. pycnantha populations may therefore also represent genetic material from the flinders range  it is highly unlikely that this region is a putative source region because of the marked differences observed in leaf morphologies that correspond to distinct ecotypes not found in south africa  <cit> . this is supported by chloroplast dna sequence data obtained from the flinders range population that showed no similarity to south african invasive populations  <cit> .

hierarchical amova of all samples showed almost no differentiation between the native and invasion ranges  but considerable differentiation among populations  whereas the majority of genetic variation resided within populations  . the pcoa indicated a close relationship between invasive a. pycnantha from south africa and native populations from southern australia, particularly mt compass  and some victorian populations  .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
we found very low population genetic structure and high levels of gene flow throughout a. pycnantha’s native distribution in south eastern australia . while this observation supports a previous phylogeographic analysis indicating that admixture frequently occurs in australian populations, it is also in contrast to the genetic structure previously identified between different ecotypes  of a. pycnantha. these two forms have been estimated to have diverged during the pleistocene, around  <dig> kya  <cit> . here we included individuals collected from the same populations as those reported previously on by ndlovu et al.  <cit> .

our results make sense as a. pycnantha is known to have been widely moved and planted throughout australia  <cit> . trial plantations have been established at numerous sites in australia due to the species’ hardiness, drought tolerance and good performance under a range of soil conditions  <cit> . it has also been widely used for revegetation and soil stabilisation as it shows high natural colonising ability and fast growth under field conditions . like many other wattles, a. pycnantha was heavily harvested in the wild as early as the 1840s. the unsustainable harvesting of wattle bark from natural populations prompted authorities in victoria to appoint a wattle bark board in  <dig>  <cit> . this board recommended the establishment of wattle plantations as a sustainable source of tannin bark; these were established in new south wales, south australia, tasmania and victoria between  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . for example, the woods and forests department annual report  for the years 1883– <dig>  <cit>  mentions that around  <dig> acres of a. pycnantha plantation were established at bundaleer, south australia; during this period testing and dissemination of both australian native species and alien species was well underway within australia . these practices may have resulted in substantial mixing of genetic material in a. pycnantha’s native range, providing many opportunities for interbreeding to occur between previously allopatric populations  <cit> . on the other hand, the extensive movement of a. pycnantha within south africa following introduction may also explain high levels of admixture observed in the invasive range, but it seems more likely that seeds introduced to south africa in  <dig> came from already admixed sources  <cit> .

it is also conceivable that the lack of genetic structure and high levels of admixture observed for a. pycnantha in australia simply reflects a species with high levels of gene flow. we consider this unlikely, as numerous authors have previously noted that native a. pycnantha populations appear to be structured into two distinct ecotypes  <cit>  and that deep genetic divergence exists between the two  <cit> . also, most acacias investigated to date show moderate to high levels of population genetic structure over various spatial scales  - including species that co-occur with a. pycnantha in its native range, like a. mearnsii <cit>  and a. melanoxylon <cit> .

the role of genetic admixture in successful establishment and invasion has been documented for numerous species  <cit> . this study is, however, as far as we know, the first to show that anthropogenic actions  may lead to admixture in the native range prior to a species’ introduction into its new range. of course high levels admixture in south africa may have also resulted from multiple introductions followed by the extensive redistribution of seed stocks within the country  <cit> . however, forestry records indicate that the movement and planting of a. pycnantha within australia predates its introduction to south africa  <cit> , making a strong case for native range admixture prior to introduction to south africa. admixture may enhance the invasion success of a species through pre-adaptation to a wider range of bioclimatic conditions prior to introduction to new regions  <cit> . furthermore, because admixture in the native range may increase overall genetic diversity, the likelihood of introducing highly diverse genotypes is enhanced, which also improves the chances of invasion success. other benefits of admixture to invasion success include masking of deleterious alleles and the creation of novel genotypes  <cit> .

since the australian landscape is characterised by many revegetated forests, it is difficult to identify putative sources of invasive a. pycnantha because admixed propagules of a. pycnantha have most likely been introduced to south africa. however, separate introductions of the biological control agent, the gall-forming wasp trichilogaster signiventris, from the dryland  and the wetland regions of a. pycnantha  had differential success in south africa. such differences in biocontrol efficacy can be indicative of native provenance. it would be useful to test this hypothesis, in line with other work on the influence of phylogeographic structure on the efficacy of biological control , as part of the ongoing efforts to improve the contribution of classical biological control to the integrated control of australian acacias in south africa  <cit> .

the acacia pycnantha case demonstrates how human influences on native range population genetic structure prior to a species being even considered for introduction, might ultimately influence evolutionary potential in the introduced range. this is an important but hitherto overlooked dimension of species introduction histories that deserves careful consideration in future studies aimed at better understanding the evolutionary consequences of invasive species.

