BACKGROUND
across animals, the bone morphogenetic protein  signaling pathway plays a major role in specifying the dorsoventral  axis  <cit> . however, the components of the bmp pathway have been repeatedly modified through lineage specific gene duplications and gene losses  <cit> . whether some of these genetic changes correlate with the origin of species-specific morphological traits that develop under the control of the bmp pathway is unknown. flies  provide an excellent opportunity to address this question firstly because the bmp signaling pathway of drosophila melanogaster has been studied in great detail  <cit> , and secondly because tissue specification presumably under the control of bmp signaling along the dv axis of dipterans has undergone significant change  <cit> . in d. melanogaster, dorsal blastoderm differentiates into a single extraembryonic epithelium, called amnioserosa, which closes the developing embryo dorsally  <cit> . this tissue is found in higher cyclorrhaphan flies , but in other dipterans, dorsal blastoderm gives rise to distinct serosal and amniotic epithelia  <cit> . serosa and amnion develop from an amnioserosal fold at the margins of the gastrulating embryo. the outer cell layer of this fold becomes the serosa, which closes about the embryo. its inner cell layer detaches from the serosa but retains continuity with the embryo while closing dorsally  or ventrally . the lower cyclorrhaphan syrphids represent the closest relatives of d. melanogaster that have been shown to develop distinct serosa and amnion tissues  <cit> . therefore, they are of particular interest in efforts to understand how the origin of the amnioserosa as a new morphology is linked to changes in the underlying developmental gene network.

in previous studies we have characterized the role that the homeobox gene zerknüllt  may have played in the origin of amnioserosa development . the transcription factor zen is regulated by bmp signaling and essential in serosa specification in non-schizophoran insects and amnioserosa specification in d. melanogaster  <cit> . in lower cyclorrhapha and more distant relatives of d. melanogaster, zen expression in the serosa is maintained after gastrulation, i. e., when the serosa begins to spread over the embryo  <cit> , whereas in d. melanogaster zen expression in the amnioserosa is down-regulated immediately after gastrulation  <cit> . in lower cyclorrhaphan flies, postgastrular down-regulation of zen abrogates serosa development and results in the formation of a single extraembryonic tissue with amniotic gene expression  <cit> . thus, the repression of this single transcription factor may account for the morphological tissue reorganization that accompanied the origin of the amnioserosa. however, loss of postgastrular zen expression does not explain, why in lower cyclorrhaphan and non-cyclorrhaphan dipterans the patterning of the dorsal blastoderm results in the specification of two distinct extraembryonic tissues types as opposed to one in schizophoran  flies such as d. melanogaster.

in d. melanogaster, amnioserosa specification occurs at the dorsal midline and requires peak-levels of bmp activity  <cit> , which are provided through the interaction of two extracellular ligands, dpp and scw  <cit> . both ligands are secreted into the perivitelline space and transported towards the dorsal midline  <cit> , where bmp-ligand dimers are released from antagonists to activate a receptor complex and initiate intracellular signaling  <cit> . a cell autonomous autoregulatory loop further increases the bmp signal at the dorsal midline and generates a narrow and sharply delineated domain of bmp peak activity  <cit> . dpp is essential for bmp activity and controls the specification of all tissues that develop under the control of this pathway in the early embryo, including amnioserosa and dorsal ectoderm  <cit> . scw boosts bmp activity along the dorsal midline and is in particular required for amnioserosa specification  <cit> .

in other dipterans, the molecular mechanisms that specify the amnion and serosa are not known. expression studies in a mosquito suggest that a tighter expression of the dpp antagonist short gastrulation  leads to broader bmp signaling, which in turn may allow for the specification of two versus one extraembryonic tissue type  <cit> . additionally, scw is absent from the genomes of mosquitoes and other insects, and it has been suggested that its origin may correlate with the origin of the amnioserosa  <cit> . several other bmp signaling components of d. melanogaster resulted from gene duplications that have been mapped to the dipteran lineage, while others - known from the bmp pathways of vertebrates - were lost in the lineage leading to d. melanogaster  <cit> . here we use embryonic transcriptome data of the hover fly episyrphus balteatus  to address the question of whether evolutionary changes in the complement of bmp signaling components occurred in correlation with the origin of the amnioserosa. specifically, we found that with the possible exception of one gene-duplication  and one gene loss , genes encoding known bmp signaling components, including scw, are conserved across the schizophoran boundary of the dipteran tree. thus, most or all of the gains and losses of bmp signaling genes in the dipteran lineage do not correlate with the origin of the amnioserosa, suggesting that the origin of amnioserosa specification was probably achieved by rearranging the interaction of established factors.

RESULTS
putative orthologues of  <dig> e. balteatus genes
we sequenced the transcriptome of e. balteatus embryos at two successive time points during early embryogenesis: 0- <dig>  hrs old embryos to sample pre-blastoderm stages prior to the onset of zygotic transcription , and 3- <dig> hrs old embryos to sample blastoderm and gastrulation stages after the onset of zygotic transcription . the cdna libraries that we prepared from these developmental stages were normalized  and sequenced using the  <dig> gs flx titanium platform. following removal of contaminants  reads from both libraries were pooled and assembled using the newbler assembler from roche. above our chosen cutoff of  <dig> nt, this assembly yielded a total of  <dig>  contigs with an average length of  <dig> nt  and  <dig>  singletons with an average length of  <dig> nt . this data set  was used in subsequent analyses .

to identify e. balteatus genes, we pooled sequence data from both libraries and performed reciprocal blast against annotated genes of d. melanogaster. based on reciprocal hits, we identified putative d. melanogaster orthologues of  <dig> e. balteatus genes. in total, about  <dig>  mb  of the assembled e. balteatus sequence data could be annotated , corresponding to 43% of annotated d. melanogaster genes. specifically, we recovered 85% of genes annotated for translational control, over 60% of the genes known to encode gene-specific transcription factors , 50% of the genes associated with known and putative gene-specific transcription factors , about 50% of genes associated with structural functions  and enzymes, and 30-40% of genes associated with receptor binding, molecular transporters, and signal transduction  .

assessment of coverage
to estimate the coverage of developmental genes, we separately mapped the reads from each library back onto all of  <dig> previously described e. balteatus segmentation genes, which comprise orthologues of bicoid , caudal , nanos , torso , orthodenticle , hunchback , krüppel , knirps , giant , hairy , even-skipped , zerknüllt , tailless , and huckebein   <cit> . the combined maternal and zygotic coverage of all fourteen genes was on average  <dig> -fold , slightly less than the average coverage of the entire assembled transcriptome . however, coverage of 5'utr sequences  and 3'utr sequences  was considerably lower than the coverage of orf sequences . as the cg content of utrs  was notably lower than the cg content of the orfs , a systematic bias against at rich sequences may have been introduced by less efficient annealing of the random hexamer primers during first strand cdna synthesis. in any case, coverage of our e. balteatus transcriptome data set was high enough to identify at least fragments of genes known to be active during early embryonic development.

all fourteen genes were represented with at least one read from the zygotic library , which is consistent with our previous finding that all these genes are expressed in the 3- <dig> hours time window of embryonic development  <cit> . for six of these genes  we also obtained reads from the maternal library . previous and new  in situ hybridization data indicated maternal expression of eba-bcd, eba-cad, eba-nos, eba-tor and eba-otd, but not of eba-hb. quantitative pcr  on non-normalized cdna suggested an 18-fold increase of eba-hb expression levels following the onset of zygotic transcription, whereas expression levels both of eba-otd and eba-cad increased by about 2-fold . coverage of these genes in the maternal and zygotic transcriptomes closely reflected our qpcr data , suggesting that, despite cdna normalization, the coverage of these genes remained roughly proportional to their expression levels.

bmp signaling components in the e. balteatus transcriptome database
in d. melanogaster, bmp signaling at the dorsal side of the blastoderm is required to specify the amnioserosa as a single extraembryonic tissue . based on mosquito data, it has been suggested that in lower dipterans restricted expression of the bmp antagonist short gastrulation  may account for an expanded bmp signaling domain in the dorsal blastoderm, which resolves into serosa and amnion territories  <cit> . furthermore, it has been suggested that the complement of bmp signaling components changed in the dipteran lineage in parallel with the origin of the amnioserosa  <cit> . we used our transcriptome database as a tool to test the latter idea by searching for e. balteatus homologues of specific bmp signaling components of d. melanogaster.

specific bmp signaling components include  extracellular ligands,  transmembrane receptors,  intracellular signal transducers, and  extracellular modulators of ligands. the d. melanogaster genome contains a total of three genes encoding bmp ligands: decapentaplegic   <cit> , glass bottom boat   <cit> , and screw   <cit> . these are selectively used depending on the developmental context  <cit> . in other insects, only homologues of dpp and gbb have been found  <cit> . we identified e. balteatus homologues of all three ligands , indicating that these genes existed prior to the origin of the amnioserosa. consistent with previous reports  <cit> , our gene tree supports a sister gene relationship between scw and gbb. as expected based on a comprehensive survey of tgf-β signaling components in the beetle tribolium castaneum  <cit> , we also identified e. balteatus homologues for each of the d. melanogaster tgf-β receptors thickveins  and saxophone   <cit> , punt   <cit> , baboon   <cit> , and wishful thinking   <cit> , and the smad transducers mothers against dpp , medea, and smox  <cit> , as well as other tgf-ß signaling components .

in d. melanogaster, activity of bmp ligands is modulated by sog  <cit> , which in turn is regulated by the related metalloproteases tolloid  and tolkin   <cit> . we identified e. balteatus homologues of sog as well as of tld. while we were not able to identify an orthologue of tok, the presence of a distinct tld orthologue in e. balteatus suggests that the dipteran gene duplication giving rise to tld and tok occurred before the origin of the amnioserosa . bmp ligand activity in d. melanogaster is additionally modulated by twisted gastrulation   <cit> , crossveinless   <cit> , shrew   <cit> , as well as the membrane associated factors crossveinless- <dig>   <cit> , kekkon  <dig>   <cit> , pentagone   <cit>  and larval translucida   <cit> . we identified e. balteatus homologues of cv- <dig>  kek <dig>  as well as tsg, cv and an additional cv paralogue, eba-cv-like . previous studies have suggested that tsg, cv, and srw originated by two successive duplications of a cv-like ancestor in the dipteran lineage  <cit> . our gene tree analysis is consistent with this idea, but does not resolve whether eba-cv-like is orthologous to srw, or whether it is the product of an independent gene duplication in e. balteatus. we did not identify orthologues of pent and ltl in e. balteatus, but putative orthologues of both genes are present in the genome of t. castaneum . thus, all currently known modulators of bmp ligand activity in d. melanogaster may have existed prior to the origin of the amnioserosa.

putative orthologues of the vertebrate bmp ligands bmp <dig>  <cit>  and anti-dorsalizing morphogenetic protein   <cit> , as well as the vertebrate bmp inhibitors bambi  <cit> , dan and gremlin  <cit>  have been found in beetles and/or wasps but not in d. melanogaster  <cit> . among these, we were able to identify a putative orthologue of dan in e. balteatus . the loss of this gene may correlate with the origin of the amnioserosa. however, the function of dan in insects remains unknown and its potential role in bmp signaling is therefore speculative.

differences in maternal expression of bmp signaling components in d. melanogaster and e. balteatus
based on our finding that coverage levels of segmentation genes in the two sequenced transcriptomes were roughly proportional to their expected expression levels , we decided to globally compare maternal gene expression between e. balteatus and d. melanogaster. for this purpose, we approximated the maternal expression profiles of all annotated e. balteatus genes based on their coverage in the maternal transcriptome and compared them to maternal expression profiles of their d. melanogaster orthologues. maternal coverage levels of all annotated e. balteatus genes were corrected for sequence lengths and sequencing depth  and plotted against coverage levels of their d. melanogaster orthologues, which were estimated from available solid total rna sequencing data of 0- <dig> hour old embryos   <cit>  . coverage levels derived from the non-normalized d. melanogaster transcriptome spread by  <dig>  orders of magnitude, while those of the normalized e. balteatus transcriptome spread by  <dig>  orders of magnitude. a reduced breadth in coverage levels of e. balteatus genes was expected due to the normalization protocol. the coverage levels of the maternal genes nanos, bicoid, torso, and caudal were higher than  <dig> in the transcriptome of d. melanogaster and e. balteatus. in contrast, the zygotic genes huckebein, even skipped, giant, hairy, knirps, tailless, krüppel, and zerknüllt showed coverage levels lower than  <dig> in both species . notably, the scatter plot correctly revealed the expression differences of hunchback  and orthodenticle . when restricting the data set to bmp components  or transcription factors , we readily identified additional candidate maternal expression differences in both gene groups. for example, the data suggest maternal expression of crossveinless- <dig> or kekkon- <dig> in e. balteatus but not in d. melanogaster, which might reflect different interactions of bmp signaling molecules and regulators in both species during early embryonic development.

CONCLUSIONS
comprising orthologous sequences of nearly half  of all annotated d. melanogaster genes, the newly generated transcriptome data of e. balteatus provide a convenient tool to identify putative orthologues of conserved insect genes. here we used the transcriptome data of e. balteatus to show that the novel dipteran bmp ligand scw and other bmp signaling components of d. melanogaster existed prior to the origin of the amnioserosa . these findings suggest that the origin of amnioserosa development was accompanied by subtle changes in the expression of conserved bmp signaling components, rather than on the origin or loss of individual genes. modification of the bmp pathway is expected to be constrained due to its multiple functions in development. however, the duplicated genes  may have relaxed these constraints, because bmp activity could now be provided by non-identical sets of genes in early  and later developmental stages. we suspect that increasing the role of scw, tld, tsg and srw in early  development at the expense of gbb, tok and cv facilitated genetic accommodation of early dv patterning following the origin of the amnioserosa. conversely, the entire complement of the duplicated bmp signaling genes might still be required for early dv patterning in lower cyclorrhaphan flies such as e. balteatus.

