BACKGROUND
sea turtles, like many other marine taxa, are increasingly prone to marine debris ingestion and associated problems  <cit> . despite many studies recording instances of debris ingestion e.g.  <cit> , little is known about the cues that attract turtles to eat plastic debris. the predominant hypotheses are that 1) turtles, as opportunistic feeders, simply consume items in proportion to what they encounter in the environment, including plastics; and 2) that turtles feed on plastic because of its similarity to prey; particularly jellyfish  <cit> . though the proportion of gelatinous prey in a turtle’s diet varies depending on the life stage and the species of the turtle, all species do target these prey at some stage of their lives  <cit> .

turtles are primarily visual predators. research indicates that loggerhead turtles have limited ability to find food based on chemical stimuli alone  <cit> , which may explain why they are primarily caught during the day on longline fishing lines, and rarely at night  <cit> . similarly, when presented with both chemical and visual cues, leatherback turtles responded exclusively to visual cues  <cit> . therefore, the visual similarity between plastic bags and jellyfish can cause confusion even in the absence of chemical stimuli associated with food sources. loggerhead sea turtles have been shown to approach plastic bags in a similar manner to gelatinous prey, indicating that they use visual characteristics to select their food  <cit> .

the spectral sensitivity of an animal depends not only on its photopigments, but also on the transmissivity of the ocular media and, in the case of turtles, of the oil droplets associated with the cones. turtles have a well-developed visual system with at least three different photopigments, indicating the ability to see colour  <cit> . the visual system of sea turtles is similar to that of fresh water turtles; however, the sea turtles’ visual pigments are slightly shifted towards the shorter wavelengths, due to the differences in spectral characteristics of the waters in which the different animals live  <cit> . sea turtles generally inhabit clearer, oceanic waters, whereas fresh water contains many dissolved organics and sediments, shifting the maximum light transmission to longer wavelengths  <cit> . the bulk of sea turtle vision studies to date have been conducted on green  and loggerhead  sea turtles e.g.  <cit> . liebman and granda found  <dig> photopigments in the green turtle retina absorbing maximally at 440 nm , 502 nm , and 562 nm   <cit> . recent evidence indicates that green turtles are also likely to have a fourth, ultraviolet sensitive  photo-pigment, like their freshwater relatives  <cit> . turtles possess at least four different types of oil droplets, again indicating they have four spectral sensitivities, like birds  <cit> . each type of oil droplet may be associated with a specific photopigment, or may combine with different photopigments to produce multiple cone receptor types  <cit> .

turtles, like many other vertebrates, also possess double cones, a specialized structure consisting of two cones joined together  <cit> . the function of the double cone is still unknown; however it has been hypothesized in both birds and reptiles to play a role in discriminating between levels of luminosity or brightness  <cit> . although the exact composition of the double cone structure is unknown, in fresh water turtles both of the members that make up the double cone have lws photoreceptors  <cit> .

we created a chromatic space model of the green turtle visual system  to investigate the following questions: are green, hawksbill, and flatback turtles selectively ingesting particular types of debris over others, and if so, what characteristics of that debris  are most relevant to turtles’ foraging choices?

RESULTS
our visual model resulted in peak sensitivities of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 560– <dig> . the mixed effects modelling results indicate that sea turtles select the debris they ingest based on a variety of physical properties. in fact, debris ingested by turtles was significantly different from beach debris for all environmental variables investigated with the exception of background contrast and the contribution of the uv cone . turtles differentiated items most strongly based on their luminance , flexibility , and translucency . items ingested by turtles tend to be less bright , more flexible, and more translucent than items found in the environment. with respect to wavelengths, items ingested by turtles had significantly lower short wavelength spectrum values .

a
note that the selectivity ratio indicates the relative strength of the turtles’ selectivity based on each factor. *indicate p values that are significant at the  <dig>  level.

acalculated as the absolute value of the ratio of the size of the turtle effect to the size of the intercept.

a simple inspection of the turtle visual space models  shows the difference in the wavelengths of ingested debris and beach debris. the average value of debris ingested by turtles is lower in the short wavelength spectrum than that of beach debris, indicating that the items turtles eat are less blue than what is available to them in the environment.

there were no significant differences observed between plastics ingested by sea turtles of different life history stages  with respect to the factors tested . however, hawksbill and flatback turtles did exhibit some significant differences compared to green turtles. because we only had a small sample size for hawksbills  and flatbacks , we omitted them from analyses.

discussion
the spectral sensitivities we calculated  are well matched with previously published electroretinography  data of c. mydas spectral sensitivities. levenson and colleagues  <cit>  observed well-defined peaks at  <dig> and  <dig>  with a relatively constant sensitivity below 500 nm; an earlier study found peaks at  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  <cit> . the technique of high frequency flicker erg used by levenson et al.  <cit>  is likely more accurate in the longer wavelengths, as it more successfully isolates the cone response from the rod response. however, the turtles in this study were older than those used by liebman and granda and may have experienced a decline in short wavelength vision similar to elderly humans, explaining the lack of a defined short wavelength peak  <cit> . our model, therefore, matches observed sensitivities based on erg.

we assumed that beach debris was a reasonable proxy for ocean-borne debris in the nearshore area inhabited by these turtles, and therefore represents the debris “available” to the turtles. although there are limitations of using beach debris as a proxy for ocean debris, it has been widely used in previous studies  <cit> . thiel et al.  <cit>  conducted a multi-year comparison of anthropogenic marine debris on beaches and in nearshore waters, finding the proportions of different items to be similar. locally, an analysis of beach debris and nearshore trawl debris for locations around north stradbroke island found similar proportions of different colors of debris in both beach and trawl surveys . we are therefore confident that local beach debris is representative of nearshore ocean debris available to turtles analysed here.

it is clear from the statistical results, as well as from inspection of the turtle visual space data that turtles are selective in what they eat . turtles do not tend to ingest debris that is reflective in the short wavelengths; i.e. blue items. when turtle preferences were analysed based on a human categorical description of colour rather than a turtle visual space model, blue was similarly found to be less prevalent in turtle samples than in beach surveys  <cit> . also in support of our findings, a laboratory-based study of loggerhead and kemp’s ridley turtles indicated that both species avoided blue dyed bait  <cit> .

colour is not the only visual factor employed in food selection. in other animal species, contrast has been found to be as important or even more influential than colour in selecting food sources  <cit> . the fact that turtles are selecting against blue items could indicate that blue plastics are less readily visible against the blue background of the open ocean. we measured this contrast value by calculating the tetrachromatic distance between each debris item and a background measurement of open ocean water, but found that turtles did not selectively ingest items based on contrast. however, this may be partially due to limitations of the model. similar models calculating colour space distances have reliably predicted honeybee behaviour when visiting orchid mimics. bees were more likely to visit an orchid mimic when there was a small colour distance between the orchid and its preferred food source than when the colour space distance was large; in other words, when the mimic was a similar colour to their preferred food choice  <cit> . however, the honeybee model was only successful when incorporating second order visual processing, assuming interactions between photoreceptor types  <cit> . our model did not incorporate these interactions, which may explain why turtles did not appear to select for high contrast items.

turtles selected debris with significantly lower luminance values than those of beach debris, possibly because dark objects stand out better against the bright ocean background  <cit> . however, we cannot completely exclude the possibility that the prevalence of darker objects in the turtles is partially an artefact of our study design, as the debris in the turtles’ gastrointestinal system is exposed to digestive fluids and other waste, which may result in a reduction of luminance. further work on clarifying the differences in selectivity between contrast and colour would help to elucidate these results.

the visual space model investigates colour and luminance, but other characteristics influence ingestion selectivity in turtles even more than colour. turtles select plastics most strongly based on their flexibility and translucency. our model suggests that turtles prefer highly flexible and translucent objects, both of which are key characteristics of one of their preferred natural prey items: jellyfish. this work demonstrates that turtles are indeed selective, and it also provides support for the widely postulated “jellyfish hypothesis”. proper waste disposal, particularly for common end user items such as plastic bags and other soft, translucent items which are preferentially ingested by marine turtles, may help to reduce the rapidly increasing debris ingestion rates in threatened sea turtles. we hope this research can inform conservation efforts not only for endangered sea turtles, but we also suggest applying similar analyses for other visual predators to investigate the key factors that drive ingestion rates and anthropogenic debris selectivity.

CONCLUSIONS
using models to visualize how turtles “see” the plastic they ingest, we find strong support for the hypothesis that they ingest plastic because of its resemblance to a typical prey item, jellyfish. our model can be extended to other species to better understand why wildlife consume plastic and to effectively focus conservation and remediation efforts.

