BACKGROUND
a fundamental technique in biological research is the use of reporter genes to track cells or tissues in developmental studies, to quantify or recognize gene expression from defined cis-regulatory elements and to normalise for differential uptake of dna or delivery vectors in transfection experiments in vitro  <cit> . the most frequently used reporters are escherichia coli lacz gene encoding β-galactosidase , the green fluorescent protein  of aequorea victoria and to a lesser degree human placental alkaline phosphatase  <cit> . in transgenic studies gfp tends to be the reporter of choice for studies at single cell or intracellular resolution or where viable cells need to be isolated by fluorescence activated flow sorting . histochemical detection of lacz is still widely used at the single cell/tissue level of resolution especially where visualization is in wholemounts of tissues or embryos. here we present a new reporter protein for cellular and whole organism studies that is validated in vitro and by generating a cre-reporter mouse in which the reporter is detected in histological sections following induction of cre recombinase. this new reporter gene, termed synbgla, is based on the bgla gene , of the thermophilic bacterium caldocellum saccharolyticum that encodes a β-glucosidase  thermostable to 85°c  <cit> .

RESULTS
a mammalian expression construct in which the subcloned c. saccharolyticum bgla gene is regulated from the human elongation factor 1α  promoter was generated to create pefbgla. for comparison, lacz was also subcloned to generate peflacz. the ef1α promoter was chosen as, unlike powerful viral promoters such as the cytomegalovirus immediate early promoter , it does not tend to undergo silencing over time  <cit> . following transient transfection cells expressing thermostable βglu could be detected using bci-glu in fixed cultures with or without heat-treatment . colonies of nih 3t <dig> cells transfected with pefbgla and peflacz were isolated. βglu expression remained detectable after heat treatment unlike βgal which was heat inactivated . to establish if βgal and βglu can be co-localized stable clones separately expressing either reporter were derived and mixed in 1: <dig> ratio and cultured together for 1- <dig> days prior to fixation and staining with bci-glu and magenta-gal at 37°c. individual cells in the co-cultures stained with one substrate only and showed no cross-reactivity demonstrating the potential to visualize these two reporters simultaneously .

after several passages, cultures derived from bgla+ clones in which all cells stained positive for βglu activity, exhibited large numbers of unstained cells. such a 'silencing effect' has been reported in experiments with the e. coli lacz gene  <cit> . silencing of lacz is ameliorated by changing its sequence to minimize the number of cpg dinucleotides that are targets for methylation in mammalian cells  <cit> . the bgla coding sequence contains  <dig> cpg dinucleotides. consequently, we undertook to resynthesize bgla such that the nucleotide sequence was depleted for cpg dinucleotides and the codon sequence was biased towards mammalian usage. a nuclear localization signal was also added as a 5' fusion . the reporter gene thus generated was termed synbgla .

synbgla was subcloned to generate pcmv-synbgla that was cotransfected with psv2neo into  <dig> cells and g <dig> resistant clones obtained. the cmv promoter was selected as a more robust test of the resistance of synbgla to silencing. four clones were expanded and all expressed the altered βglu  strongly and homogenously as evaluated by bci-glu staining. the clones were serially passaged  and continuously evaluated for expression by staining with bci-glu. no reduction in the proportion of cells stained or in their intensity was observed up to passage  <dig>  the highest analysed . we conclude that synbgla is not prone to the gene-silencing phenomenon observed with bgla and reported with unmodified lacz  <cit> .

βgal expression can be quantified by detecting cleavage of o-nitro-phenyl-galactoside conjugated sugars in colorimetric assays. we confirmed that synβglu expression is quantifiable with onp-glucopyranoside . this method was then used to gain insight into the functional stability of synβglu compared to βgal. both proteins were expressed inducibly in stably derived clones of 293ecr cells   <cit> . the rate at which reporter enzyme activity decayed following withdrawal of pronesterone a was determined by harvesting treated cells daily for  <dig> days. following the cessation of induced transcription, the rate of decay for synβglu is similar to that of βgal, with a 50% reduction in activity observed at  <dig>  days and  <dig>  days, respectively, suggesting that they have similar stabilities within cells .

in contemporary studies of gene function in vivo, genes are not only deleted or overexpressed constitutively but conditionally mutagenized using site-specific recombinases such as cre  <cit> . reporter lines for recombinase activity are necessary to determine the timing, spatial regulation and tissue specificity of recombinase expression  <cit> . consequently, we decided to generate an alternative reporter line for assessing cre activity by targeting the ubiquitously expressed murine rosa <dig> locus with synbgla placed downstream of a floxed stop cassette to create a line named r26r . frozen sections and intestinal wholemounts from adult r26r and non transgenic animals were analysed for βglu activity using bci-glu. tissues from r26r and non transgenic animals showed identical staining patterns with all  except small intestine showing no staining due to background enzymatic activity. in the small intestine, in both cases, the positive staining was associated with the epithelial brushborder and could be prevented by incubation at 65°c for  <dig> min prior to incubation in bci-glu . these results indicate that there is no background expression from the targeted allele and that detectable endogenous βglu is only present in the small intestine.

in order to functionally test the r26r line it was mated to two different cre expressing lines, pgkcrem and ahcre. pgkcrem is expressed from a maternally inherited transgene that is expressed during the diploid phase of oogenesis resulting in complete recombination at loxp flanked cassettes even where pgkcrem is not inherited  <cit> . male r26r mice were crossed with pgkcrem females and the offspring analysed around the time of weaning. tissues were excised, fixed and stained as wholemounted tissues in bci-glu for  <dig> h. tissues from age-matched mice not crossed to pgkcrem mice were also prepared. in all tissues of mice obtained from the r26r/pgkcrem intercross, including heart, thymus, spleen, pancreas, kidney, skeletal muscle, liver, stomach and brain, there was intense staining with bci-glu, where there was none in the control tissue. this demonstrates that synβglu expression is sustained in diverse tissue types following cre-mediated activation .

ahcre is a mouse line in which cre recombinase is conditionally expressed from the rat cytochrome p <dig> ia <dig> promoter in several gastrointestinal tissues, following treatment with the inducing agent β-napthoflavone  <cit> . the ahcre line was originally validated with the r26r reporter line, in which lacz is expressed from the rosa <dig> locus following cre-mediated recombination, allowing the known pattern of recombination to be compared with that obtained in ahcre/r26r mice. thus, ahcre/r26r were either left untreated or treated with five daily intraperitoneal injections of  <dig> mg/kg β-napthoflavone to activate transcription of cre and mediate excision of the stop cassette allowing expression of synbgla . there was very a very low level of background recombination in the target tissues of untreated adult animals . after induction, there was near complete recombination with extensive expression of synβglu that could be detected with bci-glu in small intestinal wholemounts . in the colon of induced ahcre/r26r mice there was extensive recombination that was maximal proximally and became increasingly mosaic towards the anus . in both untreated and treated mice the pattern of recombination was identical to that observed previously in ahcre/r26r mice although overall the extent of recombination as determined by expression of synbgla seems greater in more distal regions of the intestine  <cit> .

increasingly transgenic experiments require the simultaneous application of two or more reporter genes. we wanted to establish if synβglu can be co-localized with βgal in tissues. in order to achieve this we chose to analyse the intestinal epithelium and exploit the known clonality of intestinal crypts  <cit> . ahcre and reporter strains r26r and r26r were intercrossed to generate animals carrying all three modifications r mice). these were injected with a single dose of β-napthoflavone to induce cre submaximally such that mosaic patterns of recombination resulted. the intestines were then analysed for expression of both βgal and synβglu after  <dig> weeks, a time by which the process of crypt monoclonal conversion is largely complete  <cit> . intestinal wholemounts or cryostat sections were stained first for βgal  and then, after heat-treatment, for synβglu as described in the methods section using bci-gal and mag-glu, respectively. individual and clusters of stained crypts could be clearly identified and could be related to either reporter expressed alone or occasionally both together .

in order to determine if the introduced synβglu could be detected in sections processed for histology in paraffin wax blocks, different fixatives and protocols were tested. liver, pancreas, bladder and small intestinal samples from ahcre/r26r mice induced with β-napthoflavone 1- <dig> weeks previously were fixed in various fixatives for 1- <dig> h, processed through an ascending series of ethanols, xylene and into paraffin wax at 65°c for embedding. five micrometer sections were cut, dewaxed in xylene and rehydrated before incubation with bci-glu at 37°c. clear nuclear localized histochemical product was found in patterns identical to that observed with cryostat sections as described above . the main determinant of staining intensity was the fixation protocol with the best results achieved after  <dig> h fixation with 2%formalin/ <dig> % glutaraldehyde.

in order to test whether or not synβglu can be localized with other markers, we performed immunohistochemistry specific for intestinal cell types in tissue sections already stained for bci-glu . villus enterocytes were easily identified in such sections on the basis of their positive staining for villin as were intestinal goblet cells on the basis of staining for muc <dig> .

discussion
the βglu encoded by synbgla is an easily detected and stable protein that seems an ideal cell marking reporter molecule. it has potential application to cell and molecular studies where gene expression has to be localized. its potential applications in vivo include studies during development and in the adult where gene expression from defined promoter elements have to be detected or for the fate mapping of tissues or individual cells, for example in clonal studies  <cit> .

like βgal expression levels of synβglu can be quantified using colorimetric substrates. such assays are routinely used for normalizing for vector uptake in transfection experiments with the stability of βgal making it suitable for this purpose. however, such colorimetric assays are relatively insensitive and, as has been pointed out previously for βgal, chemiluminescent substrates can greatly increase sensitivity  <cit> . appropriate chemiluminescent substrates are available for the detection of synβglu but, to date, we have not attempted to apply them. however, the ultimate limit on sensitivity for βgal is the presence of background enzymatic activity from endogenous, mammalian β-galactosidases and it is likely that the ability to destroy such background by heat inactivation will mean that synβglu has an enhanced sensitivity over that of βgal  <cit> .

synβglu may have advantages over e. coli βgal for cellular localization in some experimental settings. the thermostability of synβglu allows it to be visualized in high-resolution sections from paraffin wax embedded tissues. the size of the coding sequence for synbgla is  <dig>  kb compared to  <dig>  kb for lacz. this smaller size is advantageous for viral delivery vectors where cloning of large inserts is problematic.

the similarity of synβglu and βgal both in terms of processing requirements for visualization and the relative stabilities of the two proteins, together with the observation that they can be can co-localized, suggests that they may be used in tandem in compound genetically modified transgenic animals where gene expression changes are being effected. the compatibility of synβglu and βgal for dual detection may become especially significant as transgenic analyses become more elaborate. for example, a stem cell marker gene  has been validated in mice by localizing stem cells using an enhanced yellow fluorescent protein targeted to the lgr- <dig> locus along with a tamoxifen activated cre recombinase  <cit> . recombination mediated by the latter is recognized in crosses to r26r mice as clones of cells expressing βgal. a recent study of neuronal function combines use of gfp and human alkaline phosphatase to allow simultaneous detection of cell bodies, neurites and presynaptic sites and envisages the potential to also detect βgal in crosses to mutant strains  <cit> . in this regard, synbgla will add to the limited platform of available reporters. the r26r mice described here will further permit detailed analysis of the pattern of cre activity in mouse models in which recombination is restricted to specific cell types and tissues and to different stages of development.

CONCLUSIONS
synβglu is an easily detected reporter protein that has a variety of applications in vitro and in vivo where cell tracking, accurate localisation and high sensitivity is required. synβglu may offer some advantages to the e. coli βgal but the ability to use these two reporter systems together suggests that they will complement each other and will be used in tandem. the cre-reporter animals described here demonstrate the applicability of synβglu to transgenic tissues and in the analysis of cre mediated recombination.

