BACKGROUND
biosurfactants  are amphiphilic compounds produced mostly by microbes on their cell surface, or secreted extracellularly and exhibit strong surface and emulsifying activities. they contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic moieties that can reduce the surface or interfacial tension in liquids  <cit> . bs are complex molecules that include glycolipids, rhamnolipids, lipopeptides, polysaccharide-protein complexes, phospholipids, fatty acids and neutral lipids  <cit> . unlike synthetic surfactants, bs are diverse and biodegradable, and have the potential for highly selective, specialized functions. several bs exhibit anti-bacterial, anti-fungal and anti-viral activities, making them appropriate candidates to combat infections  <cit> .

the list of known bs includes surfactin, the most powerful bs known, which is produced by bacillus subtilis <cit> . other bs with antimicrobial activity include iturin, also produced by b. subtilis <cit> , mannosylerythritol lipids from candida antarctica <cit> , rhamnolipids from pseudomonas aeruginosa <cit>  and those isolated from probiotic bacteria streptococcus thermophilus a and lactococcus lactis <cit> . probiotic lactobacilli, which constitute an important part of natural microbiota, are recognized as potent interfering bacteria due to the production of various antimicrobial agents including bs  <cit> . in one study,  <dig> lactobacillus strains were tested in vitro for bs production. it was found that all released surface active components during their mid-exponential and stationary growth phases  <cit> .

another valuable attribute of bs is their use as anti-adhesive/anti-biofilm agents  <cit>  as shown previously in the lack of adhesion of enterococcus faecalis to glass with an adsorbed bs layer from lactobacillus acidophilus rc <dig> or lactobacillus fermentum b <dig>  <cit> .

biofilms are conglomerations of bacterial cells protected by self-synthesized extracellular polysaccharide matrices . biofilm infections are extremely challenging to treat because antimicrobials are less effective than planktonic cells  <cit> , thus making clearance more challenging. the presence of biofilms causes numerous problems in the field of medicine, interfering with clinical therapy of chronic and wound-related infections as well as persistent infections of various indwelling medical devices  <cit> . although numerous strategies have been established and are currently in use to control biofilms, the pursuit for novel, natural, and effective anti-biofilm agents still continues  <cit> .

in recent years, the use of bs as alternatives to control biofilms has been explored extensively  <cit> . bs have been shown to modify the surface properties of bacterial cells and reduce their adhesive properties  <cit> . in addition, bs produced by bacteria have been shown to interfere with biofilm development and cell to cell communication  <cit> .

studies in the past have demonstrated the ability of probiotic bacteria l. acidophilus-derived bs to inhibit staphylococcal biofilm development and also induce its dispersion  <cit> . bs produced by probiotic lactobacilli have been shown to reduce adhesion of pathogenic bacteria to glass, silicone rubber, surgical implants, and voice prostheses  <cit> . it is believed that when bs is applied to a substratum surface, it modifies its hydrophobicity, interfering in the microbial adhesion and desorption processes  <cit> . consequently, prior application of bs on catheters and other medical insertion materials may be used as a preventive strategy to delay the onset of pathogenic biofilm growth of mdr bacteria on wounds, medical insertion materials and inert surfaces in the hospital environment  <cit> . thus, the prevention of biofilm formation or disruption by natural lactobacilli-derived agents was tested in these in vitro studies as a possible approach leading to novel antimicrobials.

the aims of this study were to determine the antimicrobial, anti-adhesive, and anti-biofilm activities of cell-bound bs isolated from l. jensenii and l. rhamnosus against several clinical isolates of multidrug-resistant pathogens.

RESULTS
oil spreading assay
the oil spreading assay was utilized to study the surface activities of crude bs. this assay is rapid, and is highly sensitive to surface active compounds  <cit> . both l. jensenii and l. rhamnosus strains demonstrated oil displacement activity in motor oil. the oil displacement activity, as measured by the area of the clear zone on the oil-water surface, increased with an increase in the concentration of bs .

l. rhamnosus
l. jensenii
pbs was used as a negative control with a clearing zone diameter of  <dig>  mm. surfactin was used as a positive control. results shown are the average of ± sd of three experiments performed in triplicate.

antimicrobial assay with bs
the crude bs of both l. jensenii and l. rhamnosus were tested against two clinical isolates of mdr a. baumannii, e. coli and s. aureus. we found both bs to be effective in killing all three mdr pathogens at 50 mg/ml . l. jensenii bs exhibited almost 100% activity against all the strains tested . the activity of l. rhamnosus ranged from 96-97% against a. baumannii and 72-85% against e. coli. for s. aureus strains uams- <dig> and mrsa respectively, activity was between  <dig> and 93% respectively .
l. jensenii 
 and 
l. rhamnosus 
 against mdr pathogens

s. aureus
results are from  <dig> independent preparations of bs. . biosurfactants were tested at 50 mg/ml concentration. numbers are represented and percent reduction in cell numbers when treated with bs.

impact of bs on bacterial attachment to abiotic surface
biofilm formation is a complex process that generally involves three stages:  primary adhesion to surfaces,  accumulation of multilayered clusters of cells, and  detachment. because binding of host proteins is a major contributor to primary adhesion, it was important to test initial adherence to surfaces that were coated with plasma. experiments were performed to determine the stage at which bs disrupts biofilm formation. using an adherence assay, the ability of two bs to inhibit the cell attachment in the presence of host proteins was measured by coating the plates with human plasma. after various concentrations of bs ranging from 25-50 mg/ml were tested, it was found that the two bs significantly impaired the attachment of a. baumannii and e. coli at 50 mg/ml . s. aureus adherence to abiotic surfaces was disrupted at concentrations between  <dig> and 50 mg/ml .

impact of bs on biofilm development
next, it was determined if the static biofilm assay could show whether both bs possessed anti-biofilm activity against a. baumannii, e. coli and s. aureus. the bs produced by both l. jensenii and l. rhamnosus significantly reduced biofilm development by a. baumannii and e. coli at 50 mg/ml . furthermore, the two bs significantly inhibited s. aureus biofilms at both concentrations of 25 mg/ml respectively .

dispersion of preformed biofilms by bs
in the experiments thus far, the bs were added concurrently with inoculation of bacteria. to determine if these compounds dispersed preformed biofilms, a. baumannii and e. coli biofilms were developed on mbec pegs, and then exposed to varying concentrations of bs in fresh media for varying time intervals. after removal of the pegs, the amounts of bacteria that remained on the pegs were quantified by crystal violet staining. compared to the controls, preformed a. baumannii and e. coli biofilms treated with bs at 100 mg/ml for 1 hr did not produce any dispersion effect. however, when biofilms were exposed for longer durations , an increased biofilm dispersion was observed . furthermore, an increase in dispersion was also observed for s. aureus biofilms when exposed to the bs at concentrations of 50 mg/ml for 18 hrs respectively .

cytotoxicity assays for bs in eukaryotic cells
results from the cell-mediated cytotoxicity assay are presented in figure  <dig>  human a <dig> lung epithelial cells were treated with bs from both lactobacilli strains at various concentrations  for 24 h. cytotoxicity was determined by ldh release according to the manufacturer’s instructions and the total cell number assay . concentrations of 25-100 mg/ml showed no toxicity. both bs showed very low toxicity levels at 200 mg/ml .

transmission electron microscopy
tem was used to evaluate the ultra-structural morphological alterations exerted to a. baumannii and s. aureus in the presence of bslr. we chose a. baumannii  <dig> and s. aureus uams- <dig> strains to represent a gram negative and gram positive pathogen for analysis. untreated cells of the both a. baumannii and s. aureus showed a normal cell shape with an intact structure of the cell wall, inner membrane and outer membrane. the images of the a. baumannii samples treated with l. rhamnosus bs were markedly different to those of the untreated cells. several bslr treated a. baumannii cells had their membranes damaged at certain areas of the bacterial cell with accumulation of dense substance . surprisingly we also found that l. rhamnosus bs seems to cause more damage specifically to the ends of the bacterial cell . s. aureus cells treated with l. rhamnosus bs exhibited profound structural differences when compared to untreated cells. several cells were observed devoid of cell walls, a phenomenon called as “ghost” cells. the dark and light areas observed in the cells were indicative of high and low electron densities respectively. several cells were found to contain septa when compared with the control samples . this may be due to bs interfering with the cell division process and this is probably indicative of one of the mechanisms of action of bslr by inhibiting the cell division.

discussion
here, we describe two cell-associated biosurfactants derived from probiotic lactobacilli bacteria that possess both antibacterial activities and inhibit biofilm formation by several important drug-resistant pathogens. although some strains of lactobacilli are known to produce surfactants, to the best of our knowledge there are no reports on the abilities of l. jensenii and l. rhamnosus bs as anti-biofilm agents. the crude bs derived from aforementioned bacteria showed significant antimicrobial activities against a. baumannii, e. coli, mrsa and s. aureus at mic concentrations ranging between  <dig> and 50 mg/ml. l. jensenii bs showed antimicrobial activity at 25 mg/ml against all three pathogens with killing that varied from 75- <dig> %, and at  <dig>  mg/ml, it showed 90-100% killing against mrsa. in addition, we observed similar antimicrobial activities from both bs with similar mic concentrations against mdr klebsiella pneumoniae . in this study, we clearly showed the effect of bs on the bacterial cells by transmission electron microscopy . the bacterial cell membrane appears to be the target of bs activity and subsequent microbicidal activity of bs may be due to the leakage of cellular contents. bs that exhibit antimicrobial activity has been previously described  <cit> , but to date there have been very few studies on the activity of bs isolated from lactobacilli  <cit> . the antimicrobial results generated from our studies were similar to the results from crude bs studies on l. paracasei ssp. paracasei a <dig> and l. lactis, which completely inhibited the growth of several micro-organisms at concentrations ranging between  <dig> and 100 mg/ml  <cit> . in addition, bs exhibited excellent anti-adhesive properties against s. aureus, a. baumannii and e. coli, as evidenced in our adhesion based assays.

next, the biofilm inhibition and dispersal capability of bs against the above mentioned three pathogens was evaluated. the crude bs isolated in this study exhibited very good anti-biofilm activities against select microorganisms. in the past, several studies have documented the anti-biofilm activity of bs isolated from different bacteria  <cit> . preformed biofilms of all the three bacteria tested in microtiter plate wells were effectively disrupted by the bs. the bs dispersed all three bacteria when exposed for longer durations. the inhibition of biofilms using surfactants has been reported previously  <cit> . in addition, bs have been shown to disperse biofilms of bordetella bronchiseptica and b. pumilus <cit> . the increased anti-biofilm and dispersal ability of the bs currently being investigated may be due to the two important properties that it displays, namely, antimicrobial and surfactant activity. previous studies with a bs isolated from lactobacillus spp. have only demonstrated its antimicrobial and anti-adhesive properties  <cit> . here we report for the first time bs isolated from lactobacillus also displaying anti-biofilm properties. both l. jensenii and l. rhamnosus bs were able to significantly reduce biofilm development by a. baumannii, e. coli and s. aureus.

the use and applications of bs in the medical field has increased considerably in the last years. the impact of bs in bacterial adhesion and desorption has been widely discussed, and subsequent adsorption of these bs to solid abiotic surfaces could prove an effective strategy to reduce bacterial adhesion, thereby combating microbial colonization in both medicine and industry  <cit> . the anti-biofilm and anti-adhesive activities of the bs observed against several pathogens in our studies opens up the possibility of using them to coat a variety of medical surfaces to drastically reduce microbial colonization.

in conclusion, in this work we have demonstrated the antimicrobial, anti-biofilm, and anti-adhesive properties of the crude bs isolated from l. jensenii against several pathogenic mdr bacteria. we also observed that addition of both bs at effective concentrations to eukaryotic cells resulted in low cytotoxicity , suggesting the safety of these compounds for topical delivery. biofilm encroachment on biomaterial is an extremely important concern post-surgery. hence, our results open the possibility of using bs-modified materials for the construction of biofilm-resistant medical implantable devices, given its broad-spectrum activity against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial strains. bs exhibits potential as a new therapeutic strategy to inhibit biofilm formation. because the increased prevalence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria generates a need for alternate and novel strategies to combat biofilms, we believe that co-administering antibiotics with anti-biofilm agents that possess surface activities such as bs may form the basis of future clinical protocols against biofilm-based infections.

currently, experiments are underway to characterize the crude fractions of the surfactants by high performance liquid chromatography. we have identified certain fractions that exhibit excellent antimicrobial activities against a. baumanni, s. aureus, k. pneumoniae and e. coli. these fractions are being further analyzed by mass spectrometry and matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization- time of flight  to identify the active component/s.

CONCLUSIONS
the bs produced by l. jensenii and l. rhamnosus showed antiadhesive, antimicrobial and antibiofilm activities against several mdr bacteria, such as e. coli, a. baumannii and s. aureus, which are prominent biofilm formers on wounds, medical implants and industrial surfaces. antiadhesive and antimicrobial activities were seen between 25-100 mg/ml. mbec based biofilm assays confirmed the inhibitory action of bs on biofilm development at concentrations ranging 25-50 mg/ml. in addition, bs dispersed preformed biofilms of a. baumannii and s. aureus at concentrations ranging 50-100 mg/ml. due to its surface tension reduction properties, bs can be used to coat medical surfaces to prevent microbial colonization by variety of bacteria causing indwelling device associated infections.

