BACKGROUND
the genome sequences of arabidopsis  <cit>  and rice  <cit>  have stimulated great advances throughout the plant sciences. comparisons of these eudicot and monocot genomes have provided many insights into the genome characteristics and evolutionary histories of both lineages , and comparisons involving additional species are generating a more global picture of angiosperm genome evolution  <cit> .

these multispecies comparisons, and comparative plant sciences more generally, have been aided by the well-supported understanding of evolutionary relationships among flowering plants that has emerged over the last decade . among the most noteworthy phylogenetic results is the well-supported inference that whereas monocots form a clade, the dicots as traditionally circumscribed do not. rather, monocots are derived from within the "primitive" dicot grade, now collectively referred to as basal angiosperms . the "eudicots"  do form a clade that comprises ca. 75% of all angiosperm species  <cit> , and most of this diversity is found among the "core" eudicots, which include the rosids, asterids, and caryophyllales . model systems such as arabidopsis thaliana, tomato , cotton , poplar , barrel medic  and ice-plant , are all representatives of the core eudicot clade . rice , maize , wheat , barley , sorghum , and sugarcane  are all members of the grass family , a phylogenetically derived lineage within the monocots . although comparisons of the rice and arabidopsis genomes will undoubtedly identify many features of the ancestral angiosperm genome, this pair-wise comparison alone will not be able to distinguish arabidopsis-specific attributes from those specifically absent in rice or visa versa. the recent posting of high coverage genome sequence for populus trichocarpa  <cit>  is a major advance for comparative plant genomics, but even populus-arabidopsis-rice comparisons cannot distinguish features common to all angiosperms from those that arose in the most recent common ancestor of eudicots and monocots, which existed at least  <dig> million years ago  <cit>  and perhaps more than  <dig> million years ago . in general, the resolving power of comparative plant genomics will increase with additional taxa representing key lineages in plant phylogeny . increased genomic resources for phylogenetically diverse plant species will lead to a better understanding of plant genome evolution, the diversification of gene families, and the origins of reproductive characteristics common to all flowering plants.

basal angiosperms and basal eudicots , while comprising a small percentage of the total number of extant angiosperm species, nonetheless encompass an astonishing spectrum of developmental patterns and floral forms  <cit> . in turn, this diversity provides a clear opportunity to reconstruct to the basal condition of angiosperms, and thereby bridge the evolutionary gap between model eudicot and monocot genomes. understanding the evolution of angiosperm genes and genomes, including the floral transcriptome, requires three-way and higher-order comparisons that extend beyond arabidopsis and rice. this point is widely appreciated, and comparative plant genomics is being fueled by the availability of genomic resources for a growing number of plant species. the addition of species representing basal angiosperms, basal eudicot, and non-grass monocot lineages will be especially valuable, not only for flowering research, but also for more general "reconstructomic" studies of housekeeping and transcription factor functions.

a primary objective of the floral genome project  is to uncover patterns of conservation and divergence of the floral transcriptome among angiosperms, particularly to elucidate the role of gene duplications and shifting expression patterns in the origin and diversification of angiosperms. the fgp has constructed a large collection of non-normalized nor tissue subtracted cdna libraries and 5' est sets from developing reproductive tissues for selected species of basal eudicots, basal angiosperms and gymnosperms . these species represent not only key nodes in the angiosperm phylogenetic tree and its sister group , but also a diversity of reproductive structures and developmental patterns. while multi-species comparisons of large sequence data sets are already possible for poaceae  <cit>  solanaceae  <cit> , and brassicaceae  <cit> , the addition of large est sets for basal angiosperms opens the door to fundamental comparative genomics investigations of the origin and diversification of flowering plants.

RESULTS
random 5' sequencing of cdnas from basal flowering plants has so far  generated  <dig>  ests assembled into  <dig>  unique gene sequences . these materials should provide essential resources for comparative genomic research because they represent previously poorly sampled genomes placed at crucial points in angiosperm phylogeny. gene sequences from the gymnosperm welwitschia, the basalmost angiosperms amborella and nuphar, the basal monocot acorus, the magnoliids persea, liriodendron and saruma, and the basal eudicot eschscholzia will aid in placing boundary dates on the origins of florally-expressed gene families, help resolve patterns of gene and genome evolution within the flowering plants, and bridge critical gaps in comparative analyses involving monocot and eudicot model systems. identification of cdna clones for finished sequencing has been aided by efficient sorting of est sequences into putative gene families based on whole arabidopsis/rice proteome comparison. phylogenetic analyses of ests are providing new insights into the process of gene family evolution in relation to the origin and diversification of the angiosperms. here we introduce our est database and provide some examples of broad utility of these data in comparative analyses.

pgn website
all fgp est data and unigene builds are available through the plant genome network  website  <cit> , linked also through the fgp homepage  <cit> . pgn was designed as a general-purpose est analysis pipeline and web-based database that can be readily employed as a "front end" for other est sequencing projects. pgn is a trace file database accepting all standard automated sequencer file formats. quality information in the raw trace files is used for sequence trimming and assembly, and chromatograms can be visualized through the website. the focus on trace file data distinguishes pgn from other est databases such as plantgdb  <cit>  and the tigr gene indices  <cit> . pgn also provides an est processing and annotation service for smaller est projects that may not have the informatics resources to generate a public database, and provides a stable web address for these projects. pgn provides public access to est library statistics, unigene build details, est chromatograms, and permits fgp taxon-specific blast  <cit>  searches.

tribe analysis
tentative classification of unigenes has allowed us to identify quickly the genes represented in our est sets. we created an objectively defined scaffold for classification through cluster analysis of the arabidopsis and rice proteomes. the planttribes database  <cit>  can be searched using blast, or by query with arabidopsis or rice sequence ids  <cit> , sequence annotations, pfam accession ids  <cit>  or keywords.

to construct planttribes, predicted protein sequences from the arabidopsis thaliana var. columbia and oryza sativa var. japonica  genomes were downloaded from tigr  <cit> . the blastp program  <cit>  was used to compare all sequences to each other, and the similarity-based clustering procedure tribemcl  <cit>  was used to group proteins into putative gene families within our planttribes database. of the  <dig>  tribes identified by mcl cluster analysis of the arabidopsis and rice proteomes,  <dig> planttribes included at least one of  <dig> known floral development regulators .

unigene overlap
to estimate the complexity of the non-normalized nor tissue subtracted fgp cdna libraries and the underlying floral transcriptomes, we analyzed predicted functions of the fgp unigenes. overall, functional classification of fgp unigene assemblies shows that est sequencing has captured a nearly uniform representation of the sampled transcriptomes. on average, 53% of unigenes from each taxon match arabidopsis genes with an e-value of  <dig> e- <dig> or better. an analysis of go annotations  <cit>  for these genes shows that the fgp unigene sets provide a remarkably consistent sampling of functional classes defined for the arabidopsis proteome . moreover, similar go classification frequencies were observed in a subset of  <dig>  genes that were found to be expressed at moderate-to-high levels  in an affymetrics microarray analysis of young  arabidopsis inflorescences .

estimation of unigene overlap is inherently error-prone because best blast hits are not necessarily orthologs. moreover, even when orthology is established through formal phylogenetic analysis, similarity in function does not necessarily follow orthology . we used the planttribes database to estimate the overlap among our unigene sets at the gene family level. unigenes were sorted into the tribes if they have best blastx hits to any member of the tribe. each taxon has unigenes sorted to 19–51% of the  <dig> tribes that include floral development regulators . on average, 70% of the gene families represented in one est set are represented in at least one other est set. as expected, the most overlap occurs in the largest gene families .

among the  <dig> arabidopsis floral regulatory genes identified from the literature ,  <dig> have closely related homologs  in at least one fgp est set. on average, ests with a best hit among the  <dig> listed arabidopsis flower development genes constitute approximately 1% of each fgp est set. the average overlap of best hits to these floral regulatory genes was  <dig> % between pairs of est sets. the amborella, nuphar and eschscholzia unigene sets shared three-way overlap in best blast hits to six floral development genes  and these species plus persea shared four-way overlap in best blast hits two of these genes . in addition, the fgp ests/unigenes were found to match on average  <dig> % of the apparent single-gene/taxon tribes  from arabidopsis. the average overlap of these putative single copy genes between two fgp taxa was 28%, and three-way overlap of such genes among the amborella, nuphar and eschscholzia est sets was 10% .

the high frequency  of crucial arabidopsis floral regulators identified in blast searches as best hits for sequences in one or more of our est sets  indicates that fgp est sets are a valuable resource for comparative floral developmental studies. for example, identifying homologs of genes being investigated in model systems opens the door to broad cross-species comparative analyses of gene function. of the  <dig> arabidopsis genes that have recently been identified as having organ-specific expression within developing flowers  <cit> ,  <dig>  are best blast matches to genes from at least one of our unigene sets . we consider this to be a high percentage, given that our cdna libraries were constructed from a subset of the developmental stages analyzed in the arabidopsis study  <cit> .

given what is already known about gene duplications in angiosperm history , the blast based measures of overlap are almost certainly underestimates of cross-taxon sampling of orthologous gene sets  represented in our est sets. whereas the measures of among-taxa overlap in gene families as defined in the planttribe database provide a possible upper bound on the degree of overlap among orthologous sets, simple comparison of best blast hits in the arabidopsis proteome provides a likely lower bound.

formal phylogenetic analyses provide a more accurate assessment of orthologous gene sets. for example, within the mikc mads-box gene family, phylogenies uncover greater levels of overlap among our est sets than were inferred from simple blast-based analyses. of the  <dig> taxa listed in table  <dig>  representatives of the deficiens, globosa, agamous, fruitfull/squamosa, sepallata, agl <dig>  and tm <dig> clades have been identified in  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> unigene sets, respectively.

in addition to providing more accurate estimation of overlap among the transcriptomes being sampled in est studies, phylogenetic analyses of gene families provide insights into the evolutionary history of genes characterized in model systems. for example, recent phylogenetic surveys of mads box genes have identified gene duplication events that appear to be associated with the origin and rise of angiosperms and the radiation of core eudicots .

phylogenetic analyses of poorly understood gene families can also provide valuable insights into both function and phylogenetic history. for example, two of the  <dig> genes identified as differentially expressed in petals by wellmer et al.  <cit>  belong to a single gene family identified in planttribes  <cit> . this gene family includes  <dig> arabidopsis genes and  <dig> rice genes, all containing a plant-specific domain, duf <dig>  <cit> , the function of which is unknown. duf <dig> homologs were identified in ests sampled from amborella, nuphar, persea, liriodendron as well as  <dig> additional plant species included in the tigr plant gene indices  <cit> . a phylogeny of these sequences reveals one weakly supported and two well supported subfamilies . we will refer to these putative subfamilies as clades a, b, and c, respectively . the well supported placement of a gymnosperm gene  as sister to all angiosperm genes in clade c indicates that the origin of this subfamily predated the common ancestor of angiosperms and gymnosperms. asterid, rosid and monocot genes can be identified in each of the three subfamilies; magnoliid genes are placed in clades a and b; and the basal-most angiosperms  are represented in both clades b and c. the phylogeny suggests that one of the two genes identified by wellmer et al.  <cit>  is a recent duplicate, the sister gene of which is not differentially expressed in petals. determining the expression patterns of other duf <dig> genes in arabidopsis, rice, and other plant species and mapping this information onto the phylogeny would be a first step toward understanding their current function and functional evolution.

discussion
proof-of-concept: est coverage
relative to the gene ontology  functional classification, the fgp is detecting new, translated sequences with astonishing similarity to frequencies known for the entire arabidopsis transcriptome. these gene discovery frequencies support the preliminary hypothesis that the functional complexity of the floral transcriptome roughly equals that of the global plant transcriptome. this point is supported by a comparison of the predicted arabidopsis proteome and the collection of genes identified as moderate-to-highly expressed in young arabidopsis inflorescences . moreover, these detection rates ensure that fgp sequences will be of great interest to the evolutionary biologists for analyses of gene and genome duplications and selection at the molecular level, as well as to the plant molecular biological community in general. for phylogenetics, fgp unigenes assigned to single-gene planttribes  could be used to develop nuclear markers spanning all angiosperms. indeed, further comparative functional analyses of such single-copy genes could be used to test whether natural selection culls duplicates from plant genomes following segmental or genome-wide duplication events.

proof-of-concept: mads-box genes
the efficacy of a comparative genomics approach to the discovery of genes involved in floral development is illustrated in an analysis of mikc-type mads-box genes. to date,  <dig> mads unigenes were identified as likely orthologs to major mads-box groups, including those of the mikc-type mads-box genes that encode well-characterized floral regulators, such as deficiens, globosa, and agamous. further phylogenetic and expression analyses of these newly identified genes from the fgp species promise to yield new insights into the evolution of this gene family critical for flower development. in addition, sequences representing the tm <dig> clade have been identified in our amborella and persea est sets. the tm <dig> gene, expressed in developing tomato flower buds, was sequenced at an early point in the study of mads-box gene function  <cit> . although a tm <dig> ortholog, eraf <dig>  has been associated with female flower development in cucumber  <cit> , no ortholog of tm <dig> has been identified within the arabidopsis or rice genomes, suggesting that it was lost from the genomes of these species. identification of tm <dig> orthologs in eudicots suggested that the gene duplication establishing the lineage had at least occurred among ancestral core eudicots  <cit> . however, phylogenetic placement of amborella and persea genes within this clade pushes its origin back to the oldest node in angiosperm phylogeny at least  <dig> mya on the basis of fossil evidence  <cit>  and perhaps 145– <dig> mya according to molecular estimates  <cit> , suggesting that the tm8-like genes were part of the basic floral "tool-kit" in the earliest angiosperms. had these new orthologs not been identified, the limited understanding of the functions of tm <dig> and eraf <dig> would have rendered them unlikely targets for candidate gene analyses of basal angiosperms.

the high capture rate of known floral development regulators in the mads-box gene family can be considered a proof-of-concept for the fgp. we expect this frequency to increase for mads-box and other floral gene families as the size of fgp est libraries and unigene sets expands.

limitations
the fgp est sets described here include sequences from non-normalized nor tissue-subtracted cdna libraries. as such, many of the genes captured are expressed across many tissues, which could in large part account for the evenly proportioned go classifications among fgp taxa and the arabidopsis proteome . additionally, our approach to est collection has limited the discovery of transcripts known to be rare, such as for the superman gene  <cit> . nonetheless, this limitation can be overcome by either targeted screening of our cdna libraries or rtpcr.

indeed, primer design for pcr amplification has already been aided by use of alignable sequences observed across multiple fgp est sets. for example, primer pairs designed from alignments of amborella and liriodendron unigenes with arabidopsis gigantea and rice homologs have been used successfully to amplify unsampled sequences in nuphar, acorus, eschscholzia and ribes.

although est sequencing alone will result in incomplete sampling of genes and gene families across taxa, they offer many possibilities for further experimentation and hypothesis testing. for example, est resources provide the opportunity to derive finished coding sequences that will be more useful for genetic manipulation as well as for comparative bioinformatics. finished full-length cdnas can be used as tools for many research endeavors, ranging from promoter isolation to anchoring of shotgun genomic sequences. whereas incomplete sequences for sampled genes may reduce resolution and accuracy in some phylogenetic analyses, parsimony methods are relatively robust with respect to missing data when taxon sampling is extensive  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
ests and assembled unigenes collected from placeholders for several critical lineages of basal angiosperms are helping to bridge the genomic gap between the eudicot and monocot model plant systems. initial findings suggest that the basic floral transcriptome, as collected from non-normalized, non-subtractive cdna libraries, are similar to the inferred arabidopsis transcriptome in the proportions of its go functional categories. moreover, the rates of acquisition of known floral gene homologues among the various basal angiosperm est sets are high. finally, in one example of floral gene capture, representation among the ests of one lineage of the mads-box gene family has set the origin of that gene group before the divergence of monocots from basal angiosperms. together, these results provide strong proofs-of-concept for the floral genome project. we anticipate that these initial findings will afford the opportunity to address a number of conspicuous evolutionary genomic questions, including reproductive organ transcriptome overlap between angiosperms and gymnosperms, genome-wide duplication history, identification of lineage-specific gene duplications and functional divergence, and analyses of adaptive molecular evolution. more generally, plant scientists may use the fgp resources and the comparative method to enhance estimates of sequence/domain conservation as well as hypotheses of function among all of the gene families captured. these resources will also be useful for designing both taxon-specific and universal primer sets for amplification and sequencing of specific genes sampled in one or more of our est sets.

