BACKGROUND
historically, the measurement of bacterial virulence has involved the use of infection models to access the ability of a pathogen to cause disease. one widely used method is the ld <dig> assay, which is defined as the number of bacteria required to kill 50% of the infected hosts. this method yields valuable data pertaining to the cumulative, absolute virulence of the bacterium, which can theoretically be compared between laboratories. but as detailed by beuzón and holden  <cit> , it is a crude method as it does not relay information on the infection kinetics. also, if the deletion of a gene does not increase the ld <dig>  it does not necessarily mean that the gene product does not play a role in the virulence of the bacterium. if two or more strains  could be compared within a single host, the kinetics of infection could be monitored, which could expose subtle differences. intra-animal experiments would help to minimise inherent inter-animal biological variation and also improve the identification of mutations or isolates with reduced competitive fitness within the host  <cit> . this form of assay has been termed a "competitive index" and is becoming an increasing popular method to examine bacterial virulence  <cit> . one crucial factor is to establish the ability to discriminate strains, without adversely impacting on the natural fitness of the organism.

listeria monocytogenes is a foodborne pathogen, which can cause fatal infections in a susceptible host  <cit> . in humans, the initial step of gastrointestinal invasion is mediated via the interaction of a bacterial cell surface exposed protein, internalin a , with the host cell surface ligand, e-cadherin  <cit> . subsequent intracellular replication and spread can lead to systemic disease. while the mouse is a poor model of listerial gastrointestinal disease due to the limited affinity of inla for murine e-cadherin, the tools required for systemic proliferation are functional once the gastrointestinal tract is bypassed via intravenous or intraperitoneal injection  <cit> . identification and assessment of genes required for the virulence of l. monocytogenes has been greatly helped by the sequencing of multiple genomes  <cit> ; however, functional post genomic analysis requires the development of improved techniques for the discrimination of virulence potential. ld <dig> measurements are still widely used, but for the reasons described above, competitive indices could provide a more elegant alternative. even though competitive index assays have been previously applied to l. monocytogenes  <cit> , these are not broadly applicable and have inherent limitations .

here, we have established a method to stably tag l. monocytogenes strains and assess their competitive fitness in complex samples. through the development of a new site-specific integrative vector, pimc, we have produced four derivatives with different iptg inducible antibiotic and phenotypic markers for their subsequent discrimination from complex samples.

RESULTS
construction of pimc
we have modified the listeria site-specific integrative vector, ppl <dig>  <cit> , by a series of soe-pcr reactions to generate pimc . the backbone of ppl <dig> was conserved, including the pbluescriptii ks multiple cloning site, low copy e. coli origin of replication, conjugative transfer functions, and the listerial phage integrase genes. to improve antibiotic selection and decrease vector size, the gram-negative cat gene was deleted and the inducible gram-positive cat promoter  <cit>  replaced with the highly expressed listerial promoter   <cit> . as shown in fig 1b, l. monocytogenes strain egde, when transformed with ppl <dig>  exhibited variable colony size and took  <dig> h to yield colonies. even upon passage in the presence of chloramphenicol, egde::ppl <dig> yielded a variable colony size and could not grow at chloramphenicol concentrations above  <dig>  μg/ml . these results suggested that the inducible gram-positive cat gene, as a single copy on the chromosome, was a poor selection marker  <cit> . in contrast, egde transformed with pimc yielded uniformly sized colonies, which were visible after  <dig> h . egde::pimc exhibited similar growth kinetics to egde and was able to grow in the presence of up to  <dig> μg/ml of chloramphenicol. the integration of pimc in egde and two additional l. monocytogenes strains  was highly stable. after  <dig> serial passages at 37°c in bhi broth  without antibiotic selection, none of the  <dig> colonies screened from each strain had lost the plasmid. this vector should prove useful for genetic complementation and as a marker for in vitro and in vivo strain selection.

development of in vivo multiple competitive index assay
comparative analysis of virulence potential is a cornerstone in understanding the ability of a pathogen to cause disease and in determining the relative contribution of putative virulence factors. we applied pimc to establish a widely applicable method to evaluate virulence potential during mixed infections, in the form of a competitive index   <cit> . to exploit the high level of chloramphenicol resistance of pimc, which allows selection from complex samples, we subcloned three iptg-inducible antibiotic resistance markers ermam , apha <dig> , tetm  and an iptg-inducible phenotypic marker, gusa  into pimca . these markers enable strains to be distinguished directly from each other by antibiotic selection or through x-gluc hydrolysis . these plasmids were electroporated into egde and the resultant strains were evaluated in vitro for growth rate and in vivo for virulence. no differences in growth rate were observed between the strains when grown in bhi .

in the initial in vivo experiments, the four egde tagged strains were mixed at a 1:1:1: <dig> ratio and then administered by intravenous injection to  <dig> balb/c mice. on each subsequent day,  <dig> mice were sacrificed, with the bacterial loads in the spleen and liver enumerated. total counts recovered from the spleen and liver throughout a three day time course were consistent with a typical egde infection , suggesting the tagging and marker expression do not impact on the virulence of egde. we were able to distinguish the four tagged strains with a double selection, using both chloramphenicol and an additional marker for selection or discrimination. we found that chloramphenicol at a concentration of  <dig>  μg/ml was sufficient to remove background host bacterial flora on bhi agar from mouse faecal and intestinal samples. counts from both organs indicated that each strain maintained a competitive index close to  <dig>  , thereby maintaining the original inoculum ratio within each mouse. this demonstrates that none of the four markers had an adverse impact on virulence. the kinetics of infection through the iv route revealed that the spleen was more permissive to initial infection than the liver, consistent with the results of other researchers  <cit> . in a second experiment, we tested whether the ratios would be maintained throughout an infection if the composition of the initial inoculum was skewed : <dig> : <dig> : <dig> ). as before, ratios were maintained throughout the course of the infection . the gus tagged strain is discriminated by a colourimetric change, which is not directly selective and thus may be overlooked at very low recovery rates . the other three markers have the advantage of clean selection; however if four strains are required, we recommend that the dominant strain  should be tagged with this marker.

virulence comparison of different l. monocytogenes strains
finally, we tested three genome-sequenced l. monocytogenes strains in a 1:1: <dig> infection; namely egde  10403s  and f <dig> , to examine the kinetics of the individual strain infection and obtain information on the relative virulence of these commonly used laboratory strains. we observed differences in the multiplication of each strain within the organs analysed, with counts of egde predominating in both the spleen and liver over the other two strains . by day  <dig> in the liver, egde out-competed 10403s, while 10403s was recovered in significantly higher levels than f <dig>  in almost all cases, the relative virulence ratio method  resulted in greatly improved statistical validity when compared to the use of raw cfu data . this was especially true for organ counts after  <dig> hours, where a large degree of variation in the infection of livers and spleens was observed. however, when relative ratios were examined, the increased statistical robustness of the data resulted in easier identification of significant differences. the rvr can only be calculated when strains are mixed within a single mouse and relative ratios are calculated. an absolute value for the ability to compete is presented in fig 3c, as the competitive index of each strain relative to egde. here we show that in the spleen after  <dig> h, both 10403s and f <dig> exhibit significantly reduced loads when compared to egde, with this margin narrowed at  <dig> h. in the livers, f <dig> was significantly impaired throughout the three day time course compared to both egde and 10403s. taken together, these results show that the number of bacteria present in the organs at  <dig> h can be ranked as follows; spleen – egde > 10403s = f <dig> and liver – egde > 10403s > f <dig> 

discussion
our prior experience with the ppl <dig> plasmid  <cit>  indicated that the chloramphenicol resistance expressed was relatively low, therefore we were unable to directly select l. monocytogenes out of complex samples. this could be due to the inducible nature of gram-positive cat genes as described by lovett  <cit> . to circumvent the requirement for induction of cat expression, we remodelled ppl <dig> to decrease plasmid size and exchange the inducible cat promoter for a highly expressed constitutive version. this increased the mic of the new vector, pimc, ten-fold compared to ppl <dig>  the improved selection allows the isolation of tagged l. monocytogenes from complex environments such as intestinal contents or food samples. further development of pimc involved the creation of a suite of four vectors with diverse antibiotic and phenotypic markers to allow the discrimination of individual l. monocytogenes isolates. these were used to establish a competitive index assay to compare the relative fitness of l. monocytogenes strains. the tags did not compromise the fitness of the transformed strains as determined by growth in complex media and by the maintenance of an initial infection ratio through out a three day time course in balb/c mice. the method established allows the direct discrimination of strains without post-enumeration manual scoring, such as pcr or replica plating  <cit> . the introduction of post enumeration scoring can introduce bias in the discrimination of bacteria, as only a small sample size is processed per organ. when samples can be directly enumerated, larger numbers can be analysed and the introduction of human error reduced. also, the iptg inducible promoter should help to decrease any potential consequences of marker expression during competitive growth.

we also observed improved statistical robustness when analysing data from competitively infected mice. we found that ratios were maintained throughout the course of infection , suggesting that, as observed with salmonella typhimurium  <cit> , true replication of the inoculum occurs rather than clonal expansion. the statistical significance was especially evident when data from the third day post infection was analysed . large differences in the cfu counts isolated from individual livers and spleens were observed due to inherent variation in the infection process and animal-animal variability. however, analysis of the ratio of strains demonstrated improved statistical validity . for the experiment reported in fig  <dig>   <dig> mice were used, whereas traditionally  <dig> mice would have been required if each strain were analysed individually. therefore, using mixed infections, fewer mice are required to produce better results, a powerful demonstration of the 'reduce and refine' principles.

competitive index assays for l. monocytogenes have previously been described by two research groups. auerbuch et al  <cit>  established a strain of l. monocytogenes  tagged with tn <dig> , which mimics wild type 10403s infections. this has been widely applied by researchers using the 10403s strain  <cit> . however, the assay developed is only applicable to 10403s, requires further analysis post enumeration  and only allows the comparison of wild type to a second unmarked strain. in  <dig>  a fluorescence based method for the discrimination of l. monocytogenes strains was established in a replicative plasmid system  <cit> . a total of five fluorescent proteins were shown to be functional, with three suitable for simultaneous use to distinguish strains . while the tagging method is non-invasive, prolonged incubation is required for chromophore maturation and in the absence of selective pressure, significant and variable plasmid loss was observed, depending on the fluorescent marker used  <cit> . the authors also describe difficulty in discriminating large virulence attenuations due to the non-selective nature of the marker.

from the comparison of three commonly used laboratory strains of l. monocytogenes, we observed distinct differences in the kinetics of infection. upon re-examination of the sequence of the inlb gene from f <dig>  it was shown to encode a nonsense mutation leading to premature stop codon in the gene  <cit> . this may help to explain the impaired ability to establish infection within the liver compared to the 10403s and egde, as inlb plays an important role in liver colonization  <cit> .

we have applied the competitive index experiments to in vivo experiments, but it equally could be used in vitro to examine growth or survival within both sterile and complex systems. additionally, we envisage the use of internal controls in experiments, such as the comparison of mutant, wild type and complemented mutant, or the dual tagging of a wild type and two separate mutants in murine or tissue culture assays . we acknowledge that problems may be encountered in certain situations when comparing multiple strains in a single host, e.g. if a molecule involved in quorum sensing complemented a virulence defect or when the route of infection can be hijacked by a defective competing strain  <cit> . nonetheless, we believe our protocol displays significant advantages over previously described methods and provides an additional tool for use in infection biology.

CONCLUSIONS
we have established a method for the comparison of the relative fitness of l. monocytogenes strains utilising a novel, stable integrative plasmid, pimc, based on the ppl <dig> phage integrase plasmid. this method allows for the selection and discrimination of up to four isolates from complex samples, without the requirement for post-enumeration processing. there were no detrimental effects on virulence or growth rate of the l. monocytogenes strains due to tag expression, as demonstrated by systemic spread in a balb/c mouse model similar to that seen with a wild type strain. the utility of the method was demonstrated through the direct comparison of virulence of three commonly used l. monocytogenes strains . the data yielded improved statistical robustness when the ratios were examined rather than the cumulative cfu counts from spleens and livers. egde was shown to predominate in the liver and spleen by day three of infection compared to the other two strains. f <dig> exhibited similar kinetics to 10403s in spleen replication but was significantly impaired in the ability to replicate within the liver when compared to both strains.

