BACKGROUND
from focal demyelination or axonal degeneration events characterizing peripheral neuropathies, to localized genetic alterations involved in primary neuro-oncogenic processes, understanding cell- and domain-specific gene function in the cns  <cit>  often requires the modification of gene expression in restricted cell populations. cre-mediated recombination has become a key strategy for the spatial and temporal control of gene inactivation or over-expression. this has been mainly achieved through genetic approaches, by crossing transgenic mouse strains carrying loxp-flanked  genes with transgenic mice expressing the cre recombinase under the control of specific promoters, or through viral or non-viral delivery of cre encoding dna. with the latter strategy, spatial restriction of the infected tissue to defined areas remains challenging. as an alternative strategy, direct delivery of therapeutic agents into cells , has had numerous and encouraging attempts  <cit> . endogenous peptides endowed with internalisation properties  have strongly improved the efficiency of delivery  <cit> . fragments of tat  <cit> , fgf  <cit> , and homeoproteins are efficient peptidic vectors, which do not have obvious deleterious impact on cell survival; they have been combined, either chemically or genetically, with different macromolecular cargoes  <cit> . however, the restricted delivery of such compounds in topographically focalized territories has not been directly evaluated in the case of neural cells, which are highly heterogeneous in term of spatial identity. we have addressed this issue with the intra-cellular delivery of cre recombinase fused to cpps, a strategy which has been already well described  <cit> . cre recombinase is a large hydrophilic enzyme frequently used to perform targeted genomic recombination  <cit> , resulting in permanent reporter transgene expression when using dedicated genetic backgrounds. this functional read-out unambiguously ensures the presence of a biologically active cre protein inside the nucleus, contrasting with the visualisation of protein internalization that has lead to conflicting results  <cit> . we show the efficient delivery of the active enzyme in topologically restricted cell populations and provide several examples of the applications of this technology to neuronal targeting and cancer research, a strategy which obviates the need for sustained expression of cre recombinase  <cit>  through genetic procedures.

RESULTS
fusion to penetratin-based cpps preserves recombinase activity and promotes nuclear cre internalization
cre recombinase coding sequence was genetically inserted in frame with several peptidic coding sequences coding for cpps and the recombinant proteins were purified from bacteria . enzymatic activity was monitored in cell-free conditions, through recombination of a target linear plasmid harbouring two loxp sites. all fusion proteins displayed similar specific recombination activities, in the range of  <dig> units/μg – except for tat-cre, which was significantly more active , outperforming a commercial cre . as both the nuclear localization signal  and the highly basic character of the tat and penetratin sequences might have enhanced cre biological activity by increasing its nuclear accumulation, independently of the internalization process  <cit> , the recombination activities of histidine-tagged cre conjugates  were further evaluated by transient transfection. the three coding sequences, sub-cloned into a mammalian expression plasmid, were expressed in cv1b cells, which display β-galactosidase reporter activity upon cre-mediated recombination  <cit> . cre immunodetection indicated that all proteins displayed similar expression and nuclear accumulation levels . furthermore, detection of reporter activity showed similar target recombination efficiency for all tested cre conjugates, consistent with previous observations  <cit> . this efficacy further applied to the antp secretion signal-appended penetratin conjugates , suggesting a robust nuclear targeting by the penetratin moiety  <cit> . these results rule out nuclear addressing as a limiting step in cre nuclear activity during protein transduction assays – which thus allows correlating their transduction efficiencies with the internalization step.

we then evaluated the biological activity of these proteins upon transduction of the adherent cv1b reporter cell line  <cit> . fusion of hc to tat, nls or penetratin, resulted in equivalent recombination efficiency and cell survival  upon exposure for  <dig> mn. maximal activity was obtained at  <dig> μm, resulting in 80% of β-galactosidase positive cells . by contrast, the native hc protein displayed a low but significant transduction rate, with less than 20% of reporter-expressing cells. interestingly, as previously reported, the transduction efficiency of nls, which is not considered as a bona fide cpp, was twice that of cre alone  <cit> . the simultaneous addition of both nls and penetratin sequences to cre protein  only slightly enhanced the transduction efficiency compared to h3c . reducing the exposure of cells to h3nc  from  <dig> down to  <dig> mn resulted in recombination efficiency levels close to maximum , suggesting a fast interaction of the protein with the cell surface.

cpp-cre fusion proteins as a new tool for the study of neural development
we next addressed whether cpp-cre mediated recombination would be suitable for the study of neural tissue. in preliminary experiments we had observed that primary neuronal cell cultures were readily amenable to transduction . to gain further insight into the efficiency of transduction at the tissular level, we developed transduction assays on explants  <cit>  of adult or embryonic cns regions derived from cre-inducible reporter transgenic mice. the explants were cultured in serum-free medium and subsequently exposed to cpp-cre fusion proteins . tissue fragments were overlaid with a  <dig> μl drop of protein solution  and assayed for reporter activity,  <dig> up to  <dig> days later. none of the explants from reporter strains used in this study displayed recombination events upon exposure to vehicle solution . firstly, drops of cpp-cre were applied at the centre of telencephalic explants from e <dig> –e <dig>  mouse embryos . dose-response assays showed that exposure to most of these conjugates resulted in a steep response, with no or barely detectable recombination events below  <dig> ng/μl, and maximal reporter expression from  <dig> ng/μl with all tested transgenic reporter strains . since all tested cpp or nls conjugates induced recombination with similar efficiencies, only tissues exposed to h3nc were hereafter used to illustrate representative assays in fig.  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  as documented in fig. 2a, b, reporter-expressing cells from r26r-derived explants were detected throughout the explant from the  <dig> ng/μl concentration on . in contrast, conjugate titres below this limit resulted in restricted clusters of targeted cells . within live cortical explants from transgenic mice carrying fluorescent inducible reporters, gene expression was detected as soon as eight hours after transduction by direct fluorescence . indirect immunodetection and confocal analysis  performed  <dig> h later suggested that neurons might be preferential targets for cpp-cre internalization, based on the morphology of the expressing cells  – consistent with previous observations  <cit> .

although indicative of efficient recombination, the drop delivery approach resulted in a heterogeneous distribution of reporter-expressing cells, either at the centre or at the periphery of the explant, which could reflect the persistent drift of the proteins towards the edge of the explants. we thus examined whether recombination could be further restricted to cell subpopulations of the developing cns thanks to the use of lineage-specific promoters. for this purpose we targeted a single lineage of neuroblasts in a model of neuronal apoptosis. the fusion proteins were used to transduce e <dig> –e <dig>  spinal cord explants from the dbx1-dta strain , in which only dbx1-positive interneurons express the pro-apoptotic diphtheria toxin a fragment. apoptosis can then be evidenced by induction of activated caspase iii. upon transduction, apoptotic cells could be detected only within transgenic explants exposed to cre fusion proteins  but not with vehicle solution . these cells were arranged along two parasagittal lines, consistent with the distribution of dbx <dig> positive interneurons . in contrast, fusion proteins did not induce significant apoptosis in non-transgenic explant . expression of the target transgene, performed here to monitor early events during cell death, can thus be induced in a lineage-restricted population, depending upon the activity of its promoter. furthermore, these observations underline the innocuous character of the exposure to cpp-cre conjugates, as illustrated by the absence of significant apoptosis in dbx <dig> negative cells.

next we asked whether topologically restricted recombination could be obtained using ubiquitously expressed instead of cell-type restricted reporter transgenes. to spatially restrict recombination, we focused the territory of protein delivery using neutral beads soaked with cpp-cre proteins. the beads were implanted onto embryonic brain explants derived from the z/ap strain, in which alkaline phosphatase is expressed upon cre-mediated recombination. as illustrated in fig. 3c, cohorts of cells were detected only in close proximity of the beads . in contrast, in a parallel drop assay using the same protein solution used for bead soaking, positive cells were widely dispersed throughout the explant surface . the limited diffusion of the fusion proteins using focal bead implantation thus allows spatial targeting of small cell clusters.

in order to verify that neuronal populations were actually transduced using this protocol, explants from the axon-specific tgz transgenic strain were incubated with cpp-cre soaked beads. following incubation, numerous reporter-expressing neuronal cells characterized by β-galactosidase positive nuclei and marcks-egfp positive neurites were detected at the vicinity of the beads . this assay further illustrates the modularity of the system, with the restriction of reporter expressing cells by a combination of focal delivery and promoter-specific transgenic lines.

whether cells from adult tissues would be similarly amenable to cpp-mediated transduction of cre recombinase remained to be determined. serial sections from adult brains of the same mouse strains were exposed to drops of cpp-cre conjugates. a robust staining developed, delineating the laminar organization of the brain as illustrated in fig.  <dig>  noticeably, all penetratin-based conjugates displayed similar targeting efficiency with the r26r strain, such that transgene-expressing cells spanned the whole surface and thickness of all exposed explants . a higher concentration of recombinant cells could be detected in cell-dense domains such as progenitor-rich periventricular layers  and striatal clusters . remarkably, when cerebellar slices were exposed to the drop transduction assay, the predominant reporter-expressing population was constituted by purkinje cells . transduction thus also occurred in mature neurons of the adult cns.

discussion
we recently reviewed  <cit>  the encouraging properties of cpp-based conjugates, including their neural tropism. efficient direct protein delivery into neural nuclei would greatly improve fundamental and clinical research in neuroscience. here, we developed non-viral transduction assays based on organotypic cultures from transgenic mice as a surrogate model of live cns tissue. as reported by others, including in vivo studies  <cit> , we confirm that fusion proteins between cpps and a large enzyme, the cre recombinase, are readily translocated through cell membranes and further shuttled inside the nucleus to target genomic loci. since successful delivery in the cns of other kind of proteins fused to cpps have been reported in vivo  <cit> , our strategy might thus be not limited to cre conjugates.

our study further expands the applications of this strategy to neural explant culture. high levels of recombination were reached on explants upon exposure with as few as  <dig> ng of protein, and transduction resulted in a mosaic of recombined and unaffected cells within live tissues. although easy to perform and efficient, the drop approach is poorly reproducible in terms of spatial distribution, mainly because the diffusion of the protein depends on the shape of the explant. with the bead protocol, spatial restriction of recombination to defined areas can easily be achieved, depending upon the position of the bead. in the explant assays, most of the cre conjugates displayed similar biological activity . we only noticed enhanced specific activity of tat-cre for cell-free dna recombination, compared to that of penetratin-based conjugates  – although their cellular activities were similar. this might reveal differential properties of these two cpps, at least in the context of fusion with cre protein.

direct delivery of cre conjugates presents several advantages over viral strategies, although these latter have been successfully used. in addition to the technical and safety limitations inherent to the production of viruses  <cit> , viral-mediated cre delivery results in the prolonged expression of the enzyme, with possible adverse effects  <cit> . with our approach, we did not observe a dramatic increase in the number of recombinant cells between  <dig> h and  <dig> h following treatment , suggesting the temporal restriction of the recombination events to the first hours of incubation. indeed, a similar situation is observed in cell culture, where optimal recombination activity is almost reached after a  <dig> mn exposure to cre conjugates . among credible possibilities, the limited stability of the protein in the extracellular medium might account for this observation. this strategy might be used in a pulse application for selecting cre-dependent genomic constructs or removing undesirable entities from manipulated stem cells, as performed in  <cit> .

on cerebral explants, neurons were prime targets for transduction, both upon generalized  and focalized  delivery. in terms of ontogenesis, we and others previously showed that regionalized properties develop early during mouse cns formation  <cit> , resulting from the combined activities of recently identified genetic programs. which mechanisms underlie neurogenesis might be best understood through focal manipulation of gene function in defined territories. interestingly, the function of both proliferating and mature post-mitotic neurons of the adult brain can also be approached with this strategy, although the efficiency of the transduction seems decreased.

in adult cerebellar explants, the preferential restriction of recombination events to purkinje neurons was unexpected and might rely on their larger membrane area offered by their extensive dendritic arborization tree. whichever mechanism is involved, targeting of this cell type – the largest cell and sole axonal output to extra-cerebellar targets – would be a decisive asset to understand normal and pathologic events during the formation and function of the cerebellum. peptide-mediated non-viral transfer of proteic cargoes could thus offer a valuable alternative strategy to viral-mediated gene transfer using purkinje cell-specific targeting elements  <cit> , with the advantage of a non-toxic and rapidly cleared vector  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
controlled inactivation or over-expression of genes both at the spatial and temporal level has become a key strategy in the study of gene function. our study provides an alternative and complementary strategy to the use of cre expressing mouse strains or of viral-mediated delivery that can be applied to both explant culture and in vivo models. the originality of this strategy relies on the spatial and temporal restriction of recombinant cells without the need of specific promoters. we demonstrate that this method of transduction could find innovative applications in different areas of neuroscience including neural development and neurophysiology.

