BACKGROUND
francisella tularensis  is a gram-negative intracellular bacterium that is the causal agent of tularemia. the francisellaceae family of bacteria has a single genus, francisella, which has been divided into two species: 1) francisella philomiragia  and 2) francisella tularensis. francisella tularensis is further subdivided into four subspecies: tularensis , holarctica , novicida, and mediasiatica  <cit> . of these, only subsp. tularensis and subsp. holarctica cause disease in humans  <cit> . ft tularensis is considered a prime candidate for use as a biological weapon because it is relatively easy to propagate and disseminate via aerosolization and because of the high morbidity and mortality associated with aerosol infection   <cit> . the live vaccine strain , which was derived from ft holarctica, is only moderately virulent in humans  <cit>  and retains virulence in mice. because lvs causes an infection in mice that is similar to the human form of disease, the murine ft lvs infection model serves as an appropriate animal model of human tularemic disease  <cit> .

ft is well adapted for growth and survival within host macrophages, as evidenced by its ability to inhibit phagosome/lysosome fusion and the respiratory burst, and to escape from the phagosome and replicate within the macrophage cytoplasm  <cit> . moreover, it has been reported that the virulence of ft depends on its ability to escape into the host cytoplasm  <cit> . however, like many other successful pathogens, the key to the pathogenesis of ft may be in its ability to overcome, evade, and/or suppress innate host immune responses. for instance, ft is known to be relatively resistant to cationic antimicrobial peptides , which may in part be responsible for its ability to overcome host innate immunity  <cit> . in fact, it has been shown that ft mutant strains that are camp-sensitive are attenuated for virulence in mice  <cit> . ft is also able to evade  innate immune detection because its lipopolysaccharide  has unusual modifications that render it immunologically inert and unable to stimulate tlr <dig>  <cit> . indeed, ft novicida mutants that lacked these modifications and produced tlr4-stimulating lps were able to induce stronger proinflammatory cytokine production and host innate responses resulting in rapid clearance and an attenuated phenotype in mice  <cit> . ft also appears to actively suppress acute inflammatory responses at early times after infection in lungs by a mechanism that has not yet been defined  <cit> . following pulmonary infection of mice with ft, there is an initial lag in recruitment of neutrophils as well as a minimal proinflammatory cytokine response in the first 24- <dig> hours following infection with ft  <cit> . this quiescent period is typically followed by a massive neutrophil influx and profound upregulation of cytokine production that appears to contribute to ft pathogenesis  <cit> . the ability of wt ft to delay recruitment of neutrophils appears to be a critical virulence mechanism because ft mutants that fail to delay influx of neutrophils are rapidly cleared from the host and are attenuated for virulence  <cit> . additionally, pretreatment of mice with ril- <dig> resulted in early neutrophil recruitment to lungs and rapid immune clearance following infection with wt ft  <cit> . these data suggest that the kinetics, rather than the magnitude, of neutrophil recruitment at the site of infection are important for resolution of ft infection.

the efficacy of innate immune responses is largely dependent on interactions between host pattern recognition receptors with cell envelope components of the invading pathogen. because wt ft appears to utilize undefined mechanism to modulate innate immune signaling events to gain a survival advantage in mammalian hosts, we postulated that mutations that altered the cell envelope structure of ft would attenuate the virulence of the bacterium. in this report we have tested the hypothesis that galu is required for ft pathogenesis. the galu gene  encodes for the production of utp-glucose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase , an enzyme that catalyzes the formation of udp-glucose from glucose-1-phosphate and utp and is known to have a key role in biosynthesis of cell-envelope-associated carbohydrates  in a variety of bacteria  <cit> . the findings reported here revealed that disruption of the ft galu gene was highly attenuating in vivo, and that the reduction in virulence correlated with changes in the kinetics of chemokine production and neutrophil recruitment into the lungs following pulmonary infection. the galu mutant strain induced more rapid production of il-1β in vivo and in vitro and it displayed a hypercytotoxic phenotype. we also found that mice that survived infection with the ft galu mutant strain developed protective immunity to subsequent challenge with wt ft.

RESULTS
effect of galu mutation on growth and intracellular survival of ft in vitro
the galu gene is highly conserved among the three major subspecies of ft . in gram-negative bacteria, galu is typically part of an operon that is involved in galactose utilization and in the production of various exopolysaccharides  <cit> . the galu mutant strain characterized here was isolated from a random transposon library of ft lvs and was isolated as a polymyxin b hypersensitive strain . the increased sensitivity of this galu mutant strain to cationic antimicrobials does not appear to be due to generalized outer envelope disintegrity because the mutant bacterium does not exhibit hypersensitivity to deoxycholate   or the antibiotics chloramphenicol or tetracycline .

the galu gene product is also known to be involved  in the catabolism of glucose and is required for the catabolism of galactose in bacteria and yeast  <cit> . therefore, we predicted that the galu mutant strain would display a mild growth defect in minimal medium containing glucose as a sole sugar source, and would have a more marked growth defect when cultured in medium containing galactose as a sole source of sugar. to determine whether the galu mutant had a galactose utilization phenotype, we characterized its growth in mueller-hinton broth  supplemented with either glucose or galactose as a sole sugar source . as predicted, the galu mutant strain of ft displayed a mild growth defect in mhb supplemented with glucose and a severe growth defect in mhb supplemented with galactose. complementation of the galu mutation restored wt growth kinetics in mhb supplemented with either glucose or galactose .

to determine if mutation of the galu gene resulted in an intracellular growth defect, we evaluated the ability of the wt and galu mutant strains of ft to grow within murine macrophage-like cells in vitro. the replication kinetics of the galu mutant within j <dig> or raw  <dig>  cells were indistinguishable from those of the wt strain , indicating that mutation of the galu gene had no effect on uptake or intracellular survival/replication of the bacterium.

virulence of the galu mutant in vivo
to determine whether the galu gene is important for ft virulence, c57bl/6j mice  were inoculated intranasally with  <dig> ×  <dig> cfu  of either the galu mutant or wt ft and then were monitored for  <dig> days. each of the mice challenged with the galu mutant experienced transient weight loss but survived and completely cleared the infection, while all of the mice challenged with wt ft lost weight continually until they succumbed to tularemia . an additional challenge trial in which c57bl/ <dig> mice  were challenged with higher numbers of the galu mutant  revealed that this mutant is highly attenuated, with an ld <dig> that is at least  <dig> logs higher than that of wt ft . moreover, trans-complementation of the galu mutation completely restored virulence of the mutant strain . these findings indicated that ft virulence in mice is dependent on the expression of a functional galu gene product.

to determine whether the reduced virulence of the galu mutant was the result of defective replication and/or dissemination of the bacterium in vivo, we performed a kinetic analysis of bacterial burdens following infection. c57bl/6j mice  were challenged with  <dig> ×  <dig> cfu of either the galu mutant or wt ft and then four mice were sacrificed at each time point  for bacterial burden determinations from the lungs, livers, and spleens . the bacterial burdens observed in the galu mutant- and wt-infected mice were similar in each of the tissues for the first  <dig> h, indicating that mutation of galu did not confer any significant defects in replication or dissemination of ft in vivo. however, the burdens observed in the galu mutant-infected mice were significantly lower  in the spleens and livers  of infected mice at the  <dig> h time point. collectively, these results reveal that despite its normal replication/dissemination phenotypes, the galu mutant is more readily cleared than wt ft.

mutation of galu alters the kinetics of innate immune responses
to determine whether differences in innate immune recognition of infection might be responsible for the dramatic difference in the outcome of disease with the galu mutant vs. wt ft, we analyzed the kinetics of immune cell infiltration into the lungs following infection. balf were collected from each mouse at the time of sacrifice and a series of flow cytometric analyses was performed. the numbers of macrophages, dendritic cells, and nk cells recruited into the lungs of mice infected with the galu mutant and wt ft were similar at each time point . however, higher numbers of neutrophils were observed in the lungs of mice infected with the galu mutant at the 24- and 48-hour time points, with peak numbers of neutrophils measured at  <dig> hours post-infection . in contrast, the kinetics of recruitment of neutrophils into the lungs of mice infected with wt ft was much slower , peaking five days post-infection .

using a luminex multiplex kit, we also measured the levels of a panel of cytokines/chemokines in the balf collected from each mouse and found that the levels of several neutrophil chemoattractants cxcl1/kc  <cit> , granulocyte colony stimulating factor or g-csf  <cit> , cxcl10/ip- <dig>  <cit> , tnf-α  <cit> , mip-1α/ccl <dig> and mip-1β/ccl <dig>  <cit> , cxcl2/mip- <dig>  <cit> , and ccl2/mcp- <dig>  <cit>  were all present at significantly higher levels in the lungs of galu mutant-infected mice  at the  <dig> or  <dig> h time points , correlating well with the peak of neutrophil recruitment at  <dig> h post-infection. the levels of these same chemokines/cytokines peaked in the lungs of wt ft-infected mice 72- <dig> hours post-infection , corresponding well with the peak of neutrophil recruitment into the lungs on day five post-challenge.

it was recently reported that mutations that result in alterations in lps structure, making the bacterium more likely to be recognized through tlr <dig> signaling, could result in robust chemokine expression and early neutrophil recruitment  <cit> . to determine if the altered kinetics of innate immune responses observed for the galu mutant strain resulted from gross alterations to its lps structure, we extracted lps from wt, galu mutant, and wbta mutant  strains of ft and performed western blot analysis using a ft lps-specific mab. no obvious alteration in lps laddering was observed, suggesting that mutation of galu did not result in gross changes in synthesis of the o-antigen component of lps . we also analyzed the ability of lps derived from the galu mutant to initiate tlr4-mediated signaling. using hela cells that stably express either tlr <dig> or tlr4/md <dig> that had been transfected with a vector bearing a nfκb-responsive luciferase reporter construct, we determined that neither galu mutant or wt ft lysates were able to stimulate tlr <dig> while both stimulated tlr <dig> to the same extent , suggesting that the lipid a portion of the mutant lps was not altered.

to further investigate whether the galu gene resulted in gross change to the outer envelope of ft, experiments were performed to measure the relative sensitivity of galu mutant and wt ft to serum components. the galu mutant, wt, and galu-complemented strains of ft all displayed a similar pattern of serum sensitivity. in contrast, an o-antigen-deficient  strain of ft was highly sensitive to serum. interestingly, the galu, wt, and galu-complemented strains were equally sensitive to heat-inactivated serum, while the wbta mutant strain displayed no sensitivity to serum that had been heat inactivated .

il- <dig> expression/activation induced by the galu mutant vs. wt ft
activation of the aim <dig> inflammasome and production of il-1β and il- <dig> are known to be a critical component of the innate immune response to ft infection  <cit> . we compared the kinetics of il-1β production following infection  with either the galu mutant or wt strain of ft. rnase protection analysis revealed that il-1β mrna levels  were similar in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells  that had been infected for  <dig> h with either the galu mutant, wt, or galu-complemented strains of ft , confirming the comparable abilities of the galu mutant and wt strains to stimulate tlr-mediated events such as cytokine expression. however,  <dig> h after infection of a macrophage-like cell line  or bmdcs with the galu mutant, the amount of il-1β released into culture supernatants was significantly higher  than was observed following infection with wt ft . the galu mutant also induced accelerated kinetics of il-1β protein production in vivo . moreover, the kinetics of il-1α protein production is more rapid following infection with the galu mutant strain of ft .

cytotoxicity of the galu mutant
in light of the findings that mutation of the galu gene resulted in altered kinetics of innate signaling and earlier production of il-1β than was observed with wt ft, we speculated that the galu mutant might induce death of the host cell more rapidly than wt ft. to investigate this possibility, we evaluated the relative abilities of the galu mutant and wt ft strains to kill their host cells in vitro. a macrophage-like cell line  was infected with either the galu mutant or wt ft strains at an moi of  <dig> and incubated for  <dig> hours. ldh activity in the culture medium was then determined as a measure of host cell death. a significantly higher amount of ldh activity was measured in the supernatants of j <dig> cells that had been infected with the galu mutant compared to those infected with wt ft , indicating that the galu mutant was hyper-cytotoxic. complementation of the galu mutation in trans partially restored the cytotoxicity phenotype. for comparative purposes, a wbta mutant strain of ft was also included and was shown to have cytotoxicity characteristics similar to those of wt ft .

immunization with the galu mutant confers immunity to wt ft challenge
because infection with the galu mutant elicited a robust innate immune response and infected mice were able to clear the infection, we assessed the efficacy of the galu mutant strain as a live attenuated vaccine strain. two months following the initial inoculation, mice that survived infection with the galu mutant, as well as a naïve group of mice, were challenged with a large dose of wt  via the intranasal route and were monitored for survival. the galu mutant-immunized mice experienced transient weight loss following challenge, but displayed no other visible symptoms of tularemic disease and survived the infection. in contrast, each of the naive mice displayed the typical visible signs of tularemia  and succumbed to wt ft infection by day  <dig> post-challenge .

discussion
a major focus of ft research continues to be the identification of virulence-mechanisms used by this extremely virulent pathogen. a number of virulence determinants have been identified, but there remains much to discover regarding the virulence mechanisms used by ft to survive and cause disease within its mammalian hosts. in this report we show that mutation of galu results in a dramatic attenuation of ftlvs virulence that appears to be unrelated to any in vivo infectivity or growth defects. although it is known that mutation of the galu gene leaves some other bacterial pathogens attenuated for virulence  <cit> , this is the first report examining the role of galu in the pathogenesis of ft.

neutrophils are a critical component of the innate immune responses to bacterial infection, and the recruitment of these cells into the lungs following pneumonic infection typically peaks by 48-hours post-infection  <cit> . however, it has been reported elsewhere  <cit>  and confirmed here that neutrophil recruitment following wild type ft infection in the lungs is not detected until approximately  <dig> h post-infection. because it is known that neutrophils are required for control of ft infection  <cit> , it is reasonable to speculate that the ability of ft to delay the kinetics of neutrophil recruitment into the lungs following pulmonary infection may be an important virulence determinant. interestingly, a comparative analysis following pulmonary infection of mice with the galu mutant and wt strains of ft revealed that the kinetics of neutrophil recruitment  occurs much more rapidly following infection with the galu mutant . kinetic analyses of bacterial burdens in the lungs, spleens, and livers of mice following infection with the galu mutant and wt strains of ft revealed that the two strains disseminated and replicated at comparable rates, but the bacterial burdens in galu-infected animals became significantly lower than in wt-infected animals by  <dig> h post-infection. the significant difference in bacterial burdens observed in galu mutant- vs. wt ft-infected mice 3- <dig> days post-infection may have been  due to differences in the kinetics of neutrophil recruitment.

it remains unclear whether ft actively suppresses innate immune responses during the early stages of infection, or if the delayed response is due to poor recognition of ft through host pattern recognition receptors. it has been well documented that ft produces an atypical lps that is not recognized via tlr <dig>  <cit>  and that ft is recognized via the tlr <dig> signaling pathway  <cit> . because the galu gene has been shown to be important for lps production  <cit>  in a number of other bacterial systems, we performed a series of studies to determine whether differences in the lps expressed by the ft galu mutant might contribute to its reduced virulence. a western blot of both bacterial extracts and lps preparations revealed no obvious differences in the o-antigen laddering between the galu mutant and wt strains of ft, suggesting that mutation of galu did not have any gross effects on o-antigen synthesis. because it has been reported elsewhere  <cit>  and confirmed here  that the absence of o-antigen is a major determinant of susceptibility to complement-mediated killing, our findings that the galu mutant displayed a wt serum sensitivity phenotype also suggested that o-antigen synthesis was not significantly altered by mutation of the galu gene. this finding contrasted with reports that galu mutant strains of p. aeruginosa and v. cholerae displayed increased serum sensitivity  <cit> . we also observed no differences between the galu mutant and wt strains of ft with respect to signaling via the tlr <dig> and tlr <dig> recognition pathways. it remains possible that mutation of galu results in minor o-antigen compositional changes, alterations in the core oligosaccharides, or differences in the carbohydrate modification of surface proteins of ft. moreover, in light of the published finding that mutations causing alterations in the lipid a of ft novicida  <cit>  are highly attenuating for virulence in vivo , we posit that mutation of the galu gene may have an impact on the lipid a moieties of ft. a complete analysis of the carbohydrate components of the ft galu mutant is needed to identify such differences.

recent studies have revealed that the innate immune response to ft infection is complex and involves multiple signaling pathways. others and we have previously shown that ft elicits a powerful inflammatory response that is primarily mediated by tlr <dig> and caspase- <dig> activation  <cit> . more recently, it has been demonstrated that the aim- <dig> inflammasome mediates caspase- <dig> activation and secretion of mature il-1β and il- <dig> during ft infection  <cit> . we predicted that the ability of the galu mutant strain of ft to accelerate the kinetics of inflammatory cytokine production/neutrophil mobilization in vivo might be due to more rapid activation of the inflammasome. to address this hypothesis, we measured il-1β protein production by either thp- <dig> cells or bmdcs infected for  <dig> h in vitro and found that the galu mutant induced higher concentrations of il-1β than did wt ft. however, rnase protection assays revealed that the differences in il-1β production by galu mutant- vs. wt ft-infected cells were not the result of differential transcription of the il-1β gene and, therefore, were likely due to more robust activation of the inflammasome. our findings that production of il-1β  was induced significantly earlier in the lungs of galu mutant vs. wt ft-infected mice were also consistent with the hypothesis. moreover, we showed that macrophage-like j <dig> cells infected in vitro with the galu mutant are killed more rapidly than those infected with wt ft and that wt cytotoxicity could be partially restored by complementation in trans with the galu gene. these findings were consistent with the possibility that the galu mutant more rapidly activates the inflammasome that, in turn, initiates host cell death via pyroptosis and limits the ability of the bacteria to replicate  <cit> . based on findings with other mutant strains that display a hypercytolytic phenotype  <cit> , it could be speculated that such a change in the in vivo life cycle of ft could result in significant attenuation of virulence like that observed for the galu mutant. overall, the findings shown here with ftlvsΔgalu are consistent with recently published studies showing that mutation of either mvin  or ripa  results in attenuated ft strains that activate the inflammasome more efficiently. additional studies designed to delineate the signaling pathway that enable early inflammasome activation by the galu mutant strain of ft are warranted.

because the galu mutant was so severely attenuated for virulence, in spite of its normal ability to replicate and disseminate in vivo, and because there still is no well-defined and efficacious vaccine for ft, we performed a vaccine trial with the galu mutant strain. mice that had been infected with the galu mutant and had survived the infection were challenged intranasally two months later with a large dose  of wt ft lvs and all were found to be immune to ft. these findings, coupled with the fact that the galu gene is 100% conserved between the lvs and schu s <dig> strains, suggest that a galu mutant strain in the schu s <dig> background could have strong prophylactic potential as a live attenuated vaccine strain. studies to characterize galu in ft schus <dig> are currently underway in our laboratory.

CONCLUSIONS
disruption of the galu gene of ftlvs has little if any effect on its infectivity, replication, or dissemination in vitro, but it resulted in highly significant virulence attenuation. the reduced virulence of the galu mutant appears to be related to its increased ability to induce innate immune responses following infection. inflammatory responses and chemokine/cytokine production elicited by wt ft proceeds with much slower kinetics than typically observed for other bacterial pathogens. in contrast, the kinetics of chemokine/cytokine expression and neutrophil recruitment is more rapid following infection with the galu mutant strain, likely resulting in more rapid uptake and killing of bacteria by neutrophils. these studies also revealed that disruption of the galu gene results in a hypercytotoxic phenotype that could be due  to activation of the aim- <dig> inflammasome. the accelerated death of cells infected with the galu mutant strain presumably interferes with the normal replicative cycle of the bacterium, resulting in the significant difference in bacterial burdens in the liver and spleen of mice infected with the galu mutant vs. wt strains of ftlvs observed  <dig> days post-infection and contributing to the reduction in ftlvsΔgalu virulence. these findings underscore the need for studies designed to understand the mechanisms used by wt ft to alter the kinetics of innate immune responses following infection. a thorough comparative analysis of the outer envelope of the wt and galu mutant strains of ftlvs coupled with a more detailed analysis of the innate signaling that results following infection with these two strains of ft could lead to a better understanding of the ability of ft to avoid detection by the innate immune system during the early stages of infection. the findings presented here also suggest that a galu mutant strain of ft has high potential as a platform for development of a live attenuated tularemia vaccine strain.

