BACKGROUND
the notch  cell-surface receptor is the central element of one of the handful of signaling pathways that are evolutionary conserved throughout metazoans. notch signaling directs the development of multicellular organisms through membrane-anchored interactions between adjacent cells. the response to notch signals varies greatly and can result in diverse biological consequences, such as cell proliferation, differentiation or apoptosis. notch signaling is initiated by the binding of the transmembrane notch receptor with one of its ligands, delta or serrate, expressed on the surface of a neighboring cell  <cit> . the receptor-ligand interaction induces a series of proteolytic events that releases the notch intracellular domain , which then translocates to the nucleus and complexes with transcription factors and co-activators to regulate target gene expression. nicd, together with suppressor of hairless , a dna binding protein in the csl /lag2) family, and mastermind  proteins form the core transcriptional complex of the signaling pathway, with the enhancer of split  locus being the most thoroughly characterized downstream transcriptional target. the notch signaling pathway is modulated at many levels: notch protein abundance, trafficking, and post-translational processing, as well as the regulated formation of repressive and promoting complexes on the dna. the final cell fate outcome is a complex interplay between all the cellular factors that regulate notch activity.

we designed a genome-wide rna interference  screen using a drosophila cell culture-based system aimed to identify novel proteins that directly influence the signaling capacity of the core notch pathway. this genome-wide rnai screen was performed on drosophila kc <dig> cell cultures that were transfected with a construct that expresses a constitutively active, membrane-tethered form of the notch receptor, nΔecn  <cit> . notch pathway activity was monitored by measuring the transcriptional response of a luciferase-reporter gene cassette  containing the native promoter element of the em <dig> gene  <cit> , the most notch responsive e target in cell culture  <cit> .

the results of our study reveal the identity of proteins that influence the signaling output of the core notch pathway. employing complementary data analyses, we found  <dig> putative modifiers -  <dig> promoting and  <dig> antagonizing notch signaling. these included several known notch interactors, validating the robustness of the assay and our experimental approach. molecules residing in the extracellular matrix , the plasma membrane , the cytosol , and the nucleus , as well as a large number of proteins with unknown function and localization , were also recovered .

the majority of the proteins are of unknown cellular localization and/or function. of the annotated proteins, most are predicted to reside in the nucleus, followed by cytosolic proteins with a small percentage found in the plasma membrane and extracellular matrix.

to further analyze and categorize our dataset, the notch signaling modifiers identified in the study were combined with physical interaction data from public databases. the interaction map that was generated revealed classes of interacting notch modifiers such as mrna processing and ribosomal proteins. the network analysis also highlighted a central core of chromatin regulating genes, including chromatin modifying enzymes and remodelers that interact directly with the su dna binding complex.

RESULTS
development of a robust assay to measure changes in notch transcriptional activity
a reporter assay was developed to measure notch activity in a high-throughput drosophila cell-based approach. the assay consists of three components: 1) a notch activity reporter construct with two, tandem copies of the em <dig> promoter positioned upstream of the firefly luciferase gene   <cit> ; 2) the constitutively active, membrane-tethered form of the notch receptor with the extracellular domain removed , driven by the viral opie <dig> promoter; 3) a control construct that constitutively expresses firefly luciferase, also driven by the viral opie <dig> promoter . con-luc was used to normalize signal intensity relative to transfection efficiency, cell density and viability, and general effects on opie2-mediated transcription.

to test the sensitivity and specificity of the notch activity assay, a series of experiments were performed in cells treated with interfering rna targeting known components of the notch signaling pathway. cells were incubated with dsrna against mastermind , hairless , and the major downstream co-transcription factor suppressor of hairless ) and then split and transfected for three assays. n-induced  luciferase expression levels were measured relative to either con-luc  or uninduced em <dig> promoter  . uninduced promoter levels were also tested by normalizing m3-luc measurements with corresponding con-luc signals .

as predicted, we found that targeting su and mam with rnai in cells expressing activated notch resulted in a sharp reduction of the reporter luciferase activity . conversely, knock-down of su increased the basal activity of the m3-luc reporter in the absence of nΔecn . these opposing effects of su rnai on em <dig> expression are consistent with the dual roles of su as a transcriptional repressor in the absence of notch activation, as well as a transcriptional activator when complexed with processed nicd in the nucleus  <cit> . in contrast, rnai against hairless resulted in a marked decrease in the ratio of induced:uninduced signal of m3-luc . this decrease is expected due to the specific de-repression of the uninduced notch target promoter when h is knocked down  and shows that there is robust su/h complex repressor activity in the uninduced kc <dig> cells. the different ratios for h rnai treatment obtained by the two different normalization methods  highlights the additional mechanistic information that can be deduced when normalizing by the uninduced em <dig> promoter activity. hairless acts as a repressor in the uninduced cells, but has no apparent role in notch activated cells.

splitting the cells into three different assays also allows the uninduced notch target promoter measurement to be used as an alternative and specific control for notch induced activity. this additional control flags dsrna treatments that may specifically affect transcription of the viral opie <dig> promoter. rnai treatment may modulate either the signal of interest and/or the control signal and the resulting ratios may be altered indistinguishably between these possibilities. whereas this second control will sort a subset of these dsrnas as definitively altering notch target transcription .

the notch activity assay responded in a predictable and specific manner to rnai of known notch signaling components, and these data establish our experimental set-up  as optimal for detecting changes in notch transcriptional activities.

genome-wide rnai screen and data analysis
the rnai screen was performed using a dsrna library from the drosophila rnai screening center , containing a total of  <dig>  dsrnas, targeting known and predicted gene products. after four days of rnai treatment, cells were uniformly dispensed by robotic liquid handling into microplates containing the different transfection mixes . each assay was performed in duplicate, and firefly luciferase activity was measured  <dig> h after transfection.

for data analysis, we eliminated all wells containing dsrna with more than one off-target, as predicted by the drosophila rnai screening center . of the dsrna in the final hit lists, 12% contained a single possible predicted off-target and are noted in the data tables. data from the screen were analyzed by the two complementary methods described above . prospective hits were selected as dsrnas that significantly perturbed the notch induced signal , normalized by the control promoter , resulting in  <dig> hits with significantly low and  <dig> with significantly high signals respectively . a complementary set of hits were selected with signals from notch induced reporter , normalized by the uninduced promoter , resulting in  <dig> hits with significantly low and  <dig> hits with significantly high signals . analyzing the data by these two methods provided a full spectrum of notch signaling effectors that could be further categorized by their respective activities. hits that scored in both normalization methods represent the subset of genes that either affect notch induced transcription specifically or have opposing effects between induced and uninduced transcription, such as su . hits that scored only for notch induced signal  normalized by the viral promoter  primarily selected for genes that affect the notch induced and uninduced transcription by the same percentage . the histone deacetylase, rpd <dig> and the brahma complex subunit, bap <dig> fell into this category . hits that scored only for notch induced signal  normalized by the uninduced em <dig> promoter  represent genes that primarily affect uninduced reporter transcription, such as the repressor complex component hairless and the brahma complex chromatin remodeling factor moira .

classification of the identified proteins
classification of modifiers identified in the screen was based upon gene ontologies  as reported by flybase  <cit> . these classes are shown as a percentage of genes with that go term and median z-scores of that class . certain classes showed particularly significant z-scores. for instance, activators of notch induced transcription as normalized by the control reporter  contained  <dig> chromatin-associated factors,  <dig> % of the hits, and  <dig> transcription factors, representing  <dig> %. both these classes have a median z-score of - <dig> , placing these groups in the top  <dig> % of the calculated genome-wide distribution . of the identified genes,  <dig> have predicted and known human orthologs associated with human genetic disorders   <cit> .

known notch pathway interactors found by the rnai screening method
thirteen genes that have been described to genetically interact with notch were identified . among these, the core notch pathway transcription factor su and the repressor hairless further validated the screening method. we also recovered the known negative regulator of notch signaling, suppressor of deltex , encoding a cytoplasmic protein that functions as an e <dig> ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates membrane-anchored notch  <cit> , and prickle , encoding a transcription factor known to play a role in emδ gene expression  <cit> . nine other genes  were identified that have been shown to genetically interact with notch signaling, but whose mechanistic level of integration into the notch pathway are understood to varying degrees  <cit> .

an in vivo rnai screen for notch activity has recently been published that is based on bristle and wing morphology and as a different approach to this transcriptional based study, the overlap was minimal  <cit> . of the  <dig> genes listed in the previous study that have known genetic interactions with notch, only tramtrack  is common to both screens. the direct transcription based method of our study would be expected to be better suited to identify transcription and chromatin factors, as indicated by the strong scores of repressor components and core chromatin components identified . in contrast, the phenotype-based study was more sensitive to membrane trafficking machinery, making the two studies complimentary.

protein interaction network of notch transcription modifiers
an interaction network was generated to map physical interactions between the notch transcriptional activity modifiers identified in the screen and core components of the notch signaling pathway . this interaction map was generated by combining physical interaction data  from the droid  <cit>  and biogrid  <cit>  databases with the notch-dependent transcription modifiers identified in this genome-wide study. this map does not include the known genetic interactions identified between the candidate genes and caution should be noted as to the presence of possible false positives in the protein interaction data.

the importance of chromatin in notch regulation has recently become apparent and this transcription-based screen was suited to uncover this class of regulators. on average, chromatin-modifying genes scored relatively high in the data analysis . the interaction map reveals a central core of chromatin modifying components that have multiple physical connections to the nuclear elements of the notch pathway such as su and h . many of these chromatin components are known to interact genetically and physically with the notch pathway  <cit> .

the protein interaction network also shows a number of protein classes that have no known mechanistic link to notch transcriptional regulation. for these classes of molecules , the network suggests that they may be affecting notch signaling through direct interactions with these core chromatin components .

epistatic analysis of candidate genes
the subset of candidate notch modifiers that overlapped between the two normalization methods  was retested with redesigned dsrnas . luciferase reporter activity was assessed in cells in which notch had been activated by either the membrane tethered nΔecn or the downstream intracellular nicd, aiming to discriminate between factors that regulate notch processing at the plasma membrane versus factors that affect notch signaling downstream in the nucleus . of the re-designed dsrna, 79% retested by either normalization method, 67% re-tested the m3-luc normalized signal and 64% the con-luc normalized signal. three genes were identified that exclusively promote the activity of the membrane bound notch and may function to inhibit the intramembrane proteolysis of the receptor. this class includes patj and two genes of unknown function, cg <dig> and cg <dig> . the soluble protein patj has not been shown to modulate notch activity directly, but is known to associate with the transmembrane protein crumbs that, in turn, is known to repress notch activity  <cit> . crumbs is a central regulator of epithelial apical-basal polarity in drosophila and has been shown to down regulate γ-secretase activity and the membrane proteolysis of notch  <cit> . our observation in kc <dig> cell culture, a non-polarized cell line, suggests that patj may be modifying notch signaling not via influencing the localization of the receptor, but instead by acting in the crumbs-based complex to down regulate membrane proteolysis of notch. in contrast, rnai against nuclear factors such as su, his <dig> a &b, nipped-a, ttk and sin3a , had similar effects on nΔecn and nicd induced transcription, indicating interactions with notch downstream of the proteolytic processing events. these results demonstrate that the screening method identified components of notch signaling that modulate activities that take place on the plasma membrane as well as nuclear and chromatin-based regulation.

factors involved in chromatin modification
the transcription-based screening method using an endogenous em <dig> promoter sequence was particularly useful for identifying chromatin components. we identified several chromatin factors previously shown to affect notch-dependent transcription. a component of the saga histone acetyltransferase complex, nipped-a, was identified. nipped-a, the drosophila homologue of yeast tra <dig> and mammalian trap proteins, is a key factor of the saga complex. it has been shown previously that reduced nipped-a dosage enhances the wing notching phenotype of both mastermind and notch mutants  <cit> . the rnai treated cell culture data demonstrates that nipped-a promotes transcription at the em <dig> promoter both in the presence and absence of activated notch . this shows that the result of nipped-a function is independent of whether active nicd is localized on the target promoter.

we also identified several homologues of components of the rpd <dig> histone deacetylase co-repressor complex, including sin3a, sds <dig> , a putative ortholog of sap <dig> , and rpd <dig> itself . when these factors were targeted by rnai, there was an increase in notch-induced reporter transcription, consistent with the role of the rpd <dig> complex and histone deacetylation as a transcriptional inhibitor  <cit> . conversely, knocking down sin3a had the opposite effect on the uninduced baseline activity of the em <dig> promoter . thus, unlike the histone acetylation complex , the activity of the deacetylation complex  on the em <dig> promoter is dependent on the presence of activated notch.

the screen identified several components of the chromatin remodeling complex brahma: brm associated protein  <dig> , brm associated protein  <dig> , polybromo, and moira . a previous drosophila phenotype based screen has found a genetic interaction between the notch ligand delta and another component of the brahma complex, brahma   <cit> . loss of function brm alleles were found to enhance delta mutant phenotypes in eye and bristle development  <cit> . the various brahma components identified in this study show a complex array of effects on the transcription of the em <dig> promoter, some consistent with previously described loss of function brm alleles while others opposing. rnai directed against bap <dig> and polybromo demonstrated a specific reduction in notch induced transcription  that is consistent with the previously observed role of brm in notch signaling during drosophila development  <cit> . unexpected are the brahma subunits identified that modulate transcription from the uninduced em <dig> promoter: bap <dig> and mor. the screen reveals that both of these components specifically mediate transcription from the uninduced em <dig> promoter, while bap <dig> activates and mor represses .

in addition to chromatin modifying complexes, a new interaction between the histone variant h <dig>  and notch signaling is seen. rnai treatment of either genomic copy of the h <dig>  histone variant  shows a dramatic decrease in notch activated transcription . the histone variant h <dig>  has been shown to be incorporated into the promoters of actively transcribed genes in a replication independent process to maintain transcription and its influence on notch targeted transcription remains to be explored  <cit> .

a major question that arises from these data is, how specific can the identified chromatin factors be to regulating notch transcription? it has recently been noted that chromatin components are more selective in function than was previously thought. surprisingly, there are now a handful of examples where modulating the expression of a single target gene can rescue the phenotype associated with a null mutation in a chromatin remodeling complex component  <cit> . by immunoprecipitation and mass-spec analysis, it has recently been shown that the notch repressor complex contains a host of chromatin modifying components  <cit> . these identified components include sin3a, rpd <dig>  lid, bap <dig> and moira, factors that were also uncovered in this screen as modifiers of notch target transcription. this repressor complex has been shown to be recruited to notch target promoters by su and this interaction may provide a mechanism for targeting the activity of these chromatin factors to notch signaling  <cit> . this is consistent with the observation that the genetic interactions demonstrated between this repressor complex and notch were not seen when tested against a host of other signaling pathways  <cit> . control reporter transcription levels in this study indicated that targeting these chromatin genes by dsrna did not significantly reduce cell viability and growth over the course of the five-day rnai incubation in culture. the screen data shows that notch signaling may be particularly sensitive to the levels of these chromatin components in the cell, while the protein interaction network confirms that many of these chromatin factors physically interact with su and hairless suggesting a mechanism to explain this observation.

regulation of histone position and modification are known factors that determine the "context dependent" nature of notch signaling during development. these factors differentially interpret the signals received from the cell surface by recording an epigenetic history on the target promoter. this transcription-based screen revealed new chromatin factors that can be further studied for their role in notch-mediated development.

mrna processing factors
the genome-wide transcription assay revealed two other classes of proteins not conventionally associated with transcriptional regulation. a number of ribosomal components and proteins associated with mrna processing were found to regulate transcription of the activated notch target gene . what is unexpected about these interactions is their relative specificity, as was for the chromatin components. again, any rnai treatments in the genome screen that significantly effected cell viability or general transcription were excluded from the analysis. in addition, all notch induced target transcription signals were subsequently normalized to either the control signal or the uninduced notch target promoter. this analysis demonstrated that knocking down these components of the ribosome and splicing machinery did not significantly affect general cell viability and had a relatively specific effect on notch target transcription.

a number of mrna splicing and processing components were found to interact with notch-activated transcription . as expected, these proteins demonstrated extensive physical interactions with each other . unexpectedly, these mrna modifying proteins show physical interactions with the core chromatin components identified in this transcription based screen . the polypyrimidine tract binding proteins sex lethal  and hephaestus  were found to repress and activate notch promoter activity, respectively, in our cell culture assay. heph was previously found to interact genetically with notch signaling during wing development  <cit> . other mrna processing components, such as the non-sense mediated decay factors upf <dig>  upf <dig> and smg <dig>  were found to modulate notch activated transcription in the analysis . these mrna components may be interacting indirectly with notch transcription through their mrna processing functions - for instance, by specifically controlling the mrna processing of transcripts for an essential notch signaling factor such as su. the network suggests a possible alternate mechanism to explain the interaction between the identified mrna processing factors and notch transcription, one that is mediated though the chromatin machinery .

in plants, components of the nuclear cap-binding complex  functionally interact with microrna  processing components, such as ars <dig>  giving these proteins dual roles in splicing and mirna processing  <cit> . the role of cbp <dig> in mirna processing was also confirmed in drosophila and mammalian systems  <cit> . the nuclear cap-binding complex component cbp <dig> was found to mediate notch transcription in this study  and demonstrates physical interactions with the chromatin remodeling component ssrp . the interaction network suggests that the mirna processing activity of cbp <dig> may be targeted to notch signaling through interactions with the chromatin remodeling machinery.

ribosomal factors and the classical minute mutations
a complex of ribosomal proteins was identified that modulated notch reporter transcription . this class of translation factors included the large ribosomal subunit rpl <dig> that belongs to the minute genetic class. the minutes are a class of ribosomal gene mutations that are homozygous lethal, delay cellular growth when heterozygous and have a rich history of study  <cit> . of interest, rpl <dig> has been shown to be a modifier of notch signaling  <cit> . in fact, the minute class of genes was first described in detail as modifiers of notch signaling in  <dig>  <cit> . since then, ribosomal components have been widely observed as effectors of notch  <cit> . the notch transcription reporter measurements compliment these long-standing, yet mechanistically unknown, genetic interactions. one mechanism proposed to explain the relatively specific genetic interactions between minute mutations and notch, is the possibility of specific translational effects. for instance, the translation of long transcripts such as the one encoding notch itself may be sensitive to lower levels of specific ribosomal components. in contrast, an alternative hypothesis has been presented that these ribosomal proteins may have post-translational effects on key components of notch signaling  <cit> . minute protein mutations are not found in the active site of the ribosome, as the peptide synthesis reaction is catalyzed exclusively by rna in the core, but rather on the surface of the ribosome. current structural and biochemical studies have demonstrated post-translational roles for these surface coating ribosomal proteins  <cit> . this includes the folding of nascent peptide chains either directly on the surface of the ribosome or by the co-recruitment of protein chaperones. the protein-protein interaction map suggests that these types of post-translational interactions may be directed towards the core chromatin components of the notch network . such a direct mechanism could explain the transcriptional effects described in this study, as well as the long-standing genetic observations between notch and the minute class of mutations.

transcription factors that affect notch-dependent transcription
analysis of the genes identified in the screen revealed a number of transcription factors that affect notch-dependent transcription. among these are cnc and maf-s that are known to form a strong transcriptional activator complex  <cit> . rnai targeting of either of these two genes strongly suppressed both the notch-induced as well as non-induced em <dig> reporter activity . also, among the  <dig> transcription factors that promote notch activity, we found the dna binding protein deaf- <dig>  cnc, maf-s, and deaf- <dig> are reported to interact with the hox protein deformed  to regulate segmentation, but their roles in other developmental events are not known  <cit> . our results provide a possible role of these proteins in drosophila development by promoting notch signaling.

another transcription factor that we found to play an agonistic role in notch signaling is the homeobox containing protein aristaless  . al has been tentatively linked to notch signaling, as it cell autonomously represses the notch ligand delta in the pretarsus during leg morphogenesis  <cit> . it is possible that al is involved in a notch-mediated lateral inhibition mechanism, where al expressing cells remain undifferentiated by favoring active notch signaling whereas their neighboring cells are free to express delta and differentiate. it has also been shown that notch mutant clones in the developing leg disk show diminished al levels, suggesting that al is a notch target gene. this would be the predicted relationship in a lateral inhibition system, where a notch/al positive feedback loop would amplify the notch activity differences between neighboring cells.

two additional transcription factors that have been previously shown to be involved in leg morphogenesis were found to promote notch signaling: bonus , a homologue of the vertebrate tif1beta transcriptional cofactor  <cit> , and crooked legs , a zinc finger protein  <cit> . notch signaling is known to play an important role in drosophila leg development, and the recovery of these two transcription factors as modifiers of notch-induced em <dig> expression suggests that bon and croi may function to modulate notch target gene output in the developing leg  <cit> .

we also identified the drosophila orthologues of two mammalian proto-oncogenes kayak , and c-myb, as positive regulators of notch-signaling. although a direct functional link between these proteins and notch signaling has not been described, kayak has been shown to interact genetically with hairless  <cit>  and c-myb genetically interacts with bon, a novel notch modifier described above  <cit> . in addition, our data reveals a synergistic relationship between the positive regulator of ras signaling, 14-3-3ε, and notch. once again, the protein interaction network shows extensive contacts between 14-3-3ε and the chromatin machinery, suggesting a mechanism for modulating notch target transcription through su mediated chromatin modifications. interactions between notch and oncogenic pathways are of particular interest, as the involvement of notch in cancer biology and stem cell maintenance is becoming increasingly apparent.

an unexpected notch target transcription modifier identified in the screen is the notch target gene tramtrack . we found that targeting of ttk with dsrna resulted in reduced notch activity . in contrast, ttk expression itself has been shown to increase in response to ectopic notch activity  <cit> . the rnai treatment data suggest that ttk may function in a positive feedback mechanism to promote notch activated transcription and the network analysis suggests that this interaction may be mediated by a direct contact with notch itself .

CONCLUSIONS
a complementary, genome-wide rnai approach has revealed a subset of factors that modulate notch target transcription that may not have been found by traditional genetic approaches. for instance, pleiotropic effects combined with non-saturating mutagenesis may have obscured the detection of some components in traditional genetic screens. several novel modifiers were identified in this rnai transcription-based screen, and these factors will be further investigated for their precise roles in the regulation of notch signaling during development. in addition, the interaction network of these factors suggests that many may work through contacts with chromatin machinery components that are in turn directed to notch target promoters by the transcription factor su.

