BACKGROUND
genotype-phenotype mapping is a fundamental aim of biological science. this is critical for many goals such as understanding of how genetic architecture shapes phenotypic variation and adaptation  <cit> , and more specific aims such as deciphering how genetic variation in humans may affect response to treatment  <cit> . many genetic variants resulting in phenotypic differences are mediated through changes in gene expression. thus, analyzing gene expression allows us to better understand genotypic variation. variation in gene expression can be due to polymorphisms both at the gene locus  and in other genes that influence its expression , as well as the non-additive interactions between the two   <cit> . furthermore, epigenetic mechanisms  <cit> , chromatin conformation  <cit> , copy number variation  <cit>  and microrna  <cit>  all play important roles in the transcription of a given gene. by partitioning regulatory variation into cis, trans, and cis-by-trans, we can identify their respective contributions to changes in gene expression and potentially how expression levels evolve within the genomes of complex organisms  <cit> .

allele-specific expression  studies have introduced a creative method to uncover the respective contributions of cis- and trans-regulatory variation  <cit> . first, total expression differences are measured from a pooled sample of two homozygous lines. then, cis-regulatory variation is estimated from the allelic imbalance  in the corresponding f <dig> heterozygote, where each allele is regulated by the same trans-factors  <cit> . trans can then be inferred from the total expression differences that are not explained by cis. of course, these inferences about cis- and trans-regulatory variation can be complicated if cis-elements and trans-factors interact non-additively  <cit> . allelic imbalance in non-imprinted genes has been shown to be common in mice, maize and humans  <cit> . also, a few studies have investigated cis- and trans-regulatory variation within and between species of drosophila. measuring ase, wittkopp et al. reported that cis-regulatory variation plays a predominant role in divergent gene expression between d. melanogaster and d. simulans  <cit> .

allele-specific expression has been measured using various targeted approaches including reverse transcription-pcr , and pyrosequencing  <cit> . genome-wide approaches have also been used including serial analysis of gene expression   <cit> , massively parallel signature sequence  <cit> , and microarray-based methods  <cit> . here, we introduce a simple approach to ase assays that combines a targeted approach to gene expression assays with the power of high-throughput sequencing. in brief, transcripts of interest  are pcr enriched and barcoded to enable large-scale multiplexing. using this approach, we sequence only regions of interest and allele-specific read counts are used to estimate ase for large numbers of samples using a single lane of a solexa flowcell . to demonstrate its application, we investigated variation in gene expression in a set of five drosophila simulans genes. using a common tester line, we measured ase in an equal mix of homozygotes , a heterozygote, and an introgression . by analyzing changes in ase under these different regulatory conditions, we elucidate the respective contributions of cis, trans, and cis-by-trans interactions on variation in gene expression. furthermore, we tested for within-species variation in cis and trans by comparing trends in ase between six highly inbred lines collected from a single population.

RESULTS
digital ase assay
in this study, we introduce an accurate approach to allele-specific expression assays that relies on read counts generated from solexa sequencing. for each gene of interest, a single nucleotide polymorphism  within the mrna transcript was identified that differs between the lines of interest and our tester line. we then designed a pcr primer that annealed immediately flanking the 5' end of the snp and another primer that annealed 200- <dig> base pairs downstream . in the primer design, we included adapter sequences, provided by illumina, as 5' tails to allow these pcr products to be sequenced on the solexa platform without additional steps. when we planned on analyzing more than one sample per gene, a unique forward primer was ordered for each sample that contained the common elements described above, plus a unique one to three base pair barcode sequence in the 5' tail that will allow for individual sample identification . we used a touchdown pcr cycling program to enrich each sample for our target region and then purified the amplicons using gel extraction. we then pooled the purified samples in large numbers  and sequenced them in parallel on a single lane of a solexa flow cell. the resulting reads were analyzed by assigning each read to a specific gene based on homology and sample based on the unique barcode . we can then compare the number of reads containing each snp to have a digital representation of ase .

in all comparisons, both alleles were amplified in the same reaction and thus utilized the same reagents. as a result, each allele should theoretically maintain the same relative abundance throughout amplification. however, this may not be the case if small differences in primer hybridization or polymerase efficiency exist between alleles. we can control for this error in amplification by analyzing heterozygous dna samples, where the actual allele frequency is 50: <dig>  and then correcting each rna sample by the difference observed in the heterozygote . dna samples from each mixed sample were also analyzed in order to correct for both allele-specific amplification error and differences in cell number between the individuals extracted from each parental line  <cit> . we report allelic imbalance as: the proportion of reads that are differentially expressed /). this approach allows us to easily estimate the binomial sampling error. if there is no difference between alleles, the bias is zero, while the bias is positive if the first allele is favored and negative if the second allele is favored.

to verify the accuracy of solexa and the normalization procedure, we created three replicate dilution series using genomic dna from the tester line and an experimental line . then we estimated the allelic bias at each step of the dilution  using a separate sequencing lane. all four genes demonstrated a strong correlation  between the expected and observed allelic bias . the gene dsx had a relatively low correlation, because there was very limited sequencing coverage for all samples within this gene. thus, the solexa sequencing output can be used to accurately measure the relative abundance of alleles in a given sample.

by analyzing technical variation and correlation coefficients in the verification experiment, it appears that coverage on the order of a few hundred reads is sufficient to yield reproducible results . thus, increased biological replication should be favored over sequencing coverage beyond a few hundred reads . in this study, coverage varied widely between genes , while coverage of individual assays within each gene was similar . this is most likely due to variation in initial transcript abundance, variation in amplification efficiency between genes and the resulting uneven pooling of dna between genes. therefore, we suggest that if the pooling of dna is done carefully based on the concentration of each purified sample or pcr amplicon band intensity, the sequencing coverage can be more evenly distributed. this will also increase the number of high-quality ase assays that can be performed on a single lane of solexa.

the cost per base of sequence using solexa is very low, so for large-scale projects, the preparation costs such as barcoded primers become the limiting economic factor. to address these concerns, we suggest one of the following approaches depending on the type of project: for studies where many assays are performed with a few select genes, barcode costs can be significantly reduced if paired-end sequencing reads are combined with multiplicative barcoding. for example, instead of ordering  <dig> barcoded adapters for a given gene, we can create  <dig> unique barcode combinations using only  <dig> barcoded forward primers and  <dig> barcoded reverse primers. for studies involving large gene sets, barcoded adapter sequences can be added to typical gene-specific annealing primers before pcr using single-strand ligation. using this approach, barcoded adapter sequences can be used in multiple experiments. we have shown that solexa can effectively estimate ase using this targeted approach and we mention these additional modifications to allow easier adaptation for future researchers.

error analysis
to understand the error in quantifying ase, we looked at sources of variation at multiple levels. first, we estimated sequencing error at the snp position by identifying the proportion of reads with an incorrect base-call. sequencing error was well below 2% for most of the genes. furthermore, this error rate did not seem to change when the position of the snp within the read shifted due to barcode lengths changing from one to three base pairs . second, we estimated the binomial sampling error and found that this error quickly becomes negligible with the high coverage obtained with this method . third, we assessed the error introduced by the method, such as polymerase and reverse transcription error by comparing allelic imbalance between technical replicates . this technical variation was considerably more than binomial sampling once coverage was over a few hundred reads . and finally, to analyze overall variation in expression estimates, including dynamic gene expression in vivo, we compared ase estimates between biological replicates . the biological variation was greater than technical variation in this study, but an accurate assessment of the relative magnitude of technical and biological variance is beyond the scope of this study and thus, both should be considered when designing future experiments .

cis- and trans-regulatory variation within species
we used six highly inbred lines of d. simulans from winters, ca  and a scarlet ebony  tester line in this study. for each w line, we compared expression to the tester line in a parental mix , the related f <dig> heterozygote, and a corresponding introgression  . this experimental design allows us to assess intraspecific regulatory variation in cis, trans and cis-by-trans. to do this, we estimated the overall expression differences in four genes in the aforementioned parental mix. then, we determined cis-regulatory variation from the allelic imbalance present in the related f <dig> heterozygote, where trans-factors affect each allele equally. we can then infer trans from the overall expression difference that is not explained by cis. in the four genes analyzed, cis-regulatory variation explains the majority of the overall divergence in gene expression between the tester line and the w lines . it should be noted that this is a small gene set and most of these genes have been shown to be variable within-species . thus, we do not consider this result to be a reflection of the genome as a whole. one explanation for the small contribution of trans in these genes is that trans-variation has an increased potential for pleiotropic effects, some of which may be deleterious and removed by purifying selection in the w lines tested.

gene expression is a result of cis-regulatory elements interacting with trans-regulatory proteins. if there is variation in both cis-elements and trans-proteins, there is the potential for non-additive interactions   <cit> . to test for cis-by-trans, we compared allelic imbalance in the heterozygote and the introgression within each w line . if all genes act additively, allelic imbalance in the heterozygote and introgression should be equal because the cis-regulatory elements for each allele and the trans-factors within each genotype are identical. if allelic imbalance between these genotypes is not equal, that difference is due to cis-by-trans. we lacked the statistical power to individually detect these cis-by-trans interactions, but we were able to test for a systematic shift in expression between these genotypes across all genes and w lines. we hypothesized that if the cis-elements and trans-factors within the tester line and the w lines co-evolved, non-additive interactions would be relatively common and therefore we might detect significant cis-by-trans effects across all genes and lines. to test for this, we analyzed the relationship between heterozygous and introgression ase values for the  <dig> w lines and  <dig> genes using a linear model. the regression coefficient is not significantly different from one  and thus, there is no systematic cis-by-trans interactions detected within our sample population and selected genes. this result, together with recent findings seems to be indicating that at least within drosophila, epistasis may be rare or is small in magnitude  <cit> . this may also be due to the lack of population structure in drosophila, which would hinder the co-evolution of divergent cis-elements and trans-factors.

to compliment our previous estimates of cis and trans between the tester line and the w lines, we measured variation in cis between w lines in order to give additional insight into the type and magnitude of regulatory variation that may be segregating in natural populations. to identify this variation we tested for a significant effect of a given w line on the overall estimate of cis and trans. using this approach we were unable to detect significant variation between lines . we did however find evidence for variation between the w lines and the tester line suggesting that genetic variation may be more common between populations .

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented a new method that uses solexa to accurately measure ase for hundreds of samples using as little as one lane of a solexa flowcell. this will be a valuable technique for analyzing a few genes for many individuals or under many conditions, measuring a large selection of genes for a few individuals, and verifying ase estimates from genome-wide expression assays.

