BACKGROUND
large scale biological networks and their associated dynamical systems have a crucial role to play in unravelling the systemic properties of cells. structural studies of large scale metabolic, protein interaction and genetic regulatory networks have uncovered some unexpected patterns leading to interesting hypotheses and questions . for a deeper understanding of system level phenomena, it now seems that we need to explore the relationship between network structure and the dynamics of genes, proteins and other biomolecules. in this paper we study the escherichia coli regulatory network and show that the dynamics leads to biologically important properties such as cellular homeostasis and flexibility of response to varied environments. our study reveals that some very simple features of the genetic regulatory network are responsible for these properties. these design features may be universal across prokaryotes and possibly have vestiges in higher organisms as well.

large scale mathematical models for dynamical phenomena are difficult to construct due to paucity of data and are difficult to profitably analyze due to their complexity. in this context flux balance analysis  has proved to be a useful computational technique to explore steady state flows in large scale metabolic networks  <cit> . a conceptual framework to study dynamics of large scale genetic regulatory networks as boolean systems was introduced by kauffman  <cit> . in this paper we use this approach to study the large scale transcriptional regulatory network  of an organism in which both the network and the boolean functions have been constructed from real data. our study is based on the database imc1010v <dig>  <cit>  which describes the regulatory network controlling metabolism in e. coli.

the boolean approach provides a coarse-grained model of the dynamics of trns, in which each gene's configuration has only two allowed values , each gene's update is given by a boolean function of all its inputs, time is discrete and  all genes are updated synchronously. a differential equation based simulation of large scale trns is not feasible at the moment due to lack of kinetic data, and the large number of unknown parameters would also render the results of such a simulation difficult to interpret  <cit> . on the other hand boolean simulations of smaller biological systems have provided useful insights  <cit> . the boolean approach can provide useful information about some qualitative features of the dynamics, e.g., the nature of the attractors of the system, and through that, insights about what might happen in a more detailed simulation and the system itself.

the genetic network regulating e. coli metabolism as a boolean dynamical system
the database imc1010v <dig> contains  <dig> genes. these are collectively regulated by a set of  <dig> transcription factors  which are gene products of  <dig> of the genes in the set,  <dig> external metabolites,  <dig> other conditions,  <dig> internal fluxes of metabolic reactions and  <dig> stimuli. the directed graph of this network is shown in fig.  <dig>  where a directed link from one node to another denotes a regulatory interaction.

the database also provides the boolean input-output map at each node, e.g., the configuration of each gene , as a function of the on-off states of all its inputs. using this information we construct the following discrete dynamical system describing e. coli's trn :

 gi = gi, m);   i =  <dig>   <dig> ...,  <dig>  

here gi is the configuration of gene i at time t. time is measured in discrete units: t =  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> ... gi =  <dig>  means that at time t gene i is on . the vector g collectively denotes the configurations of all the genes at time t; its ith component is gi. the vector m denotes the configuration of external metabolites; its ith component mi =  <dig> if metabolite i  is present in the external environment for uptake into the cell, and mi =  <dig> if it is absent. the above equation expresses the fact that the on-off state of a gene at any time instant is controlled by the state of the genes at the previous time instant as well as the state of the external environment. the interaction of genes is mediated by transcription factors. thus a single time unit corresponds to the average time between the initiation of transcription of a gene coding for a transcription factor and the initiation of transcription of a gene regulated by that transcription factor.

in principle m can also change with time as the cell uses up food molecules in its external environment for its metabolism and excretes other molecules  <cit> . however, in the present work we consider only buffered media which are characterized by mi that are constant in time. m thus defines a constant external environment of the cell. we have considered two classes of buffered media,  a set of  <dig> minimal media  each capable of supporting the growth of the cell as determined by fba , and  a much larger library of  <dig> minimal media constructed using the method described by barrett et al  <cit> .

the functions gi contain all information about the internal wiring of the network  as well as the logic of each gene's regulation . each function gi typically depends only upon those components of g and m that directly affect the expression of gene i . we have considered the dynamical system  with two slightly different forms of the functions gi, called 1a and 1b, arising from two different treatments of intermediate variables  that appear in the database imc1010v <dig>  in the first approach  for simplicity we have treated only the genes and their products as dynamical variables, keeping these internal fluxes fixed. the second approach  includes the effect of some other internal variables such as concentrations of internal metabolites  also being dynamical. the latter effectively introduce additional interactions among the genes.

the conceptual framework for studying trns as boolean dynamical systems of the type gi = gi) was set up by kauffman  <cit>  almost four decades back and subsequently has been studied extensively, resulting in several important insights  <cit> . in particular kauffman found that such systems with a large number of components possess an ordered regime in which the attractors have short periods and large basins. in this regime these systems have the property of homeostasis or robustness to perturbations of the genetic configuration. in the absence of detailed molecular data on the real genetic networks, this approach was used for ensembles of biologically motivated random boolean networks, and, more recently, real networks with the functions gi chosen randomly from a suitable ensemble of boolean functions  <cit> .

references  <cit>  have applied the boolean approach to specific biological gene regulatory networks where detailed genetic data is available. these networks are smaller than the ones mentioned above, and have up to  <dig> distinct genes, proteins and other molecules  <cit> . in reference  <cit> , where a boolean network of  <dig> nodes is considered, the network contains  <dig> distinct genes and proteins . these models, apart from reproducing several observed phenomena of these systems, have also found that the networks possess the property of homeostasis, as well as robustness to genetic mutations.

the present study is inspired by the work of kauffman and extends the above development in two important ways. one, it studies the empirically derived network of a real organism, but one that is much larger than the biological systems mentioned above. the present network  <cit>  has  <dig> genes and  <dig> external metabolites accounting for close to half of all genes currently believed to be involved in metabolism in e. coli. being more than an order of magnitude larger  than other real genetic networks considered as boolean systems, this allows us a qualitatively different systemic view of the organization of the genetic network of an organism. we not only find homeostasis in this large system, but also identify the design feature of the network responsible for this property. two, we are able to study the effect of the external environment on the trn dynamics through the vector m in eq. . note that the system studied by kauffman is described by the equation gi = gi) instead of eq. , which takes into account the effect of genes on other genes but not the effect of the external environment. other works that investigate real biological systems as boolean networks have only a few environmental signals  <cit> . as a consequence of the present database  <cit> , we are able to take into account the effect of external environment in a much more systematic and extensive way than before. this sheds light on a different property of the network, namely its flexibility of response to a diversity of environments.

RESULTS
homeostasis: the final state is essentially the same after any perturbation of the genes
we simulated the dynamical system 1a for each of the  <dig> m vectors corresponding to the  <dig> minimal media mentioned above, starting from a set of  <dig> randomly chosen initial conditions for the gi. for each m and each initial condition of the genes, the system reached a fixed point attractor in a maximum of  <dig> time steps. furthermore, for each m the fixed point was independent of the chosen initial condition of the genes. this is shown in fig.  <dig> for glucose aerobic medium for four initial conditions. we also considered the library of  <dig> minimal media for a single randomly chosen initial condition each. a fixed point attractor was found in each case. there are in principle  <dig> possible initial conditions. we present later the analytic argument as to why a unique final configuration independent of initial condition is inevitable for each fixed m, given the architecture of the trn. this property means that as long as the external environment remains fixed, the trn regulating e. coli metabolism will revert to a unique configuration of its genes after any perturbation of the latter.

the dynamical system 1b, which includes some additional links between the genes compared to 1a, was also studied for the  <dig> minimal media with  <dig> randomly chosen initial conditions each. in this case for  <dig> of the  <dig> media, we found  <dig> distinct attractors . for the remaining  <dig> minimal media, there were  <dig> distinct attractors . again the attractor was reached in a maximum of  <dig> time steps. for each of the cycles, we found that most of the genes  were in fact frozen in a fixed configuration, and only  <dig> to  <dig> genes oscillated back and forth between zero and one with period two. these  <dig> genes are listed in supplementary table s <dig> in additional file  <dig>  furthermore for any given medium we found that each of the  <dig> frozen genes had the same configuration across all the attractors . this means that for any given medium, most genes  end up in the same fixed configuration independent of the initial conditions of the genes. recently, shlomi et al.  <cit> , using a different technique, also observed that the state of only  <dig> genes is undetermined for a given medium in the regulatory network controlling e. coli metabolism  <cit> . one can show that there are no other attractors of system 1b, using its structural properties . we have also checked that the  <dig> frozen genes end up in the same configuration in both system 1a and 1b for any given medium.

kauffman has characterized random boolean networks as having two regimes, an ordered regime wherein the attractors have a large 'frozen core' of genes locked in a fixed configuration together with a few 'twinkling islands' of genes that switch on and off, and a chaotic regime wherein the number of 'frozen' genes is much less than those of the 'twinkling' ones  <cit> . our findings above imply that the genetic regulatory network controlling e. coli's metabolism is deep in the ordered regime, since the dynamical variables corresponding to  <dig> out of  <dig> genes are frozen in a fixed configuration when the external environment is fixed. collectively, our results of both dynamical systems imply that the e. coli trn exhibits a high degree of homeostasis, in that it is highly insensitive to initial conditions and for any given medium all genetic perturbations die out quickly, restoring an overwhelming majority of genes to a configuration that is independent of the perturbation.

flexibility: the system has a wide range of response to changes in environmental conditions
while homeostasis is a useful property in any given environmental condition, the organism also needs to respond flexibly to changes in the environment. we investigated flexibility of the trn to environmental changes in two ways. first, we determined the hamming distance between attractor states of the system 1a corresponding to pairs of minimal media. for the set of  <dig> minimal media, we found the largest hamming distance between two attractor states corresponding to two different minimal media to be  <dig>  we also determined the attractors of the dynamical system 1a for the larger library of  <dig> minimal media . we ran 'constrained fba' for each of these attractors to determine which of them supports a nonzero growth rate . this yielded a subset of  <dig> minimal media. we computed the pairwise hamming distances among this set of  <dig> attractors also. the largest of these distances was found to be  <dig>  the distribution of these hamming distances is trimodal  similar to that found and discussed in barrett et al.  <cit> . thus, although the attractor for a fixed environmental condition is unique, the attractors for two different environmental conditions can be quite far apart. therefore, while the system is insensitive to fluctuations in gene configurations in a fixed external environment, it can move to quite a different attractor when it encounters a change in environment. thus the system shows flexibility of response to changing environmental conditions.

second, we found that across these  <dig> conditions the genes that had a configuration that differed between any pair of attractors were drawn from a set of  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes. of these  <dig> genes,  <dig> genes code for tfs and  <dig> genes code for metabolic enzymes. the remaining  <dig> genes had the same configuration  in all the  <dig> attractors. the variability of a gene's configuration across different environmental conditions can be characterized by the standard deviation of its value  across this set. we found this standard deviation to range from zero to close to its maximum possible value  <dig> , with the mean of the  <dig> standard deviations mentioned above being  <dig> . the histogram of standard deviation values is shown in fig.  <dig>  these observations quantify the considerable variety in a gene's variability across environmental conditions.

adaptability: the genetic network's response to changed media increases metabolic efficiency
to further investigate flexibility, we tracked how the metabolic response of the cell, as measured by its growth rate computed using fba, changes when its environment changes. a reaction in the metabolic network can be assumed to be off if none of the enzymes catalyzing it are being produced, or, equivalently, in our dynamical system, if the genes coding for those enzymes are in the off state. for any configuration of the metabolic genes, fba can thus be used to compute the growth rate of the cell by turning off all reactions whose corresponding genes are in the off state in that configuration, thereby capturing the effect of gene regulation on metabolic function . we computed this 'constrained fba' growth rate for each of the attractors of the trn dynamical system 1a for the  <dig> minimal media.  <dig> of them, listed in table s <dig> in additional file  <dig>  gave a nonzero growth rate. starting from an initial condition of the trn that corresponds to the attractor of one of these  <dig> media, say x, we computed the time course of the trn configuration in another buffered medium y, until it reached the attractor corresponding to y. for each of the trn configurations in the trajectory we computed the growth rate using constrained fba.

this effectively tracks how the constrained growth rate of the cell changes with time after its environment changes suddenly from x to y. the result is shown in fig.  <dig> for the cases where the carbon source in x is glutamate and in y is glutamine, lactate, fucose or acetate. in the attractor of x the growth rate is low for the medium y. the trn configuration changes with time so as to typically increase the growth rate. we found that for the above  <dig> minimal media, the growth rate in the attractor configuration of the medium was greater than the average growth rate in the other  <dig> attractors by a factor of  <dig>  . moreover the average time to move to the attractor from such initial configurations was only  <dig>  time steps. in other words regulatory dynamics enables the cell to adapt to its environment to increase its metabolic efficiency very substantially, fairly quickly.

we also calculated the growth rate for each of the  <dig> minimal media in their respective attractor configurations as a ratio of the maximal growth rate possible in those media . the average value of this ratio was found to be as high as  <dig>  and was less than  <dig>  for only 7% of the media . this shows that the regulatory dynamics results in a close-to-optimal metabolic functioning under a large set of conditions. this observation also lends support to the usefulness of fba in probing metabolic organization.

in a dynamical system of the type gi = gi, m) it is of course not surprising that the attractor of the genes' configuration g depends upon the external metabolite configuration m. our results related to flexibility and adaptability are an attempt to quantify the change in the attractors as the external environment is varied and to show that the change is functionally useful in the survival of the organism.

robustness of the network to gene knockouts
in order to test the robustness of network functionality to successive gene knockouts, we considered the progressive decline of metabolic performance for an ensemble of  <dig> 'random knockout trajectories'. each trajectory was constructed as follows: one out of  <dig> genes was chosen at random and knocked out, i.e., its gi was set to be identically  <dig>  the constrained fba growth rate was determined for the attractors of the resultant dynamical system of  <dig> genes for each of the  <dig> minimal media discussed above. this was repeated after knocking out another gene chosen at random from the remaining  <dig> genes, and so on until the attractors for all the  <dig> media became dysfunctional . the number of knockout steps, n, needed for the network to become metabolically dysfunctional for all the  <dig> media was determined for each of the  <dig> random knockout trajectories constructed in this way. figure  <dig> shows the number or frequency f of trajectories with a given value of n. the curve fits the exponential distribution f ~ exp with n <dig> =  <dig> . thus the chances of survival decrease exponentially with the number of knockouts.

design features of the regulatory network: origin of homeostasis and flexibility
the following structural characteristics of the trn explain several of the dynamical features described above: the trn 1a is an acyclic directed graph with maximal depth  <dig>  the largest connected component is displayed as a hierarchy in fig.  <dig>  in which all links are pointing downwards. at the bottom of the hierarchy are  <dig> metabolic genes in the full system  coding for enzymes that have no outgoing links. thus these nodes do not influence the dynamics of any other gene. we refer to these as the 'leaves' of the acyclic graph. at the top of the hierarchy are nodes with no incoming links, or 'root nodes'. the depth of a node in the acyclic graph is the length of the longest path to it from a root node. root nodes correspond to external metabolites and other variables that have fixed values in the system 1a such as certain conditions, fluxes, etc. since we consider only buffered media the m variables, by virtue of their root location, act as control variables of the dynamical system. the genes coding for tfs are at intermediate levels in the graph. these observations immediately explain why  there are only fixed point attractors of this system,  their basin of attraction is the entire configuration space,  it takes at most  <dig> time steps to reach the attractors from any initial configuration, and  the attractor configuration depends upon the medium. for, the m vector determines the configuration of the root level. this fixes the configurations of all nodes at the next level  at the next time instant  and subsequent times irrespective of their values at t =  <dig>  because the input variables to the boolean functions controlling them are fixed. this fixes the configurations of all nodes of depth  <dig> at t =  <dig> irrespective of their configurations at t =  <dig>  and so on, until at t =  <dig>  the configuration of the maximum depth leaves are fixed irrespective of the configuration they held earlier. a change in the medium or external environment is a change in the configuration of root nodes; this also percolates down in a maximum of  <dig> steps resulting in a new fixed point. the acyclicity of the e. coli trn was noted by  <cit> . its maximum depth being  <dig>  was remarked upon by  <cit> . that root control of this acyclic graph is in the hands of environmental signals has been observed by  <cit> . however, to our knowledge the present work is the first one that brings these facts together to study dynamics and elaborate upon their consequences for homeostasis and flexibility of the system.

disconnected structure of the reduced dynamical system: modularity, flexibility and evolvability
since leaf nodes do not affect the dynamics of upstream nodes, it is worthwhile to ask about the dynamics of the 'reduced dynamical system' which is obtained from the full system by removing the leaves. when leaf nodes in the system are removed along with all their links, one is left with fig.  <dig>  this is a surprisingly disconnected graph; the large connected component has broken up into  <dig> disconnected components. it has several small components containing upto only  <dig> nodes at depth ≥  <dig> and one component with  <dig> nodes at depth ≥  <dig>  the latter component is regulated by oxygen, some inorganic sources of nitrogen, and certain amino acids and sugars. other components are typically regulated by single metabolites or groups of biochemically related metabolites. this procedure reduces the number of outgoing links from global regulators drastically. for example the gene b <dig> coding for crp is left with only  <dig> outgoing links instead of  <dig> 

two components of a dynamical system that are disconnected from each other are dynamically independent: the dynamics of each can be analyzed independently of the other. the dynamics of the 'reduced dynamical system' shown in fig.  <dig>  in particular its attractors and basins of attraction, can be reconstructed from those of its disconnected components. such a disconnected or 'product' structure of a dynamical system greatly simplifies its mathematical analysis. modularity of biological systems refers to the existence of subsystems that are relatively independent of each other  <cit> . each connected component of fig.  <dig> can therefore be regarded as a core of a module, and modularity of the present genetic regulatory system is then nothing but the property that it is composed of disconnected components at this level of description.

restoring the leaves and their links in fig.  <dig> will take us back to fig.  <dig> which contains the large connected component shown in fig.  <dig>  this means that leaf nodes typically receive links from more than one module core. the structure is like a banyan tree which has multiple trunks emanating from independent roots and in which leaves receive sustenance from more than one root. in this picture, there is no direct crosstalk between the module cores but they can affect common leaves. this enables many leaf nodes to be influenced by several environmental conditions. this 'multitasking' adds to the complexity of cellular response to different environments and possibly contributes to greater metabolic efficiency. when a minimal medium is changed by replacing its carbon source by another that belongs to a different module, the genetic network needs to respond by activating genes coding for enzymes that catalyze metabolic reactions needed to break down the new source and process its moieties. the connections of the leaf nodes to the modules above them must be such that that is achieved, given our finding that the constrained fba growth rate increases as the new attractor is reached.

the location and dynamical autonomy of the modules could also contribute to evolvability. a new module added to fig.  <dig> would not affect existing ones; thus the organism can explore new niches characterized by new food sources without jeopardizing existing capabilities. this may be a particular case of the more general observation  <cit>  that the architectural features of organisms responsible for their flexibility to environmental conditions also contribute to their evolvability.

the graph of the dynamical system 1b is not completely acyclic. effectively some of the genes that are leaves in 1a now get outgoing links that feed back to genes coding for transcription factors. this results in the cycles we have seen as attractors. our analysis of this dynamical system, not discussed here, reveals that removing the leaves of this system exposes a modular structure in terms of which the attractors can be understood.

almost all input functions are canalyzing in the e. coli trn
it has been shown by kauffman and his colleagues that the stability in the genetic regulatory networks to perturbations can arise due to the canalyzing property of boolean functions  <cit> . a canalyzing boolean function has at least one input such that at least one of the two values of this input determines the output of the function  <cit> . for a given number of inputs, k, the fraction of boolean functions that are canalyzing decreases as k increases. all boolean rules compiled for eukaryotes from the available literature have been found to be canalyzing functions  <cit> . for the present e. coli trn the frequency distribution of the number of genes with k regulatory inputs is given in table s <dig> in additional file  <dig>  we found that boolean functions for  <dig> of the  <dig> genes in the e. coli trn possess the canalyzing property. only  <dig> genes had input functions that were not canalyzing.

the dynamical system achieves flexibility even though it is far from the edge of chaos
one might expect that a dynamical system whose attractors have large frozen cores and very small 'twinkling islands' is rather rigid and therefore unlikely to be adaptable to the external environment and also unlikely to be evolvable. this expectation has given rise to the conjecture  <cit>  that genetic regulatory systems ought to be close to the 'edge of chaos', the boundary that separates the ordered phase from the chaotic phase in the space of dynamical systems. however, as discussed above in the section on homeostasis, the present dynamical system is deep in the ordered phase, since it always falls into the same attractor that is a fixed point or has isolated low period cycles for all initial conditions in a few time steps . in other words it is far from the edge of chaos. we have seen that this is an inevitable consequence of the hierarchical, largely acyclic architecture of the network . at the same time, we have seen that the system is also highly responsive to the environment. how have these two properties managed to co-exist? the answer lies in the observation that root nodes of the hierarchy are largely the environmental variables – the external metabolites in the present case. the attractor configuration is thus a function of the external environment, specified by the variable m. while for any fixed m there is a global attractor in which most or all genes have frozen configurations, when m changes the genes 'unfreeze' and move to a new attractor configuration. the modular organization of the network with a lot of crosstalk between modules at the leaf level  ensures that the melting and refreezing is quite substantial. the same architecture that produces this flexibility of response to the external environment can also enhance evolvability.

the present architecture as an alternative to the edge of chaos hypothesis for simultaneously producing homeostasis and flexibility has not been noticed earlier because the earlier literature has primarily focussed on the abstract genetic network itself without much reference to the environmental control variables that abound in the real systems. here, since we are investigating the database imc1010v <dig> which brings together, within the same network, genes as well as nodes describing external environmental signals, this possibility has become evident.

discussion
all our results, being derived from the database imc1010v <dig>  have some limitations that stem from the database itself. first, the database covers the regulation of only about half of the metabolic genes in e. coli. even among these genes the present set of connections could have false positives as well as negatives, especially the latter. additional nodes and connections would modify the dynamics reported here. however, new nodes and connections corresponding to genes coding for enzymes are unlikely to affect our qualitative conclusions about the nature of attractors significantly. the reason is that most such genes are likely to be leaves of the network like the nodes at the bottom of fig.  <dig>  in which case they would not affect the dynamics of other nodes. however the inclusion of such genes as well as additional connections of existing genes in the network would add to the constraints on fba; it would be interesting to see the extent to which regulatory dynamics enhances metabolic efficiency in different environmental conditions. the inclusion of more tf genes and modified connections among existing genes would affect the dynamics. in particular feedback loops could bring in longer cycles as attractors. several genes are known to have autoregulatory self-loops  <cit>  that are not included in the present database. these could produce 2-cycles at the individual nodes even at constant input. present work seems to indicate that apart from self-loops, trns are largely acyclic  <cit>  and have a small depth . furthermore the kind of modularity described here for the trn regulating metabolism seems to exist for other parts of the e. coli trn. this together with the evidence of preponderance of canalyzing functions suggests that cyclic attractors where they do exist are likely to be of low period and localized. cyclicity is needed for explicitly temporal phenomena like the cell cycle or circadian rhythms. it is possible that metabolism being a functionality that needs to be active whenever food is available is largely regulated without cycles at the genetic level, with feedbacks typically entering at the level of metabolites regulating enzymes to ensure efficient functioning on a faster time scale. nevertheless it would be important to explore these questions with an enlarged database.

in this context, we remark that the lack of feedback from genes to other genes via tfs is not an assumption on our part, rather it reflects the way this biological system actually is as captured in the present database and also in other studies mentioned above. the models studied originally by kauffman  <cit>  were random boolean networks. those networks had substantial feedbacks between genes and hence more complicated attractors and dynamics. one of our main results is that the genetic regulatory network of this real biological system is structured  in such a way that it has simple attractors and dynamics. thus while our modeling technique is not very different from kauffman's  our dynamical results are quite different because the underlying network has a very different structure from the one kauffman considered.

in addition to the feedback from genes to other genes via tfs, discussed above, there can be another kind of feedback from the metabolic network  into the genetic network. the database we have used has such feedbacks via the fluxes of certain metabolic reactions. we have converted these into effective feedbacks from genes to other genes in order to have a simplified dynamics and a closed system of the genes alone . we remark that there exist in the literature alternative ways of treating metabolic feedback on regulation and in particular the flux variables. these include the regulatory fba  <cit>  and dynamic fba  <cit>  in which the fluxes and the genes are dynamically coupled to each other. however, in these methods one makes an arbitrary choice of the flux vector out of many alternative flux vectors satisfying the constraints. another method, sr-fba  <cit> , has been proposed that systematically accounts for multiple optimal metabolic steady states given a regulatory state. however sr-fba cannot be used for dynamical simulations since it only yields the various steady states for the metabolic-regulatory system. our treatment of the internal fluxes is simpler compared to the above mentioned methods in that it eliminates the flux variables in favour of an effective feedback of the genes upon other genes. in the context of the present database we believe that our broad conclusions would not change significantly because of our simplified approach to the treatment of the fluxes since the feedbacks from the fluxes affect only  <dig> genes coding for transcription factors and  <dig> genes downstream of these coding for enzymes, thus affecting only  <dig> genes out of  <dig>  a better treatment of the feedbacks from internal metabolites than is achieved by our approach and the other approaches mentioned above requires metabolite concentrations which are difficult to compute at the present time due to the paucity of kinetic information for large scale networks.

we end this section with a comment relating this to earlier works and a speculation. kauffman  <cit>  has found biologically motivated random boolean networks to possess multiple attractors that he has interpreted as different cell types of a multicellular organism. in the present work, we have studied the genetic network regulating metabolism in a prokaryote. perhaps not surprisingly, we get a much simpler picture of the network exhibiting a much higher degree of order in the dynamics than the systems kauffman investigated. while we also find that the system can go into different attractors , yet, unlike kauffman, for whom different attractors were realized via different initial conditions of the genes, in the present case the different attractors are realized when the control variables  have different configurations. when the control variables are held fixed we find no  multiplicity of attractors irrespective of the initial condition of the genes . the architecture and dynamics we have found is probably quite suitable for prokaryotic lifestyles and evolution. the question remains open whether for eukaryotes and especially multicellular ones, the hypothesis that associates different cell types with different attractors of the regulatory dynamics is valid. while that hypothesis remains an enticing possibility, it is worth noting that the present simple architecture would have its uses in the eukaryotic case as well. environmental control of cellular attractors  can itself cause a cell to differentiate into another type, the environment being determined in the multicellular case by the state of other cells in the organism. the modular structure discussed above would even permit a cell to hop through several attractors in the course of development of the organism as the environmental cues to this cell change. such an architecture could thus contribute to developmental flexibility and, potentially, evolvability of eukaryotes as well. the multiplicity of internal attractor basins pointed out by kauffman would be an asset in keeping the cell in its new attractor after a transient environmental cue has caused it to shift from one basin to another. it would be interesting to investigate these questions when a database similar to imc1010v <dig> becomes available for a multicellular organism.

CONCLUSIONS
the overall organizational picture of the system that emerges from our study is the following: the genetic regulatory network controlling metabolism in e. coli as represented in the present database is  an acyclic graph. cycles, where they do exist, are short and 'localized' in that they have a limited number of nodes downstream of them in the present system. the nodes at the root of this graph are primarily environmental variables . the leaves of this graph are genes coding for enzymes while the middle layers correspond to genes coding for transcription factors. the maximal distance between a root node and a leaf node is  <dig>  the top and middle layers are organized into small dynamically independent modules; crosstalk between the modules occurs at the lower level of enzyme coding genes. the database, and hence the above mentioned architecture, represents a limited portion of the genetic regulatory network of e. coli and can change as more information becomes available. nevertheless, this architecture has the virtue that it endows the system with the property of homeostasis, namely, that in a fixed environment the genes relax within a short time to the same fixed configuration after being perturbed. it is also responsible for the property that the system responds in a flexible and efficient way to a sustained change of environment. we have speculated that such an architecture can contribute to the evolvability of the network, and variants of it might be useful for multicellular organisms as well.

