BACKGROUND
p. gingivalis, a gram-negative anaerobe, plays a critical role in the development of adult periodontitis, a chronic inflammatory disease  <cit> . epidemiological studies have demonstrated a positive association between periodontitis and cardiovascular diseases  <cit> . the immune response to this organism correlates with atherosclerosis  <cit> . we have detected intracellularly located p. gingivalis in periodontal tissues from patients  <cit> . we and others have also demonstrated the presence of dna from periodontal pathogens such as p. gingivalis in atheromatous tissues  <cit> . most importantly, we recently demonstrated for the first time the presence of viable invasive p. gingivalis in atheromatous plaque  <cit> , thus implicating this chronic inflammatory agent in direct contribution to the development of inflammatory lesions at remote sites. this discovery led us to the legitimate question of the mechanism that would allow this organism to penetrate vascular walls upon dissemination and to persist in human vascular tissue.

oral epithelia are likely the primary site for p. gingivalis infection but this bacterial species can enter the circulation following tooth brushing and other dental procedures therefore periodontitis is known to cause transient and low-grade bacteremia in patients  <cit> . this makes the periodontal site an "open gate" to circulation.

in addition to numerous other virulence factors, the invasion ability of p. gingivalis allows it to invade multiple cell types including animal cell lines, human vascular and gingival epithelial cell lines in vitro  <cit> . tissue invasion is very likely a key virulence factor for this bacterium as it provides 1) a "privileged niche" with access to host protein  and iron substrates, 2) a sequestration from the humoral and cellular immune response, and 3) a means for persistence that is essential for a chronic pathogen.

studies from several groups have demonstrated the ability of p. gingivalis to invade gingival epithelial cells  <cit> . studies of invasion in epithelial cells demonstrated that 1) the invasion is mediated by the interaction between p. gingivalis fimbriae and β <dig> integrin receptors  <cit> . 2) host cell cytoskeletal rearrangements are required for the entry  <cit> ; 3) while inhibitors of protein kinase activity have no obvious effect on invasion, suppression of protease activity inhibited invasion process  <cit> ; 4) during the first four hours of invasion, p. gingivalis appears to be able to replicate inside cells  <cit> , but then recoverable cfu counts decrease  <cit> . in fact, we have detected intracellular p. gingivalis immunohistochemicallyin periodontal tissues from patients, located in the perinuclear region  <cit> .

many bacteria capable of invasion have been found to reside in phagosomes. invasion of host cells is a common strategy for bacteria to escape immunosurvelliance and hostile environment. in phagocytic cells, mycobacterium tuberculosis persists in phagosomes . it stops the normal maturation of phagosomes into an acidic, hydrolytic active environment, a phenomenon referred to as inhibition of phagosome-lysosome fusion  <cit> . similarly, legionella pneumophila enters its host, amoebae and protozoa  <cit>  through phagocytosis, then rapidly modifies the phagosome to create an environment that supports its replication. again a critical modification is the prevention of phagosome-lysosome fusion  <cit> . virulent brucella abortus also replicates in phagosomes with an increase in intraphagosomal ph  <cit> . the inhibition of the fusion between phagosomes and lysosomes seems to be a common theme to ensure the survival of invaded bacteria in phagosomes. when the inhibition is overcome, the acidification of the phagosomes eliminates the intracellular microbes  <cit> . in some cases, cytoplasmic bacteria can be ultimately trafficked into the lysosomal compartment for elimination  <cit> .

p. gingivalis was found to be able to reside in phagosomes following invasion of endothelial cells  <cit>  and possibly modify the phagosome to delay its fusion with lysosomes  <cit> . therefore, host cell invasion by p. gingivalis may play a critical role in the development of vascular inflammatory lesions.

this raises the general question, what is the fate of this intracellular organism? does p. gingivalis actually persist in tissues while in fact it is uncultivable? even more important for vascular pathology, can p. gingivalis penetrate the vascular tissue, invading different cell types? the data on the intracellular fate of the organism itself hasn't clarified these broad questions yet while their answer is central for further elucidation of the persistent presence of this organism in atheromatous tissue and for clarification of the impact of that presence on the vascular wall.

although there is an abundance of studies on p. gingivalis invasion of different cell lines  <cit> , there is only one communication on p. gingivalis persistence that focuses on intercellular spreading  <cit> . the authors demonstrated that the bacteria can spread cell-to-cell, similarly to actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans  <cit> . however, the study is performed with gingival epithelial cells that are not representative for vascular pathology. further, only one cell type was studied. therefore, in the present study we decided to analyze the fate of intracellular p. gingivalis during extended incubation using cell-to-cell transmission among various cell types that exist in the vasculature in vivo. using intracellular visualization by in situ immunofluorescent microscopy and bacterial recovery on blood agar plates , our experiments addressed the ability of p. gingivalis to survive over extended periods of time inside epithelial, endothelial  and smooth muscle cells . in particular, we investigated whether p. gingivalis can leave the infected cells to invade and replicate in new host cells, including cells from different tissue type.

RESULTS
p. gingivalis w <dig> invasion ability of kb, ec and smc differs and can be increased by centrifugation
to investigate the ability of p. gingivalis to invade and survive inside epithelial, endothelial and smooth muscle cells, we first assessed the invasion ability of p. gingivalisw <dig> to epithelial  cells, ec and smc at multiplicity of infection  of  <dig> using an antibiotic protection assay as described  <cit> . at three hours post invasion, the host cells were lysed and the number of invaded p. gingivalis was enumerated on bap. as shown in figure  <dig>  the number of p. gingivalis colony-forming units  recovered on bap varied among cell lines, suggesting differential invasion ability, as previously observed  <cit> . among these three cell lines, the p. gingivalis recovery from kb on bap was the highest while the recovery from smc was the lowest. this may be due to the differential affinity between p. gingivalis and each cell type. this differential affinity could be overcome by spin inoculation. when increasing p.gingivalis and cell contact by spin inoculation , the bacterial invasion into each cell type increased by orders of magnitude .

p. gingivalis w <dig> invasion doesn't affect the viability of the infected host cells
since infection using the spin inoculation protocol can cause considerable stress to the host cells, we verified their viability using mtt  cell proliferation assay. ten thousand cells were seeded per well in a 96-well format, reaching 70% confluency, similarly to the confluency we used in the invasion assays. mtt assay measures the ability of living cells to convert yellow water soluble mtt into insoluble purple formazan. with uninfected cells as a control, p. gingivalis invasion at moi of  <dig> with spin inoculation has no effect on cell proliferation/metabolism in all three cell types using mtt assays at  <dig> hr,  <dig> hr and  <dig> hr post infection .

to independently confirm the result of the mtt assays, invasion assays were also carried out where the host cells were counted using a hemocytometer at each time point . similarly, there was no difference in cell numbers between invaded cells and uninfected controls in all three cell types .

recovery of intracellular p. gingivalis w <dig> on blood agar plates  declines over time after invasion
in order to study the replication kinetics of the intracellular p. gingivalis, we harvested intracellular p. gingivalis using the antibiotic protection assay at various time points post invasion. to our surprise, as shown in figure  <dig>  we did not detect intracellular p. gingivalis amplification using the antibiotic protection assay at the described infection condition. instead, a sharp decline in the number of p. gingivalis recovered on bap at  <dig> hr post invasion was detected and no bacteria could be recovered at  <dig> hour time point from ec and smc . these experiments were repeated five times to confirm the unexpected data. when facilitating the invasion by spin inoculation, the number of p. gingivalis recovered on bap at  <dig> hr time point increased  <dig> fold as described above , but still no p. gingivalis could be recovered on bap from ec and smc at  <dig> hr post invasion. similarly, only very low number of p. gingivalis was recovered from kb cells at  <dig> hr time point .

values are means +/- standard deviation  for the number of colony forming unit  recovered on blood agar plates . multiplicity of infection ,  <dig> 

in contrast to the recovery rate on bap, immunofluorescent microscopy demonstrates the presence of a large number of p. gingivalis at  <dig> hour post invasion
surprised by the loss of p. gingivalis recovery over time on bap, we performed immunofluorescent microscopy to verify the status of intracellular p. gingivalis. p. gingivalis was easily found throughout the cultured cells at each of the time points, including the 48-hr time point. as demonstrated in figure  <dig>  at  <dig> hr post-invasion, while no p. gingivalis can be retrieved on bap, the bacteria could be observed with the immunofluorescent staining and most were perinuclear in all three cell types. this is consistent with the observation made in primary oral epithelial cells  <cit> . similarly, under the condition of spin inoculation, while no p. gingvalis was recovered on bap, copious numbers of the intracellular p. gingivalis could be found by immunofluorescent staining .

p. gingivalis is able to transmit from infected to uninfected cells
once we found that no p. gingivalis could be recovered on bap from ec and smc at  <dig> hours post invasion, we investigated the possibility of intracellular p. gingivalis leaving the host cells to invade and possibly replicate in new host cells.

endothelial, smc, and kb cells were infected with p. gingivalis at moi of  <dig> using the spin inoculation protocol. twenty-four hours post invasion, the invaded host cells were harvested by trypsinization,  <dig> ×  <dig> of these initially infected cells were mixed with  <dig> ×  <dig> fresh uninfected host cells and plated in  <dig> well plates using the uninfected host cell culture media. after twenty-four hours of co culturing , the cells from each well were lysed by sterile water and plated on bap. the results are shown in table  <dig> . surprisingly, the amount of colony forming units  recovered on bap increased above the zero or minimal recovery obtained after  <dig> hour post-infection in the initial cultures alone, indicating that p. gingivalis had transmitted and possibly replicated in the new host cells.

to confirm that the cfu counts are due to p. gingivalis transmitted into new host cells, we further performed immunofluorescent staining using smc as new host cells. smooth muscle cells were selected in order to utilize anti-smc actin antibody that is able to stain intracellularly, therefore can be used to determine if the bacteria are intracellular. as described above,  <dig> ×  <dig> p. gingivalis-invaded ec  were co cultured with  <dig> ×  <dig> uninfected smc cells. twenty-four hours later , the cells were fixed and stained using antibodies against p. gingivalis and smc actin. the result indicated presence of p. gingivalis in the smc cells by both immunofluorescent  and confocal  microscope analysis, confirming our hypothesis that p. gingivalis is able to leave primary host and enter new host cells in the co culture system .

p. gingivalis is able to exit the primary host cells, to infiltrate the medium and to invade new host cells. the cell-cell contact is not required for bacterial cell-to-cell transmission
to determine whether cell-cell contact is required for the p. gingivalis transmission to new host cells, a transwell system was utilized to separate the initially infected host cell from uninfected new host cells as described above. the following host cell combinations were tested: 1) the transwell insert containing infected ec  placed on top of uninfected smc; 2) similar insert placed on top of uninfected kb cells; 3) the insert containing ismc placed on top of uninfected smc;  <dig>  similar insert placed on top of uninfected kb cells. after 24-hour incubation with the transwell insert, the cells at the bottom were fixed and stained by anti-p. gingivalis monoclonal antibody followed by cy3-labeled secondary antibodies and also with anti-sma antibody followed by fitc labeled secondary antibodies. dapi staining was used to visualize the nuclei as before . despite the physical barrier between the two cell layers, the bacteria were found in the new host cells, indicating that p. gingivalis can exit primarily infected host cells, penetrate the media and invade new host cells.

the cell contact between infected cells and new host cells increases the transmission rate
furthermore, after the removal of transwell inserts, we also lysed the cells at the bottom compartment by sterile h2o and plated the lysate on bap. in concordance with the microscopy observations, p. gingivalis could be recovered from cells that had no direct contact with infected cells . however, based on the number of p. gingivalis cfu recovered on the plates, the cell contact between infected cells and new host cells increases the transmission rate.

discussion
periodontitis, one of the most prevalent infectious diseases  <cit>  is caused by a small number of bacteria, including p. gingivalis that we have shown to reside in gingival tissue from periodontal patients  <cit>  and, even more significantly, in atheromatous plaque  <cit> . the main challenge for tissue-embedded p. gingivalis is to survive and we set out to explore a possible mechanism of its persistence.

here we present data demonstrating that in our experimental set-up p. gingivalis strain w <dig> displays an invasive ability that differs by up to an order of magnitude in the tested cell lines and that this difference could be minimized by spin inoculation. the differential invasion efficiency observed for different cell types is likely due to different interactions between p. gingivalis and the types of cell surface receptors present on the surface of the different cell types that are involved in the invasion process. p. gingivalis fimbriae and hemagglutinating adhesins have been reported to serve as ligands for the initial attachment to the host cells  <cit> . beta integrins  <cit> , cd <dig> and the β <dig> integrins cd11b/cd <dig>  <cit>  have been reported to be host cell receptors for p. gingivalis fimbriae. achieving higher cfu numbers after spin-inoculation of the tested cell lines is likely due to the increased contact between these p. gingivalis ligands and the host surface receptors.

we also demonstrate that the 48-hr invasion  of the studied three different cell types, kb, ec and smc doesn't affect the viability of the host cells, in contrast to the data for gingival fibroblasts  <cit> . again, this observation is most likely due to the different cell type, and in terms of invasion of primary ec is supported by a recent report  <cit> . this effect is plausibly due to the advantage for the bacterium to prevent the death of the host, thus evading the humoral or cellular immune response and securing a source of nutrients.

we next found that p. gingivalis could be detected intracellularly at  <dig> hr post invasion in large numbers by immunofluorescent microscopy. while different entry pathways and intracellular trafficking in various cell types have been proposed  <cit>  we observed that at a relatively high m.o.i. of  <dig>  virtually all host cells in culture contained several microbes, and that recovery of viable intracellular p. gingivalis was relatively high a few hours post-invasion, which was also expected. over a period of  <dig> hr, however, while the level of intracellular localization did not change, the recovery of viable microbes on bap diminished to virtually zero for smc and ec . most of the bacteria in all three cell types are perinuclear at this stage, similarly to what has been demonstrated in primary oral epithelial cells  <cit> .

it is unclear why p. gingivalis could not be recovered on bap at this stage. the inability to recover p. gingivalis on bap has been reported before. for example, we found high amount of p. gingivalis genomic dna in atheromas using q-pcr  <cit>  but no bacteria could be directly recovered on blood agar plates, as previously observed  <cit> . one of the possibilities is that p. gingivalis may not survive the intracellular environment. however, based on our previous data  <cit>  and on the data presented in this study it can not be ruled out that p. gingivalis may actually enter a latent state to reside intracellularly, resulting in inability to be cultivated on bap, and that it may leave such a state upon contact with fresh host cells.

therefore, there are two possible scenarios with these observations. the first scenario is that some of sequestered intracellular p. gingivalis had become non-viable. several killing mechanisms may be proposed, for example the bacteria may be killed by trafficking into the phagolysosomal or autolysosomal compartment  <cit> . the trigger for this to occur could be initiated by a high number of intracellular p. gingivalis or by depletion of intracellular nutrients. such mechanism may be used to control the p. gingivalis population. previously, another p. gingivalis strain  has been reported to persist in kb cells for eight days  <cit> . using the antibiotic protection assay, the amount of p. gingivalis fdc <dig> recovered on bap from kb cells started to decline at day  <dig>  however, in that case, kb was infected at a m.o.i. of  <dig>  or 50-fold less than what we used in our experimental system. this therefore is in line with the hypothesis that the number of intracellular p. gingivalis may serve as a trigger to trafficking to a lysosomal compartment thus regulating the number of intracellular p. gingivalis.

however, this hypothesis does not rule out another possible scenario, that p. gingivalis may not be killed by host cells and that number of bacteria may be instead converted into a stage of dormancy. such hypothesis, supported by ours and others' data, is that the cell-to-cell transmission converts latent intracellular bacteria from state of dormancy to a cultivable state. it explains the observations that dormant intracellular p. gingivalis could not be recovered in vitro by plating, but only after transmission to fresh host cells. in addition, further support of this hypothesis originates from the global genomic profile data of intracellular p. gingivalis  <cit> . using microarray genomics, that study demonstrated that the majority of differentially regulated p. gingivalis genes  were down-regulated upon invasion. even more interesting, a substantial number of the down-regulated genes  were involved in protein synthesis, transcription, and energy metabolism. such specificity in the down regulation indicates a reduced growth rate of intracellular bacteria, or a latent state.

our hypothesis that the cell-to-cell transmission converts latent intracellular bacteria from state of dormancy to a cultivable state was first made possible based on our previous data on identification of viable p. gingivalis in atherosclerotic tissue only after transfer to new host via co incubation with fresh cell culture  <cit> . subsequently, cell-cell transfer of p. gingivalis has been demonstrated within oral epithelial cells as well  <cit> . further confirming our observations of leaving the primary infected cell, extracelullar p. gingivalis has been detected in invaded kb culture supernatants  <cit> . in the present study, this hypothesis is further supported by our experimental data demonstrating that p. gingivalis can spread intercellularly between the same as well as between different cell types, as a consequence substantially increasing the cfu count number when recovered in vitro. this cell-cell transmission took place even when the new cells were separated from the already invaded cells via transwell set-up, although the numbers were 6– <dig> times lower, apparently due to the separation . finally, we demonstrated that cell contact between infected cells and new host cells increases the rate of transmission.

the mechanism of this transmission remains to be determined, but bacterial replication in the medium is unlikely for this strict anaerobe, especially providing its average replication time  and the rapid internalization by host cells . in addition, we tested whether p. gingivalis can survive and replicate in media for up to  <dig> hours and the results were negative . to differentiate between these two scenarios, intracellular trafficking, viability of intercellular p. gingivalis and its gene expression profile at  <dig> hours post-invasion in different cell types must be extensively studied in parallel.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, here we present data demonstrating that in our experimental set-up p. gingivalis strain w83:  displays an invasive ability that differs by up to an order of magnitude in the tested cell lines and the difference could be minimized by spin inoculation,  could be detected intracellularly in large numbers at  <dig> hr post invasion by immunofluorescent microscopy, but most of the bacteria could not be recovered on bap;  can spread intercellularly between the same as well as between different cell types;  the invasion of fresh host cells ends the dormant, uncultivable state allowing for p. gingivalis isolation in vitro, and  cell-cell contact between infected cells and new host cells increases the rate of transmission.

therefore, our working model, supported by our observations is as follows. upon invasion, p. gingivalis is able to reside/replicate inside the host cells for a limited time. a high number of p. gingivalis or the depletion of nutrients may then initiate the killing  of p. gingivalis leading to control of bacterial population numbers, for example by trafficking it to the lysosomal compartments. in addition, facing hostile environment, some p. gingivalis would exit into intracellular space and invade new host cell, thus escaping from the dormant stage, further penetrating the vascular tissue transcellularly and becoming both invasive and cultivable in vitro.

using such mechanism, p. gingivalis would control its population in vascular tissues yet allow for a persistent infection, similarly to infection and spreading among primary gingival epithelial cells  <cit> . with the epithelial host, there was a very low level of cell-to-cell transmission during the early stage of invasion , but the rate of transmission increased substantially at later stages of infection . the increased transmission rate at the late stage of infection is in agreement with our hypothesis of cell-cell transmission-mediated bacterial survival and persistence. our observations support a model of atherosclerosis where the inflammation is initiated and/or exacerbated by invasive inflammatory agents that may endure intracellularly in a dormant stage, whose numbers are controlled but that can also escape the host, become invasive and infect new host cells thus persisting in the vascular tissue. this model is currently under further investigation. studies of the molecular machinery of p. gingivalis cell-cell transmission will further elucidate the mechanisms by which p. gingivalis is able to establish persistent infection of vascular walls and ultimately contribute to vascular inflammations.

