BACKGROUND
eukaryotic gene expression is controlled by a series of biological events involving various interactions among proteins, dna and rna that are subject to complex regulation. one of the essential processes is pre-mrna splicing, in which the spliceosome complex recognizes splice sites  in the precursors of mrna following transcription, removes noncoding introns and joins neighboring exons to form mature messenger rna that can be further translated into protein sequence. both 5' splice sites  and 3' splice sites  consist of short basal signals well conserved from yeast to human, but contain insufficient information to accurately identify exon-intron boundaries in vertebrates  <cit> . consequently, there are numerous cryptic splices embedded throughout the pre-mrna transcript. variations in the splice site detection process can create multiple transcript variants for a gene and is referred to as alternative splicing. alternative splicing events may include the skipping or retention of entire exons, intron retention or alternative usage of 3' or 5' splice sites. these changes often lead to modifications in the encoded proteins and have been shown to play a critical role in development and disease  <cit> . alternative splicing also provides an efficient means to expand protein diversity from the limited gene pool. it is estimated that 50–80% of the approximately  <dig>  human protein-coding genes are subject to alternative splicing  <cit>  underscoring the importance of splicing regulation.

the correct recognition of splice sites is facilitated by various protein-protein and protein-rna interactions. in addition to exon-bridging or intron-bridging interactions of splice sites, there are many non-splice-site sequences in exons and adjacent introns, termed enhancers or silencers, that stimulate or repress the splicing of constitutive or alternative exons. both enhancers and silencers have been identified through in vitro and in vivo methods  <cit> . large-scale identification of these sequence elements are based on computational methods which analyze multiple sequences simultaneously. some authors have focused on constitutively spliced exons  <cit> , while others have focused on identifying the sequence signals that discriminate between constitutively and alternatively spliced exons  <cit> . more recent methods now take advantage of the availability of genomes from related species to make predictions based on evolutionarily conserved sequences  <cit> . although motif search methods such as  <cit>  identify sequences that are similar to previously determined enhancers and silencers, most computational approaches require as input a large collection of alternatively spliced exons.

the most widely used method to identify alternative splice variants is based on aligning est and mrna sequences to the genome  <cit> . application of this method has provided estimates for the percentage of human genes with multiple splice variants between 40% and 60%  <cit> . however, est-based methods are often biased towards the transcript ends, prone to sequencing errors, biased towards more highly expressed genes, limited by the availability of clone libraries for particular cell and tissue types and not uniformly annotated. the recent adaptations of microarray technology in the form of splice arrays are now providing new directions for detecting alternative splicing. dna microarrays were originally developed to measure expression levels for a large number of genes simultaneously. arrays for detecting alternative splicing  contain probes specifically designed to investigate splice events. they have been used to explore splicing in yeast. <cit>  and in mammalian cells . several different designs reviewed in  <cit>  have been developed including tilling arrays, arrays with specific probes that distinguish between known splice forms  <cit> , arrays based on exon probes  <cit> , exon-junction probes  <cit>  or both  <cit> . most of the data analysis methods for splice arrays and levels of alternative splice inference depend on the array design , and the design of these arrays typically rely heavily on known or predicted annotation of gene structures. in summary, splice arrays have been shown to complement the est-based approaches by identifying a large number of novel alternative splices with no previous est support, despite a moderate validation rate of ~50% by rt-pcr  <cit> .

in this paper, we propose a new statistical approach for identifying alternatively spliced exons from exon-junction arrays, and predict a large set of alternatively skipped exons. this is achieved using the most comprehensive exon-junction array analysis to date  <cit> , which monitored all exon junctions of over  <dig>  refseq genes in  <dig> tissues samples. our approach consists of a novel exon-skipping score that serves as a quantitative measure of evidence for alternatively skipped exons. by applying kmer-contrast and regression-based sequence analysis methods to the top ~ <dig> exons according to our score, we are able to recover several known splicing enhancers and identify additional novel candidate splicing regulatory motifs associated with skipped exons. finally, we also identify a set of development-related alternative splices and their associated enhancers using a tissue-pair analysis followed by de novo motif finding algorithms. enrichment analysis of gene ontology annotation supports the functional roles of the predicted development-related alternative splices and suggests a new scheme for identification of process-specific alternative splicing.

RESULTS
analysis of exon-junction array
the pre-processed array data described in  <cit>  were obtained from the ncbi gene expression omnibus  database with accession number gse <dig>  the dataset contains the average background subtracted intensity yi, j, k from two dye-swapped arrays for each exon-junction probe j of gene k in tissue i, where i is one of the  <dig> tissues surveyed and j =  <dig>  ..., nk for gene k, which has nk probes bridging nk+ <dig> exons. note that intensity patterns of exon-junction  probes alone cannot distinguish between intron retention or alternative 5' or 3' splice site usage, and hence we only focus on the effective detection of exon skipping in the  <dig> genes containing  <dig> exons or more . for each gene, we fit a linear model with terms for probe and tissue effects. because of the large number of effects that need to be estimated, we must restrict the analysis to genes where there are enough data points. we found that a minimum of  <dig> exons was an adequate cutoff that avoids over-fitting in our statistical analysis but does not filter too many genes. for each gene,  <dig> exons corresponds to  <dig> exon-junctions  and consequently  <dig> adjacent exon-junction pairs.

if we treat exon inclusion as a simplified binary "on" or "off" event in each tissue, then conceptually, there are three main signal sources, other than noise, for the observed ej probe intensity yi, j, k:  probe-specific effect describing sequence binding affinity,  tissue-specific effect resulting from differential expression, and  alternative splice  effect determined by exon inclusion or alternative splice site selection. a simple approach to recover the variance components of individual signal contribution is to use linear models on the properly transformed data , essentially assuming that the transformed intensity is the sum of the probe, tissue, as effect and white noise. a skipped exon will result in the two spanning ej probes to be switched "off". this supports an exon-skipping score that measures the magnitude and concordance of as effects in adjacent ej probes spanning the same exon. identifying exons that are alternatively skipped in some of the tissues surveyed is then equivalent to the detection of scores that deviate across tissues. in summary, our data analysis method can be described as a three-step procedure:

 <dig>  estimate the variance stabilizing transformation  <cit>  for the ej probe intensities to satisfy the constant variance assumption for linear models.

 <dig>  fit a linear model on the transformed data to estimate probe and tissue effects. the residuals of the fit ri, j, k represent as effects adjusted for probe- and tissue-specific effects.

 <dig>  summarize exon-skipping events at the exon and gene level by defining an exon-skipping score based on the residuals ri, j, k and test for large deviations of this score across tissues.

note that  <cit> , among others , also used a linear model on log-transformed  intensities but estimated linear model parameters by medians , followed by ad hoc thresholding of the residuals ri,j,k to define as scores . we considered several alternatives to this approach. first, the original method of  <cit>  only examined individual exon-junctions by thresholding the residuals into four categories from  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig>  the largest residuals, those given a score of  <dig>  were predicted as splicing events. for each junction, the authors then tallied the number of tissues where the residuals had a score of  <dig>  there appeared to be no systematic evaluation of neighboring pairs of exon-junctions in this scoring procedure. therefore, as an alternative, we calculated the novel statistic of residual products so that both flanking exon-junctions for an exon contribute to its score. second, our preliminary analysis  indicated that the logarithm function used by  <cit>  to stabilize the variance may be insufficient. therefore, we also tried alternative transformations. third, we used statistical significance cutoffs to threshold the residuals .

in particular, at each stage of the three-step procedure, we considered several alternative methods for the same objective: applying the logarithm or arcsinh-based variance stabilizing transformation  function for stabilizing variances in step 1; using the standard least square fit  or robust fit  for linear model parameter estimation in step 2; and measuring deviations from normality of residuals in step  <dig> using the non-parametric kolmogorov-smirnov  test, a weighed non-parametric kolmogorov-smirnov test , parametric wilk-shapiro test   <cit>  or simple thresholding of the coefficient of variation  on the residuals or residual products . we viewed the selection of these options as an optimization problem, and determined the best procedure in terms of prediction accuracy using control data. we used two sets of alternatively and constitutively spliced exons curated from independent sources as controls . the positive control  consists of  <dig> genes supported by est data. the negative control  consists of  <dig> genes selected from the analysis of an affymetrix exon array experiment that show constitutive splicing across a panel of  <dig> tissues. these two examples represent "approximate" controls because they rely on available ests or other data on selected tissues. however, we expect that they will be dominated by the desired events.

using the control data sets and receiver operating characteristic  curve analysis, we found that the vsn transformation performs better than log-transformation as expected , and that the fitting procedures in step  <dig> were indistinguishable in terms of prediction errors . figure  <dig> shows the improvement of our procedure  over our best reproduction of the method described in  <cit>  using exon-level summaries . note that the as calls in the previous work  <cit>  were calculated from consistent as scores from individual arrays which were not publicly available . therefore, we could not reproduce previous results in  <cit>  but believe that the cv score is similar in spirit to that approach. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of the wks-statistic at the gene level for the two control sets. overlaps in the distribution between the positives and negative may be due to the caveats regarding the control sets discussed above. nevertheless, the values of the wks-statistic are generally higher for the positive controls versus the negative controls.

to further validate these results, we examined the wks scores on another set of positive controls; the positive rt-pcr results in  <cit>  and the  <dig> refseq entries on the array with "cassetteexon" events from the ucsc "knownalt" table hg <dig> annotation  <cit> . although the rt-pcr set also contain genes with alternative splice site selections and intron insertions, the two new combined positive controls had wks-statistics significantly greater than the negative control . several of the highest scoring examples using the wks method, such as uba <dig> , mapkap <dig>  and ppm1b  were identified as "cassetteexon" gene entries from ucsc but were low scoring using the cv method, which only uses data from a single exon-junction. this illustrates that the combined product score based on neighboring exon-junctions can predict known examples which are missed by single junction methods. in summary, given the original linear model in  <cit> , we derived a new exon-skipping score that 1) is based on an alternative transformation which improves the correction for non-constant variance and 2) draws on information from both splice junctions of an exon using the product residuals.

using a score cutoff that balances the rate of true positive and false positives in our original two controls, we identified a set of alternatively spliced genes and corresponding exons . we then determined the lowest ranking genes and exons according to our score to obtain an equivalently sized set of constitutive spliced exons. in total we predicted  <dig> alternatively skipped exons and  <dig> constitutive exons. an analysis of the gene ontology  terms  <cit>  for our predicted alternatively spliced genes  using gostat  <cit>  showed enrichment in  <dig> go terms. more than half of these go terms are related to metabolism, cell death, regulation, transcription, splicing and protein targeting and localization , which are categories consistent with prior studies  <cit> .

sequences associated with alternatively splicing
to identify sequence motifs associated with the regulation of alternatively skipped exons, we adapted the contrast-kmer-based rescue-ese algorithm for splicing  <cit>  and the regression-based reduce program for transcription factor binding sites  <cit> . the rescue-ese algorithm accounts for the fact that splicing enhancers compensate for weak splice site signals, and finds candidate exonic splicing enhancers  for constitutive splicing from statistically over-represented hexamers in exons versus introns and associated with exons defined by weak splice sites versus strong splice sites. reduce enumerates all possible kmers in the promoters up to a specified length and uses a linear regression model to find kmers that show significant correlation with gene expression levels from a single microarray experiment. to identify putative splicing regulatory elements associated with alternative splicing, we used different contrast sets for rescue-ese and employed our exon-level statistic for reduce on exons and their flanking intron sequences.

exonic splicing enhancers  for alternatively and constitutively spliced exons
a direct contrast of alternatively skipped exons  versus constitutively spliced exons  in addition to differences in exons versus flanking introns gave  <dig> motifs associated with the 5' splice site of ae  and  <dig> motifs for the 3' splice site of ae , among which  <dig> motifs are in common. several of the motifs overlap known ese motifs from deletion experiments, functional selex or sr protein binding sequences , such as the purine-rich aaga for srp <dig>  srp <dig>  srp30a and srp <dig>  acga and tgaag for 9g <dig>  sc <dig> and asf, and consensus gaag for tra2β  <cit>  and motif variants for asf/sf <dig>  three of the  <dig> nonredundant motifs  also match rescue-ese predicted and experimentally verified motifs for constitutive splicing from  <cit> , indicating that similar eses and splicing factors are involved in both alternative and constitutive splicing. for the kmers that define the predicted motifs, there are ~ <dig>  to  <dig>  times more kmer counts in alternative exons versus constitutive exons .

interestingly, when the hexamers were subjected to the additional contrast of splice site strength association  as in the rescue-ese analysis for constitutive splicing, the number of significant kmers reduced drastically. the only significant ae motif associated with weak splice sites is the well known motif gaaga from  <dig> and  <dig> non-redundant hexamers in the 5' and 3' analysis respectively . two other ae-associated ese motifs, an a-rich and a tgga motif, are linked to strong splice sites. these results suggest that the gaaga motif and its associated splicing factors  may be critical for regulating alternative exons in the presence of very weak splices. this result may be due to the observation that splice sites involved in alternatively spliced exons tend to be weaker overall  <cit>  and therefore, splice site strength dependency will only pick up the strongest enhancers. using position-specific scoring matrices to evaluate splice site strength, we did not observe a bias in weaker splice sites in the entire group of ae versus ce. however, correcting for overall gene effects, the splice site scores in the ae were relatively smaller than the scores in the ce .

we also focused the contrast analysis on constitutively spliced exons to select for eses relevant for constitutive splicing using ce versus ae and exons versus introns comparisons and found  <dig> motifs for the 5' analysis and  <dig> motifs for the 3' analysis. the majority of motifs detected are cg-rich with diverse consensus patterns, most likely reflecting the coding bias of ce . besides the cg-rich motifs,  <dig> of the  <dig> non-redundant motifs found also overlap known motifs or natural occurring enhancers, including ca-rich motifs  for splicing factor yb <dig>  tgccgtt for sc <dig> and functional selex motifs for schaal-ii-d   <cit> . the resulting motifs were similar when we also restricted the comparison to weak splice sites. finally, no motifs were found to be associated with strong splice sites in support of ce, consistent with the notion that splicing enhancers are required only when splice sites do not contain enough information in order to facilitate unambiguous exon recognition.

alternatively, we applied the reduce software to correlate sequence features with the exon-skipping score . table  <dig> shows the most significant kmers . kmers positively correlated with the exon-level skipping score are associated with alternatively spliced exons, while negatively correlated kmers are associated with constitutively spliced exons. note that this regression-based approach is a natural extension of contrast analysis of ae versus ce, and aims to evaluate the sequence association at the genome scale without the need to dichotomize scores. the reduce kmers were consistent with the above rescue-ese analysis; the top negatively correlated kmers for ce are primarily g/c rich with a cacc-containing motif , and the aagaa motif was found to be the top candidate for ae.

the kmer, the correlation between the kmer counts and exon-skipping score for each exon, and the p-value for the correlation are listed in columns  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> respectively.

we applied similar contrast analysis to identify intronic motifs associated with ae by selecting for kmers over-represented in introns flanking ae versus ce-associated introns and in introns versus exons. we found a/t rich motifs associated in introns flanking ae and pyrimidine tract-like motifs and g-triplets in introns flanking ce . randomization runs were performed on the exon data to assess the frequency of observing the predicted kmers in random data. the results indicate that we are observing more predicted kmers than expected by chance .

development-related alternative splices derived from tissue-pair analysis
to investigate whether trans-acting elements  are relevant for development, we analyzed a comprehensive gene expression data set from the gene expression atlas  <cit> , which contains results from similar tissues lines as the exon-junction array. the cel files of the gene expression atlas data were provided by the authors and the data were preprocessed using robust multi-array analysis  proposed by  <cit> . we extracted genes encoding the family of serine/arginine  proteins, which contain both rna-binding and protein domains and are known to facilitate the assembly of the spliceosome by binding to eses  <cit> . figure s <dig> in additional file  <dig> shows the processed log-intensity values in adult and fetal lung, brain, and liver tissues for sr proteins listed in  <cit> . in particular, srp <dig>  srp <dig> and asf/sf <dig>  clearly show reduced expression in the adult tissues compared to the fetal tissues in at least two of the three examined tissue types.

these results imply that some sr proteins may be involved in a general developmental response. to explore this hypothesis, we further investigated the exon-junction array, which has extensive results from different tissues , developmental stages  and disease cell lines . therefore, it is possible to identify as involved in specific biological process by examining splice patterns between tissue pairs. for instance, genes that show different splicing profiles in fetal versus adult brain tissues may be indicative of functional roles in the regulation of brain development through splicing control. by comparing fetal versus adult tissues for several different organs, we adapted our gene-level exon-skipping score to obtain alternatively spliced genes that are associated with development.

within one gene, for each tissue i we have the product score rij across exons j. we are interested in genes where there are large differences in rij for pairs of tissues . define d = rij - ri'j as the difference between two tissues, i and i', in exon j. extreme values  for d indicate differences in exon-skipping levels between the tissues for that exon. we calculated a gene-level tissue pair difference score as the ks-statistic of d across all exons relative to a simulated null model assuming normally distributed residuals rij to gauge the differences in exon-skipping patterns between two tissues. genes with bonferroni-adjusted p-value <  <dig>  were selected as candidate genes for development-related alternative exon-skipping in brain, liver, and lung tissues . many of our predicted genes are known to have multiple splice variants which are regulated during development, including neurofibromin  <dig>  in the brain for the ras signal transduction pathway  <cit> , l <dig> cell adhesion molecule  for nervous system development  <cit>  and ion transport pump gene atpase isoform  <dig>   <cit>  and fibroblast growth factor receptor  <dig>  for cell division in brain development  <cit> .

a keyword hit is defined as a gene that has at least  <dig> abstracts with the keyword. the numbers in parentheses indicate the percentage of genes with a keyword hit within that gene set. tissue keyword is the tissue name.

to systematically assess the functional validity of our predictions, we analyzed the functional annotation of the predicted genes in the literature. tissue-specific keywords were searched in the abstracts listed in the pubmed entries for each gene . for example, for our lung-developmental genes , we searched for the keyword "lung" in each abstract, and a p-value was derived for tissue-specific keyword enrichment compared to all genes on the exon-junction arrays using fisher's exact test . we also specifically searched for a splicing-related keyword to check that the tissue annotations are not only due to transcription related information. in summary, all our predicted tissue-specific gene sets showed statistically significant  enrichment for the respective tissue-specific keyword, splicing-related keyword and for a combination of tissue-, splicing- and development-related keywords. a separate analysis of the go terms in the  <dig> predicted brain-development associated genes with the "brain" keyword in pubmed showed functional enrichment in  <dig> go terms using gostat . the most common go terms  were those with functions related to signaling and ion transport , which are relevant for synaptic transmission and neurogenesis. in summary, the two annotation analyses collectively support the validity of our predicted genes.

to identify potential cis-regulatory elements involved in splicing regulation for development, we applied de novo motif finding algorithms meme  <cit>  and bioprospector  <cit> . to keep the number of exons manageable for these algorithms, only genes predicted to undergo development-related as for all three tissues and had a "splicing" or "development" keyword hit from the pubmed abstract search were considered. applying the motif algorithms to alternatively spliced exons within these genes , we repeatedly found a "gaagaa" motif , which is very similar to the ae motif retrieved by our previous analyses and suggests that this motif and its binding factors are also involved in the developmental regulation of splicing. furthermore, since we previously found that this motif was more strongly associated with weak splice sites rather than strong splice sites, these results also suggest that the mode of regulation for splicing during development may be due to the combination of a weak splice site and the presence of this enhancer. however, the appearance of the "gaagaa" motif in exons predicted to undergo development-related as may just be an artifact of this motif appearing in as exons in general. to investigate this scenario, we checked whether the "gaagaa" motif appeared in the development-related as exons more frequently than all as exons . we counted the occurrence of the motif in both sets of exons and found that indeed the occurrence of the motif was significantly higher than expected in the development-related as exons  based on the frequency of the motif in general as exons.

experimentally verified binding sites in their natural context and from selex experiments are listed in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig> for the three sr proteins that we identified based on the expression data as possibly involved in general developmental roles . most of these sequence elements contain the "gaa" sequence and are similar to the motifs discovered by our motif search in the development set of as exons . the known binding sites, expression data, annotation results, and motif analysis provide consistent evidence supporting the hypothesis that these proteins may be involved in the regulation of alternative splicing during development.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a novel approach for the analysis of exon-junction arrays that will specifically search for exon-skipping alternative splice events. our proposed score evaluates the product of expression levels across exon-junctions to more accurately reflect exon-skipping. our score also accounts for overall expression levels for a gene and uses an improved variance stabilizing correction. we have shown that the combination of these approaches improves the discrimination of positive and negative control sets determined from independent data sources. we could not, however, directly compare our method with existing methods in  <cit>  because that analysis was based on individual array replicates, which we could not access. nevertheless, utilizing another source of external validation, we demonstrate that the annotations for our alternatively spliced gene predictions were consistent with previous literature. there are several other exon-junction studies, but our method was not applicable because they were either disease specific or a detailed examination of a relatively smaller number of genes  <cit> .

following the array analysis, we examined our sequence predictions for dual purposes; to validate our analysis of the exon-junction array and to predict novel splicing enhancers and silencers. the results from the sequence analysis provide a further source of validation for the quality of our alternative and constitutive exon predictions. using randomization trials, we found that our predictions were enriched in sequences that were not contained in random sets of sequences. we also identified several sequence signals that are consistent with the experimental literature  and identified several motifs that are highly specific. for example, the known exonic sequence enhancer cacc was discovered in the constitutive exons but not in the alternative exons. another known enhancer, gaagaa, appears to be more specific to alternative exons than constitutive exons. furthermore, we found that the occurrence of gaagaa is biased towards exons with weak splice sites, while the other identified motifs associated with alternatively skipped exons do not have splice strength specificity. the sequence analysis also shows that, although originally developed for gene expression data  <cit> , correlation-based methods utilizing whole genome data like reduce are applicable to splice arrays and corroborate the kmer enrichment analysis without relying on pre-determined cutoffs.

by our definition, the alternative exons show patterns of exon skipping among different tissues. the presence of known exonic enhancers in these sequences supports the hypothesis that depending on tissue-specific expression, the corresponding binding factors are enhancing the splicing of these exons, which would otherwise be skipped. an alternative hypothesis, not supported by these results, but also discussed in the literature  <cit> , is that silencer sequences in the exon or flanking introns prevent proper splicing and are responsible for exon-skipping. these hypotheses are not mutually exclusive because both enhancer and silencer sequences may function cooperatively in splicing regulation. furthermore, some sequence elements have been shown to act as both enhancers and silencers  <cit> .

a useful feature of the rosetta array is that both fetal and adult samples were included for three different tissues. we used this to develop a method for predicting genes with pairwise tissue differences in exon-skipping and applied our procedure to explore both the cis and trans-regulation of splicing during development. our method for pairwise tissue analysis is not limited to the developmental comparison but can be extended to other tissues or cell lines . we made gene predictions for three tissue types  but only looked at the intersection to focus on general developmental alternative splicing, which was motivated by observed expression changes in specific sr proteins. our final predictions for development-related alternative splicing were consistent with functional annotation and literature searches. in our sequence analysis of the development-related predictions, we found that a form of the gaagaa motif may also have a role in alternative splicing during development. furthermore, the changes in gene expression between fetal and adult tissues for several sr proteins that bind to this motif provide further evidence for their roles in developmental regulation.

because of the array design, our work focuses on the detection of exon-skipping. however, these data can also be used to predict and analyze other types of alternative splice events. in particular, if alternative splice site selection or intron retention occurs, we would observe variation in a single exon-junction across tissues, but not necessarily in consecutive junctions, as observed with exon-skipping. therefore, a product summarization step would not be necessary, but we could adapt our procedure in other ways to predict alternative splice selection and intron retention. we will, however, not be able to discriminate between these other types of splice events because of the nature of the array design.

a recent direction taken by several groups is to use sequence conservation across multiple species to aid in the search for enhancers and silencers  <cit> . comparative approaches have also been used to examine the conservation of alternative splice events by comparing genomic or est data from multiple species  <cit> . as more splice array data become available from different organisms and tissues, there may also be opportunities to explore the conservation of splicing events from meta-analysis of splice arrays, without relying on ests from orthologous genes that are often limited across species.

