BACKGROUND
transcriptome sequencing is a convenient way to rapidly obtain information on the expressed fraction of genome. with the advent of next-generation sequencing transcriptomic data for many species became available. however many important taxonomic groups of living organisms remain underrepresented. this is especially pressing problem for plants since few of them have been a priority for large-scale sequencing projects. the present study aimed at filling the gap in the genomic data for the genus fagopyrum, a group of plants important for both practical and theoretical reasons.

fagopyrum  belongs to the eudicot family polygonaceae. the genus fagopyrum comprises about  <dig> species; one of the species, f. esculentum , is a crop and honey-producing plant widely cultivated in several countries, in particular, canada, china, japan, russia and ukraine. recently, an extensive search for the wild ancestor of the cultivated buckwheat identified the ancestral group, called f. esculentum subspecies ancestrale  <cit> . two more distant relatives of the cultivated buckwheat are f. homotropicum and f. tataricum  <cit> . both of them have an important favorable trait absent in the common buckwheat, the ability to self-pollination . thus they have a potential for use in breeding for the development of self-compatible cultivars.

despite its economic importance, molecular studies on buckwheat are few. they are mainly confined to the development of molecular markers based on anonymous dna sequences  and the characterization of several proteins  <cit> . also, the molecular systematics of the genus fagopyrum was extensively studied using nuclear and plastid sequences  <cit> , and a complete sequence of the chloroplast genome of the common buckwheat was reported recently  <cit> . these data, however, have only limited applicability for the buckwheat breeding and improvement. the identification of genes expressed during flower development can enable the search for candidate genes responsible for agriculturally important traits.

the utility of large-scale buckwheat gene sequencing data is not limited to their potential practical applications. they will also contribute to the plant comparative and evolutionary genomics. not only the buckwheat, but the entire family polygonaceae was out of scope of molecular genetic studies. the polygonaceae is a middle-sized family  characterized by several morphological features that are not typical for other eudicots. among them is an unusual floral structure with flowers having a uniseriate perianth not differentiated into sepals and petals. this feature, as well as the trimerous perianth found in several polygonaceae genera and considered as ancestral state for the family, is common for monocots and basal angiosperms but rarely found in eudicots.

the genetic control of the floral development has been well studied in several model plants, primarily arabidopsis thaliana and some gene interactions have been found to be conserved in a variety of species  <cit> . however, it is widely accepted that for understanding of the plant morphological evolution new model systems representing different lineages of the angiosperms should be selected  <cit> . given the morphological peculiarities of polygonaceae, fagopyrum, and specifically, f. esculentum, a fast growing annual weed with high seed production, is a plausible candidate for such a system.

many factors are important for species to be useful as a model system, a crucial one being the availability of genomic and transcriptomic data that enable efficient analysis of gene structure, expression and evolution. until recently, such data were available only for major model species such as a. thaliana and rice, and for several species of basal angiosperms  <cit> . we report characterization of genes expressed in the flower and inflorescence of two species of buckwheat, the common buckwheat f. esculentum and f. tataricum. this choice was based on the reasons outlined above. one is the economical importance of f. esculentum; and f. tataricum being a potential donor of agriculturally important traits such as self-compatibility and resistance to environmental stresses  <cit>  to the common buckwheat. the other stems from the evolutionary developmental genetics  considerations. these two species have contrasting floral morphology: f. esculentum has petaloid tepals and f. tataricum has sepaloid ones . further qualitative and quantitative analysis based on the transcriptome data may help to reveal the mechanisms that are responsible for the morphological difference between these species.

we expect that characterization of buckwheat transcriptomes will contribute not only to the genetics of this genus. the order caryophyllales is characterized by a striking diversity of the floral structure and the perianth evolution that can hardly be explained based only on the knowledge about classic model species  <cit> . few transcriptome datasets of the caryophylalles are available to date  <cit> . publicly available, annotated set of buckwheat genes expressed in the flower and inflorescence resulting from this study will facilitate comparative and evolutionary studies within the caryophylalles, important for the plant evo-devo field.

RESULTS
 <dig> sequencing and assembly
pyrosequencing of normalized cdna libraries resulted in  <dig> reads for f. esculentum and  <dig> for f. tataricum with the average length of  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides respectively. the raw data were deposited in the ncbi sequence read archive  under the accession number sra <dig> 

after assembly,  <dig> and  <dig> contigs were obtained for f. esculentum and f. tataricum, respectively, while  <dig> and  <dig> reads were retained as singletons . the average contig length and other characteristics of the assembly are given in table  <dig> . the sequencing coverage  was assessed as  <dig>  for f. esculentum and  <dig>  for f. tataricum .

since several full-length coding sequences of buckwheat genes were available in genbank, we used this information to assess the assembly quality by mapping the contigs onto these sequences. of  <dig> available sequences of f. esculentum,  <dig> were found in our assembly. in the latter, the average fraction of coding nucleotides covered by at least one read was  <dig> %; while for  <dig> genes the coding sequence was covered completely . this demonstrates that the assembled contigs can be a useful source of complete or near-complete coding sequences for f. esculentum.

annotation
contig sequences were compared to the non-redundant protein database and about two thirds of them had significant matches . in both f. esculentum and f. tataricum, the species that provided most of the top blast hits was vitis vinifera . the vitis nuclear genome has been recently sequenced  <cit> . the next closest species were another plant with completely sequenced nuclear genome, populus trichocarpa  <cit> , and ricinus communis, whose genome sequencing project is now in progress  <cit> . a similar taxonomic distribution of blast hits has been found in a transcriptome of an asterid, crataerostigma plantagineum  <cit> .

for the singletons, the fraction of sequences that had blast matches was lower than for the contigs , as expected given their smaller length  <cit> . the taxonomic distribution of species that provided most top hits was the same as for the contigs.

an automatic orf prediction revealed open reading frames with length more than  <dig> bp in about 98% contigs in both buckwheat species. this length, though being much less than the average length of protein-coding sequence in plants, is higher than expected to arise by chance  suggesting that most of the contigs correspond to protein-coding genes. this is consistent with the method used for cdna synthesis, as it is based on the presence of polya-tail on the 3'-end of most mrnas, the library is highly enriched in mrna sequences. interestingly, most contigs that had no blast matches, also contained predicted orfs with length exceeding the one expected for a random sequence of a similar gc-content .

to obtain a functional annotation of the buckwheat genes, we used gene ontology . for both species of buckwheat, about 60% contigs were annotated. this fraction is similar to or exceeds the annotated fraction in other recently published 454-derived transcriptomes, for example those of pine  <cit>  and ginseng  <cit> . the distribution of go categories is very similar in f. esculentum and f. tataricum, with no categories showing significant differences between the species .

the contigs that had no blastx hits but contained an orf with a length exceeding  <dig> nucleotides were searched against the pfam database . a similar number of translated contigs had significant match in the database for both species,  <dig> for f. esculentum and  <dig> for f. tataricum, with  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, having a match in pfama families. among the latter, about 50%  had hits to families containing at least one protein from plants.

since one of our aims was to identify genes that are responsible for the flower development, we specifically searched for buckwheat orthologs of genes and gene families that are known to be involved in the flower development in arabidopsis. candidate orthologs were identified as bidirectional best blast hits. such orthologs were found  for  <dig> out of  <dig> genes of arabidopsis. among them were all genes controlling the floral organ identity  and some other mads-box genes; genes controlling stem cell maintenance ; negative regulators of agamous ; genes of the yabby family; auxin response factors and some others .

since this type of search is not able to detect duplications, we performed a manual inspection of the results of blast search for several gene families. for the b-class mads-box gene, apetala <dig> , we were able to find two highly similar sequences. the similarity between them is lower than that expected for alleles, with multiple indels and non-synonymous substitutions. thus we assume that they represent paralogs arisen from a recent duplication. in another species from the same family, rumex acetosa, two genes with high similarity to ap <dig> were also found  <cit> . hence, this duplication likely occured in the common ancestor of the polygonaceae.

comparative analysis of the buckwheat transcriptomes
the contig assembly and annotation characteristics, as well as the raw data characteristics, are similar for f. esculentum and f. tataricum. moreover, the data indicate that there is a strong correlation between the number of reads constituting contigs for orthologous genes of f. esculentum and f. tataricum . if a contig of a certain gene is overlapping with a certain number of reads, there is a high probability that the contig of its ortholog from the other species is overlapping with a close number of reads.

we addressed the question whether these transcriptomes completely consist of orthologous genes or there are genes expressed in one species but with orthologs that are not represented  in the other species. such transcripts are plausible candidates for the determinants of morphological differences between the species.

to identify these putative differentially expressed genes we first performed a bidirectional blast search of the f. esculentum and f. tataricum contigs against each other. those contigs that had no match in the other species  were regarded as potential differentially expressed genes . starting bidirectional blast search from either species, a similar number of pdegs was found:  <dig> in f. esculentum and  <dig> in f. tataricum. the pdeg fraction of both transcriptomes is enriched in contigs that have no genbank hits  and go annotations were assigned to only  <dig> contigs in f. esculentum and  <dig> contigs in f. tataricum. the distribution of go categories in both pdeg sets is largely similar, with only few categories being unique for either species . these categories are represented by a small number of contigs. in most cases the number of contigs representing a category is higher in f. tataricum - presumably, because of higher total number of go-annotated contigs in this species. however, one category, "dna metabolic process", is represented by a considerably higher number of contigs in f. esculentum  than f. tataricum . in both species, the contigs from this category are almost exclusively represented by sequences with high similarity to retrotransposons. thus there is strong evidence that f. esculentum and f. tataricum differ in the number or expression of retrotransposons.

in addition to the direct comparison of the pdeg sets, we addressed the question whether they represent random subsets of the overall transcriptomic datasets. to test this, the enrichment analysis was performed, with the pdeg set taken as a test group and the overall set taken as a reference group . no enrichment by any specific category was found for f. tataricum; while several categories were found to be overrepresented in the f. esculentum pdeg set , in particular categories obviously related to retrotransposons  and to processes inherent to plants such as sugar metabolism, signaling and amino acid transport.

when we observe that a certain gene in either species is sampled by at least one read but its ortholog in the other species is not sampled this does not necessarily means the absence of expression of this gene in the other species. it might be not sampled due to technical issues related to the processing of rna and cdna before sequencing. taking this into account we performed a statistical assessment of the fraction of such cases . since there is a correlation between the number of reads constituting contigs of orthologous genes , the expected number of false positives differs for different levels of coverage. our analysis indicates that only about 25-30% of pdeg indeed represent genes whose orthologs are not expressed in the other species. for genes that are represented by a high number of reads in one species the probability is much higher .

shared single-copy genes in the  <dig> transcriptome assemblies and their phylogenetic analysis
large-scale transcriptome data are a potential source of information for multigene phylogenetic analysis . to adopt its use in plant phylogenetics, duarte et al.  <cit>  identified a set of single-copy genes shared between arabidopsis, populus, vitis and oryza. only few of them were well represented in est assemblies across the major lineages of angiosperms. though being quite small , this subset produced well-resolved tree topologies similar to those inferred in many recent phylogenetic studies. to provide further validation of this approach and to assess the utility of  <dig> sequencing data for phylogenomics we performed a search for the orthologs of these genes in five  <dig> transcriptome assemblies. two of them are those reported in this study - f. tataricum and f. esculentum, the third one is from another caryophyllales species - silene latifolia . taking into account that the analysis of plastid genes indicates on the affinity of caryophyllales and asterids  <cit>  two recently published transcriptomes of asterids: craterostigma plantagineum  <cit>  and artemisia annua  <cit>  were also included in the analyses. for all species almost all genes were present:  <dig> in artemisia annua,  <dig> in f. tataricum, craterostigma plantagineum and silene latifolia and  <dig> in f. esculentum. for most genes, only one sequence with high similarity to a certain gene was found thus suggesting that they are single-copy in the species sampled. the only exception is artemisia annua, where each of two genes - the orthologs of at4g <dig> and at5g <dig> - is represented by two sequences with high similarity to the arabidopsis gene but differing one from another by multiple nucleotide substitutions and indels. we assume that these sequences represent paralogs emerged from the recent duplication . such «shallow paralogs» do not necessarily adversely affect phylogenetic reconstruction  <cit>  so they were included in the analysis . the sequences were added to the dataset from  <cit> . the resulting 73-taxon nucleic acid sequences dataset contained  <dig> characters . the phylogeny was reconstructed using the maximum parsimony  and bayesian inference  methods based on both nucleotide and amino acid sequences. as an alternative to the combined approach a super distance matrix  analysis was also applied . the trees resulting from mp and bi were similar to those inferred by duarte and coworkers  <cit>  in topology and resolution . the maximum parsimony trees inferred from both nucleotide and amino acid sequence data were much less resolved, and much less consistent with the current knowledge on the angiosperm phylogeny. the bayesian trees were well resolved, with posterior probabilities higher than  <dig>  for all nodes in the amino acid tree and all but one in the nucleotide tree. in general, the bayesian tree is similar to those inferred from the analysis of several genes and from the multigene analysis of plastid datasets  <cit> , with amborella trichopoda and nuphar advena being basal among angiosperms, and monocots, eurosids and asterids resolved as monophyletic. nonetheless there are some points of incongruence, primarily the position of magnoliids and non-monophyly of eurosids i and ii.

an interesting result is the position of the caryophyllales. with the addition of fagopyrum and silene, the sister relationships of the caryophyllales gained high support  in the bayesian analysis. this is consistent with our previous data on the plastid genome phylogeny  <cit> , but in the nuclear gene analysis this topology is present as highly supported for the first time. in the dataset of duarte et al.  <cit> , where the only caryophyllid species, beta vulgaris was present, it was also grouped with asterids in the maximum likelihood tree but with very a low support .

the supertree resulting from sdm is in most points congruent with the bayesian trees and also supports sister relationships of the caryophyllales and asterids .

discussion
utility of  <dig> sequencing for gene discovery in non-model species
despite the economical importance of buckwheat and the great advances in dna sequencing technologies no genomic data were available to date for any of the species of fagopyrum, with the exception of the complete chloroplast genome sequence of f. esculentum ssp. ancestrale  <cit> . prior to this study, the total number of sequences in genbank was  <dig> for f. esculentum and  <dig>  for f. tataricum. sequencing and assembly of genes expressed in flower and inflorescence presented in this study results in  <dig> thousand contigs for each species. given that the average number of genes encoded in a plant nuclear genome is about  <dig> thousands , we assume that our dataset represents a substantial fraction of the buckwheat genes. among them are putative orthologs of genes that play key roles in the flower and inflorescence development, including those that are expressed at low level and are not widely represented in other transcriptome assemblies. these results are highly consistent with previous experimental and simulation-based studies  <cit>  and provide further support for the use of combination of cdna normalization and  <dig> sequencing for fast transcriptome characterization in non-model species. application of the floral transcriptome sequence data for gene expression studies in f. esculentum mutants with altered flower development  <cit>  will constitute the basis for the study of the genetic control of flower development in this species.

a fraction of contigs that did not produce any blast hits may also be an integral part of genomic data. the existence of such "non-blastable" sequences is reported in virtually all plant transcriptomes characterized to date, with their fraction varying from about  <dig> to 70%  <cit> , depending on the species, the depth of sequencing and the parameters of blast search. there are two major groups of effects that may be responsible for this. the first group comprises the technical issues such as low quality of raw data, contamination by genomic dna, inaccurate contig assembly and wrong choice of search parameters . the second group of effects, biological ones, is related to the characteristics of the data that are inherent to the species: the existence of non-coding cdna fraction , lineage-specific genes  and fast-evolving genes, those that have orthologs in the other species but with a high level of sequence divergence precluding efficient recognition of orthologs.

in our study we tried to minimize the influence of technical effects. dnase treatment of rna was performed before cdna synthesis to preclude genomic dna contamination; also low quality data were excluded from the assembly process. as for the assembly accuracy, in the absence of a reference genome the possibility of assembly errors can not be completely ruled out. however given the relatively large length of 454-generated reads even chimeric combination of reads corresponding to different genes in one contig is unlikely to hamper efficient blast search. indeed, assembly errors cause problems with similarity search only if short reads corresponding to small and weakly conserved fragments of different genes are combined into one contig.

thus we assume that most of non-blastable contigs in our data are due to biological reasons. some of them might indeed represent non-translated regions, but since the average length of predicted orf in such contigs is significantly higher than in artificial sequences produced by random shuffling, we suggest that most of them correspond to protein-coding sequences, either lineage specific or highly variable. currently there are no means to select one of these two options. addition of more genomic and/or transcriptomic data for the polygonaceae and other caryophyllales is expected to improve the annotation and gene prediction in buckwheat.

the favourable effect of using the data from closely related species for annotation was reported for the analysis of chestnut  transcriptomes  <cit> . several genes that could not be annotated using the information from the arabidopsis proteome  were successfully annotated when compared with populus  proteome. this emphasizes that despite the availability of large-scale sequence data for model plant species and the increased rate of data acquisition for non-model species denser taxon sampling will further improve plant gene annotation. given that the caryophylalles is a group of exceptional interest from the point of view of evolutionary developmental biology we expect that more transcriptomic data will be available for this group.

comparison of two buckwheat transcriptomes: finding potential differentially expressed genes
gene expression is often compared within one species at different developmental stages or in different conditions  <cit> , and several efficient tools have been developed to analyze the enrichment in specific sets of genes . the interspecific comparisons are rare and confined to the cases when it is possible to use sequence information from a phylogenetically close model species  <cit> . the possibility to use de novo sequencing data for the comparison of gene expression  in different species has, to our knowledge, never been addressed in plant genomics.

here we used an approach that is similar in its concept to the digital transcriptome subtraction  <cit> . the latter is based on the similarity search of sequences from one species against the other and selection of sequences that do not have significant matches. as expected, for most sequences from both datasets the sequences with high similarity were found in another species, either in contigs, or in singletons. however, about four thousands contigs in each species were found to be "species-specific". it is difficult to directly associate these contigs with the observed differences between f. esculentum and f. tataricum, the more so because about two thirds of them do not have significant blast hits in the nr database, and thus lack any functional annotation.

still, some patterns are likely caused by species-specific expression. firstly, the f. esculentum pdeg set shows a strong prevalence of contigs highly similar to retrotransposons. this suggests that either the f. esculentum genome has more retrotransposons than the genome of f. tataricum, or more of them are expressed. the former explanation seems to be more plausible, considering the fact that the genome size of f. esculentum is three-fold larger than that of f. tataricum  <cit> . while such differences in the genome size in plants are often caused by the polyploidy, it is not the case for the buckwheat since both species have the same chromosome number  <cit> .

secondly, the f. esculentum pdeg set is enriched in genes related to the disaccharide metabolism. mono- and disaccharides, primarily glucose, fructose and sucrose, are a major component of the f. esculentum nectar  <cit> . f. tataricum, being a self-pollinated species, does not produce nectar. so the disaccharide metabolism genes indeed might be differentially expressed due to the difference in the nectar production. however, any conclusion about the differential expression should be treated with caution and verified by more precise methods such as quantitative rt-pcr. the set of "unique" contigs identified in our study is a mixture of genes whose orthologs are actually not expressed in the other species and those genes that are expressed in both species but are absent in the sequence data from one of the species due to some random fluctuations on different stages of rna and cdna processing. indeed, our statistical analysis indicates that about 25-30% of pdeg are really differentially expressed. one of the possible issues responsible for this is the normalization because in normalized libraries more transcripts are represented and thus the probability of being sequenced is lower for each transcript than in case of non-normalized library.

the probability that a gene is expressed, given the observations of no reads from the other genome, is proportional to its coverage. it is very low for low-covered genes but among genes represented by a contig covered by more than  <dig> at least 95% of genes are expected to be differentially expressed . thus, further investigation of the genetic basis of specific differences between f. esculentum and f. tataricum may be conducted in two ways. the first one is the survey of the expression of pdegs from the categories that are enriched in either species and that are likely to have species-specific expression for biological reasons . the second one is the analysis of those genes that have a high number of reads in one transcriptome but are absent in thе other. a combination of these approaches may provide insights in the genetic and evolutionary mechanisms underlying morphological and physiological differentiation in the genus fagopyrum. further insights, including quantitative analysis of gene expression levels are also expected to result from the sequencing of non-normalized cdna. this approach demonstrated its utility on several plant species  <cit> .

phylogenetic utility of transcriptome sequence data
besides its potential utility for functional genetic studies, the data from large-scale transcriptome sequencing is an important source of information for phylogenetic analysis. phylogenetic studies based on transcriptome sequences yielded well-resolved and highly supported tree topologies for many groups of animals  <cit> . in plants, however, the phylogenomic approach has been mostly limited to plastid genome sequences  <cit> . there are two reasons for that. the first one is the relative scarcity of plant genome-scale data. secondly, the starting point of any phylogenetic analysis, identification of orthologous genes, is a major problem for plants due to abundant genome-wide and small scale duplications.

recently a set of single-copy genes was proposed for phylogenetic analysis on different taxonomic level. though a number of articles reporting de novo plant transcriptome sequence data were published  <cit>  none of them reported the use of these data for phylogenetic analysis. here we attempted to validate the use of these genes for inferring angiosperm phylogeny by including in the analysis the data from four  <dig> transcriptome assemblies, with focus on caryophyllales and asterids. orthologs of most of these genes were found in all these transcriptomes. the tree inferred from the bayesian analysis of these genes is similar to the ml tree from duarte et al.  <cit>  but has a higher resolution and node support. we suggest the increased resolution and node support reflects favourable effect of improved taxon sampling.

a major problem observed in our phylogenetic trees is the incongruence between different methods. the bayesian inference and supertree  approach yield congruent topologies but these topologies are not congruent with those inferred from the maximum parsimony analysis. also, mp analysis results in a tree with very low bootstrap support values. this may indicate that the mp is not applicable for transcriptomic data, where high variation is combined with lot of missing data. it is known that several types of data may require additional adjustments of procedures used for phylogenetic analysis . for example, for non-coding sequences of plastid genomes special rules of alignment were developed and this increased resolution and reliability of phylogenetic trees inferred from these sequences  <cit> . the evolutionary peculiarities of plastid sequences are well studied  <cit> . on the contrary, little is known about the nuclear genes used for the phylogenetic analysis in this study. it is probable that the angiosperm-wide survey of the patterns of evolution of these genes will identify the source of incongruence between different methods of the analysis and, as the result, improve their utility for plant phylogenetics.

however, even under limited taxon sampling these genes provide valuable information on phylogenetic relationships within the angiosperms. the novel result inferred from these data is the strong support of sister relationships of caryophyllales  and asterids. earlier we have shown that these relationships are strongly supported by the chloroplast genome sequence data  <cit> . it is well known however that the results of phylogenetic analysis of chloroplast gene datasets may be misleading and thus require verification by independent data  <cit> ; the present study reports such verification for the phylogenetic position of caryophyllales.

the results presented here emphasize that even shallow-coverage transcriptome sequence data are an important source of information for phylogenetic applications. the addition of such data from various lineages of flowering plants is expected to improve greatly the resolution, support and reliability of phylogenetic trees and to provide novel insights into the evolution of angiosperms.

CONCLUSIONS
 <dig> pyrosequencing of normalized cdna libraries produced a large set of cdna sequences for two congeneric plant species, fagopyrum esculentum and f. tataricum. these sequences are an important resource for the evolutionary and developmental genetics in these species and in the order caryophyllales. analysis of single copy genes derived from transcriptome sequence data have great potential for inferring angiosperm phylogeny, especially with increased taxonomic sampling.

