BACKGROUND
in the czech republic, the genus fallopia adans. , also reported as a separate genus reynoutria  ronse decr. consists of two species - f. japonica  ronse decr.  and f. sachalinensis  ronse decr. , and their hybrid, f. xbohemica  j. p. bailey. the hybrid appeared when the two parental species, introduced into europe from asia in the 19th century  <cit>  as garden ornamentals, came into contact  <cit> . these perennial herbs are highly invasive, exotic species and recognized as a major environmental management problem in europe  <cit>  including czech republic  <cit> . however they also produce nectar and a plethora of organic substances that may be harvested for medicinal use  <cit> . their use has not been only as melliferous or medical, but also as energetic plants  with high growth rate and biomass production  <cit> . the knotweeds are utilized as a cultivated crop under rigid regulations in the czech republic  <cit> . knotweeds are also used for soil amelioration, sewage treatment  and riverbank and sand hill reinforcement  <cit> . however, these qualities also contribute to its competitive advantage over other plants and result in monospecific stands, which are undesirable in nature reserves. there have been attempts to eradicate it by use of a glyphosate herbicide, combined with physical removal of the plants including sheep grazing, which was most efficient http://www.pod.cz/projekty/moravka-kridlatka/zaklnformace/metodikarev <dig> pdf herbicide treatment is, however, questionable as glyphosates contain phosphorus and may act as fertilizers enhancing knotweed growth especially on phosphorus-deficient soils.

knotweed species differ in their clonal architecture, morphological and ecological properties. f. xbohemica has a high regeneration potential and a number of clones of the hybrid can be considered as the most successful representatives of the genus in terms of growth rate, regeneration and the establishment of new shoots. the species f. sachalinensis has the lowest regeneration ability  <cit> . fallopia spp. also differ in their relative abundance in the czech landscape  <cit> , the hybrid is most widespread.

knotweeds grow as pioneer species on volcanic soils  <cit>  and coal ashes produced by power plants. therefore, because of the very low n content in these substrates, they may be suitable for testing the effect of nitrogen content on the production of stilbenes  and emodin used in the pharmaceutical and food industries. there is evidence that secondary metabolites are produced in greater amounts in plants growing in low-nitrogen soils, because phenylalanine formed by photosynthesis is converted into phenolics under low n conditions  <cit> . however, under high n conditions phenylalanine is assimilated into proteins  <cit> . for these reasons, we selected ash as a model substrate in this experiment.

the pharmaceutical uses for knotweed have focused on stilbenes  and emodin. resveratrol-glucosides  can be split into glucose and resveratrol, which increases the resveratrol levels. therefore, we monitored the full range of resveratrol-containing substances, besides emodin.

emodin is a biologically active, naturally occurring anthraquinone derivative  that is produced by lichens, fungi and higher plants that possess purgative, anti-inflammatory and anticancer effects  <cit> . in addition, emodin has been shown to induce apoptosis  <cit> . resveratrol  is a naturally occurring polyphenol that is present in various fruits and vegetables in significant levels. it has been shown to have antibacterial  <cit> , antifungal  <cit> , antioxidant, antimutagenic, anti-inflammatory, chemopreventive  <cit>  and anticancer effects  <cit>  including the inhibition of breast cancer  <cit> . it also inhibits α-glucosidase which is promising for the control of diabetes  <cit> . knotweed is traditionally used for the production of resveratrol in asia, particularly in china. in europe, wine is the main source of this substance. a variety of stilbenes have been found in wine, including astringin, cis- and trans-piceid and cis- and trans-resveratrol.

fungi  have been reported to increase the resveratrol content in wine grapes or in the leaves as a possible plant response to stress  <cit> . resveratrol has antifungal activity and can restrict growth of trichosporon beigelii, candida albicans  <cit> , penicillium expansum, aspergillus niger  <cit>  and a. carbonarius  <cit> . specifically it was found that  <dig> μg.ml- <dig> of resveratrol reduced mycelial growth and the germination of b. cinerea conidia by 50%  <cit> .

some plants are known to possess advantageous features, such as mycorrhizal symbiosis, that enable them to overcome the challenges in their environment in harsh conditions. however, some plants react to the same mycorrhizal fungi adversely - namely plants that do not host mycorrhizal fungi, including all of the members of the family polygonaceae, such as fallopia  <cit> . although knotweed is supposed to be a non-mycorrhizal plant, an arbuscular type of mycorrhiza was found in the roots of knotweeds growing in the volcanic soils of mt. fuji, japan  <cit> . in addition, we found mycorrhizal colonisation in the roots of knotweeds sampled from a flooded alder forest in moravia . therefore, mycorrhizal fungi may associate with knotweeds and potentionally alter their growth characteristics, their genotype and accumulation of plant secondary compounds  <cit> . synthesis of resveratrol and its derivatives, especially piceid, is regulated by stilbene synthase  gene which typically occurs in grapevines  <cit> , wherefrom it was also transduced into different crop plants with the aim to increase their resistance against pathogens. sts gene is a typical stress-inducible/responsive gene. fungi, not only pathogens but also mycorrhizal ones, belong to the stressors capable of induction of such responses in plant cells like chromatin decondensation enabling, besides others, gene expression  <cit> . it is thus to be expected that mycorrhizal colonization of knotweed roots may also induce sts gene expression in this plant, resulting in synthesis of resveratrol and its derivatives, namely piceid  <cit> . we thus chose to inoculate knotweeds with mycorrhizal fungi  as a factor expected to increase the yield of these economically valuable compounds.

it has been reported that simulating herbivore  grazing can increase the production of phenolic compounds in these plants  <cit> . therefore, we exposed the knotweed plants to leaf damage to investigate if they would respond by increasing the production of stilbenes and emodin. in addition to studying the potential of traditional source of resveratrol in fallopia japonica, we also wanted to study the "inland" sources of resveratrol and other stilbenes in f. xbohemica, along with the other parental species, f. sachalinensis. the resveratrol and piceid contents in these plants, in terms of dry mass, have not been discussed in the current literature. this study constitutes a novel contribution to the production of stilbenes and emodin in knotweeds. we use the term stilbenes for the sum of resveratrol and resveratrol contained in all its derivatives measured .

it can be expected that related taxa may respond differently to the same conditions. the present study compared the responses of two clones of the hybrid, along with its parental species. the following questions were addressed:

 how do the different species and clones of knotweed respond to soil nitrogen contents, in terms of stilbene and emodin production?  what is the effect of mycorrhizal inoculation/colonisation?  what is the effect of leaf damage to the individual species/clones on the production of stilbenes and emodin?

RESULTS
the biomass and chemical characteristics measured and tested by anova are shown in table  <dig>  f-values and degrees of freedom may be found in table s <dig> in additional file  <dig>  only the three clones  that contained stilbenes and emodin in higher concentrations were analysed for organic substances.

results of four-way anova with the following factors: clone = knotweed clone; inoc = mycorrhizal inoculation; n = nitrogen level; lf dmg = leaf damage. shown for data from  <dig> 

x = non-tested, ns = non-significant

differences between clones at two nitrogen levels
biomass
the aboveground biomasses  of the clones differed and the pattern of the values was constant under lower and higher soil n levels in  <dig>  the lowest aboveground biomass was produced by fj, followed by fbp. fbm and fs produced the highest biomass. similar differences between the clones were measured in  <dig> as well. fj and fs produced the lowest belowground biomass, whereas fbm produced the highest biomass at both soil n levels . as expected, the higher soil nitrogen supply increased the biomass of all of the clones.

mycorrhizal colonisation
no colonisation by mycorrhizal fungi was found in the roots of the non-inoculated plants. in the inoculated plants, vesicles and internal hyphae were present in the roots; however, arbuscules were not. figure  <dig> shows that the inoculated plants developed very low intensity of mycorrhizal colonisation . fs had the lowest m value , whereas fj had the highest m value and was the best host for the mycorrhizal fungi. the m values for the two hybrid clones fell in between the parents. the effect of nitrogen on mycorrhizal colonisation was not significant. the trend of the frequency of mycorrhizal colonisation  was similar to that of the m values and is not shown here.

nitrogen content in plant biomass
when the data for all the clones were combined, the higher soil n level was reflected in the higher n content of the belowground biomass . however, the individual clones did not show a statistically significant increase between the lower and higher n levels .

there were differences in the n content of the belowground biomass at the two levels of soil nitrogen content studied between the particular clones. the two parental species had higher n contents than the hybrid clones. fbp had an extremely low nitrogen content of around  <dig> % n.

stilbene content
fj had a higher stilbene content compared to the two f. xbohemica clones measured . stilbene content was not affected by the soil n levels. however, the increase in the belowground biomass at the higher soil n level also brought about an increase in stilbene production . fbm had the highest stilbene production . the biomass increase as a result of n fertilisation did not restrict the production of stilbenes at the n levels used in our experiment.

emodin content
effect of mycorrhizal inoculation
mycorrhizal inoculation significantly lowered the n content in the belowground biomass of all knotweed clones with the exception of fbp. this effect was observed to various degrees within the different clones , most likely as a result of the competition the microbial community brought into the system with the inoculum. figure  <dig> gives about a summary of the effect of mycorrhizal inoculation on the n content with different combinations of clones and soil nitrogen level. mycorrhizal inoculation had no effect on the production and the concentration of resveratrol, stilbenes and emodin.

effect of leaf damage
the leaf damage negatively affected leaf water content, mycorrhizal colonisation and belowground biomass . however, leaf damage had no effect on aboveground biomass, leaf area and sla. the effect of leaf damage on the n content was more complicated . leaf damage increased the n content in fbp at both soil n levels and in fbm at the higher soil n level and decreased the n content in fj at the lower soil n level . leaf damage had no effect on the n content in the belowground biomass of the knotweed in the inoculated variants.

even though the effect of leaf damage on resveratrol and emodin content was not significant at p =  <dig>  , leaf damage significantly increased the resveratrol  and emodin  content in belowground biomass of the non-inoculated knotweed plants. leaf damage had no effect on stilbene content but enhanced piceid content in the inoculated f. japonica . the leaf damage significantly lowered the intensity of mycorrhizal colonisation . m value decreased from  <dig> % to  <dig> % in fj in response to leaf damage.

for more results see additional file  <dig> 

discussion
even though resveratrol is produced commercially from the japanese knotweed in asia, there is little knowledge concerning resveratrol and piceid contents of knotweed clones within the scientific literature. the lack of information may be due to the various efficiencies of the variety of extraction agents used or due to the measurement of the extract rather than the whole plant. we measured the stilbene yields of these plants under specific conditions designed to increase stilbene production by the knotweed. in addition, we determined the most efficient clone for the production of resveratrol and piceid.

seasonal variability in the resveratrol and piceid contents
although it may be more economical to process the aboveground biomass rather than the rhizomes and roots, belowground biomass has a much higher content of stilbenes and emodin. additionally, we found  that stilbene content in rhizomes peaked at the end of the growing season. supposed that there is transport of these substances to the shoots in the spring, a seasonal variation may be then expected. a pronounced seasonal variation in resveratrol and piceid contents occurred in the aboveground biomass of the f. japonica at the beginning of its growth cycle . knotweed is known for its fast growth rate in the spring and can produce up to  <dig> mm a day. thus the transport of substances from the rhizomes to the shoots results in a dillution in the total biomass pool. both resveratrol and piceid possess antifungal activities and are present in high concentrations in the rhizomes ; when transported into shoots, they help to protect the fresh tissues from pathogens. in the foliage, the concentration of resveratrol gradually increased up to  <dig> %. the concentration of piceid in the aboveground biomass showed high initial values that were followed by a significnat decrease before the full development of the shoots, and a subsequent increase up to  <dig> %. it is reasonable to assume that the transition between resveratrol  and piceid  depends on the amount of available glucose produced during photosynthesis.

interaction of leaf damage, mycorrhizal colonisation and piceid in f. japonica
hartley and firn  <cit>  found increased levels of phenolics in damaged birch leaves. similarly, increased concentrations of some phenolics including resveratrol in wounded spruce trees have been detected  <cit> . in our experiment, leaf damage elicited a positive effect on the piceid content in f. japonica, which is in line with these studies. f. japonica was most substantially affected by leaf damage out of the clones, most likely because it had the highest content of resveratrol derivatives, the majority of which was piceid . piceid may be viewed as a source from which resveratrol may be generated and has been shown to exert fungistatic effects; resveratrol itself was present in knotweed at very low amounts.

the most interesting findings pertain to the relationship between piceid, leaf damage and the intensity of mycorrhizal colonisation. in inoculated f. japonica, leaf damage increased piceid content, decreased the intensity of mycorrhizal colonisation and weakened the relationship between piceid and the intensity of mycorrhizal colonisation, which was significant and positive in plants not exposed to leaf damage. in plants exposed to leaf damage, no correlation was found between the intensity of mycorrhizal colonisation and piceid content in the belowground biomass of f. japonica because leaf damage increased its piceid content. however, there was a significant correlation in the undamaged plants. figure  <dig> summarises these results, which suggest that in the japanese knotweed, leaf damage stimulates piceid production to a greater extent than colonisation by mycorrhizal fungi. leaf damage may even control the intensity of knotweed mycorrhizal colonisation, presumably because of the increased production of piceid.

despite the fact that the mycorrhizal colonisation of the knotweed roots was low , a significant effect of mycorrhizae on the piceid levels in plants not exposed to leaf damage was still observed. recent research on mycorrhiza has devoted more attention to the effects of low levels of colonisation by mycorrhizal fungi on their plant hosts  <cit> . knotweeds are non-obligately-mycorrhizal plants and maintain low colonisation levels when they are grown in monocultures. however, when grown together with a typical mycorrhizal plant, such as leguminous melilot, they can be colonised up to 60%  <cit> . our findings may be a small contribution to this discussion which touches upon new paradigms in mycorrhizal science.

piceid is at least as effective in the prevention of fungal penetration into leaves as resveratrol. it was found that sorghum seedlings infected with the anthracnose pathogen colletotrichum sublineolum accumulated trans-piceid as the major stilbene metabolite, along with an unknown resveratrol derivative  <cit> . in vitro experiments  <cit>  revealed that piceid and resveratrol had an inhibitory effect on the germination of the phytopathogenic fungus venturia inaequalis and its penetration through the cuticular membrane, which improved the resistance of plant leaves. it has been reported that resveratrol can be transformed into piceid by bacillus cereus  <cit> . this evidence suggests that these two closely related substances have similar antifungal effects and can create an efficient barrier against the penetration of pathogenic fungi. in the sorghum cultivars  <cit> , piceid was induced  <dig> hours after mycorrhizal inoculation. this result agrees with our finding that the exposure of knotweed leaves to leaf damage, as well as mycorrhizal colonisation of the knotweed roots, increased the piceid concentration in the belowground biomass. we hypothesise that damage to the leaves increased the piceid level, which then restricted the mycorrhizal colonisation of the roots.

piceid/n ratio
as shown in table  <dig>  n content in rhizomes was strongly affected by all the factors tested in the pot experiment. we found an interesting relationship between n and piceid contents in rhizomes of knotweed clones. piceid is a transient molecule and its content increases when there are enough energy-rich glucosides available; resveratrol is a suitable receptor on which glucosides are bound. according to the protein competition model of phenolic allocation  <cit> , plants use photosynthetic carbon products  predominantly for the synthesis of secondary metabolites, such as phenolics, alkaloids, stilbenes and/or lignin when the nitrogen availability is low and for the synthesis of proteins at higher n concentrations. a negative correlation between leaf phenolic and nitrogen contents has been reported  <cit> ; however, we did not find a relationship between the nitrogen and piceid contents in the belowground biomass of the individual knotweed clones tested. figure  <dig> shows the consistent differences between the piceid content of the clones related to the nitrogen content. the highest concentrations of piceid were measured in the belowground biomass of fj. the two hybrid clones, fbm and fbp, had about the same piceid content but differed in their n content . the exposure of these clones to leaf damage eliminated this difference by increasing the very low n content in fbp. the positive effect of both leaf damage and mycorrhizal inoculation on the ratio of piceid to n content is a novel finding.

in another experiment with f. xbohemica  <cit>  we found that the piceid/n ratio significantly decreased  because of the presence of melilot, which enriched the system with nitrogen fixed by its rhizobia. in this experiment, the piceid/n ratio was significantly increased by leaf damage  in fj  and by mycorrhizal inoculation  both in fj  and fbm . two things that likely contributed to the increased piceid/n ratio were the net increase of piceid in fj subjected to leaf damage, resulting from a defence response, and a decrease of nitrogen in fj and fbm, resulting from mycorrhizal inoculation. this decrease was likely caused by competition with soil microorganisms for nitrogen.

CONCLUSIONS
significant production of stilbenes and emodin was found in two widely spread knotweeds, f. japonica and f. xbohemica, which were cultivated in pots in the ash substrate. the content of some target compounds in the plant tissue can be significantly altered by these means:

1) manipulation of the nitrogen content in the substrate - the increase in biomass as a result of the n fertilisation did not restrict the production of stilbenes at the n levels used in our experiment;

2) imposing stress on plants - leaf damage increased the resveratrol and emodin contents in the belowground biomass of the non-inoculated knotweed plants;

3) inoculation with mycorrhizal fungi - mycorrhizal fungi elicited an increase in the piceid  content in the belowground biomass of f. japonica, but only in the absence of leaf damage.

4) selection of the appropriate plant clone - the production of secondary compounds differed among the plant clones tested. despite the higher concentration of these substances in f. japonica, their total production is higher in the two clones of f. xbohemica, because of their higher biomass produced per plant.

both fallopia japonica and the two clones of f. xbohemica  are promising sources of resveratrol and piceid, which possess the potential to protect and improve human health.

