BACKGROUND
tuberculosis is still a major killer worldwide, causing an estimated 2- <dig> million deaths per year  <cit> . the sequence of the pathogen mycobacterium tuberculosis  strain h37rv has been available for a decade  <cit> , but the biology of the pathogen remains poorly understood. available genome sequences from mtb strains and other closely related mycobacteria present an opportunity to bring the power of comparative genomics to the study of mtb.

we report here the results of a comparative analysis of  <dig> publicly available genomes . these include eight closely related members of the mtb complex that can cause tuberculosis disease, . another  <dig> additional mycobacteria range from obligate parasites to free-living soil bacteria: m. leprae and m. avium subsp. paratuberculosis k <dig>  the causative agents of leprosy and paratuberculosis respectively, are pathogenic and require hosts to survive; m. ulcerans, m. marinum, m. avium  <dig>  and m. abscessus have the potential to be pathogenic but can survive outside the confines of a host; m. vanbaalenii, m. sp. kms, m. sp. mcs, and m. gilvum are free-living soil bacteria which are known to degrade a variety of compounds including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , and are useful in bioremediation efforts. thus, the mycobacteria included in our dataset span an ecological range from host-dependent pathogens to soil bacteria, allowing us to study multiple evolutionary transitions.

to gain further insight into the mycobacterium cluster, we also included a related rhodococcus , a pathogenic nocardia, four corynebacteria , two streptomyces , acidothermus cellulolyticus , propionibacterium acnes , and bifidobacterium longum . we extend this comparative analysis to other more distantly related actinobacteria to yield additional insight into evolutionary trends.

we examined protein evolution across these  <dig> organisms, both at the nucleotide level and at the level of protein families, including studying gene families associated with the transition from nonpathogenic soil-dwelling bacteria to obligate pathogens. our results highlight the importance of lipid metabolism and its regulation, and reveal differences in the evolutionary profiles for genes implicated in saturated and unsaturated fatty acid metabolism. our analysis also suggests that dna repair and molybdopterin cofactors are expanded in pathogenic mycobacteria and mtb.

we also identified highly conserved elements within noncoding regions using whole-genome multiple alignments and gene expression data. these conserved elements include  <dig> predicted conserved promoter regulatory motifs, of which  <dig> correspond to previously reported motifs. they also include approximately  <dig> predicted novel noncoding rnas. guided by our computational analysis, we tested and experimentally confirmed the expression of  <dig> novel small rnas in mtb.

the results of our analyses are available on our website, and provide a foundation for understanding the genome and biology of mtb in a comparative context.

RESULTS
an orthogroup catalogue for mycobacteria
we used synergy  <cit>  to reconstruct the phylogeny of proteins across all  <dig> organisms, define sets of orthologs , and construct a phylogenetic tree of the genomes . an orthogroup is defined as the set of genes descended from a single common ancestral gene in the last common ancestor of the species under consideration  <cit> , containing both orthologs and possibly paralogs . at each node in the phylogenetic tree, we tabulated orthogroup appearances, duplications, and losses . figure  <dig> gives an overview of the evolution of gene families within these species. full listings of the events tabulated in figure  <dig>  as well as additional information about each orthogroup, can be found on the supplementary information website:

tracing the evolution of biological processes
to examine the evolution of entire pathways and gene families, we categorized orthogroups according to go  and go slim terms  <cit> , pfam domains  <cit> , metabolic pathways, predicted regulons , and groups of genes upregulated under certain lipids . we also looked for orthogroups undergoing positive selection by calculating the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations . figure  <dig> shows several examples of pathway or gene family profiles and the predicted evolutionary events associated with the gene family. the sort of graphic presented in figure  <dig> is browsable for every pathway, pfam, and go term in our supplementary information website. tables  <dig> and  <dig> show the pfam and go categories most expanded  in the mtb clade relative to the non-pathogenic mycobacteria, and tables  <dig> and  <dig> show those most expanded in the mycobacteria relative to the non-mycobacteria.

a bonferroni-corrected p-value calculated from t-test

b pathogenicity or survival within the host

c lipid metabolism

d pterin cofactor biosynthesis

e unknown function

abonferroni-corrected p-value calculated from t-test

b pathogenicity or survival within the host

c lipid metabolism

d cofactor biosynthesis

e unknown function

abonferroni-corrected p-value calculated from t-test

b pathogenicity or survival within the host

c lipid metabolism

d cofactor biosynthesis

e unknown function

abonferroni-corrected p-value calculated from t-test

b pathogenicity or survival within the host

c lipid metabolism

d cofactor biosynthesis

e unknown function

substantial expansion of known pathogenicity and lipid metabolism genes
despite the smaller genome sizes present in the pathogenic mycobacteria, and the resulting background of orthogroup loss in the evolution towards pathogens, we observe significant expansions in certain gene families in the pathogenic mycobacteria and the mtb complex relative to non-pathogenic relatives. we also observe evidence for selection in certain families on branches leading to the pathogenic mycobacteria, the mtb complex, and the soil-dwelling mycobacteria.

as expected, many genes known to be related to pathogenicity or antigenic variability are among the groups most expanded in the mtb clade relative to soil dwelling mycobacteria as well as being among the categories with the most variability in copy number in their category-level profiles overall, including toxin-antitoxin genes, genes containing pe  and ppe  domains, mce  genes, genes involved in the synthesis of the mycolic acid coat, esx genes, and gene involved in antibiotic resistance. complete results for all groupings are available on our supplementary information website. below we focus on specific additional families showing noteworthy expansions and trends.

the single most significant trend in our analysis of protein family evolution is that genes related to lipid metabolism are greatly expanded across all mycobacteria and related organisms, consistent with previous observations  <cit>  . our analysis extends these previous observations by identifying the emergence of this expansion in lipid metabolism genes as occurring at the root node of the mycobacteria and rhodococcus .

particular expansion of saturated fatty acid metabolism and lipid synthesis genes in pathogenic mycobacteria
genes predicted to be involved in the metabolism of saturated fatty acids are more expanded than those involved in the metabolism of unsaturated fatty acids. using a compendium of microarray expression experiments , we compiled a list of genes upregulated in the presence of different fatty acid sources. we found that genes upregulated under unsaturated conditions have more uniform phylogenetic profiles, while those upregulated under saturated conditions, cholesterol or ceramide have expanded through duplications in pathogenic mycobacteria . saturated fatty acids and cholesterol are more prevalent in an animal host than in the soil, which contains mostly unsaturated fatty acid from plant inputs. since it is believed that mtb uses cholesterol as a carbon source within the host  <cit> , this could reflect an adaptation to the host environment. consistent with our observations in host-adapted mycobacteria, desulfovibrio desulfuricans intestinal strains contain a higher ratio of saturated to unsaturated fatty acids than soil strains of desulfovibrio desulfuricans  <cit> .

our analysis also reveals differences in evolutionary profiles between genes predicted to be involved in catabolism and anabolism of lipids. both sets of genes are expanded in soil-dwelling and pathogenic mycobacteria, but lipid synthesis genes are additionally expanded in pathogens relative to soil dwellers. general lipid synthesis genes are expanded across the mycobacteria, but certain groups of lipid synthesis genes, including those related to cell wall synthesis, are further expanded in the mtb complex . in pathogenic mycobacteria, the waxy mycolic acid coat helps evade the host immune system  <cit> . consistent with this, we see categories related to mycolic acid synthesis showing up among the most non-uniform categories, highly expanded in the mtb complex .

in contrast, some lipid degradation gene families are more expanded in the soil-dwelling mycobacteria than in the pathogens . the soil-dwellers have the unusual ability to degrade a vast array of compounds, including diverse lipids.

positive selection of lipid metabolism genes
in addition to gene family expansions, we observe evidence for selection on the coding sequence of lipid metabolism genes. in our dn/ds calculations, we observe enrichment for positive selection in lipid degradation genes on the branch leading to the pathogenic mycobacteria . for example, rv2524c, the multifunctional fas-i polypeptide utilized during de novo fatty synthesis  <cit> , has the second highest dn/ds value on this branch. additional lipid metabolism genes with elevated dn/ds values include  <dig> genes predicted to be involved in the β-oxidation pathway of fatty acid degradation: seven fade  genes, three fadd  genes, two fadb  genes, one fada  gene, and two echa  genes. hence, we observe expansions of lipid biosynthesis genes, as well as observing evidence for positive selection acting on genes within the β-oxidation pathway. both the lipid biosynthesis and lipid degradation pathways are specialized within the pathogenic mycobacteria. this expansion could possibly benefit the pathogen in a manner to accommodate production and modification of cell wall lipids involved in manipulation of host immune response. the lipid degradation is particularly beneficial for the long term survival of the pathogen metabolizing host lipids encountered during infection.

coordinated evolution of lipid metabolism genes and the regulator kstr
kstr is a transcription factor known to be involved in lipid and cholesterol degradation  <cit> . it has been recently shown that mtb uses cholesterol as a carbon source within the host  <cit> . strikingly, kstr exhibits an evolutionary history that parallels the expansion of lipid metabolism genes in the mycobacteria, and displays a singular conservation in its regulatory binding sites.

kstr appears to have evolved at the last common ancestor of the mycobacteria and rhodococcus. in all mycobacteria analyzed , rhodococcus, and nocardia there is one highly conserved ortholog of the kstr gene. however, in organisms more distantly related to mtb, the kstr gene is not present in a single copy. rather, 2- <dig> paralogs of kstr are present in these more distantly related organisms, as well as the environmental mycobacteria, including m. ulcerans, m. avium  <dig>  m. sp. mcs, m. sp. kms, and m. vanbaalenii . remarkably, these paralogs of kstr are all absent in the pathogenic mycobacteria. thus, coincident with the expansion in lipid metabolism genes described above, the kstr gene appears to have emerged through gene duplication within the existing gene family of tetr-like transcriptional regulators at the last common ancestor of mycobacteria and rhodococcus. all other members of this gene family were subsequently lost in the mtb complex, while the kstr protein was maintained and underwent limited sequence divergence.

there is another homolog to kstr found in mtb h37rv  that has previously been reported to also be involved in cholesterol metabolism, named kstr <dig>  <cit> . however, kstr is much more similar to the other members of the mycobacterial tetr family discussed above than it is to kstr <dig>  kstr <dig> is categorized into a separate orthogroup  and is more distantly related to kstr.

the high sequence conservation of the kstr transcription factor is mirrored in the conservation of kstr binding sites across numerous promoters. kstr binding sites are known to be highly conserved across the mycobacteria, out to rhodococcus and nocardia  <cit> . these sites are conserved in both sequence and position within their respective promoters. in our analysis, both in searches using known transcription factor binding motifs, as well as in our de novo motif searches, a subset of kstr binding sites are the most conserved transcription factor motifs observed. they are also among the most conserved of any noncoding sequence we identified. the conservation of the kstr gene and binding sites, the emergence of kstr at the ancestor of rhodococcus and the mycobacteria, and the loss of kstr paralogs within the pathogenic mycobacteria, suggests that this transcription factor and its evolving regulon have played an important role in the expansion of lipid metabolism and its adaptation to pathogenicity in mtb.

positive selection of dna repair genes
mtb, as well as non-tuberculous mycobacteria, differ from other bacteria in several key respects of dna repair  <cit> . within the host, mtb must combat damage to its dna from macrophage-generated reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates. the mechanisms by which this is accomplished are not fully understood  <cit> . although genes implicated in dna repair have not expanded in the mtb lineage, we note that the set of genes showing positive selection on the mtb lineage in our dn/ds analysis is enriched for genes involved in the cog category for dna replication, recombination, and repair . several of the genes in this set with highest dn/ds values are known dna repair genes , and several additional genes are helicases .

interestingly, we observe that reca has the highest dn/ds score of all the genes in mtb on the branch leading to the mtb complex, and recb also has a very high score. mycobacteria lack a mutsl-based mismatch repair  system  <cit> , and it is believed that reca may be involved in compensating pathways. dnae <dig>  also has one of the highest dn/ds values on the branch leading to mtb, and both dnae <dig>  and dnae <dig> show evidence of selection on the branch leading to the pathogenic mycobacteria. in mtb, damage-induced base-substitution mutagenesis is dependent on dnae <dig>  loss of dnae <dig> activity renders mtb hypersensitive to dna damage, eliminates induced mutagenesis, attenuates virulence, and reduces the frequency of drug resistance in vivo  <cit> . dnae <dig> provides essential, high-fidelity replicative polymerase function  <cit> , and is expressed in response to dna damage, along with dnae <dig> and reca  <cit> .

we also observe positive selection for dinx  on the branch leading to the pathogenic mycobacteria  in our dn/ds analysis . most organisms use specialized dna polymerases that are able to catalyze translesion synthesis  across sites of damage, including the dinb group of y family polymerases. there are two dinb-family polymerases in mtb . unlike in other bacteria, dinx and dinp expression are not dependent on reca, the sos response, or the presence of dna damage, and could therefore serve a novel yet uncharacterized role in mtb  <cit> .

expansion of pterin cofactors
genes involved in the first steps of pterin cofactor  biosynthesis are known to be expanded in the mtb complex  <cit> . molybdenum cofactor-requiring enzymes  could have physiological functions in the metabolism of reactive oxygen species during stress response  <cit> . molybdenum cofactor is an efficient catalyst in oxygen-transfer reactions, can be used in anaerobic respiration, and can catalyze redox reactions in carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur metabolism. recently, genes related to molybdenum cofactor protein synthesis have been shown to be upregulated under conditions of stress in mtb  <cit> . molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis has been previously linked to pathogenesis. the regulator of the moa <dig> locus, moar <dig>  was identified as having a snp in m. bovis bcg, but not in virulent m. bovis or mtb  <cit> . in addition, moa <dig> is present with varying frequency in the rd <dig> region, which is absent in m. bovis bcg, of pathogenic strains  <cit> .

in agreement with previous observations of expansions of molybdopterin biosynthesis genes, we observe five protein domains related to pterin cofactor biosynthesis among the top protein domains expanded in the mtb complex compared to the non-pathogenic mycobacteria . among the top go terms expanded in the mtb clade relative to the soil dwellers , there are also several groups involved in pterin and molybdopterin biosynthesis. some of these gene copies  are believed to have been acquired by lateral gene transfer on the branch leading to the mtb complex  <cit> .

we also observe evidence for selection on molybdenum-related genes in our dn/ds data. on the branch leading to the pathogenic mycobacteria, several orthogroups with high log likelihood scores when testing for selection are related to molybdenum . the orthogroup containing bisc , as well as the orthogroup containing moda , are among those with the highest dn/ds values on the branch leading to the pathogens. moab <dig> is one of the highest-scoring genes on all three branches tested.

expansions of genes of unknown function in mtb clade
there are also many categories of unknown function that are greatly expanded in the mtb clade relative to the non-pathogenic mycobacteria . for example, rv <dig>  was found in a genetic screen that facilitates isolation of mutants defective in arresting the maturation of phagosomes  <cit> , helping mtb to survive within host cells. pf <dig> contains four lipoproteins . lprg and lppx were found to be in vivo essential genes by trash analysis  <cit> .

detection of conserved noncoding sequences
sequence conservation - or phylogenetic footprinting - provides a powerful approach for identifying potential functional noncoding sequences, and has been used in a variety of eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms to identify protein coding genes, noncoding rnas, and regulatory elements  <cit> . for optimal power, the organisms being analyzed must be sufficiently distant such that non-functional elements have diverged, but not so distant such that functional elements have evolved or re-arranged. organisms within the mtb complex are all highly similar at the sequence level, and thus by themselves do not allow for effective phylogenetic footprinting. by leveraging the evolutionary similarity of the most distantly related mycobacteria and actinomycetes, we gained additional power to allow us to detect functional sequences under purifying selection, albeit only those shared by at least a majority of mycobacteria. we used this approach to predict two classes of conserved noncoding sequences: small noncoding rnas and transcription factor binding motifs.

novel putative conserved small noncoding rnas in mycobacteria
small noncoding rnas  have been shown to play a role in regulating gene expression in numerous bacterial species  <cit> , including streptococcus  <cit> . yet only recently were srnas reported in mycobacteria  <cit> . using a combination of direct isolation of small rnas, and validation by northern blotting and 5' and 3' race transcript mapping, arnvig and young  <cit>  first described nine srnas in mtb. subsequently, dichiara et al.  <cit>  describe  <dig> small rnas in m. bovis bcg, of which many were conserved in both mtb and m. smegmatis.

to build on these results, we used a combination of comparative genomics, rna-seq, and experimental validation by northern blotting to identify additional srnas conserved among the mycobacteria . our computational results provide evidence for  <dig> conserved small rnas in mtb that have not been previously reported. it is likely that additional conserved regions are expressed under other diverse conditions. figure 5a shows the expression and conservation map for one of our predicted rnas in the genomeview browser  <cit> . table  <dig> shows a listing of the top  <dig> candidate rnas. to verify a subset of these candidate small rnas, we used northern blot analysis on four of the top predicted regions . the results  show signals corresponding to small rnas from each of four candidates . all transcripts were near the expected size, or slightly larger. full-length gels are provided in additional file 3: figure s <dig>  consistent with previous work, the majority of small rnas were seen as more than one size transcript  <cit> . this suggests that small rnas might be generated by processing of larger transcripts. in the rna-seq data, there are longer "tails" extending outside of the main peak that corresponds to the rna prediction--different length rnas could be responsible for the additional bands of higher mass.

1conserved intergenic regions determined by gumby.

2indicates whether this region is predicted to fold by evofold.

3region in m. smegmatis that aligns with the conserved region in mtb, and its corresponding rpkm value.

4tested experimentally

5orientation relative to neighboring genes. the first and last characters give the strands of the flanking genes; the middle character gives the strand for the predicted rna.

conserved cis-regulatory motifs in mycobacteria
few transcription factor binding motifs have been identified in mtb. transcription factors for which binding motifs have been identified include kstr  <cit> , dosr  <cit> , ider  <cit> , zurb  <cit> , crp  <cit> , csor  <cit> , fura  <cit> , mprab  <cit> , and acr  <cit> . because of the limited knowledge of transcriptional regulation in mtb, we searched for additional motifs computationally. we combined comparative sequence analysis with microarray data to identify a large number of motifs conserved in mycobacteria.

we clustered microarray data contained in the tb database  <cit>  and searched for upstream regulatory motifs shared in the upstream regions of the resulting clusters using alignace . because of significant noise in the results, we used a set of stringent filters, including a requirement that candidate motifs be highly conserved.  <dig> motif instances passed our stringent filters .  <dig> of the top  <dig>  motif instances correspond to cases of known mtb motifs . in contrast, none of the top motifs showed similarity only to known e. coli or corynebacteria motifs. within these top motifs, we were able to identify four of the nine known mtb motifs .

ak indicates the value of k in the k-means clustering process 

bmap score indicates the alignace map score  <cit> 

cspecificity score  <cit> 

dcompareace score ≥  <dig>  to the alignment for this known motif

ecompareace score to its reverse complement

fnumber of scanace hits in the genome that are conserved in ≥  <dig> genomes

gsequence logo  <cit> 

as described above, the kstr motif shows a much stronger signal, in terms of both conservation and information content, than any of the other motifs . based on the distribution of highly conserved predicted motif instances for kstr across the genome, we predict a more general role for kstr in lipid metabolism. we see kstr motif instances near many other lipid genes not related to cholesterol degradation, in support of the view that kstr is a more general lipid regulator controlling a large regulon  <cit> .

one of the most interesting new motif candidates that shows up in our analysis is a conserved palindromic motif, consisting of a highly conserved tac... gta separated by  <dig> bp of less well conserved sequence  that is found in clusters of 2- <dig> closely spaced sites upstream of several genes related to fatty acid metabolism . there is a cluster of  <dig> evenly spaced sites upstream of rv3229c , a cluster of  <dig> sites upstream of the adjacent rv3230c , and a cluster of  <dig> sites upstream of rv2524c . this is the second highest-scoring new motif identified . this motif shows up as one of the top motifs associated with the clusters of genes upregulated under saturated fatty acid conditions .

CONCLUSIONS
to better understand mtb, we performed a comparative analysis of  <dig> organisms from the tuberculosis database. we studied the evolution of protein families and metabolic pathways, looked for proteins with evidence of selection, and searched for new noncoding rnas and transcription factor binding site motifs.

the most striking features of our analysis are related to lipid metabolism and its regulation. in addition to observing a general expansion of lipid metabolism genes in the mycobacteria and rhodococcus, we observe increased expansions of genes related to saturated fatty acid metabolism in the pathogenic mycobacteria compared to the soil-dwelling mycobacteria. we also note differences in evolutionary profiles for catabolic and anabolic lipid metabolism genes, and evidence for positive selection in lipid metabolism genes. the cis-regulatory elements bound by the kstr protein, a known regulator of lipid/cholesterol metabolism, are among the strongest, most highly conserved noncoding signals across the mycobacteria. both kstr and its binding sites are highly conserved, appearing at the last common ancestor between rhodococcus and the mycobacteria.

within our set of organisms, we examine the evolution of pathogenicity, moving from the soil-dwelling mycobacteria up to the intracellular parasites of the mtb complex. we see expansions of many known gene families related to pathogenicity . by similarity of phylogenetic profiles, we can predict likely candidates for novel gene families related to pathogenicity. for example, we see similar expansions in gene families related to biosynthesis of molybdopterin. we further observe evidence of positive selection on molybdenum-related genes, providing further support for the importance of molybdenum in these pathogens. on the branch leading to the pathogenic mycobacteria, we also observe evidence for positive selection in genes related to replication, recombination, and repair. it is possible that these dna repair-related processes give the pathogenic mycobacteria an advantage when dealing with the assault on its dna by macrophage-generated reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates.

our whole-genome alignments, coupled with rna-seq and microarray data, allowed us to predict novel noncoding features, including small rnas , and potential transcription factor binding sites.

the main forces driving genome evolution in prokaryotes include gene genesis, lateral gene transfer, and gene loss. our analysis of protein evolution using synergy does not examine whether orthogroups appearing have arisen by lateral gene transfer or by gene genesis involving duplication and divergence from other orthogroups. a detailed comparison to categorize these orthogroup appearances according to lateral or vertical gene transfer is beyond the scope of this study, but other studies indicate that lateral gene transfer has played a significant role in mycobacterial evolution and the evolution of pathogenesis  <cit> .

a recent paper suggests that the mycobacterial genome has been shaped by a biphasic process involving gene acquisition  and duplications followed by gene loss  <cit> . other studies report numerous genes, including a large number involved in lipid metabolism, that have been acquired by horizontal gene transfer at different phylogenetic strata and have led to the emergence of pathogenesis in mtb  <cit> . previous studies indicate a possible more ancient lateral gene transfer of fatty acid biosynthesis genes from α-proteobacteria to actinobacteria  <cit> . however, genetic studies show that the mtb complex and pathogenic mycobacteria do not exchange genetic material frequently  <cit> , so there is limited lateral gene transfer within the mtb complex.

we are currently performing high-throughput chromatin immunoprecipitation -seq experiments in several different mycobacteria, including mtb, m. smegmatis, and m. vanbaalenii <cit> . we plan to integrate the information obtained from our comparative analysis with data coming from these high-throughput experiments, as well as other 'omic datasets, using a systems biology approach. this will enable construction of gene regulatory networks for mtb, and examination of their evolution across species.

