BACKGROUND
barbarea is a genus comprising  <dig> species of flowering plants from the tribe cardamineae in the family brassicaceae  <cit> . b. vulgaris, b. intermedia, b. stricta, and b. verna are four widely distributed biennial species that are commonly used as model plants in research  <cit> . b. vulgaris contains two distinct genotypes: the g-type has glabrous leaves and is resistant to infestation by the diamondback moth  and a flea beetle ; the p-type has pubescent leaves and is susceptible to dbm and flea beetles . the two types also differ in their glucosinolate composition, flavonoid composition, saponin content and disease susceptibility . recently, significant genetic diversity and reproductive incompatibility have been reported between the two plant types  <cit> . the ability to induce oviposition and kill larvae of the dbm, a serious pest of cruciferous crops, makes the g-type b. vulgaris a useful trap crop for pest management . the p- and g-types of b. vulgaris and the dbm represent an ideal model to study evolution in plant-insect ecology .

the insect resistance ability of g-type b. vulgaris relies on the four triterpenoid saponins, including 3-o-cellobiosyl-oleanoic acid, 3-o-cellobiosyl-hederagenin, 3-o-cellobiosyl-gypsogenin and 3-o-cellobiosyl-4-epihederagenin . to the best of our knowledge, these metabolites are not found in p-type b. vulgaris or non-barbarea cruciferous plants. the saponin biosyntheses have developed from the triterpenoid pathway, which exists commonly in plants. the triterpenoid backbone,  <dig> -oxidosqualene, is first cyclized to form a core structure by oxidosqualene cyclases , and then decorated by cytochrome p450s  and further covalently linked to sugars by glycosyltransferases   <cit> . the different decorations and diverse sugar residues of saponins produce distinct biological activities, such as anti-pathogenic, insecticidal, anti-tumorigenic and immunomodulatory effects . in g-type b. vulgaris, the  <dig> -oxidosqualene is cyclized into β-amyrin by a specific osc, and then the c <dig>  c <dig> and c <dig> residues are modified by p450s to form the four sapogenins, all of which are subsequently linked to a cellobiose at the c <dig> position with a carbon–oxygen β-glycosidic bond  <cit> , thus conferring insect deterrence or insecticidal activity  <cit> . the ugts catalyzing the first glycosylation have been cloned from both g- and p-type b. vulgaris  <cit> . however, the p450s responsible for the c <dig>  c <dig> and c <dig> decoration and the ugts for the second glycosylation remain unidentified.

much research effort has been applied to identify the anti-insect genes in b. vulgaris, including quantitative trait locus  mapping and cdna scanning. a p × g-type derived f <dig> population has been used for qtl analysis; the insect resistance and the four kinds of triterpenoid saponins co-segregated and were mapped on two genomic regions spanning 7–30 cm  <cit> . higher-density markers are needed for fine mapping and finally cloning of the resistance genes. by activity scanning of a cdna expression library, ugt73c <dig> encoding the enzyme catalyzing the first monoglucosylation of the saponins was identified. the authors also detected two homologous genes from both p- and g-type b. vulgaris with similar functions  <cit> . another efficient technology to identify saponin pathway genes is transcription profiling. using cdna-amplified fragment length polymorphism-based transcript profiling of jasmonate-treated plant tissues, a regulator gene mkb <dig> has been screened out in medicago truncatula and its control mechanism to manage the biosynthesis of triterpene saponins was further revealed  <cit> . using a similar method, a synthesis enzyme of the saponin biosynthesis pathway, cyp716y <dig>  has been identified in bupleurum falcatum, and combining this with several other genes the synthesis of monoglycosylated saponins was reconstituted in yeast  <cit> . benefitting from the rapid development of next-generation dna sequencing technology, pyrosequencing has become a labor-efficient and cost-saving transcript profiling method.

our previous study revealed the transcriptome profile of g-type b. vulgaris under a series of dbm herbivory treatments  <cit> . the dbm-responsive genes, including those related to secondary metabolism, transcription factors and signaling transduction, were monitored. in the present study, we report the transcriptomes of p-type b. vulgaris before and under dbm infestation, with the aim of determining the differential expression patterns between the two plant genotypes in response to the dbm. the saponin biosynthesis pathways of the two genotypes were compared. a rich set of single nucleotide polymorphism  and simple sequence repeat  markers were identified, which will accelerate the map-based cloning of the resistance genes. additionally, the quality of the ssrs was tested experimentally and the genetic diversity of the barbarea plants analyzed.

RESULTS
generation and annotation of the transcriptomes of p-type barbarea vulgaris
the transcriptomes of g-type b. vulgaris under diamondback moth feeding and non-feeding conditions were pyrosequenced in our previous study  <cit> . to perform a comparative analysis of the transcriptomes between susceptible and resistant genotypes of barbarea vulgaris, the transcriptomes of p-type seedlings under dbm feeding and non-feeding conditions were pyrosequenced in the present study. a total of  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> clean paired-end reads containing  <dig>  and  <dig>  gigabase pairs of clean nucleotides were generated from insect infested and control p-type b. vulgaris, respectively. these data were assembled into a set of  <dig>  non-redundant unigenes, with a mean length of 896 nt and an n <dig> length of  <dig>  nt, which were comparable with the g-type transcriptome assembly . the length distribution of the unigenes are listed in additional file 1: table s <dig> table  <dig> summary of the sequencing and assembly of the g- and p-type b. vulgaris transcriptomes


go, gene ontology; cog, clusters of orthologous groups; kegg, kyoto encyclopedia of gene and genomes



subsequently, we screened the unigene sequences against the ncbi non-redundant , swissprot, gene ontology , clusters of orthologous groups of proteins , and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathway protein databases using blastx . protein function was predicted from the annotations of the most similar proteins in those databases. as shown in table  <dig>   <dig>   unigenes were annotated by at least one of these databases. detailed information on the nt, nr, swissprot, go, cogs and kegg annotations is shown in tables s2–s <dig>  respectively. the gene functional classification by go analysis showed that the largest go terms were “cell”, “binding activity” and “physiological processes” from the “cellular component”, “molecular function” and “biological process” ontologies, respectively. the most abundant cogs terms were “general function prediction only”, “replication, recombination and repair” and “transcription”. the distributions of the functional categories were similar to that of g-type plants .fig.  <dig> function classification of unigenes. a, the gene ontology  classification of p-type b. vulgaris transcripts; b, the comparison of clusters of orthologous groups of proteins  classification between p- and g-type transcriptomes



comparison of pest-induced transcriptome patterns between susceptible and resistant b. vulgaris
of the unigenes,  <dig>  were differentially expressed in p-type b. vulgaris, including  <dig> up- and  <dig> downregulated, by dbm infestation . this is far fewer than the number of genes affected by dbm in g-type plants, which accounted for  <dig> – <dig>  up- and  <dig> – <dig>  downregulated genes at a series of experimental time points  <cit> . the go classification of the differentially expressed p-type unigenes indicated that the “cell junction” and “extracellular region”, “electron carier activity” and “enzyme regulator activaty”, “response to stimulus” and “localization” were the over-represented terms from the “cellular component”, “molecular function” and “biological process” ontologies, respectively. the most abundant cog class was “general function prediction only”, followed by “amino acid transport and metabolism” and “carbohydrate transport and metabolism” . kegg pathway analysis indicated that the over-represented pathways of the dbm-infected p-type transcriptome were “nitrogen metabolism”, “phenylpropanoid biosynthesis”, “photosynthesis–antenna proteins” and “flavonoid biosynthesis” . as shown in additional file 2: figure s <dig>  the photosynthesis pathway genes were generally repressed by dbm infestation, indicating that the pest not only consumed the existing assimilates, but also disrupted the photosynthesis process. the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and flavonoid biosynthesis pathways were upregulated extensively , similar to the results found in g-type b. vulgaris and arabidopsis  <cit> , indicating that these kinds of secondary metabolites  <cit>  were common response compounds to dbm infestation in plants. generally, in susceptible plants, the main dbm-affected genes are those engaged in nutrient, amino acid, carbohydrate transport and metabolism, and photosynthetic processes. however, genes related to certain secondary metabolism pathways such as glucosinolate biosynthesis, as well as phytohormones and transcription factors, which were dramatically induced by dbm in g-type b. vulgaris, showed less significant induction in p-type plants.fig.  <dig> the functional classification of differentially expressed unigenes in p-type b. vulgaris infested with dbm. a, gene ontology ; b, clusters of orthologous groups of proteins 

differentfr, differentially expressed frequency, indicating the number and percentage of differentially expressed genes in each cluster; genomefr, genome frequency, indicating the number and percentage of the transcriptome distributed in each cluster.



the saponin pathway in susceptible and resistant b. vulgaris
the genes of the triterpenoid saponin pathway  were identified in both g- and p-type b. vulgaris transcriptomes, based on gene annotation. to limit the omissions, the saponin pathway genes were blast searched against the transcriptome databases from both g- and p-type plants. seventy-one g-type and  <dig> p-type unigenes representing  <dig> enzymes catalyzing  <dig> metabolic reactions of the triterpenoid saponin pathway were identified . the presence of more unigenes in the g-type plants could partially reflect the higher heterozygosity among the sequenced individuals; polymorphisms within the alleles could produce multiple potential unigenes during the assembly process. particularly evident were mdd and lup <dig>  which were represented by seven cl <dig> contigs and five cl <dig> contigs, respectively . the authenticity of these sequences requires further experimental analysis. the expression abundances of these saponin synthesis genes were compared between g- and p-type plants ; the genes upstream of se showed similar expression patterns between the two genotypes. unexpectedly, expression of genes for the bottom first and third enzymes, the glucosyl transferase  and an oxidosqualene cyclases , was significantly upregulated, and these mrnas accumulated by more than 10-fold in the p-type compared with the g-type plant. the over expression of these genes were also comfirmed by q-pcr analysis, though the change levels were not as high as rna-seq displayed . one of them, ugt73c <dig>  is known to be functional in the p-type plant  <cit> . the dramatic induction of these two enzymes could result from the p-type plants suffering more serious damage under insect infestation and because the regulator of this pathway is still functioning. however, some of the enzymes upstream of ugt73c <dig>  most likely the uncharacterized enzyme-p450s, are perhaps dysfunctional or have gained new functions, resulting in no anti-dbm saponin being produced in p-type plants.fig.  <dig> comparative transcription profiles of the putative genes in the triterpene saponin synthetic pathway in p- and g-type b. vulgaris. a, heatmaps representing the expression levels of different genes/families determined by rna-seq. the color bar is shown on the top right. data represent log  of each treatment. the metabolites of the pathway are shown in bright green on top and the enzymes for each metabolic step are shown below in black using the following abbreviations: mva, mevalonic acid; mep, 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate; ipp, isopentenyl diphosphate; g3p, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; dmapp, dimethylallyl diphosphate; gpp, geranyl diphosphate; fpp, farnesyl diphosphate;  <dig> -os,  <dig> -oxidosqualene; aact, acetyl-coa acyltransferase; hmgs, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coa synthase; hmgr, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coa reductase; mk, mevalonic acid kinase; pmk, phosphomevalonate kinase; mdd, mevalonic acid diphosphate decarboxylase; dxs, deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase; dxr, deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate reductase; mct, 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate cytidylyltransferase; cmk, 4-diphosphocytidyl-2-c-methyl-d-erythritol kinase; mds, 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol  <dig> -cyclodiphosphate synthase; hds, -4-hydroxy-3-methyl-but-2-enyl pyrophosphate  synthase; hdr, hmb-pp reductase; idi, ipi isomerase; gps, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase; fps, farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase; ss, squalene synthase; se, squalene epoxidase; osc, oxidosqualene cyclases; p <dig>  cytochrome p-450; ugt, udp-dependent glycosyl transferases. two stars indicate the two significantly induced genes in p-type plants. b, q-pcr analysis of three selected genes of the pathway. the ordinates show the relative expression levels; the abscissas show the time points. error bars indicate the sd of three biological replicates



gene divergence and snp and ssr markers between susceptible and resistant b. vulgaris
the homologous genes were detected by blast searching the unigenes from p- and g-type b. vulgaris against each other with a cutoff e-value < e− <dig>  the most similar unigenes within the p- or g-type were treated as paralogous genes, while the most similar ones between the p- and g-type were treated as orthologous genes.  <dig>  gene families containing  <dig>  p-type and  <dig>  g-type unigenes were shared between p- and g-type b. vulgaris . the  <dig>  p-type and  <dig>  g-type unique unigenes were mainly composed of 200–300-nt short sequences. the less clustered but more unique unigenes in p-type than in g-type reflected the fact that the p-type transcriptome contained a large fraction  of 200–300-nt short sequences. we then analyzed the snp and ssr markers among the orthologous genes distinguishing the two plant genotypes.  <dig>  snps were found within the  <dig>  orthologous genes between the p- and g-type plants ; thus, about  <dig>  % unigenes contain snps, with an average of four snps per snp-containing unigene . among these snps, nucleotide transitions accounted nearly triple the number of transversions, and there were many more a/t transversions than g/c transversions . the overall gc content is 47 % in this transcriptome. we detected  <dig>  ssrs in the p-type transcriptome; the majority comprised mono-nucleotide-repeats  and triple-nucleotide-repeats , which represented  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % of the total ssrs . the ssr-harboring unigene sequences were blast searched against the orthologous genes from the g-type plant.  <dig>  ssrs with polymorphisms between the two genotypes were identified by a manual check. among these,  <dig>  % comprised mono- , double-  and triple- nucleotide-repeats, which accounted for  <dig>  %,  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % of the total, respectively . from the polymorphic ssrs,  <dig> primer pairs were designed to detect ssrs with a length divergence of more than two nucleotides between the two genotypes . as shown in table  <dig>  the ssrs with  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 12-bp variants comprised significantly larger fractions than the other types, suggesting that the ssr type and repeat variant that did not cause frameshift mutations were preferentially selected during evolution.fig.  <dig> venn diagram showing unique and homologous genes in p- and g-type b. vulgaris




genetic diversity of barbarea germplasm
to test the utility of the ssrs produced in this study,  <dig> randomly chosen ssrs were used to investigate the genetic diversity of germplasms from the barbarea genus. thirty accessions assigned by the supplying seedbank to four species  and derived from seven countries  were analyzed in addition to the two g- and p-type accessions used for transcriptomics . on pcr,  <dig>  % of the primer pairs produced clear peaks on electrophoresis and generated  <dig> data points. the three  low-quality reactions were treated as missing values in the analyses. the  <dig> ssr markers generated  <dig> alleles in the population. among these,  <dig> alleles displayed a frequency of more than 5 % in the total sample. rare alleles could have been missed because of the small sample size. the summary statistics of the ssrs are shown in table  <dig>  the unweighted pair-group method with arithmetic means  tree was generated using the ssr data. based on the tree topology, the germplasms could be clearly divided into  <dig> groups and the p-type alone . the g-type and p-type accessions from this and a previous  <cit>  transcriptomics study were widely separated as a logical consequence of their polymorphism for all markers used. the b. verna and b. stricta accessions were also separated onto different branches of the tree. interestingly, the p-type from transcriptomics did not group with any other tested accession, while the g-type from transcriptomics grouped with all the remaining seed bank accessions of b. vulgaris, including twenty-two western and central european b. vulgaris accessions. all seed bank b. vulgaris accessions were also found to be resistant to the dbm. some substructure was evident in the b. vulgaris group, including a distinct group of three accessions . however, the seed-bank assigned b. intermedia accessions were completely embedded in the g-type-like b. vulgaris germplasms. morphological inspection of the two seed bank assigned b. intermedia accessions  revealed only modest morphological difference from b. vulgaris  and both b. intermedia accessions showed full dbm resistance .table  <dig> characteristics of the  <dig> analyzed simple sequence repeat  markers and the diversity detected in  <dig> barbarea accessions


bv13-17

bv13-18

bv13-65

bv13-92

bv13-98

bv13-103

bv13-108

bv13-112

bv13-123

bv13-125

bv13-146

bv13-174

bv13-339

bv13-370

bv13-372

bv13-375

bv13-417

bv13-425

bv13-426

bv13-436

bv13-439

bv13-443

bv13-445

bv13-462

bv13-485

bv13-509

bv13-542

bv13-544

bv13-557

bv13-558

bv13-564

maf, major allele frequency; gno, genotype number; ano, allele number; gd, gene diversity; h, heterozygosity; pic, polymorphism information content.

fig.  <dig> bootstrapped unweighted pair-group method with arithmetic means  tree of barbarea species. the p-type and g-type used for transcriptomics were compared to  <dig> seed bank accessions from four barbarea species. the numbers on the branches indicate bootstraps



discussion
the p- and g-types of b. vulgaris have been used extensively to explore plant-insect co-evolution, plant secondary metabolism, and for anti-insect gene identification . however, publicly released transcriptome data and molecular markers are extremely rare compared with other model plants. following our previous transcriptome analysis of g-type plants, the present study presented the first p-type transcriptome data, which will be useful for further studies of the two genotypes. there were  <dig>  % fewer assembled unigenes in the p-type compared with the g-type. one possible explanation is that the g-type sequencing produced nearly twice as many clean nucleotides as the p-type , allowing the detection of more poorly expressed transcripts. however, the homology analysis of the unigenes revealed that the g-type contains significantly more paralogous genes than the p-type in each family  . the targeted analysis of the triterpenoid saponin pathway also revealed more unigenes in the g-type than in the p-type  . research in other plants has indicated that the genes involved in the triterpenoid pathways are often in gene clusters and can evolve new functions by duplication and reorganization . thus, it would be interesting to know whether the g-type plants have evolved a relatively more complicated genome with whole or partial genome duplication, and whether the genes of the triterpenoid saponin pathway are in a cluster in barbarea. however, more data, such as genome sequencing, are needed to answer these questions.

the functional classification of the unigenes showed similar patterns between the p- and g-type transcriptomes, except in terms of the absolute number of each term, which was usually lower in the p-type compared with the g-type , implying no bias derived from the transcriptome sequencing and assembly. there were significantly fewer dbm-affected genes in p-type plants, indicating that they have a less complex defense system against the dbm than the g-type. the major groups represented in the dbm-affected genes are those engaged in photosynthesis, nutrient processes, amino acid, lipid and carbohydrate transport and metabolism. the relationship between photosynthesis and insect herbivory response in plants was reviewed by ref.  <cit> . it is not easy to distinguish which of these effecs are direct responses to insect stimuli and which are indirect, reflecting the severe damage to the plant. however, the triterpenoid saponin pathway, which produces the major insect resistance compounds, was apparently efficiently induced by the dbm in p-type plants, indicating the insect sensing and induction networks of this pathway to be functional. it is thought that the anti-dbm triterpenoid saponins evolved in a common ancestor of b. vulgaris and b. verna, because these species share saponin based dbm  resistance and the major saponin 3-o-cellobiosyl-hederagenin as the only known plants from the crucifer family  <cit> . it was also suggested that the p-type might have lost dbm resistance secondarily if truly included in the species b. vulgaris, but that the phylogeny of the two types needed to be tested by modern methods  <cit> . our analyses of the putative saponin biosynthesis genes in the p-type suggest that the p-type plants possess the ability to produce other triterpenoid saponins than those conferring resistance to the dbm, because most of the genes of the pathway are expressed and show a positive response to insect stimuli. one possible explanation of the lack of dbm resistance is that in p-type plants certain enzymes in the biosynthesis pathway, such as p450s, are missing or not expressed, or p450s or oscs have altered product profile, resulting in non-production of the specific anti-dbm saponins. indeed, presence of unidentified saponin-like metabolites in the p-type has been suggested based on lc-ms analyses  <cit> . the putative p-type saponins and the present finding of differentially expressed saponin biosynthesis genes support that the p-type represents an advanced state derived from a g-type-like ancestor. it would be interesting to combine our expression-data with quantitative analysis of saponins in the infested p-type plants, but so far no-one has ever identified any of the putative p-type saponins, and the putative metabolites may require elaborate analytical methods  <cit> .

great efforts have been made in the map-based cloning of the insect-resistance genes in b. vulgaris. a genetic map has been constructed using  <dig> amplified fragment length polymorphisms  and  <dig> ssr markers to map saponin genes and several other quantitative trait loci  <cit> . the authors identified  <dig>  ssrs from the g-type transcriptome by  <dig> pyrosequencing. among these, only  <dig> ssrs were finally used for map generation. one possible reason is that screening for polymorphic ssrs is inefficient using a single reference transcriptome. in the present study, two transcriptomes were compared and manually screened for polymorphic ssrs before primer design. more than 70 % of the  <dig> primer pairs produced clear polymorphic bands between the p- and g-type plants. our method, although seemingly labor intensive, could reduce the costs of primer syntheses and the labor cost of experimental screening. our high-quality ready-to-use ssrs and snps will be useful to construct high-density maps and for fine mapping of the saponin genes and other interesting trait loci.

in our genetic diversity analysis, because the ssrs we used are those that primarily distinguished the g- and p-type plants, the distance between the two types was expected to be magnified, and indeed the types were widely separated in the resulting tree. however, the fine clustering of the accessions in accordance with traditional taxonomy  suggested that the additional topologies of the tree represent genetic difference with biological significance. many studies have shown that the p- and g-type plants are divergent in their morphology, phenology, cytology, phytochemical compounds and anti-insect capability . recent studies also revealed a strong genetic separation and hybridization barrier between the two plant genotypes using five ssr markers, aflp markers and a series of pollination experiments  <cit> . our diversity analysis demonstrates similarity of the previously investigated g-type  <cit>  to a large sample of central and western european b. vulgaris accessions in contrast to remarkable distinctness of the p-type accession investigated here and previously  <cit> . the p-type is apparently recognized at the level of “variety” in classical taxonomy   <cit> . any future taxonomic revision is yet undecided. a recent investigation across a hybrid zone of the two types in eastern europe found signs of hybridization and otherwise distinct geographical zones of each type, but the question of e.g. variety, subspecies or even species level separation has not been answered  <cit> .

interestingly, although p-type like accessions were not discovered in the investigated germplasm, another genetic substructure with no correlation to geographic origin was evident within b. vulgaris, with three accessions  forming a distinct group. this diversity deserves further investigation, and could represent established taxa  <cit>  or yet unknown genotypes  <cit> . the finding of two b. intermedia accessions completely embedded in b. vulgaris and fully resistant to dbm was a surprise and could be a chance effect, considering genetic distinctness of b. intermedia in previous molecular investigations  <cit> , near lack of flea beetle resistance in the species  <cit> , and the well established status of b. intermedia  <cit> . natural hybrids between b. vulgaris and b. intermedia are known  <cit> , and as the two studied accessions were surprisingly similar to b. vulgaris, a hybrid nature of the seed bank-assigned accessions is another possible explanation for this finding.

future studies employing unbiased molecular markers and integrating more germplasms of the barbarea genus onto the tree may explain at what point the dbm resistance arose in a common ancestor of b. vulgaris and b. verna and possibly was lost in the p-type line  <cit>  during the evolution of the barbarea. the present detailed molecular genetic investigation of lack of dbm resistance, as compared to full dbm resistance  <cit> , will contribute to understanding the molecular events associated with evolutionary loss of insect resistance.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the present study reports the first p-type b. vulgaris transcriptomes from insect-free plants and those under dbm infestation. at the transcriptome level, the p-type plants reacted differently to the g-type under dbm infestation. most of the genes of the triterpenoid saponins pathway are present and insect inducible in p-type plants. many high-quality snps and ssr markers were identified based on p- and g-type transcriptome comparison. a subset of ready-to-use ssr primers was designed for genetic analysis of p- and g-type populations. using the ssrs, further genetic diversity of barbarea germplasms was revealed. these findings provide a basis for further investigation of the molecular biology and molecular ecology of the on-going evolution of insect resistance in barbarea plants.

