BACKGROUND
burkholderia  pseudomallei and b. mallei are genetically closely related bacterial species that can cause fatal disease in humans and animals. b. pseudomallei is a facultative intracellular soil bacterium and the cause of melioidosis, which has the highest prevalence in the hot and humid regions of southeast asia, and northern australia. the infection can be acquired by contact with contaminated soil or water by inhalation or percutaneously. human infections can be asymptomatic, can present with focal lesions that may affect almost any organ, or may be disseminate resulting in pneumonia and septicaemia. in certain regions of asia melioidosis is a major cause of human morbidity and acute systemic melioidosis has a case fatality rate of up to 50% even if treated  <cit> . melioidosis has been described in wild animals, but also in farm and pet animals and can be spread by animal trade and transport  <cit> . both species are pathovars of a single genomospecies which was divided historically in two separate species due to their clinical impact and host tropism. b. thailandensis is the third closely related species of the so-called “pseudomallei complex” which has been out-grouped from the species b. pseudomallei based on arabinose fermentation and its markedly lower pathogenicity. b. thailandensis and b. pseudomallei are soil bacteria that share the same geographical distribution.

b. mallei is a gram-negative, non-motile obligate pathogen and the causative agent of glanders and farcy in equines . in horses, glanders primarily presents with purulent nasal discharge, inflammation of the mucous membranes of the upper respiratory tract, and poor general condition, whereas farcy is a chronic cutaneous disease with formation of nodules which may develop into ulcers. equines are the only known reservoir. contact with infected animals, ingestion of glanderous meat and exposure to aerosols can cause b. mallei infections in humans. human glanders is highly lethal and resembles melioidosis. chronic and latent infections can exacerbate into the acute form even after 15 years in both diseases. both bacterial species are intrinsically resistant to many antibiotics including ampicillin and broad- and expanded-spectrum cephalosporines due to the production of a beta-lactamase  <cit> . b. mallei and b. pseudomallei have been classified by the cdc as priority category b biological agents.

isolation and microbiological identification of b. pseudomallei and b. mallei from clinical samples can take up to one week. commercial biochemical test systems for b. mallei are not available and b. pseudomallei may be misidentified as chromobacterium violaceum or other bacteria  <cit> . latex agglutination using a monoclonal antibody was shown to be a valuable technique for the rapid identification of b. pseudomallei in positive blood cultures, but no commercial tests are available  <cit> . real-time pcr systems have been developed for diagnosing and differentiating as rapid alternatives to biochemical tests, but few have been validated on clinical samples  <cit> .

matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry  for identification of bacteria has become a useful tool for the rapid identification of bacteria . in some studies intact cell mass spectrometry  showed better correlation to genetic markers than conventional morphological classification  <cit> . the technique and modified procedures including a digestion step  have been successfully used for subspecies-level classification in some species  <cit> . characteristic features of icms are simple sample preparation procedures of whole cells, spectrum acquisition in the mass range between approximately  <dig>  and  <dig>  da and analysis based upon comparison of sample spectra with reference spectra. by statistical approaches, similarity between mass spectra can be exploited for the identification of microorganisms. maldi-tof ms was also established for identification of non-fermenting gram-negative bacteria isolated from cystic fibrosis patients in brazil  <cit> . patients with cystic fibrosis suffer primarily under infections with pseudomonads, but burkholderiae play also an important role. in the brazilian study a comprehensive number of burkholderia species was included and could be identified correctly in most cases. however, neither b. pseudomallei nor b. mallei were among the clinical isolates tested. sporadic cases of melioidosis in cystic fibrosis patients have been described in the literature and seem to be an emerging problem  <cit> . due to increased travel activity, international trade, climate change, and the potential threat of bioterrorist attacks infections caused by b. pseudomallei and b. mallei can become a serious problem.

the aim of this study was to evaluate the potential benefit of maldi-tof ms for the rapid and reliable identification and differentiation of b. pseudomallei and b. mallei.

RESULTS
construction of a reference database
a custom made set of  <dig> reference spectra, which are called main spectra  in the maldi biotyper terminology , was generated and used as the basis for all further calculations. this reference spectra set included all strains listed in table  <dig>  and additionally samples from b. ambifaria , b. cenocepacia , b. dolosa , b. glathei , b. multivorans , b. stabilis , and b. thailandensis . this set of  <dig> samples will be referred to as the ‘custom reference set’. the full set of maldi biotyper reference database entries will be referred to as ‘maldi biotyper reference set’. in a first analysis, spectra of the custom reference set were queried against a combined database composed of the custom reference set of  <dig> burkholderia samples and the maldi biotyper reference set. for every queried spectrum, maldi biotyper software generates a score-based ranked list of organisms. the organism with the highest score is ranked first  and its species is taken as the result of the query. msp scores are calculated by an algorithm that compares the masses of a tested sample with those present in the msp of the spectra collection by agglomeration of scores for every mass and performing a normalisation that will result in a final value between  <dig>  and  <dig> . for convenience, the result is given as logarithmic value smaller than or equal to  <dig> . masses of the tested spectrum will be scored in a weighted fashion depending on their location within a narrower or a wider mass tolerance window centred on the masses of the msp. additionally, the score for every coinciding mass of the tested spectrum will be weighted according to the frequency with which the corresponding mass of the msp has been found in the single spectra that were used for the construction of the msp. thus, scores carry information on the number of coinciding masses found in the tested spectrum and the msp, the mass aberration that is observed between the corresponding masses of the tested spectrum and the msp and the reproducibility of the respective masses of the msp. cut-off values for reliable species determination cannot be theoretically calculated and have to be determined empirically. according to the manufacturer, experience has shown that scores exceeding  <dig>  will allow reliable genus identification and species identification in the majority of cases. scores calculated for all spectra of the custom reference set among them are summarized in figure  <dig>  in the hit lists of all tested specimen, the highest-ranking entry represented the same species as the tested specimen, indicating that, within the given database, the standard maldi biotyper identification procedure reliably allows the determination of burkholderia species including the differentiation between b. mallei and b. pseudomallei. even though species identification was correct in all cases, the distribution of scores in figure  <dig> gave rise to concern about the reliability of the discrimination of the three members of the pseudomallei group: b. thailandensis produced relatively high scores with some of the b. mallei and b. pseudomallei samples, and b. pseudomallei generally produced relatively high scores with b. mallei. therefore, a set of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei samples was additionally cultivated and processed in two different laboratories and queried using the custom reference set as database in order to challenge the identification procedure. it is known that cultivation conditions can influence the outcome of icms experiments. in an interlaboratory comparison that was performed in three laboratories with b. thailandensis we had observed that cultivation on different growth media , chocolate agar, and mcconkey agar) and different cultivation periods  had a notable influence on the scores in the identification procedure . to avoid any variance caused by differing growth conditions, all b. mallei and b.pseudomallei were grown on csb and the cultivation period of 48 h was strictly observed.

t type strain.

*constituents of the reduced reference set dedicated for the discrimination of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei.

characteristics of burkholderia  mallei and b. pseudomallei strains used to establish the database for the identification and differentiation with maldi-tof mass spectrometry. species identity was confirmed by real-time pcr assays targeting a sequence of the flic gene that is specific for both species but does not discriminate b. mallei from b. pseudomallei. the real-time pcr assay targeting flip is specific for b. mallei. motility was also assessed as a phenotypic marker because b. pseudomallei is motile while b. mallei is not.

discrimination of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei
scores between b. mallei samples listed in table  <dig> ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig> , whereas those between b. pseudomallei samples ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig> . for b. mallei samples, the score range over  <dig>  was completely reserved for correct species assignments and the top scores of all isolates reached this threshold. due to the stronger variation of b. pseudomallei, such a well-defined threshold for correct species assignments could not be defined for this species.

as msp will usually not be constructed for routine samples, the identification procedure with maldi biotyper was repeated with single spectra of the b. mallei and b. pseudomallei samples from table  <dig>  the results were very similar to those obtained with msp. for b. mallei samples, scores between  <dig>  and  <dig>  were observed, whereas b. pseudomallei were recognized with scores in the range from  <dig>  to  <dig> . the top-ranking hit of the hit-list correctly indicated the species of all queried samples. scores of all top-ranking hits exceeded  <dig> . construction of a score-based dendrogram of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei samples  with maldi biotyper software resulted in the expected clustering of the two species. interestingly, the b. pseudomallei type strain atcc  <dig> separated notably from other b. pseudomallei representatives. this was at least in part caused by the appearance of two series of masses between  <dig>  and  <dig>  da and  <dig>  and  <dig>  da which were not detected in any of the other samples . the observation of multiple mass differences of 14 da in these series suggests that they were caused by multiple methylations being specific for this strain. the mass series reproducibly appeared in all single spectra used to calculate the msp of the b. pseudomallei strain atcc  <dig> and were also observed in independent replicates of the spectra with a freshly cultivated specimen. the identity of the modified molecule is unknown. a dendrogram was constructed from the msp of the b. mallei and b. pseudomallei strains listed in table  <dig> and the burkholderia, chromobacterium, and rhodococcus species from table  <dig> which were added from the maldi biotyper database . as expected, score-based distances between b. mallei and b. pseudomallei were smaller than between the other burkholderia species and b. mallei/b. pseudomallei and b. thailandensis formed a distinct group which was separated from the other species of the burkholderia genus.

t type strain.

list of bacteria to be differentiated from burkholderia mallei and burkholderia pseudomallei using maldi-tof mass spectrometry. these bacteria include closely related bacteria, possible sample contaminants, bacteria with very similar clinical presentation and other relevant bacteria. msp reference spectra were constructed for the species indicated with an asterisk ; all other samples indicate isolates of the maldi biotyper database.

the distance relations of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei were further analysed after transfer of the mass lists into statistical programming language r. based on the mass alignment, a cluster analysis was performed, a distance matrix was calculated, and the distances within and between the b. mallei and b. pseudomallei strains were calculated. to test the influence of the peak intensities on the clustering behavior, cluster analysis was performed with the quantitative and qualitative data. for the latter purpose the quantitative alignment containing the intensities of every mass peak was transformed into a qualitative binary table by marking the absence or presence of a mass with  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. from both tables, distance matrices were calculated and visualized as sammon-plots . for qualitative and quantitative data the average normalized distances between b. mallei strains were smaller than between b. pseudomallei strains  confirming the score-based clustering in figure  <dig> that suggests a higher variation among b. pseudomallei than among b. mallei strains. as a measure for the separation of the two species, the weighted ratio between the distances of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei strains within the species and the distances between the species was calculated. transition from qualitative to quantitative data showed slight improvement  in the species separation indicating that peak intensities are relevant for the discrimination of the two species and should not be neglected. cluster analysis with the quantitative data using the k-means algorithm indicated the presence of two clusters which were congruent with the two burkholderia species whereas cluster analysis based on the qualitative data failed to do so. on basis of the qualitative data, which weights every mass equally for the calculation of the distance, b. pseudomallei atcc  <dig> was notably separated from all other spectra, most probably because of the multiple modifications shown in figure  <dig> 

as some b. mallei and b. pseudomallei specimen from the reference spectrum set produced quite high scores with the respective other species, it was essential to test the practicability of the custom reference set in a routine laboratory setting with samples prepared in a different laboratory. the panel of samples used for this test  only partially overlapped with the custom reference set  so that not only inter-laboratory variation was tested but also the ability of the custom reference set to discriminate newly appearing isolates like those from a glanders outbreak in the united arabic emirates in  <dig> 

*b. mallei isolates from several horses isolated during the glanders outbreak in uae  <dig> 

list of strains used to evaluate the reliability of icms-based discrimination of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei using a dedicated set of reference strains. column ‘score’ designates the score value of the top-ranking hit in the dedicated database, which in all cases represented the same species as the tested sample. .

using the complete custom reference set as database a number of misclassifications of the test set isolates occurred. considering the distribution of scores  and the distance relations between b. mallei and b. pseudomallei , this was not unexpected and obviously a consequence of the indiscriminate inclusion of all available b. mallei and b. pseudomallei samples into the custom reference set. classification could be substantially improved by selecting combinations of isolates of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei to form a dedicated reference set which is optimized for the discrimination of the two species. to screen the complete custom reference set of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei for appropriate combinations of isolates, the outcome of a database query was simulated with all permutations of up to four members of each species. the smallest reference group yielding error-free results was composed of two b. mallei  and three b. pseudomallei  isolates which are highlighted by an asterisk in table  <dig>  not surprisingly, these isolates located close to the centers of their respective species in the sammon plot visualization of the distance matrix .

finally, multivariate statistics on basis of the four different statistical approaches  available in clinprotools  <dig>  showed that b. mallei and b. pseudomallei could be well separated with cross validation results ranging between  <dig> % and  <dig> % . principal component analysis  carried out with clinprotools  <dig>   further confirmed the separation of both species and also the broader distribution of b. pseudomallei in comparison with b. mallei.

identification of taxon-specific biomarker ions
mass spectra of the reference spectrum set were analysed for species-specific masses which may be used for species identification independent of the score values considered so far. for that purpose the mass lists of the msp generated with maldi biotyper software were evaluated in detail. an alignment of all masses occurring in the spectra was constructed as a table in which every column represented the mass spectrum of a sample and every row the intensity of a mass occurring in a certain mass range. the alignment contained a total of  <dig> masses. one of them,  <dig>  da, was found in the spectra of all  <dig> samples and also in every one of the single spectra underlying the msps so that this mass can be considered a reliable indicator of the set of nine burkholderia species that was analysed . seven more masses  were present in all b. mallei and b. pseudomallei samples but also in one or more of the other burkholderia species. considering the close relation of b. thailandensis with b. mallei and b. pseudomallei, mass  <dig>  da is of interest, which was specific for all b. mallei, b. pseudomallei, and b. thailandensis samples, i.e. the pseudomallei group. finally,  <dig>  da was present in all b. mallei and b. pseudomallei samples but in none of the other species, making it an effective discriminator between the b. mallei/pseudomallei group and the other representatives of the genus burkholderia. concerning the distinction of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei, statistical analysis with clinprotools  <dig>  software revealed a number of masses with significant class separation between the two species based on peak intensity. most significant separation could be obtained based on the masses  <dig>  and  <dig>  which differ significantly in intensity between the two species.

discussion
in recent years maldi-tof ms has been introduced in microbiological laboratories as a time saving diagnostic approach supplementing morphological, biochemical, and molecular techniques for identification of microbes  <cit> . in several studies the comparability with conventional identification procedures was assessed with generally good correlation, but discordances were seen on the species and even on the genus level  <cit> . this proteomic profiling approach was successfully applied in routine identification of bacterial isolates from blood culture with the exception of polymicrobial samples and streptococci  <cit> . the identification of burkholderia spp. and other non-fermenting bacteria using maldi-tof ms was investigated in cystic fibrosis  patients as burkholderia spp.  cause a relevant number of life-threatening infections in these patients  <cit> . it was demonstrated that maldi-tof ms is a useful tool for rapid identification in the routine laboratory. b. pseudomallei can be the cause of melioidosis in cf patients and travelers to tropical regions, but this bacterium and the closely related species b. mallei was not included in previous maldi-tof ms studies  <cit> . natural catastrophes like the tsunami in indonesia  and occasional flooding in other tropical regions resulted in elevated incidence of melioidosis and several cases among travelers and tourists  <cit> . b. mallei and b. pseudomallei are biological agents which further underlines the need for rapid detection tools. identification of burkholderia ssp. and distinction of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei from other species was feasible. this was also true for the closely related bacterium b. thailandensis. all strains grew well within 48 hours and could then be readily prepared for maldi-tof ms.

due to the close relationship of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei, it was not surprising that the search for species-identifying biomarker ions discriminating these species was not successful. obviously, more complicated mass signatures are required for this purpose and, as we could show after separate statistical evaluation of qualitative and quantitative data, peak intensities also play a crucial role for the discrimination of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei. however, group-specific masses like  <dig>  da, standing for the pseudomallei complex  or  <dig> , exclusively found in b. mallei and b. pseudomallei may be of use for the discrimination of these three species.

for the identification of b. mallei and b. pseudomallei samples under routine laboratory conditions, it was necessary to reduce the reference spectrum set to avoid misclassifications. interestingly, the reference spectrum set optimized for spectrum-based discrimination neither contained the type strain atcc 23344t  nor atcc 23343t . one reason for the exclusion of atcc  <dig> could be the occurrence of two peak series with repeating mass increments of 14 da most probably representing polymethylated proteins. this strain has been shown to have unique immunological features. in an immunization experiment with a panel of  <dig> b. pseudomallei strains, atcc  <dig> induced monoclonal antibodies in mice which did not cross-react with any of the other b. pseudomallei strains  <cit> . these peculiarities may indicate that this type strain has been genetically modified by frequent subcultivation or misuse of media. to our knowledge, similar modifications which may have an impact on classification of bacteria have not been reported to-date. these series were specific for the isolate and also for two molecules within the observed mass range.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have demonstrated that isolates of the closely related species b. mallei and b. pseudomallei can be identified using maldi-tof ms. dangerous and cumbersome handling under bsl  <dig> conditions can be minimized by inactivation of the isolates with ethanol and subsequent maldi-tof ms analysis that requires much less time than nucleic acid amplification methods  <cit> . the reference spectra exhibited a higher homogeneity among b. mallei than among b. pseudomallei. the type strain of b. pseudomallei atcc  <dig> was isolated decades ago and separated from the other b. pseudomallei specimens in the dendrograms which is probably due to polymethylation as indicated by two intensive series of mass increments of 14 da. to our knowledge, this is the first report of such a modification in whole cell maldi-tof ms spectra of microorganisms. as expected for closely related species, especially when one of them, b. pseudomallei, displays the broad distribution of maldi-phenotypes that was observed, the identification process requires the selection of spectra from representatives of the centers of their respective distance distributions. uncritical inclusion of all available samples as references in a library was counterproductive for the identification process. only by selecting an appropriate set of reference spectra  it was possible to identify all strains. this underlines the need for careful curation of reference spectra databases used for the identification of microorganisms.

