BACKGROUND
micrornas  are small non-coding rnas that are important regulators of biological processes in animals and plants. mirnas regulate gene expression at the posttranscriptional level by binding to mrnas and either inhibit translation or modify the stability of the mrna. due to the important biological role of mirnas it is of great interest to study their expression level in the cells. furthermore, mirnas have been associated with cancer and other diseases  <cit>  and mirna expression can help in the diagnosis and prognostic of human disease  <cit> . the discovery of mirnas in blood and their surprisingly high stability holds great promise for diagnosis of human disease with mirnas as biomarkers  <cit> . several studies have shown that the amount of individual mirnas in blood is affected by human disease and that the level of specific mirnas can be used as a diagnostic tool .

the three methods most frequently used for detection of mirnas are high-throughput sequencing, microarrays and reverse transcription quantitative pcr . the latter method is used independently and for validating data obtained from high-throughput sequencing and microarrays. it is challenging to design pcr primers for mirnas as the typical mirna is only  <dig> bases long, which is about the same size as a conventional pcr primer. several methods have been developed to overcome this problem. chen and coworkers  <cit>  developed stem-loop rt-pcr where reverse transcription is done at low temperature with a specially designed loop-primer followed by pcr with one specific primer and a universal primer. the pcr product is detected with a taqman probe. although the method requires a specific rt primer for each mirna, this method can be performed as multiplex so that one rt reaction can be used as template for several qpcr reactions  <cit> . unfortunately, stem-loop rt-pcr does not allow the user to control the specificity of the reaction by melting curve analysis and the taqman probe does not contribute to specificity as the probe binds to the part of the cdna sequence that originates from the rt primer. thus, if the rt primer binds to another sequence than the mirna of interest, this will lead to incorporation of the binding site of the taqman probe and this unspecific amplicon will be indistinguishable from the desired pcr product.

the recently published method based on circularization of the mirna also depends on a specific primer for reverse transcription  <cit>  and may be difficult to adapt to multiplexing. furthermore, circularization by rna ligase is sensitive to sequence bias  <cit> .

another way to perform mirna qpcr is to add a poly tail to the mirna and use a tagged poly primer for reverse transcription  <cit> . subsequently, pcr is performed with a mirna-specific primer and a universal primer. this method is very convenient when the amount of sample is limiting, which is often the case for samples such as biopsies and microdissected samples, and when mirna concentrations are low such as in blood, because it only requires a single rt reaction to generate a template for detection of all mirnas. however, as only one specific primer is used for pcr there is little degree of freedom in primer design and specificity could be an issue. especially the discrimination between closely related mirnas that differ by only one or a few nucleotides can be difficult using this method.

the method called universal rt microrna pcr combines the benefits of a universal rt reaction with the specificity of two mirna-specific pcr primers  <cit> . the pcr product is detected with the intercalating dye sybr-green that allows the control of unwanted pcr products by melting curve analysis. the method relies on poly tailing of the mirnas followed by reverse transcription with a tagged poly primer. pcr is performed with two specific primers that are spiked with locked nucleic acid  to increase the tm and the specificity. although the pcr reactions are specific and discriminate well between closely related mirnas, they often exhibit a low amplification efficiency which is a common cause of inaccurate quantification. this is in agreement with the observation that sequences containing lna are poor templates for most dna polymerases  <cit> .

in the present study we describe that qpcr with two mirna-specific dna primers leads to higher amplification efficiency than qpcr with lna-spiked primers. in addition, this method has all the benefits regarding freedom of primer design and specificity of the lna-based method. optimization of primer tm and high specificity of the pcr reaction is achieved by adding a tail to each of the pcr primers.

RESULTS
mir-specific qpcr of mirnas combines the benefits of a universal rt reaction with the specificity of two mir-specific primers for qpcr . we designed mir-specific dna primers  and tested them at different concentrations in real-time pcr of synthetic mir templates in a background of salmon sperm dna. a final concentration of  <dig> nm of each primer was found to be optimal for qpcr . this primer concentration gave significantly lower cq values than  <dig> nm primer whereas  <dig> nm primer did not reduce the cq values further.

the pcr reactions were linear over a range of eight log <dig> of synthetic template , produced one peak in melting curve analysis  and exhibited a good correlation between cq and template concentration .

amplification of mirnas from biological samples yielded similar amplification curves as for synthetic templates  and melting curve analysis indicated the presence of only one amplicon . in addition, there was a good correlation between cq and template concentration over four log <dig> dilutions when biological samples were used  .

to test the hypothesis that lna can inhibit pcr amplification by decreasing the amplification efficiency we compared the efficiency of amplification of  <dig> mirnas from porcine uterus with commercially available lna-spiked primers sets from exiqon  and with dna primers without lna. with lna-spiked primers, amplification efficiencies ranged from  <dig> to 95% for  <dig> of the  <dig> assays. the last assay  had an apparent efficiency of 85% but more than one peak appeared in the melting curve analysis of the pcr product . this indicates that the assay is unspecific and it was excluded from the analysis of assay efficiency . amplification efficiencies with dna primers ranged from  <dig> to 102%  and were significantly higher than with lna-spiked primers . on average, the pcr reactions with dna primers yielded  <dig> % higher efficiency than lna-spiked primers corresponding to a  <dig>  fold higher sensitivity after  <dig> cycles of pcr. melting curve analysis of the let-7d assay with dna primers only yielded one peak corroborating that this assay was specific .

the ability of dna primers to distinguish between mirnas with a single base difference was tested for three cases where the one base difference was in the part of the mirna sequence used for forward primer design and two cases where the difference was in the sequence used for reverse primer design . on average, qpcr of the specific template gave almost 100-fold higher signal than amplification of the template with a single base difference . for example, amplification of let-7a with the let-7a assay gave a cq that was  <dig>  cycles lower than amplification of the same amount of let-7e with the let-7a assay corresponding to a difference of  <dig> fold in favor of the intended template compared to the single base mismatch .

to investigate the effect of different pcr master mixes on the performance of mir-specific qpcr with dna primers we compared the amplification of synthetic templates with the quantifast sybr green pcr master mix  and the brilliant iii ultra-fast qpcr master mix . there was no difference in amplification efficiency  for the five assays tested  between the two master mixes and all the assays gave one peak in melting curve analysis and were comparable over eight log <dig> of template concentration . the different tm  in the two master mixes may probably be attributed to different composition of the buffers.

mir-specific qpcr of let-7a, mir- <dig>  mir-23a and mir- <dig> with dna primers on rna from six different pig tissues showed expression levels from  <dig> copies per pg total rna up to almost  <dig> copies per pg total rna . expression of let-7a was remarkably stable with differences below  <dig> fold between the six tissues. regardless of the level of expression  and the type of tissue, the assays yielded products with one peak in melting curve analysis as expected for specific pcr amplifications . the same expression profile of the four mirs in the same six samples  was obtained with lna primers but the cq values were one cycle higher on average .

discussion
mir-specific qpcr is a relatively new method that holds great promise. the use of two mir-specific primers makes the method as specific as stem-loop rt-pcr and the reverse transcription is performed with a universal primer compatible with all qpcr primer pairs and is therefore optimal for analysis of small rna samples and for high-throughput screening  <cit> . furthermore, detection with intercalating dye allows characterization of the pcr product by melting curve analysis. mirna pcr may produce unwanted side products that can only be detected by melting curve analysis.

commercially available primers for mir-specific qpcr are spiked with lna . in the present study we found that qpcr reactions with lna-spiked primers had a tendency to exhibit low amplification efficiencies, which makes accurate quantification more difficult  <cit> . although several algorithms that account for amplification efficiency are available to calculate the original template concentration from real-time pcr data  <cit>  low amplification efficiency is a sign that the amplification reaction is suboptimal and will in all cases lead to lower sensitivity of the pcr reaction  <cit> . however, we found that dna primers can be successfully used for mir-specific qpcr and that the use of dna gives significantly higher amplification efficiencies than lna-spiked primers. low tm is often a problem in case of the short primers designed for a mirna template. this issue can be solved by spiking lna into the sequence to increase the tm  <cit> . however, the same can be achieved by adding an artificial sequence to the 5' end of the primer as done for the stem-loop rt-pcr method  <cit> . in the present report we optimized forward primer tm to 59°c by adding an artificial sequence at the 5' end and found that these primers performed well in mir-specific qpcr. the reverse primer for mir-specific pcr is constructed with a short, specific sequence that varies from 4- <dig> bases at the 3' end followed by a  <dig> bases long thymidine stretch as in the rt primer and finally, a 5' end tail  that can be varied in length to optimize the tm  <cit> . strictly speaking the primer is not specific as only the last  <dig> -  <dig> bases in the 3' end are complementary to the mirna. however, this short sequence combined with the thymidine stretch is sufficient to confer high specificity to the pcr reaction. e.g. templates without a polya tail or premirs that extend the mir at the 3' end are not amplified  <cit> . it was reported that it is necessary to spike an lna into the reverse primer to avoid aberrant amplification products but this effect was only demonstrated for primers with very high tm   <cit> . we found that when the tm of the reverse primer is optimized to 59°c, which is the optimal tm for the forward primer, the lna is no longer crucial for successful pcr.

a possible explanation of the lower amplification efficiency with lna-spiked primers is that for short targets such as mirnas the primers that are incorporated into the template during amplification will lead to a high proportion of lna in the template that will decrease the efficiency of subsequent pcr cycles. this possibility is supported by differences between the solution structure of a dna:lna helix and the structure of double-stranded dna  <cit>  and that nucleotide incorporation opposite to an lna base may be difficult for some polymerases  <cit> . a second possibility is that the lna-spiked primers may be more prone to form secondary structures that will lower the efficient primer concentration available to hybridize to the template. stem-loop rt pcr is performed with dna primers  <cit>  and should therefore have the same efficiency as mir-specific qpcr with dna primers provided that the detection method does not influence efficiency. measurement of the efficiency of  <dig> stem-loop rt pcr assays gave an average efficiency of 94% ±  <dig>   <cit> . as expected this efficiency is not significantly different from the average efficiency  for the  <dig> mir-specific qpcr assays with dna primers reported in the present study  but it is higher than the average efficiency  for the  <dig> mir-specific qpcr assays with lna-spiked primers reported in the present study . it therefore seems that dna primers give higher amplification efficiency of mirna templates than lna-spiked primers independently of whether intercalating dye or taqman probes are used for detection.

the lower dissociation rates of double-stranded dna containing lna bases  <cit>  suggest that pcr with lna-spiked primers requires longer denaturation times. however, the recommended protocol  has a denaturation time of  <dig> seconds which should be more than sufficient.

the use of two specific primers for each mirna allows for design of several different primer sets. e.g, for a  <dig> bases sequence the forward primer can be from 15- <dig> bases long and the reverse primer  can be from 4- <dig> bases long and the combination of two primers will still cover all of the sequence. this is in contrast to pcr methods with one specific primer, where the primer should always be as long as possible. one significant advantage of this freedom of design is that when discriminating between two mirnas with a single base mismatch, it is easier to design primers with the 3' end close to the mismatch position, which is optimal for mismatch discrimination  <cit> . in agreement with this, mir-specific qpcr efficiently discriminates between related mirnas .

another indication of the robustness of mir-specific qpcr is that the pcr can be performed in different master mixes both with lna and with dna primers .

of the  <dig> assays designed for the present study,  <dig> worked well in qpcr, which is a success rate of 94% for primer design. for the failed primer set the forward and the reverse primers were able to form primer dimers and redesign of the primers solved this problem. by taking primer dimer formation into account it may be possible to reach even higher design success rates for dna primers. in contrast, the success rate of lna-spiked primers is 70% when dimer formation is ignored and 80% when accounting for putative primer dimer formation  <cit> . although the primer design data set for both dna and lna-spiked primers are limited, the difference suggests that dna primers may be easier to design than lna-spiked primers in agreement with that the design rules for lna-spiked primers are complex and slight variations in lna number, position and sequence context can yield different results  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, mir-specific qpcr is a useful method for mirna detection and the present study demonstrates that the use of dna primers without lna gives high pcr efficiencies that allow for precise quantification of the target.

