BACKGROUND
in the present climate, many low-latitude mountain ranges are environmentally isolated from one another by intervening low elevation habitat. geological and paleoecological data indicate that cooling global climate led to the historical growth of alpine glaciers  <cit>  and to down-slope range shifts of montane vegetation  <cit> . it has been argued that ice age climates provided environmental corridors between mountain ranges that enabled arctic and alpine populations to migrate into and among sky-islands  <cit> . this hypothesis suggests that the expansion of continental and alpine glaciers during recent climatic cycles of the pliocene and pleistocene epochs facilitated spatial expansion of populations in alpine environments and, subsequently, contraction of these glaciers led to the diversification of geographically isolated lineages.

molecular genetic studies support this hypothesis in several ways. first, several wide-ranging arctic species also inhabit alpine habitats  <cit>  and these isolated populations exhibit recent genetic divergence  <cit> . this is most easily explained by colonization events or gene flow during the last glacial cycle. second, many alpine species comprise closely related populations separated on geographically distant mountain ranges. these patterns are evident in mountainous regions in north america  <cit> , japan  <cit> , europe , and new zealand  <cit> . finally, several molecular studies examining divergence patterns of populations on separate mountains have detected low levels of gene flow during the divergence process, implying connectivity during glacial periods  <cit> . fossil remains also suggest that winged insects  <cit>  and plants commonly exhibit widespread range shifts during glacial cycles  <cit> .

most of the alpine organisms exhibiting these spatial patterns are highly vagile species. in contrast, many alpine species that have low vagility are considered to be restricted endemics and often form species complexes within mountain ranges  <cit> . the phylogeographic history of low vagility organisms might therefore exhibit different patterns  <cit>  and can offer several important contributions to the study of alpine biogeographic history. first, population diversification of poorly dispersing species might provide insight on the effects of alpine glaciations within mountain ranges, in particular by delineating the spatial location of climatic refugia. second, the temporal pattern of diversification within and between these species might provide information on the relative impact of different glacial cycles because poorly dispersing populations are more likely to diverge genetically due to the stochastic effects of genetic drift  <cit> . third, low vagility species provide an opportunity to understand the dispersal history of populations in alpine environments. for example, these species clarify whether shifts in elevation are necessary to the survival of alpine populations, or if populations managed to survive in high elevation refugia . similarly, under a "progression-rule" biogeographic model  <cit> , ancestral-descendent relationships could be used to infer the direction of colonization into mountain ranges by a dispersing population.

in this study, the evolutionary history of a low vagility species complex is examined within california. grylloblatta species , or ice-crawlers, are members of an ancient lineage that evolved during the radiation of neopterous insects  <cit> . all grylloblatta species are cryophilic, with an obligate link to stable near-freezing temperatures. acute physiological temperature tolerance ranges from - <dig>  to 10°c in an undescribed species on mt. ranier  <cit> , and low temperature tolerance is a conserved trait in the genus  <cit> . very few arthropods survive prolonged exposure to temperatures experienced on snow fields, but grylloblatta have a foraging strategy utilizing snow-fields, where wind-blown insects and organic detritus are deposited  and form an energy rich resource for scavenging insects  <cit> . while five extant genera of grylloblattidae are known, less than thirty species have been described. these species occur in northeastern asia  and western north america . a single genus, grylloblatta, occurs in north america with eleven described species, five of which occur in california. in california, grylloblatta species are restricted to montane areas, caves, and deep canyons, and within these habitats remain in close proximity to permanent ice and deep retreats in rock outcrops. previous to this study, most of the california species were known from type localities and are extremely rare in entomological collections.

kamp  <cit> , working on populations of grylloblattids in northeastern california and the canadian rocky mountains, proposed that contemporary populations were relicts of populations broadly distributed in periglacial habitat during glacial periods. he hypothesized that 1) populations expanded their geographic range during glacial cycles and that 2) alpine populations colonized high elevation habitat after the retreat of glacial ice. we set out to test kamp's  <cit>  ideas by studying the genetic relationships of california grylloblatta populations in the context of alpine glacial cycles in california. we attempt to explicitly test whether the diversification of grylloblatta in california is intimately tied to glacial-interglacial fluctuations during the pleistocene. previous studies have shown that low vagility organisms often exhibit deep genetic breaks due to stochastic processes  <cit> . while these genetic breaks can occur at random in continuously distributed populations  <cit> , they also occur due to evolutionary and environmental events that impede gene flow  <cit> . multi-locus phylogenies offer a way to distinguish between random and non-random genetic breaks  <cit> . a previous multi-locus phylogeny of grylloblattid populations in both the pacific northwest and northeastern asia  <cit>  showed a recurrent pattern of deep genetic subdivision over a small geographical area, suggesting that california grylloblattids might provide similar levels of phylogenetic substructure. we therefore utilize genetic sequence data from multiple independent loci to infer the population genetic history, phylogenetic relationships and diversification time of california grylloblatta species. our results support kamp's hypothesis that grylloblatta populations expanded spatially at the edges of glacial habitat. furthermore, we provide evidence that pleistocene climatic shifts have had a direct role in grylloblatta species formation.

RESULTS
population genetic patterns of grylloblatta
a total of  <dig> individuals of grylloblatta from  <dig> sites  were screened for genetic variation at four genes. there were  <dig> unique coii haplotypes, with one individual  having two highly divergent copies. these copies were amplified with two different primer sets, never co-amplified, and yet translate into appropriate amino acid residues. although it is unclear whether or not this individual has acquired a nuclear mitochondrial dna gene , or is heteroplasmic, analyses using alternate copies did not significantly alter phylogenetic results. the copy amplified from the least degenerate mitochondrial primers was chosen for subsequent divergence time analyses. there were  <dig> unique sequences of the nuclear histone  gene,  <dig> unique sequences of the nuclear  <dig> s gene, and  <dig> unique sequences of the nuclear  <dig> s gene. the combined sequences included a total of  <dig>  sites , with considerable rate variation among genes . all sequences have been deposited in ncbi's genbank .

*relative substitution rates are based on a fixed mean rate of evolution across lineages .

in five well-sampled alpine populations, within-population genetic variation is quite low . mitochondrial dna variation approaches zero in the sonora pass, white mountain and graveyard lakes populations . in contrast, the barker pass and susie lake populations exhibit slightly higher mtdna variation . in all populations, variation in the nuclear gene histone is low and approaches zero. tests for deviation from neutral equilibrium are non-significant in most populations, although some show a trend towards negative d and fs values. the susie lake population exhibits significant negative d and fs values in the histone locus, possibly indicating recent population expansion. mismatch distribution tests for most populations across loci were consistent with a model of sudden population expansion, the exception being the barker pass population for coii. under a spatial population expansion model, mismatch distributions were qualitatively similar .

*statistical tests significant at α =  <dig>  are labeled with an asterisk.

estimates of phylogenetic relationships
the concatenated phylogenies estimated from the unrooted bayesian analysis  and the maximum likelihood bootstrap analysis  are very similar. notable differences in the relationships of a few lineages  under these two methods largely concern the order of early branching events in the phylogeny. separate bayesian analyses of the mitochondrial data  and nuclear data  provide similar topologies to the bayesian concatenated phylogeny, although fine scale geographic structure is only evident in the mitochondrial data. the concatenated phylogenetic analysis identifies three to four major lineages, with substantial phylogeographic structure within these lineages . the first lineage represents the oregon cave sample of southern oregon. the second lineage includes two unique taxa, g. gurneyi and g. chandleri, sampled from northeastern california. the third lineage includes all individuals from the sierra nevada. in the maximum likelihood analysis, a fourth lineage is identified, which is nested within the sierra nevada lineage in the bayesian analysis. this lineage includes g. rothi  and g. barberi , which form a sister group in both analyses. within the sierra nevada lineage, there is further subdivision into two major clades, including a northern sierra nevada clade and a southern sierra nevada clade . within each of the sierra nevada clades there are strongly supported monophyletic groups that are geographically subdivided. the northern sierra nevada includes g. bifratrilecta, g. washoa, and a tioga crest subclade . the southern sierra nevada clade includes a southwest sierra nevada and a central sierra nevada subclade , as well as a deeply divergent subclade including ostrander lake-indian cave, lillburn cave, and a unique individual at graveyard lakes. the unusual graveyard lakes specimen is a juvenile which was sympatric and actively foraging with grylloblattids from the central sierra nevada lineage, yet exhibits  <dig> % uncorrected mtdna divergence as well as unique nuclear alleles. the subclade including ostrander lake-indian cave, lillburn cave and the graveyard lake specimen are sister to the alpine populations in the southern sierra nevada. there is further geographic subdivision within the alpine subclades, notably north  to south  in g. bifratrilecta and northeast , north , and south  in the central sierra nevada subclade.

temporal pattern of diversification
time to most recent common ancestor  was estimated using a bayesian relaxed clock model with two different methods: an unscaled, fixed evolutionary rate and a calibrated molecular clock . unscaled estimates of tmrca provide a representation of the tempo of diversification, unbiased by a prior on the molecular substitution rate. in the alpine populations, pulses of diversification are evident at several different time intervals, first in the diversification within the northern and southern sierra nevada clades, then in the diversification of subclades , and finally in the diversification within populations of these subclades . the time of divergence roughly doubles across these different levels and this is clear in the unscaled relaxed clock estimates, as well as the clock analysis. however, median estimates of tmrca in both methods result in large confidence intervals and the lineage through time plot  does not indicate synchronous pulses of diversification. instead, divergence rates are shown to be high in the past relative to a constant-rate model, with a subsequent decline and a more recent recovery.

 <dig>  based on a fixed mean rate of evolution across lineages .

 <dig>  based on a mean rate calibration for coii .

the calibrated molecular clock estimates have large confidence intervals, but the median estimates of tmrca suggest grylloblatta species inhabited california before the onset of the pleistocene . tmrca of major lineages in the sierra nevada are estimated to be in the early pleistocene  and during the early to middle pleistocene for geographically isolated subclades in the sierra nevada.

discussion
phylogenetic relationships among california grylloblatta
previous phylogenetic analysis  <cit>  demonstrated that north american grylloblatta are monophyletic and derived from a northeast asian grylloblattid ancestor, and that grylloblatta was split into two deeply divergent lineages occupying the northern cascades and southern oregon-california. by increasing the taxonomic and spatial sampling of grylloblatta in california, our analysis reveals a deep split in the sierra nevada with a high degree of local geographic subdivision. both bayesian and maximum likelihood methods identify a basal polytomy of three major lineages. these lineages include an oregon cave lineage, a northeastern california lineage, and a sierra nevada lineage. a fourth lineage is identified in the maximum likelihood analysis, comprised of southern cascades g. rothi and northern californian g. barberi, but is alternatively nested in the sierra nevada lineage in the bayesian analysis. this conflict might result from differences in methodological assumptions and/or long-branch effects. all currently recognized species in california form discrete monophyletic groups and correspond to subclades within the major lineages. the northeastern california lineage includes g. gurneyi and g. chandleri. the northern sierra nevada clade includes g. bifratrilecta and g. washoa. the monophyly of these groups indicates that morphological criteria have been useful in delineating distinct evolutionary lineages. however, other monophyletic groups of similar levels of genetic divergence are present in the sierra nevada, including populations along the tioga crest, the southwest sierra, and the central sierra. several other specimens from unique low elevation sites  are highly divergent from and sister to alpine subclades. finally, one specimen collected at graveyard lakes is genetically distinct, with unique alleles at all loci . this specimen may represent a sympatric population that has come into contact but is reproductively isolated from the central sierra nevada lineage. most of the sierra nevada populations sampled in our study represent new localities and several monophyletic clades may represent undescribed species.

biogeographic patterns of lineage diversification
the diversification of grylloblattids in north america has taken place over a large geographic region that has experienced a complex geological and climatic history  <cit> . despite dramatic environmental events, including periodic volcanic eruptions, grylloblatta have managed to persist and recolonize alpine habitats  <cit> . they are currently found in small, relictual populations where local microenvironments provide cold temperature retreats. the major division of north american grylloblatta occurs between a northern cascades-rocky mountain clade and a california-southern oregon clade  <cit> . this provides little information about the geographic origin of californian taxa, but indicates that a common ancestor diversified across western north america in the distant past. furthermore, a basal polytomy in our phylogenetic analysis leaves the relationship of major california lineages unresolved. the oregon cave lineage is isolated in the lower slopes of the siskiyou mountains, which stretch south into the california trinity alps and mount shasta region. this population is at the southern end of the cascades range and represents the most likely source of colonization into california. however, the unusual relationship and placement of g. rothi and g. barberi suggests that there may have been multiple dispersal events between oregon and california, perhaps utilizing other biogeographic corridors.

relationships of the remaining california taxa are particularly interesting, because these species are a mix of low elevation relict populations and alpine populations. kamp  <cit>  proposed that taxa in northeastern california were relicts of populations broadly distributed in periglacial habitat during glacial periods. the geographical location of widely separated populations of g. chandleri supports this hypothesis, as these populations lie within the periglacial zone of mt. lassen. g. chandleri and g. gurneyi form a highly divergent monophyletic group in northeastern california, suggesting that these low elevation populations have been isolated for a long period of time. time to most recent common ancestor, based on fossil-derived substitution rates, suggests diversification within these species  was initiated during the early stages of glacial cooling phases  <cit> . other low elevation populations in our study, including g. barberi, ostrander lake, and lillburn cave, are distinct from and sister to alpine lineages. these taxa do not appear to be recent remnant populations of alpine populations that moved down-slope during glacial periods, but instead seem to share ancestry with populations that gave rise to alpine lineages. all populations in the sierra nevada share a single common ancestor, suggesting one dispersal event gave rise to a diverse group of alpine lineages.

within the alpine lineages, there is a high degree of substructure reflecting the dispersal limitation of populations and, perhaps, the existence of geographical barriers. some subclades  have unique mitochondrial haplotypes at all geographical localities sampled, but other well-sampled populations  have shared haplotypes across sites. current sampling does not clearly elucidate whether nunataks  were important in the persistence of alpine populations and the preservation of genetic variation. it is clear that alpine populations are subdivided north to south, with unique lineages occupying major drainage basins. these drainages were the principal course of alpine glacial growth and it is probable that grylloblatta populations tracked suitable habitat along the periglacial edge environment of these growing glaciers. the white mountains, lying east of the sierra nevada at the edge of the great basin, has a population of grylloblatta closely related to central sierra nevada populations. currently, a distance of roughly  <dig> miles separates the two ranges in the long valley region . historically, a high plateau connected these mountain ranges, but subsidence along the owens valley fault  separated high elevation habitat of both mountain ranges  <cit> . our dating analysis suggests that grylloblatta populations from the white mountains  may have been isolated during this period of subsidence. these are the first data to suggest multiple refugia existed in the sierra nevada, and on both sides of the crest, during glacial phases.

evolutionary history of alpine endemics
grylloblatta lineages, clades and subclades in california are characterized by broadly overlapping periods of diversification. using unscaled relaxed clock methods, median estimates of tmrca reveal pulses at multiple nested levels in the phylogeny. however there is inherent error in these estimates and a lineage through time plot does not show synchronous pulses of diversification. instead, the lineage through time analysis shows a high early diversification rate, a pronounced decline, and a very recent recovery in grylloblatta diversification. the calibrated molecular clock rate places diversification times within sierra nevada grylloblatta lineages during the pleistocene glacial stages. although some median estimates are in accord with specific events in the glacial chronology in the sierra nevada, confidence intervals are broad and overlap glacial-interglacial cycles. for example, median age estimates of within-population variation in alpine populations is ~ <dig>  years b.p., during the glacial maximum of the illinoian advance, which was followed by an interglacial warm phase  <cit> , but confidence intervals include the most recent glacial maximum . hence, the inherent uncertainty in the timing of diversification does not provide clear resolution to whether grylloblattid populations diversify during glacial advances or, alternatively, diversify during the retreat of alpine glaciers. population genetic statistical tests provide equivocal support for recent population expansion in several well-sampled alpine grylloblatta populations, although this may be an artifact of limited sample sizes. furthermore, glacial phases in the sierra nevada are known to involve multiple glacial advances and retreats  <cit> , which caused dynamic shifts in vegetation over short periods of time  <cit> . the pace and scale of such changes may not have favored periods of stable growth in grylloblatta populations.

an older period of lineage diversification, corresponding to the tmrca of recognized morphological species, dates to ~ <dig> - <dig> , <dig> years b.p., well within the middle pleistocene epoch. morphological criteria for distinguishing these species involve differences in male and female reproductive morphology, as well as differences in sensory structures and body size attributes. changes in reproductive morphology are known to impede reproductive compatibility in insects  <cit> , which suggests that multiple alpine grylloblatta lineages have undergone recent speciation. the tmrca of all california and all sierra nevada populations  predates the pleistocene. this suggests that grylloblatta species may have colonized california during glacial advances of pliocene epoch. it is likely that climatic oscillations led to the formation of discrete genetic populations, morphologically distinguishable taxa  <cit> , and the first dispersal event into the sierra nevada during the evolution of california grylloblatta.

CONCLUSIONS
recent speciation and the formation of multiple endemic lineages may be a common feature of alpine landscapes. this has been shown repeatedly in alpine taxa, as demonstrated in examples of north american grasshoppers  <cit> , new zealand plants and insects  <cit> , and european plants  <cit> . these studies provide evidence that pleistocene climate change has acted as a species pump  <cit>  in alpine environments. california grylloblatta provide an example of lineage diversification during glacial expansion events on a very small geographical scale. this highlights the importance of multiple refugia in mountains as sources of contemporary genetic variation in alpine species.

