BACKGROUND
sexual dimorphism, the differentiation of both primary  and secondary  sex characteristics is the norm in animal systems  <cit> . in angiosperms the majority of extant species are co-sexual, being either monoecious or hermaphroditic . however, ~4% of plant species are dioecious  <cit> , with different individuals producing only male or female flowers, and it is thought that dioecy evolved from ancestral hermaphrodites, which inherently lack sex chromosomes  <cit> . in several animal systems including nematodes, insects and mammals, sex determination is well characterised  <cit> , whereas the molecular mechanisms underlying dioecious sex determination in plants remain largely unresolved  <cit> . the emergence of dioecy appears to have occurred relatively recently in many plant species, with sex determining loci being located in small regions of reduced recombination where there may not yet have been adequate time for heteromorphic sex chromosomes to have evolved  <cit> .

evolutionary theory suggests that sexual dimorphism arises after release from a co-sexual state as each sex adapts to a new fitness optimum following the removal of constraints previously imparted by the other sex – i.e. that trade-offs necessarily exist between the male and female functions in a monoecious state  <cit> . with the exception of sex-determining loci , males and females share the same genome. thus sexually dimorphic phenotypes that are not controlled by genes within the sex determining loci/chromosome must result from differential expression regulation of autosomal genes involved in the development and control of those traits  <cit> . examples of expected sexual trade-offs include differential optimal strategies of resource allocation to growth and secondary metabolites  given production of either pollen or seeds; for example, females may allocate more carbon to secondary metabolites at the expense of stem growth in order to protect seeds from predators and pathogens  <cit> , resulting in males and females experiencing contrasting selective pressures  <cit> .

the genus populus includes poplars, aspens, and cottonwoods and is a well-established model system  <cit>  with a high quality genome sequence available for p. trichocarpa  <cit> . populus species and hybrids have numerous industrial and silvicultural uses  <cit>  and are often keystone species  <cit> . in populus, dioecy is the common condition with the only exception being the monoecious, hermaphroditic p. lasiocarpa . there are also rare cases of gender reversion, perfect  flower formation and even mature seed catkin formation on male trees . populus species do not have heteromorphic sex specific chromosomes  <cit> , and the molecular mechanism of sex determination remains undetermined, although sex is genetically determined  <cit> . in p. trichocarpa there is substantial evidence that the sex-determining locus is located in the peritelomeric region of chromosome  <dig>  <cit> . for all populus genetic maps where sex has been included as a marker during map construction, there is always a single sex-linked locus that is located on chromosome  <dig>  however, its location on that chromosome varies in different sections of the genus. there are also contrasting reports as to which sex is heterogametic  <cit> . in the aspens it is now well established that the sex determination locus is located in the pericentromeric region of chromosome  <dig>  <cit> . pakull et al.  <cit>  recently identified that potri.019g <dig>  a gene that the same group had previously identified as a candidate in the sex determination locus  <cit> , is either completely or partially deleted specifically in females, a finding that we independently discovered and detail below.

there is a current lack of knowledge of whether global or specific patterns of sex biased gene expression exist in non-reproductive tissues of dioecious plant species  <cit> . to date, this has been investigated in a single study of silene latifolia  <cit> , which considered only  <dig> ests. here we addressed this question using p. tremula, which produces high amounts of phenolic-based secondary metabolites that have been implicated in defence against herbivores and pathogens  <cit>  making it a suitable model system to test for sexually dimorphic differences in resource allocation to growth and defence. we explored global gene expression patterns in combination with a set of diagnostic phenotypes in non-reproductive tissues  of sexually mature p. tremula. the same phenotypes were additionally assayed in sexually immature trees. gene expression was profiled using both whole genome oligonucleotide microarrays and rna-sequencing . the expression data were used for both individual gene differential expression tests as well as a machine learning approach to test for genomic regions containing combinations of genes exhibiting sex-related expression differences.

RESULTS
phenotypic analysis reveals no evidence of sexual dimorphism in p. tremula
we found no evidence of sexual dimorphism in tree height or diameter  in either the umeå aspen collection  or the swedish aspen  samples or for height increment, a measure of vigour, in the juvenile swasp samples . similarly, we found no statistical evidence of sexual dimorphism for leaf area , leaf nutritional quality  or specific secondary metabolites  in either the umasp or swasp samples . all swasp phenotypic data except carbon and nitrogen concentration were generated by robinson et al.  <cit> , who showed that these, and other, traits had a substantial degree of heritability , a result that could only be obtained from high quality phenotypic data, negating the possibility that the observed lack of significant sexual dimorphism resulted from low data quality.figure  <dig> 
growth and resource allocation in male and female
populus temula
trees. boxes representing females  are coloured pink and males  coloured blue, in the umeå aspen  and swedish aspen  collections.  growth rate calculated as height increment over five years in swasp. analysis of variance  results showed no significant sex differences   individual leaf area in umasp and swasp. anova results showed no significant sex differences for samples from either the um  or sw  collections.  foliar carbon/nitrogen ratio in um. anova results showed no significant sex differences .
secondary metabolite and herbivory phenotypes in male and female
populus tremula
in the umeå aspen  and swedish aspen  collections. boxes representing females  are coloured pink and males  coloured blue.  foliar condensed tannins. analysis of variance  results showed no significant sex differences for samples from either the um  or sw  collections  foliar total phenolic concentrations. anova results showed no significant sex differences for samples from either the um  or sw  collections.  shannon-wiener index of arthropod herbivore diversity. anova results showed no significant sex differences for samples from either the um  or sw  collections.



herbivorous insects display no sexual preference
arthropods are common folivores on p. tremula and numerous aspen-associated morphospecies have been recorded  <cit> . we found no statistically significant sex-related differences for arthropod abundance, species richness, feeding guild abundances, or the shannon-wiener diversity index in either the umasp or swasp samples . we also found no statistically significant sex-related differences in the arthropod community of umasp and swasp analysed by non-parametric multivarite analysis of variance .

transcript profiling reveals no global patterns of sex-biased expression
we profiled gene expression in mature leaves of male and female p. tremula from the umasp collection using whole genome oligonucleotide microarrays  and rna-sequencing . the samples used for rna-seq profiling were collected in two years and a principle component analysis  analysis revealed clear differences between samples from the two years . a total of  <dig>  genes were identified as significantly differentially expressed between years .figure  <dig> 
overview of microarray gene expression patterns in male and female
populus tremula
trees from the umeå aspen collection.  principal component analysis plot of the microarray data with samples classified by sex . the percentage variance explained by each component is shown in parenthesis for each axis. the female sample shown at the bottom left of the plot was classified as an outlier and excluded from statistical analyses.  volcano plot of the negative log <dig> p-value  plotted against log2-fold change  showing the results of differential expression analysis comparing male to female trees assayed using whole-genome agilent oligonucleotide microarrays. technical noise was accounted for in the statistical model by including factors for slide and sub-array within slide and the effect of sex was tested after removal of variance due to those technical effects. non-significant genes are coloured to indicate density, which is shaded from yellow  to blue . no genes were significant .
overview of rna-sequencing gene expression patterns in male and female
populus tremula
trees from the umeå aspen collection.  principal component analysis plot of the rna-sequencing  expression data with samples classified by sex  and by year of sampling . the percentage variance explained by each component is shown in parenthesis for each axis.  volcano plot of the negative log <dig> p-value   plotted against log2-fold change  showing the results of differential expression analysis assayed using rna-seq comparing male to female trees. the statistical model included factors for year of sampling and sex and the effect of sex was tested after removal of the year effect. significant genes are shown in blue where expression was higher in males. for the two significant genes at a 1% false discover rate  cut-off, the obtained p-value was <1e- <dig> and was therefore set to  <dig>  as a result the log odds value is infinite and was therefore replaced with the next largest log odds + <dig>  non-significant genes are coloured to indicate density, which is shaded from yellow  to blue . the dashed horizontal line represents a 1% fdr. the four genes with the smallest p-values  and the four genes with the highest and lowest non-significant fold change values are circled in red. these genes are represented in additional file  <dig>  the gene identifiers for the two statistically significant genes are shown .
differential expression of year of sampling effect. volcano plot of the negative log <dig> p-value  - i.e. log odds ratio - plotted against log2-fold change  showing the results of differential expression analysis assayed using rna-sequencing comparing samples collected from trees in  <dig> and  <dig>  gene expression was assayed using samples collected from trees in  <dig> and  <dig> by rna-sequencing. significant genes are shown as larger brown points. non-significant genes are coloured to indicate density, which is shaded from yellow  to blue . the dashed horizontal line represents a 1% false discovery rate.



despite many genes having relatively high mean fold-changes between sexes in the rna-seq data , the within-sex variation for those genes was high resulting in non-significant statistical test results. to further explore this, we examined the variance among samples for the four genes with the lowest and highest fold change values and for the four genes with the smallest p values regardless of fold change  in the rna-seq data. variance for genes with high between-sex fold-change values was high  and only two genes  were statistically significantly differentially expressed between males and females.

we applied a machine learning approach, support vector machines , to sliding windows of contiguous genes in the p trichocarpa genome to identify any regions where the combination of expression patterns for all genes within the window were predictive of sex. no statistically significant gene combinations that were predictive of sex were identified.

potri.019g <dig> is not present in females and is located in the sex determination locus
in contrast to the clear influence resulting from year of sampling, differential expression analysis identified only two statistically significant sexually dimorphic differences in the rna-seq dataset  and none in the microarray dataset . these two genes were not represented in the v <dig>  genome annotation that was used for the array design, therefore excluding the possibility to cross-validate the result in the microarray dataset. however, pakull et al.  <cit>  provide an excellent and completely independent confirmation of this finding for potri.019g <dig> 

potri.014g <dig> has no functional annotation but contains pfam  domains associated with cellulose synthase activity. this gene has highest sequence similarity to the arabidopsis thaliana homolog at2g <dig>  which is annotated as “cellulose synthase-like b4”. more interestingly, the second gene  is one of seven candidate genes identified within the sex determination locus of p. tremuloides by kersten et al.  <cit>  and was recently shown by the same authors to have a partial or complete deletion in female aspens  <cit>  resulting in expression only being observed in males. the gene has no current functional description in poplar but contains wd <dig> domains and shows highest sequence similarity based homology to the a. thaliana gene at5g <dig> . in a. thaliana this gene is required for regulated division planes and embryo development  <cit>  and is thought to be involved in 18s rrna biogenesis and rna methylation. we examined the expression of the seven candidates highlighted by kersten et al.  <cit>  within our data, revealing that this was the only gene displaying any evidence of differential expression between sexes . the gene was expressed more highly in male than female trees. examination of affymetrix gene expression microarray data represented at the poplar efp resource  shows that this gene has high expression in male catkins and low expression in female catkins for the three array probes representing this gene . however, as these data represent expression in p. balsamifera and as this gene is not deleted in female p. trichocarpa trees  these results require caution for extrapolation to the aspens.figure  <dig> 
bar graph showing differential expression of seven candidate genes from the sex determination locus of
populus tremuloides
[
24
]. the width of each bar indicates the mean expression level of each gene relative to the gene with the highest expression , which had an expression value of  <dig>  such that narrow bars represent low expression and wide bars high expression. the y-axis indicates the log <dig> fold-change between male and female trees. expression values represent variance stabilising transformation normalised read counts. genes displaying higher expression in females are shown in pink and those with higher expression in males in blue. the gene model identifier for the only one of these genes that was identified as significantly differentially expressed in the rna-seq data is marked in bold text.



we used genomic re-sequencing data  from two of the assayed trees, one male and one female, to further explore this locus. genomic dna sequencing reads  were aligned to the reference p. trichocarpa genome sequence and only uniquely mapping reads were considered. this revealed that there is a deletion of this region in the female individual , which is in agreement with the results recently reported by pakull et al.  <cit>  and that explains the lack of any rna-seq reads being produced from female individuals in this region. as such females appear to be homozygous for absence of this locus. corresponding plots based on rna-seq reads from all individuals assayed are available in additional file  <dig>  a single female individual  showed expression of the toz gene. we have been unable to confirm the sex of this tree as it has not flowered again since sex was originally determined. repeating the above analyses with or without this individual did not affect the results obtained .figure  <dig> 
genomic dna and rna-sequencing read coverage  for the region of chromosome  <dig>  including potri.019g <dig>   read coverage of uniquely mapping genomic dna reads from a male  and female  individual. black arrows represent exons with arrow direction indicating strand.  read coverage of uniquely mapping rna-sequencing reads for male  and female  individuals. the coloured line represents the average per base pair read coverage across all individuals with grey indicating ± two standard deviations.



no evidence of biased sex ratio in p. tremula
we observed no sex bias in the p. tremula collections studied. the sex ratio of the swasp samples was 1: <dig> . in the umasp samples the sex ratio was 1: <dig>  .

discussion
in dioecious species, evolutionary theory suggests that males and females may have contrasting optimal strategies of resource investment to maximise reproductive success. as a result, natural selection would result in the emergence of sexual dimorphism in phenotypic, biochemical and ecological traits associated with contrasting resource allocation and utilisation as each sex evolves towards fitness optima. if phenotypic sexual dimorphism does arise, there will be concomitant dimorphism in gene expression patterns in the corresponding tissue associated with those phenotypic traits. such dimorphic gene expression patterns will be independent of any differential gene expression associated with sex determination and the control of reproductive tissue development. as such, although those genes may in some cases be located within the sex determination region or chromosome, it is likely that many such regulated genes will be autosomal.

in the current study our primary interest was to test the hypothesis that male and female p. tremula individuals invest resources differentially, resulting in sexual dimorphism. to this end a number of morphological and biochemical traits  were selected to be diagnostic of such dimorphism in leaves sampled from a set of wild-growing, sexually mature p. tremula individuals  and a set of common-garden, sexually immature and clonally replicated individuals . we focused on leaves as these are the primary point of interaction between aspens and the majority of their associated herbivores as well as representing the site of energy assimilation and therefore carbohydrate production for utilisation in primary  and secondary metabolism.

p. tremula shows no phenotypic evidence of sexual dimorphism
height and diameter are often used as proxies for fitness based on the assumption that faster growing and larger individuals are better equipped to out-compete their neighbours, allowing greater resource acquisition that can be invested in sexual reproduction  <cit> . we found no statistical evidence supporting phenotypic differences between males and females for any of the phenotypic traits that we assayed in either the sexually mature umasp or sexually immature swasp samples. these results contrast with observations in pauley  <cit>  who reported a strong male biased sex ratio within a collection of superior-growth individuals of five north american populus species. this was interpreted as potential evidence that males may display more vigorous growth. in p. euphratica growth traits showed variable differences between sexes among sample plots with no consistent statistically significant difference between sexes for assayed growth traits  <cit> . in the cross-species meta-analysis presented in cornelissen & stillin  <cit> , males in general exhibited larger leaves, lower concentrations of secondary metabolites and higher growth rates. however, and in agreement with our results, there was no sexual dimorphism for height or nutrient concentrations. in p. deltoides, farmer  <cit>  observed that males were taller than females but did not have greater stem diameter. citations within farmer detail observations that the height of p. tremula x p. tremuloides seedling cohorts was correlated to the proportion of males, but also that no differences in vigour between sexes had been identified in p. tremuloides. our results are also in agreement with those reported for p. tremuloides by mitton & grant  <cit>  and stevens & esser  <cit> . based on the current limited number of publications examining sexual dimorphism we would conclude that it is not yet possible to ascertain whether any generalisations can be formed regarding the presence or absence of sexual dimorphism for growth or defence related traits in populus.

several studies have additionally reported higher herbivore loads associated with increased growth in males  <cit> , however we found no such reports in populus. although the meta-analysis presented in cornelissen & stiling  <cit>  found that, in general, males suffered higher arthropod abundances, showed evidence of reduced levels of secondary metabolites and increased growth rates, it is not possible to extrapolate such generalised findings as being relevant to a specific species. our own data identified no statistical evidence of sexual dimorphism in arthropod abundance, diversity or folivore herbivory damage in p. tremula in concordance with a lack of dimorphism in assayed growth and defence related phenotypes.

the majority of current evidence for sexual dimorphism in populus has been identified in response to stressful environmental conditions, for example under drought, salinity  <cit> , uv-b radiation  <cit> , chilling stress  <cit> , or differential nutrient availability  <cit>  where females were found to be more sensitive. however, these studies typically used small sample sizes, in some cases being restricted to only a single individual of either sex. they also profile response to short term, acute stress exposure in most cases. this is in contrast to the approach taken here where we sample a collection of wild-growing trees. in these conditions individuals would have been exposed to various short to long-term stress events. we were interested to know whether evidence of dimorphism is present under such conditions in addition to knowing if there is evidence of sexual dimorphism for resource allocation to growth in sexually immature trees. in salix it has been reported that evidence for sexual dimorphism varies through the growing season  <cit> . such reports can lead to the general impression that sexual dimorphism is common or expected. however, bias against the publication of negative results potentially means that many such examples of a lack of dimorphism have remained unreported. the variable presence of evidence for sexual dimorphism also cautions against over-extrapolation of such results until multiple conditions and seasonal sampling points have been considered for each species and each geographic area of interest.

at both the national  and local  scales we believe that our sampling represents an unbiased representation of wild-growing mature trees, with sampling taking place with no knowledge of, or consideration for, sex or the presence of flowering. it is, of course, possible that studies testing more specific hypotheses, for example along an elevational cline , may uncover evidence for shifting sex ratios or for sexual dimorphism. indeed we see weak evidence for this within the swasp collection  suggesting that further studies are needed in p. tremula before general conclusions can be drawn. we would caution against extrapolation of these findings beyond p. tremula growing in natural conditions within the geographic range covered by our sampling. to allow more general conclusions to be drawn for other populus species, members of the salicaeae and, more widely, other dioecious herbaceous species, will require equivalently detailed investigation and publication.

environment affected gene expression more than sex
we profiled gene expression in leaves of sexually mature p. tremula individuals from the umasp collection to test the hypothesis that sexually dimorphic phenotypic traits would also be revealed by concomitant differential gene expression between males and females in non-reproductive tissues for genes associated with those phenotypes. in agreement with the above morphological and biochemical phenotypic results, we found no reliable evidence of large-scale sexually dimorphic  differential expression . in contrast, clear evidence of an effect of sampling collection was found . as samples from the two years were collected on different dates and from different heights within the canopy we cannot determine whether environmental/climatic variation between years or height in the canopy accounted for this difference. significantly differentially expressed genes between the sample collections were over-represented for gene ontology  biological process categories primarily involved in cellulose biosynthesis and glucan and lipid metabolism, most likely reflecting the slightly different sampling dates, with year-to-year variance in climatic conditions affecting the rate of leaf development and maturity. this exemplifies that in p. tremula leaves, changes in environmental conditions influence expression to a greater extent than the sex of an individual and that our expression data was of sufficient quality to identify biological effects influencing gene expression patterns.

the primary aim of this study was to identify patterns of sexually dimorphic gene expression associated with the morphological and biochemical traits profiled. as such, we would have expected relatively large numbers of genes to be involved should dimorphism have been present. for example, if females invest more resources into chemical defences produced via secondary metabolism, there would be corresponding sexually dimorphic differences in the expression of genes involved in secondary metabolism. here we present gene expression results generated using p. tremula rna-seq read alignments to the p. trichocarpa reference genome. on the basis of a number of considered factors we do not believe that this biased our results: firstly, the vast majority - over 90% - of rna-seq reads aligned to the p. trichocarpa genome, suggesting that the two species have an almost entirely overlapping gene space and that sequence divergence within coding regions is not high enough to impact read alignment; secondly, we have also used a draft assembly of the p. tremula genome  to confirm that the vast majority of annotated cds regions in p. trichocarpa can be aligned to the draft assembly and that analysis of the rna-seq data aligned to this draft genome does not produce different results; lastly, alignment of p. tremuloides and p. tremula x p. tremuloides genetic maps to the p. trichocarpa chromosomes suggests that there have been no major genome rearrangements between aspens and p. trichocarpa  <cit> , although micro-synteny has not been examined to date. as such, although there may be a small number of genes unique to, or highly variable between, each species, differences between the two species are not sufficient to affect the results of global-scale expression pattern analyses. we would caution that studies aiming specifically to identify the gene underlying sex determination, where genetic mapping suggests a single locus is involved and for which a single or small number of genes are likely involved, could substantially benefit from use of species-specific genome sequences.

potri.019g <dig> is absent in females and is located in the sex determination locus
the proposed peritelomeric sex determination locus on chromosome  <dig> of p. trichocarpa represents a region of reduced recombination  <cit> . kersten et al.  <cit>  recently provided evidence of a similar region of reduced recombination in the pericentromeric sex-linked locus of chromosome  <dig> in p. tremuloides. one of the two genes that we identified as being highly, and exclusively, significantly differentially expressed between sexes in the rna-seq data  is located in that identified sex determination locus of p. tremuloides. it is one of seven candidate genes identified by kersten et al.  <cit>  on the basis of gene ontology and other annotation evidence as having the potential to be involved in sex determination, primarily due to annotated involvement in floral organ development. this was the only one of those seven genes with evidence of differential expression between sexes in our data . pakull et al.  <cit>  recently refined this finding, reporting a complete or partial deletion of this gene in female p. tremuloides and p. tremula individuals. here we present independent confirmation of this finding, supported by both genomic dna and rna-seq results . it is unclear what the biological influence of differential expression of the gene in leaves might be. our results clearly show that this single gene did not result in any larger-scale downstream patterns of sex-biased expression and examination of expression evidence at the popgenie  <cit>  org and poplar efp resources showed that expression of this gene varies between tissues and through the growth cycle, suggesting that expression is not merely constitutively fixed in males. this is certainly a finding that deserves future attention.

due to reduced recombination rates in sex-determination loci, all genes within a locus will, on average, be co-inherited  <cit> . such a case could be identifiable as a region of the genome where a contiguous set of genes would have consistently sex-biased expression, resulting from either presence/absence differences for genes present only in the w-linked  haplotype, or expression level differences for genes present in both haplotypes, but with fixed cis-acting differences between the z and w  haplotypes. as the degree of expression bias may be small on a gene-by-gene basis, single gene analysis methods may lack the sensitivity to detect such differences but methods considering combinations of genes may succeed. for example, such a situation could have been possible for all seven of the candidate genes in the p. tremuloides sex determination locus discussed above. we therefore applied a machine learning approach to identify any sets of collinear genes  that were predictive of sex. however, no statistically significant combinations of weakly predictive genes or synergistically predictive genes were identified.

CONCLUSIONS
we present an assessment of sex ratio and the lack of sexual dimorphism based on two independent samplings of swedish p. tremula. our sample of  <dig> was more comprehensive than almost all previous such assessments in populus and, as such, we feel that the results obtained are an accurate representation for p. tremula. we identified no evidence that sex has served as a significant selective pressure affecting gross-scale morphological, biochemical or herbivorous insect interaction traits expected to be diagnostic of differential resource investment and allocation strategies. correspondingly, there was no evidence for sex-biased patterns of gene expression associated with those, or any other, traits.

although no evidence of large-scale patterns of sexually dimorphic gene expression patterns were identified, a previously identified candidate gene for sex determination in p. tremuloides  <cit>  showed exclusive expression in males due to the homozygous absence of the locus in female individuals, an observation warranting future attention.

