BACKGROUND
methods for the analysis of gene expression profiles have gone through progressive development over recent years. traditionally, the level of transcribed mrna has been analyzed using methods such as northern blots, quantitative rt-pcr, differential display  <cit> , representational difference analysis  <cit> , total gene expression analysis  <cit>  and suppressive subtractive hybridization  <cit> . all these methods, although fruitful and still in use, have a limited scope with regard to the number of genes that can be analyzed simultaneously. because of this limitation, new methods have been developed, including serial analysis of gene expression   <cit> , massive parallel signature sequencing   <cit> , cdna and oligo microarray chip technologies  <cit>  and affymetrix genechips  <cit> .

sage is based on the high-throughput sequencing of concatemers of short  sequence tags that originate from a known position within a transcript and therefore theoretically contain sufficient information to identify a transcript  <cit> . in contrast to microarrays, sage estimates the abundances  of thousands of transcripts without prior knowledge of the transcripts being expressed. the proportion of the tag within the total number of tags in the library gives a direct estimate of the abundance of the transcript within a biological sample. the advantage of the sage technique is that it performs a random sampling from the pool of all expressed transcripts  allowing the discovery of new transcripts. the proportional nature of the data enables easy exchange among researchers thus allowing the creation of large public sage data sets for numerous human tissues, both normal and diseased  <cit> . disadvantages of sage are that the technique is expensive, labor-intensive and prone to sequencing errors. moreover, the annotation of the short  <dig> bp sequence tags may identify more than one transcript. this can be overcome by using longsage libraries that contain  <dig> bp tags which can be more reliably mapped to unigene clusters or the complete genome sequence  <cit> . however, sage is not suitable for high-throughput analyses of multiple samples.

in contrast to sage, dna microarrays are used to measure relative expression levels between samples of thousands of known transcripts. currently, three array variants are being used  i.e. spotted cdna microarrays, spotted oligonucleotide microarrays and synthesized oligonucleotide microarrays . the advantages of affymetrix genechips are that they are highly sensitive enabling the detection of mrnas present at levels as low as  <dig> transcript in  <dig>  <cit>  when the probe labeling step is not considered  <cit> . they are suitable for high-throughput analyses of multiple samples, and data can easily be shared and used for comparisons with other researchers using the same chips. disadvantages of affymetrix genechips are that they are only commercially available, are costly and require expensive specialized equipment and are inflexible in design . furthermore, genechips only measure the expression of genes represented on the chip in contrast to sage, in which the expression profile of the complete transcriptome can be mapped.

at present, sage, oligo microarrays, cdna microarrays and affymetrix genechips are the most widely used techniques for determining gene expression levels and gene expression ratios in different disease states and in cells under different physiological conditions or environmental stimuli. often these different gene-expression profiling platforms are being used in parallel and data generated with the different techniques need to be compared, and possibly interchanged, within and between laboratories. due to the overall difference in platform design, transcript level estimation, and gene annotation, direct comparisons are difficult and only a few attempts have been made to compare these different platforms . to determine the overall correspondence between expression levels or expression ratios of two different platforms several methods have been used in literature . these include the parametric  or non-parametric  correlation coefficients between platforms, and contingency tables with varying numbers of classes for each platform. for the latter a correspondence measure can be calculated as the percentage of transcripts falling in the cells on the diagonal . an extreme form of the contingency table has only  <dig> classes per platform  and therefore only  <dig> cells. this form of concordance estimation is dubbed "up/down classification" . none of these correspondence measures was deemed satisfactory because they either treat very different ratios as similar . this, in our view, makes the up/down classification very unreliable as an agreement measure. the use of contingency tables with more classes is already a better approach, but still some genes will be considered to be "in disagreement" while they have nearly corresponding expression ratios . the pearson correlation coefficient is a measure for the fraction of variation in y that is explained by the variation in x, and as such, only gives a measure for the tendency of the plotted points to increase simultaneously . because of the large number of points, a slight linear regression of y on x will give a highly significant correlation coefficient. however, when studying the correspondence between gene expression platforms, the expected linear relation has a slope of  <dig>  when the results of both platforms are in complete correspondence , and the deviation of the observed scatter plot from this expected relation should be tested. neither the linear pearson, nor the spearman rank correlation coefficient is suited for such a test. although the fit of the point cloud to the y = x relation can be easily calculated, the resulting statistic would still only provide a goodness of fit measure for the whole data set without giving any information on the correspondence per gene. to remedy these pitfalls we will introduce a correspondence measure based on the difference between the log values in the two platforms for each individual transcript. apart from serving as the basis for a measure for overall platform concordance, this method also provides the user with an agreement measure for each individual transcript which is of more interest than the overall correlation.

in the current study we have determined the similarity between sage- and affymetrix genechips-generated gene expression profiles of two independent rna samples. one rna sample is isolated from a wilms' tumor; the other is the stratagene universal reference rna. these expression data were then used to evaluate the annotation problems when comparing different gene profiling platforms and the methods that can be used to compare two different platforms with respect to individual gene expression measurements and with respect to between-sample gene expression ratios. finally, it is demonstrated that the between-ratio difference can be applied to select those transcripts that display similar expression changes in both platforms.

RESULTS
sage data analysis
in order to compare sage with other gene expression profiling techniques we created a sage library with  <dig> tags from a wilms' tumor sample. sage data  for the stratagene universal reference rna  were obtained from the ncbi website. all tag counts are after removal of duplicate dimers and linker sequences. within the sage libraries we could identify  <dig> and  <dig> unique sage  <dig> bp tags, for the wilms tumor sample and the stratagene sample, respectively. tags can be divided into tags with low abundance , intermediate abundance , and high abundance . in each of the libraries, these categories contained on average 84%, 15% and 1% of the total number of unique tags . in addition, we created a longsage library of the wilms tumor sample for annotation purposes  and not for the comparison with affymetrix genechips. this library could be used as a technical replicate of the 'short' sage library. comparison of the sage and longsage libraries showed a pearson correlation coefficient of  <dig>   and using z-test statistics  <cit>  the two libraries only differed significantly from each other in 3%  or  <dig> %  of the tags . the observed differences in the longsage library versus the normal sage library might be due to treatment with different linkers, tagging enzyme  and elimination of a blunt-end ligation. the pattern of variation in figure 2a closely resembles the variation predicted by the binomial distribution  <cit>  of sage tag counts with only the 3% significantly different tag counts , falling outside the range of critical values. overall sage and longsage give identical results.

microarray analyses
microarray experiments were performed using wilms' tumor rna and the stratagene reference rna. results of biological replicas of each sample, with independent crna synthesis and hybridizations, showed a good reproducibility  and  <dig>  ;both p <  <dig> ) using intensity values for all probe sets with a "present" signal  . this indicates that two identical rna samples perform very similar within the pre-processing and final hybridization reactions. although, in contrast to sage, the intensity signals on the array do not represent the actual abundance of mrna molecules, we classified the affymetrix data to get an impression of the signal distribution. these distributions are similar to those of the sage data. the majority  of the probe sets showed low signal intensity.

annotation problems
in the comparison of data obtained by sage and affymetrix genechips only reliably annotated tags can be included . annotation of sage tags to genes and their corresponding unigene cluster numbers revealed that on average 30% of all tags  could be reliably annotated based on the sage genie principles  <cit> . annotation improves to an average of 70% for tags that have an intermediate to abundant expression level. the remainder of the tags could not reliably be associated with a gene or unigene cluster because they were not available through the sage genie site, annotated to unclustered ests, or their reliability was below 67% . additionally, we performed longsage for the wilms' tumor sample, which allows the identification of  <dig> bp tags instead of  <dig> bp tags. theoretically, over  <dig> % of the  <dig> bp tags are expected to occur only once in the human genome. however, analyses based on actual sequences have demonstrated that only 75% of the  <dig> bp tags occur only once in the human genome, with the remaining tags matching duplicated genes or repeated sequences  <cit> . complete annotation of longsage tags using sage genie data and principles revealed that 28% of all tags could be assigned a reliable unigene cluster. similar to sage, the annotation improves to approximately 70% for tags that have an intermediate to abundant expression level.

the affymetrix hg-u133a genechips contained probe sets for  <dig> unigene clusters that could be identified, whereas eight percent of the probe sets  could not be linked to a unigene cluster because these sequences are withdrawn or because these sequences are currently under revision. figure  <dig> gives a schematic representation of the matching of sage and affymetrix hg-u133a genechips data with additional information about the number of unigene clusters within each platform, number of unambiguous unigene clusters in each comparison and the unigene clusters included in the final comparison. this final comparison contains 13% of the sage unigene clusters and 8% of the affymetrix unigene clusters. these data represent 32% of the unambiguous unigene clusters. because of the above-mentioned problems and restrictions, only  <dig> tags and probe sets were uniquely matched to the same unigene clusters and were 'present' in both tissue samples and platforms. this relatively low number underscores the major problem in "how to merge different expression platforms". however, in view of the following quantitative comparison of gene expression platforms it is important to note that a comparison of frequency distributions of all clusters and of the selected clusters showed that the final selection of  <dig> unigene clusters does not represent a biased sample neither for the sage tag counts, nor for the affymetrix array intensities. this is illustrated in figure 2d in which the frequency distributions are given for affymetrix intensities and sage tag counts from the final data set of  <dig> unigene clusters. the smoothed line, which represents the frequency distribution of all sage tag counts and all affymetrix intensity data , does not differ from the distribution of the subset included in the comparison of the two platforms.

comparison of gene expression levels
in the comparison of platforms, we first analyzed the similarity of gene expression levels between sage and affymetrix data in one tissue sample. both datasets were matched according to their unigene cluster numbers. figure 2c shows a scatter plot of sage and affymetrix gene expression values of the  <dig> unigene clusters before exclusion of ambiguous matches . for multiple matches, the highest tag count or intensity value per cluster was plotted. in this scatter plot the black spots represent the final selection of  <dig> unambiguous and filtered unigene clusters. note that high affymetrix expression levels are observed for low sage tag counts , but that no high tag counts are found for low affymetrix data . overall, the correlation between sage tag counts and affymetrix intensity levels of the  <dig> matching unigene clusters seemed to be modest. this was confirmed by mapping the distribution of the top  <dig> highly expressed genes in sage in the distribution of the affymetrix dataset, and vice versa . in both comparisons, only halve of the genes from the top  <dig> of one platform have a rank in the top  <dig> of the other platform, whereas approximately 10% are matched to genes with ranks of over  <dig> in the other platform. this already shows that the correlation of expression levels between platforms is modest.

comparison of between-sample expression ratios
in most gene expression studies, alterations of expression levels are expressed in relation to the simultaneously determined expression level of a reference sample and conclusions are drawn based on these ratios. to this end, expression ratios were calculated between the reference rna and the wilms' tumor data for the sage tag counts as well as for affymetrix hg-u133a genechips spot intensities. in this comparison the final data set containing only the between-sample ratios for unambiguous transcripts was used , allowing effective comparison of the two platforms.

to enable direct comparisons of ratio measurements using different gene expression platforms, the ratios of the affymetrix platform were scaled to those of the sage platform as described in figure  <dig> . in addition, different approaches were used to describe the correlation of the resulting scaled gene expression ratios between platforms . for the comparison of gene expression ratios based on contingency tables we used two approaches, i.e. up/down classification  and a contingency table diagonal based on intensity classes . these comparisons lead to an agreement of 63% and 76% between platforms, respectively. furthermore, the pearson correlation coefficient, calculated as a measure for the agreement between platforms, was  <dig>  . regression analysis shows a linear trend with a slope of  <dig>  for affymetrix versus sage, which according to the correlation coefficient differs significantly from a slope of  <dig>  however, this slope also deviates significantly from the slope value of  <dig> which is expected when the platforms are identical . finally, we compared sage and affymetrix data using our proposed classification based on the difference between the two ratios per unigene cluster. when we accept a  <dig> to 3-fold difference as indicative for agreement between the two platforms , this approach showed that the two platforms have an agreement of 78%.

like others have demonstrated  the overall agreement between platforms improves when only highly expressed transcripts  are included . when only lowly expressed genes were included the concordance based on the contingency table diagonal and correlation coefficient steeply decreased whereas the other measures were both hardly affected. inclusion of only those tags that were significantly differentially expressed between the two samples markedly improved the up/down classification and correlation coefficient based measures. note that the concordance measure based on the between-ratio difference was least affected by these selections. this indicates that this new measure is robust and less dependent on filtering than the other overall measures.

 <dig>  based on the binomial sampling error of sage tags, tags counts below  <dig>  and  <dig>   for the wt and stratagene sample, respectively, are not significantly different from tag count  <dig>  when a tag falls below these thresholds in both libraries it is included in the "low expression" group ; when a tag counts is above these thresholds in both libraries it is included in the "high expression" group . the thresholds were calculated as the 95% confidence interval of the tag proportion: ci95%) = n ±  <dig> *  with n = tag count; n = library size and p = n/n 

 <dig> significant difference between the two sage libraries is defined as a significant p-value  according to the z-test between two libraries  <cit> .

 <dig> all observed correlation coefficients are significant at p <  <dig> 

sources of differences in gene expression ratios
in an attempt to explain the difference in gene expression between sage and affymetrix genechips we summarize different sources. variation due to "noisy fold ratios" generated from low-intensity transcripts is a widespread cause of error when computing statistics on ratios without accounting for the intensities from which the ratios were derived  <cit> . within our data set we have shown that the final data set is an unbiased selection of the total data set . additionally, the mean intensity signals for both sage and affymetrix genechips appear to be randomly distributed over the ratio distribution . this indicates that the difference in expression ratios between platforms is not caused by low intensity values.

in addition, it has been suggested that the gc-content of the transcripts could influence the correspondence between platforms  <cit> . to test this hypothesis for the final data set  we retrieved all transcript sequences  and probe set sequences and calculated the gc-content for each transcript and the average gc-content of the corresponding probe sets. the gc-contents were divided into classes  and the correlation between gc-content and the differences in expression ratios between platforms was tested. statistical analysis showed that ratio differences did not depend on the gc-content of the transcript . however, unigene clusters showing good agreement between platforms tend to depend on the high gc-content of the corresponding probe sets . this gc-analysis indicates that expression data from probe sets with a higher gccontent show a better agreement with their corresponding sage data and are more reliable. note in this respect that for a unigene cluster the gc content of a probe set is not necessarily the same as that of a transcript.

discussion
to answer the question whether gene expression data generated by sage and by affymetrix hg-u133a genechips can be used interchangeably, data from these two techniques were compared using two independent rna samples. analysis of intra-platform variation shows good correlation for both sage and affymetrix; this is also observed by others . the inter-platform comparison depends on reliable annotation of the sage tags for which we used the tag annotation from sage genie  <cit> . a reliable association could be made only for 30% of all tags, which increases to 70% for intermediate and high abundant tags. this indicated that sage tag annotation requires improvement, especially for low abundant tags. based on literature findings, the use of longsage should refine annotation of sage tags  <cit> . however, the current study showed an annotation profile similar to the above-mentioned percentages, indicating that longsage is still not sufficient for unique gene identification. similar disappointing improvements in annotation efficiency have been found in other studies  <cit> . further comparison of sage and longsage requires a study that falls beyond the scope of this paper; such a study has recently been published  <cit> . for the annotation in affymetrix genechips, accession numbers had to be converted to unigene clusters, which was hampered by the fact that 8% of the transcripts present on affymetrix hg-u133a genechips were no longer present in a unigene cluster. moreover, some probe sets might represent a different transcript than initially reported .

a first impression about the agreement between sage and affymetrix hg-u133a genechips was obtained from the evaluation of the top <dig> of highly abundant transcripts in one rna sample in each platform. this comparison showed that approximately 50% of the top <dig> of highly expressed transcripts showed a corresponding expression within the top <dig> of highly expressed transcripts of the other platform. this is in line with the findings of ishii et al.  <cit>  who compared sage with affymetrix genechips containing approximately  <dig> transcripts, and iacobuzio-donahue et al.  <cit>  who showed that only genes that display robust changes in gene expression were identified by both platforms. in our current study, approximately 80% of transcripts detected in the top <dig> of one platform were mapped within the top <dig> of the competing platform. a similar figure was presented by evans et al.  <cit>  who used the rg-u34a affymetrix genechips. recently, kim  <cit>  suggested that absolute expression analyses of sage and oligonucleotide microarray technology reliably detected medium-to-high abundant transcripts.

for a more extensive comparison between the individual gene expression profiling platforms we used gene expression ratios between wilms' tumor and stratagene universal reference rna as determined by sage and affymetrix genechips. the use of ratios might have the disadvantage of losing information about individual expression values. however, it corrects for platform specific variations . by matching sage and affymetrix data, an unambiguous data set was generated. on average about 30% of the unambiguous genes were observed to be expressed by both sage and affymetrix genechips and could be included in the final comparison. although this comparison comprised only 13% of all sage unigene clusters and only 8% of the affymetrix unigene clusters, it was demonstrated that this selection was unbiased with respect to gene expression levels in each of the platforms. this allows the extrapolation of the conclusions to the whole platform.

we looked for the correspondence in gene expression results between the two techniques using up/down classification , the contingency table diagonal  and correlation coefficients . in addition, an approach was introduced in which differences between scaled ratios were calculated. the latter measure was introduced to circumvent pitfalls of up/down classification, contingency tables and correlation coefficient that were discussed in the background section. to this end, we introduced an approach in which the scaling of the ratio data enables the calculation of individual ratio differences between platforms. these ratio differences can then be used to determine to which extend and in which range  two platforms differ in their expression ratio estimation. in this study we show that, as opposed to the other overall concordance measures, the between-ratio difference is hardly sensitive to filtering of noisy data. from the current analysis, we conclude that contingency tables and, preferably, calculation of ratio differences between two platforms should be used to compare gene expression profiles from different platforms. moreover, the between-ratio difference provides the user with a correspondence measure per individual gene that can be used to select those genes for which a predetermined correspondence level is reached. the approximately normal distribution of the between-ratio differences  allows the calculation of a standardized difference value for each gene from which a p-value can be obtained. note that this p-value cannot be used to test whether the ratio difference equals zero. such a test requires a gene specific variance estimate in the denominator of the standardized difference and such a variance estimate cannot be obtained from the four non-replicated expression values that are used to calculate the ratio difference. however, the standardized difference and its p-value can be used as a measure for the position of a specific gene within the distribution of between-platform ratio differences and as such they can serve as a statistical threshold to determine which genes can be confidently interchanged between platforms. for instance, in the current study, the transcripts with a less than  <dig>  fold between-ratio difference  have a chance of at least  <dig>  that they show similar gene expression on both platforms. some of the choices in the scaling procedure can be considered to be ad-hoc. however, given the current state of understanding of the causes for within and between platform variability it was deemed best to opt for a simple quadratic scaling equation to convert the distribution of ratios, which is asymmetric around  <dig> to a common scale. when the knowledge on the physics, chemistry, and sampling statistics increases, better conversion functions will present themselves.

the overall similarity between sage and affymetrix genechips is modest when expression ratios are compared. the correspondence improves to 90% when only highly expressed transcripts are included which means that noise is filtered out for both platforms. the differences between sage and affymetrix genechips were not caused by a biased selection of the final data set, differences in gc-content of the included transcripts or extreme ratios resulting from low gene expression values. the observed cross-platform differences, arise from intrinsic properties of the platforms themselves, differences in the principle of determining the expression levels, such as absolute  versus quantitative  mrna levels, and/or processing and analytical evaluation  <cit> . these disparities of the two technical approaches are summarized in table  <dig> and may all contribute to the modest overall correlation of sage and microarray data. we cannot conclude which of the platforms performs best. these results show, as also argued by tan and co-workers  <cit> , that it is important to validate the results obtained with sage or affymetrix genechips with subsequent northern blots or quantitative pcr analysis  <cit> . it was beyond the scope of our analysis to perform such a verification of expression data. anyway, such a validation is impractical for large numbers of genes. however, it seems that the divergence of the sage and affymetrix platforms in this study is for a large part due to the wide range of affymetrix gene expression values observed for transcripts with a low gene expression level in sage . a similar over-representation of high affymetrix expressions for low sage tag counts has been published by lu et al.  <cit> . we currently showed that a sage and longsage library from the same rna sample showed nearly identical expression profiles . these findings confirm the results found within direct comparisons of sage libraries  <cit> . in addition, the differences between sage and longsage can be fully explained by the binomial distribution of the sampling error in individual sage tag counts  <cit> . therefore, it can be ruled out that many low sage tag counts originate from high abundant transcripts. this is also confirmed by sun et al. who demonstrate that 70% of the low-copy sage tags represent real low level transcripts  <cit> . the affymetrix platform showed highly reproducible intensity values when applied twice to the same tissue sample. however, because of the variation between probe sets per unigene cluster  <cit>  it cannot beruled out that some affymetrix probe sets provide systematically biased intensity levels and expression ratios. it is a known problem that different probe sets belonging to the same transcript show variation in expression detection. several explanations have been given for this variation:  probe sets may represent splice variants or may cross-hybridize to different members that belong to a highly similar gene family or transcripts with different poly-a sites;  one probe set is more 5' located than the other and  one probe set is better designed than the other  <cit> . such a bias might explain the weak correspondence between the sage and affymetrix platform observed in this and other studies  <cit> 

future studies should be aimed on improving the efficiency of sage tag annotation and avoidance of systematic bias in microarray techniques. only then, measurements of various technologies can be directly compared and transformed to a universal gene expression catalogue. sage has the advantage that a whole transcriptome is analyzed, but is limited to the analysis of a small number of samples. for screening of large sets of samples sage cannot be the favored choice and affymetrix genechips might be a good alternative. therefore, we think that the future lies in combining the data from sage with affymetrix genechips, custom cdna or oligo arrays. this gives the advantage of complete expression profiling using sage and high-throughput array screening of a larger panel of samples allowing rapid identification and for instance validation of clinical relevant genes involved in disease onset  <cit> . finally, the proposed ratio difference between platforms using an universal reference sample  can serve as a measure for interplatform correspondence per individual gene.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper evaluates several approaches for the comparison of different gene expression platforms, outlined using sage and affymetrix genechips. we demonstrate that for both sage and affymetrix genechips the intra-platform correlations are extremely good, but that the inter-platform agreement based on an unbiased selection of transcripts is modest. the agreement between platforms increases if only transcripts are included with high tag counts and high hybridisation intensities. it appears that the expression distributions are similar for each of the platforms, but that the correlation between platforms is modest due to intrinsic differences, like sensitivity, levels of noise, and gene annotation. finally, we introduce a novel, filtering-independent approach for data analysis based on the calculation of differences between expression ratios observed in sage and affymetrix genechips for each individual transcript. the statistical probability value that can be assigned to each individual betweenratio difference, allows the selection of individual transcripts that display similar regulation on both platforms.

