BACKGROUND
hair is one of the distinguishing characteristics of mammals and it has many important biological functions
 <cit> . hair is produced by hair follicles , which are complex mini-organs in the skin that are formed during embryonic development . new hair is generated continuously throughout life because the postnatal hfs experience cyclic phases of active growth , regression , and inactivity 
 <cit> . many genes and signaling pathways are involved in hf development
 <cit> , including the hairless  gene and fibroblast growth factor  <dig> 

the hr gene is significantly expressed in skin and it encodes a putative zinc finger transcription factor of approximately  <dig> kda
 <cit> . hr is a candidate gene that regulates basic hf functions
 <cit> . more detailed biochemical analyses of the function of the encoded protein have shown that hr is a transcriptional corepressor that interacts with nuclear receptors, including thyroid hormone receptor , retinoic acid orphan receptor α  and vitamin d receptor , to regulate specific target genes involved with hair morphogenesis and hf cycling
 <cit> . it appears that hr functions during the cellular transition to the first adult hair cycle because hair growth ceases completely in its absence, which results in a form of inherited total alopecia
 <cit> .

the fibroblast growth factor  <dig> , comprises three exons and it is an essential regulator of the hf development and cycling
 <cit> . recent studies have also suggested that the fgf <dig> gene is associated with hair length and it controls the cessation of the anagen stage
 <cit> .

cetaceans  are ecologically diverse and they inhabit waters that range from coastal to oceanic and from tropical to polar
 <cit> . numerous paleontological, morphological, embryological, and molecular studies have suggested that cetaceans evolved from terrestrial mammals
 <cit> . the transition from land to water and their subsequent adaptation to completely aquatic habitats make cetaceans remarkable and evolutionarily significant, although few studies have investigated the molecular basis of this process
 <cit> .

cetaceans generally lack a coat of hair, although some cetacean species retain a few hairs on their face while the fetus has whiskers in others. this is probably an adaptation that reduces friction and improves locomotion. however, the precise molecular mechanisms underlying hair loss are unclear. given the important roles of the hr and fgf <dig> genes during hf morphogenesis and hf cycling, the current study determined the full open reading frame  sequences of these two genes in seven representative cetacean species and compared them with orthologous sequences from terrestrial mammals. the goal was to determine whether evolutionary changes in these two genes were associated with the transition from land to water, and the hair loss of cetaceans during this adaptive process. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the molecular basis of hair loss in cetaceans.

RESULTS
hairless  and fgf <dig> genes in cetaceans
complete orf sequences were determined for the hr and fgf <dig> genes in seven cetaceans. as shown in additional file
 <dig>  the cetacean hr gene contained  <dig> exons and detailed information on each exon is provided in table 
 <dig>  they all shared the typical features of mammalian hr genes and alignments of the deduced amino acid sequences of the cetacean hr genes are shown in additional file
 <dig>  no frame-shift mutations or premature stop codons were detected in cetaceans, although a series of apparent deletions and specific amino acid changes were found in important functional domains of the cetacean hr genes . in contrast to the toothed whale, the two baleen whales  lacked insertions/deletions , so they had intact orfs .

the cetacean fgf <dig> also contained an uninterrupted orf, with no premature stop codons. three exons were identified based on an alignment of the cetacean fgf <dig> sequences with those from other mammals. exons  <dig> and  <dig> were highly conserved in all of the mammals examined in this study . as shown in additional file
 <dig>  the fgf <dig> gene encoded a protein containing approximately  <dig> amino acid residues, including a signal peptide with  <dig> amino acid residues.

phylogenetic analysis
the maximum likelihood and bayesian analyses of all datasets yielded similar tree topologies . this strongly supported the nesting of cetacea within artiodactyla and the monophyly of cetartiodactyla. overall, the relationships among the nine placental mammalian orders examined were in agreement with those reported in previous studies, except for perssodactyla  and the sister relationship between odontoceti  and mysticeti  within cetacea .

relaxation of selection for cetacean hr genes
a series of evolutionary models were performed with the likelihood framework to analyze the selective constraints on hr, using the species tree shown in figure
 <dig> as the working topology. one-ratio model analyses of all mammals  showed that all of the branches in figure
 <dig> shared the same estimated ω of  <dig>  , which indicated the existence of strong functional constraints on mammalian hr genes. in the two-ratio model analyses , the ω value of the focal branch was  <dig>  and model b fitted the data significantly better than a one-ratio model, which assumed a single ω for all branches . a comparison of model b and model c  also showed that ω <dig> was significantly less than  <dig>  which suggested that the relaxation of the functional constraint on the hr gene did not occur immediately after the common cetacean ancestor diverged from the terrestrial mammals.
 <dig>  the ω values of individual branches shown are based on the free-ratio model. in some cases, zero synonymous substitutions produced an ω value of infinity . the estimated numbers of nonsynonymous and synonymous changes are shown in parentheses. the ω values of branches a, b, and c  were estimated using the two-ratio models.

note: a, ln l is the log-likelihood score; b, number of parameters; c, twice the difference in ln l between the two models compared.

interestingly, both the common ancestors of toothed whales and baleen whales had a higher ω compared with other mammals . in addition, the likelihood ratio test  results detected no significant difference in the estimates using the two-ratio model where ω was not fixed for the branch of the common ancestor of baleen whales and that where it was fixed to  <dig> , which suggested that the hr gene was close to selective neutrality in baleen whales. furthermore, a series of sites were polymorphic in cetaceans whereas they were highly conserved  in other mammals . overall, these results suggest that the cetacean hr gene has experienced a significant relaxation of selection during its evolution from terrestrial mammals and subsequent lineage diversification.

positive selection for the cetacean fgf <dig> gene
in the branch-specific model analyses, the ω ratio calculated in the one-ratio model  was  <dig>  , which indicated a generally strong purifying selection for the mammalian fgf <dig> gene, whereas only the lineage leading to the common ancestor of toothed whales  contained significant evidence of positive selection . in addition, the lineage leading to the common ancestor of baleen whales  had a higher ω value  than the background , although the two-ratio models did not fit significantly better than model m <dig> . significant lrt statistics and positively selected sites were detected in the lineage leading to the common ancestor of toothed whales  in the branch-site model, whereas most lineages outside the cetaceans showed no evidence of positive selection .

note: a, ln l is the log-likelihood score; b, likelihood ratio test  to detect positive selection.

five codons were shown to be under positive selection in the branch leading to the common ancestor of toothed whales  according to the branch-site model , and four of these were shown to have undergone radical changes . these positively selected amino acids did not correspond to residues known to interact with the fgf receptor  and heparin , but many of them were involved in or near a region rich in o-glycosylation and n-glycosylation sites, near the signal peptide region, or the fgfr-binding sites .

discussion
relaxed selection for the cetacean hr gene suggests its functional loss
the hr gene is highly conserved and has traditionally been regarded as strongly functionally constrained during mammalian evolution because of its functional significance in hf cycling and the important roles of hair in mammals
 <cit>  . however, our data suggest that the cetacean hr gene may have experienced a relaxation of selective pressure to become a pseudogene . pseudogenes that experience relaxed selective pressure are expected to have a higher ω ratio compared with functional genes, which are usually under purifying selection
 <cit> . our analyses of the ω ratio based on different datasets showed that the ω ratios for the hr sequences of toothed whales, baleen whales, and all cetaceans were clearly higher than those of putative functional sequences in other mammals . more importantly, the presence of a series of polymorphic  sites in cetaceans may be further evidence for the relaxed selection of cetacean hr genes. in addition, most of the mutations in cetacean hr genes were found in or near important functional domains or conserved regions, which was also supported by the homology modeling analysis of of cetacean hr genes . for example, h996q and g1036a mutations in the jmjc domain probably have led to the loss of histone demethylase activity and constitutive methylation, which would have promoted the transcriptional repression of hr-interacting signaling pathways genes and ultimately hair loss
 <cit> . this was corroborated by many natural mutants in the jmjc domain, which cause hair loss in mice and humans . many mutations, including deletions, insertions, nonsense, missense and splice-sites, in the functional domains of the hr genes from human patients or rodent models have also been reported to cause congenital atrichia  . many, if not all, of the mutations  and 18-bp deletions in toothed whales) found in cetaceans are predicted to disrupt the local secondary structure and produce defects in hf regeneration, as found in humans and mouse models.
 <cit> . interacting domains  <dig> and  <dig>  mediating the interaction between hr and the retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor-alpha 
 <cit>  or with the thyroid hormone receptor 
 <cit>  are boxed in green and blue, respectively. specific cetacean, toothed whale, baleen whale, and delphinoidea mutations are highlighted in red, blue, pink, and green, respectively
 <cit> .

furthermore, mutations leading to the absence of hr function were found to differ to some extent in toothed and baleen whales, e.g., the 6-bp deletion in exon  <dig> was only present in toothed whales. mutations in the cetacean hr gene also exhibited a taxa-specific pattern. for example, the four delphinoids examined in this study all had an identical 18-bp deletion in exon  <dig>  another 6-bp deletion was identified in exon  <dig> of the finless porpoise. these different mutations in the hr gene in different cetaceans may have resulted in a similar hair loss phenotype, which agrees with the fact that different mutations produce the same form of alopecia  in humans and mice
 <cit> .

in summary, this study suggests that the cetacean hr gene has undergone various evolutionary changes that probably correspond to its loss of function. these findings are consistent with morphological evidence that adult whales have no body hair covering, whereas they have hair during their early development
 <cit> . during the transition from land to water, the ancestor of cetaceans was faced with different habitats and survival challenges, and the presence of hair may have been a hindrance to locomotion. therefore, hair was probably unnecessary for cetaceans based on the cetacean hr gene.

positive selection for the cetacean fgf <dig> gene
in contrast to the relaxed selection for the hr gene, the cetacean fgf <dig> gene was under strong positive selection, according to the significantly higher ω value on the branch leading to the toothed whale compared with the background and the large number of specific codons detected by the branch-site models . the ω value  of the lineage leading to the common ancestor of baleen whales was not significantly higher than  <dig>  but this value was higher than the background value  . this elevated ω estimate for the fgf <dig> gene relative to other branches suggests the accelerated evolution of the fgf <dig> gene in baleen whales. however, no evidence of positive selection was detected in the common ancestor of cetacea , which suggests that positive selection occurred after the odontoceti-mysticeti split. furthermore, a series of potentially important adaptive amino acid changes were detected in toothed whales  and most of these codon changes had radical effects on their physicochemical properties  . in general, more radical amino acid substitutions have greater functional effects during evolution
 <cit> . in addition, these residues were located in or near a region rich in o-glycosylation and n-glycosylation sites, near the signal peptide region or near the fgfr-binding sites. therefore, these amino acid changes may have affected the secondary or tertiary conformation of the fgf <dig> molecule and ultimately affected its function
 <cit> .

accumulating evidence suggests that the fgf <dig> gene controls the cessation of the anagen stage of the hf cycle and pathogenic mutations in this gene are known to produce long hair in phenotypic variants of many mammals
 <cit> . it has been suggested that the epithelium and underlying mesenchyma interact in utero to form hfs , before the hfs enter their three stages 
 <cit> , which is consistent with embryological evidence that cetaceans develop body hair in the womb
 <cit> . however, no extant whales retain any body hair after birth, with the exception of some snout hairs and hairs around the blowholes that act as sensory bristles in some baleen whales.

humans and mice with mutations in the hr gene develop apparently normal hfs but shed their hair completely soon after birth
 <cit> . however, cetaceans lose their body hair in the womb rather than after birth. in addition, no positive selection was detected in fgf <dig> genes in other branches, including the human and mouse genes. overall, this study suggests that positive selection for fgf <dig> genes in toothed whales may have played an important role in terminating the hair growth cycle and accelerated entry into the catagen stage of hair growth. interestingly, the current study showed that the hr gene may have lost its function in cetaceans. this gene loss initiates a premature and abnormal catagen stage, which leads to the destruction of the normal hf architecture and abrogates the hf’s ability to cycle. this hypothesis may be tested by elucidating the molecular mechanism of hair loss in cetaceans and the differences in hair loss between cetaceans and hr mutants in humans and mice. however, it is not easy to obtain cetacean biopsies for expression analyses, and so further research  will be required to test our hypotheses of hr pseudogenisation and fgf <dig> positive selection in cetaceans. further samples should also be obtained from cetaceans  and other fully aquatic marine mammals  to test this hypothesis and elucidate the molecular basis of hair loss.

CONCLUSIONS
the data presented in this study suggest that the cetacean hr gene has undergone evolutionary changes related to its loss of function. by contrast, positive selection on the fgf <dig> gene was detected in cetaceans, including a series of positively selected amino acid residues. the evolutionary changes in these two genes may provide new insights into the molecular basis of significant hair loss in cetaceans during their transition from land to water. many signaling pathways and factors are known to be involved in the regulation of hf morphogenesis and the hf cycle
 <cit> . therefore, additional genes related to hair development should be investigated to improve our understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying hair loss in fully aquatic marine mammals.

