BACKGROUND
the nucleolus was initially characterised over four decades ago and shown to be the site of ribosome subunit production  <cit> . it is now known to play a role in other cellular activities, including assembly of diverse ribonucleoprotein particles , cell cycle progression and proliferation regulation, as well as the response to numerous forms of cellular stress  <cit> . all of the proteins that are strongly enriched in the nucleolus, including marker proteins such as fibrillarin, can nonetheless cycle continually in and out of the nucleolus, as discovered by photobleaching experiments  <cit> . in addition, many of the processes that occur, at least in part, in the nucleolus require the re-location of proteins to this nuclear sub-compartment. many proteins are able to conditionally relocate between either the nucleoplasm, or other nuclear sub-compartments and the nucleolus  <cit> . in addition to the 'part-time' nucleolar proteins which remain in the nucleus, many proteins are known to travel between the cytoplasm  and the nucleolus. these include ribosomal and non-ribosomal proteins that travel to the nucleolus for assembly into ribosome subunits and other rnps respectively, as well as many growth factors and cell cycle regulators  <cit> . the nucleolus thus accommodates a large amount of traffic and its composition is very dynamic, which may be facilitated by its lack of a surrounding membrane  <cit> .

recent large-scale proteomics experiments have detected thousands of distinct proteins that stably co-purify with nucleoli isolated from human cells  <cit> . although the first datasets defining the nucleolar proteome did not offer information regarding the proportion of each of these proteins in the nucleolus relative to other cellular compartments, this information has now been obtained in a high throughput manner using a combination of cellular fractionation and silac protocols  <cit> . these data indicate that although thousands of distinct proteins are detected in the nucleolus, their degree of association with the nucleolus is variable. some proteins are predominantly nucleolar while others, although detected in small numbers in the nucleolus and annotated as such in large databases, are present in much larger numbers in other cellular compartments. these proteomics data give a snapshot of the content of the nucleoli of a population of one cell type under specific conditions. in comparison to the first nucleolar proteome datasets  <cit> , they provide a much clearer picture of the dynamic protein content of the nucleolus and its relationship with other cellular compartments. this methodology also offers the possibility of distinguishing the nucleolar-enriched proteins from the proteins which cycle between the nucleolus and other cellular locations or conditionally localise to the nucleolus. however, because only one cell type and a small number of conditions have been examined so far and because of the current limitation of the methodology, which does not yet offer full proteome coverage, the dynamic nucleolar proteome still has not been fully defined. here, we investigate how a computational method can help fill this gap.

the prediction of eukaryotic protein subcellular localisation has been extensively investigated over the past decade using various machine learning methods and based on many diverse protein characteristics . however, while many such predictors exist, most do not consider the nucleolus as a separate localisation: very few whole-cell predictors include the nucleolus in the list of cellular compartments to which they predict localisation  <cit> . several nuclear-centric mammalian protein localisation predictors have been created to predict membership to one of at least four nuclear sub-compartments including the nucleolus  <cit> . however, proteins annotated as being in more than one subnuclear compartment are often not considered, thus substantially decreasing their actual coverage of the nuclear proteome. because the individual nuclear subcompartments are not membrane-enclosed, it is expected that a significant proportion of nuclear proteins diffuse between these subcompartments and will be detected and annotated as present in several of these compartments. thus these nuclear-centric predictors likely do not realistically model localisation patterns of nuclear proteins.

the prediction of nucleolar protein localisation has been investigated mainly in the context of a binary classification problem where proteins are predicted to be either associated with the nucleolus, or not. such studies include a predicted nucleolar complex dataset, which is based on the clustering of protein-protein interactions, involving human proteins either detected experimentally in the nucleolus, or predicted to be nucleolar using a neural network  <cit> . more recent studies include a naïve bayesian classifier trained to predict yeast nucleolar proteins and ribosomal components  <cit> , a sequence-based support-vector machine predictor that differentiates between nucleolar associated and non-nucleolar associated nuclear mammalian proteins  <cit>  as well as a kernel canonical correlation analysis predictor based on genomic sequence and protein-protein interaction data that also differentiates between nucleolar associated and non-nucleolar associated nuclear mammalian proteins  <cit> .

recent efforts to predict nucleolar association acknowledge the fluidity of the nucleolus and its close relationship with other cellular regions, but do not model different degrees of protein association with the nucleolus. in order to build on previous efforts, we investigate here the possibility of classifying the degree of nucleolar association of human proteins, by integrating various genomic and protein features in a bayesian framework. more precisely, we predict whether proteins are highly nucleolar-enriched, highly non-nucleolar, nucleolar-nucleoplasmic or nucleolar-cytoplasmic . the last two groups include proteins that localise to other cellular regions and cycle to the nucleolus or relocate to the nucleolus under specific conditions. to perform this classification, we consider several protein features including the frequency of specific amino acids in the protein sequence, the predicted presence of signal peptides, mitochondrial targeting peptides and nucleolar localisation sequences as well as expression data, gene ontology  annotations and subcellular localisation annotations of protein interactors.

RESULTS
architecture of the protein nucleolar association classifier
the protein nucleolar association classifier  was created to investigate the classification of the degree of nucleolar association of human proteins into four classes as illustrated in figure 1:

-nucleolar-enriched proteins which correspond to proteins that are accumulated predominantly in the nucleolus and likely include the core nucleolar proteins.

-nucleolar-nucleoplasmic proteins which can localise both to the nucleolus and to other nuclear regions. they either cycle between the nucleolus and other nuclear regions or are mainly nucleoplasmic but relocate to the nucleolus under specific conditions.

-nucleolar-cytoplasmic proteins which can localise to the nucleolus and the cytoplasm . they either localise to the nucleolus for assembly into larger complexes but then function mainly in the cytoplasm, cycle between these compartments, or are predominantly cytoplasmic but relocate to the nucleolus under specific conditions.

-non-nucleolar proteins which show little or no localisation in the nucleolus.

because such detailed annotations describing dynamic characterisations of proteins are rarely available in large public databases, extensive manual curation of the nucleolus literature was required to create the datasets for this study. additional file  <dig> shows experimentally determined proteins belonging to the three nucleolar-association classes .

pnac integrates diverse types of protein features and annotations in a naïve bayes framework to classify human proteins according to their degree of nucleolar association. the individual features considered are summarised in table  <dig> and detailed in the methods section. as indicated in table  <dig>  five distinct features are taken into account: amino acid frequency, protein targeting motifs, gene co-expression, go biological process and molecular function annotations as well as subcellular localisation annotations of interactors. protein-protein interaction data have been included because many proteins are likely to be either targeted to, or retained in, specific cellular compartments by binding to proteins resident in these compartments. since the nucleolus is not enclosed by a membrane, interaction based localisation could be widely employed by proteins associated with this compartment  <cit> .

each predictive feature is used to calculate a score for the presence of a given protein in each of the nucleolar association classes described above. for each feature, the association score for a given class is evaluated by considering the relative proportion of proteins from that class that have a specific state . the features are trained on manually curated nucleolar datasets  and a randomly generated non-nucleolar dataset. the final classification results from the product of the initial class priors and the scores derived from the individual predictive features as detailed in the methods section. proteins are annotated as belonging to their highest scoring class.

statistical tests of accuracy
cross validation analysis
the classifier was first tested using a leave-one-out cross-validation test as described in the methods. table  <dig>  shows the sensitivity and positive predictive values  for all classes. all classes obtain values significantly higher than those that would be obtained by random assignment . the overall accuracy of the predictor by leave-one-out cross validation is  <dig> .

a test set 1: leave-one-out cross-validation test

b test set 2: independent literature-based test

c test set 3: silac experimental independent test

d these sensitivity measures represent average sensitivity values over ten runs. their standard deviations were all below  <dig> .

e ppv: positive predictive value. these measures represent average ppv values over ten runs. their standard deviations were all below  <dig> .

independent literature test
the classifier was then tested on a literature-based test set which consists of proteins reported to be nucleolar-associated in the literature but that were not used to train the predictor . once again, all classes obtain values well above what you would expect by chance. the overall accuracy of the predictor using the independent literature test is  <dig> .

silac independent test
the pnac classifier was further tested with a silac -derived test set which consists of proteins whose ratio of relative abundance has been measured experimentally over two pairs of cellular compartments: each protein has an associated nucleolar/cytoplasmic abundance ratio and a nucleoplasmic/cytoplasmic abundance ratio . while there is no direct relationship between these ratios and our nucleolar association classes, they provide a means to map proteins into these classes. proteins that belong to both the independent literature test set and the independent silac test set were used to determine abundance ratio thresholds defining the nucleolar association classes . the sensitivity and ppv values for the silac test are lower than the equivalent measures for the other tests although they are all significantly higher than what would be expected by chance . the overall accuracy of the silac test is  <dig> .

there are several reasons why the silac test accuracy values are lower than those of the other tests. firstly, the thresholds used to define the nucleolar association class to which silac characterised proteins belong were determined using a very small number of proteins. as shown in figure  <dig> , the intersection between the literature curated dataset  and the silac-derived dataset , which was used to map silac experimental ratios into the nucleolar-association classes only consists of fourteen proteins. the thresholds most likely do not perfectly define the nucleolar association groups and will improve when the intersection between the literature-curated dataset and the silac-derived datasets increases in size. secondly, the silac test set consists of a larger number of proteins than considered in the other tests  and is most likely not biased towards proteins that are well annotated, as the much smaller literature datasets would be. as the predictions depend in part on annotations , the prediction accuracy will increase as proteins become better annotated. finally, the silac test set is not characterising nucleolar association exactly in the same way as we seek to do here. as such, the two approaches are somewhat complementary in their aims. the silac-derived dataset investigates one cell type under normal growth conditions, thus providing a snapshot of the abundance of the proteins in each of the compartments considered under those conditions. in contrast, our method aims to classify human proteins according to their degree of nucleolar association under any possible condition and in all cell types. so while the silac test set is useful to increase the coverage of our test sets and investigate the classifier accuracy on proteins that might be highly uncharacterized, the silac test set is not a perfect match to test our classifier. this is particularly obvious for proteins that associate with the nucleolus only under specific conditions that were not experimented on in the silac-derived dataset. this most notably concerns nucleolar-nucleoplasmic and nucleolar-cytoplasmic proteins.

-proteins that are conditionally localised to the nucleolus: these are proteins that are generally highly non-nucleolar but translocate to the nucleolus under specific conditions. for example, several heat shock proteins including hspa <dig> are usually cytoplasmic but are known to translocate to the nucleolus after heat-shock, which was not a condition considered in the silac analysis .

-proteins that are cyclically localised to the nucleolus, often in a cell-cycle manner, for example rcc <dig> and ki- <dig> in table  <dig> 

-unknown proteins for which little information is available to confirm the true localisation.

in all these cases, a disagreement between the two classification methods warrants further investigation.

reliability analysis
as described above, pnac outputs one score per class and proteins are classified as belonging to their highest scoring class. for some proteins, one class clearly scores much higher than the other classes. however, for other proteins, two or more classes have equally high scores indicating that the classifier does not have enough information to make a clear-cut decision. the reliability index measures the fold difference between the highest scoring class and the second-highest scoring class. we investigated whether increases in the reliability index of the classification resulted in increases in the sensitivity and ppv of the classification, using the silac-derived independent test-set. figure  <dig> shows that as the minimum reliability index increases from  <dig> to  <dig>  the sensitivity and ppv both increase significantly, providing a means to offer higher quality classifications for a subset of the proteome. the overall accuracy thus goes from  <dig>  for the entire test set  to  <dig>  when the minimum reliability index is  <dig>  and  <dig>  when the minimum reliability index is  <dig> . the nucleolar association classification and its reliability are provided for all human proteins  in additional file  <dig> 

biological process annotations of nucleolar-associated proteins
to characterise the predicted nucleolar-associated proteins, we considered the go biological process annotations of nucleolar-enriched, nucleolar-nucleoplasmic and nucleolar-cytoplasmic proteins . of the  <dig> proteins classified as nucleolar-enriched with a reliability index greater than  <dig>   <dig> are annotated with rna metabolic process or any of its children terms including  <dig> proteins annotated with rrna processing and  <dig> annotated with trna processing. the second and third most abundant biological process terms for nucleolar-enriched proteins are respectively cellular component organisation with which  <dig> proteins are annotated and ribosome biogenesis with which  <dig> proteins are annotated. taken together, these are the most representative biological process go terms for nucleolar-enriched proteins and correspond well with the most prominent and well-characterised nucleolar functions.

a count includes proteins annotated with child terms

in contrast, the  <dig> nucleolar-nucleoplasmic and  <dig> nucleolar-cytoplasmic classified proteins with reliability index above  <dig> are annotated with a wide variety of different terms. as shown in table  <dig>  the biological process term annotating the largest number of nucleolar-nucleoplasmic proteins is nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolic process which includes  <dig> proteins involved in dna repair and  <dig> in dna replication. other biological process terms highly populated with nucleolar-nucleoplasmic proteins include cell cycle, chromosome organisation, regulation of transcription, dna-dependent and signal transduction, in agreement with more recently described nucleolar-associated functions. unsurprisingly, in the case of nucleolar-cytoplasmic proteins, the most predominant biological process is protein metabolic process, which includes  <dig> proteins annotated with the term translation.

analysis of the evolution of nucleolar-associated proteins
the different nucleolar association groups investigated here are thus composed of proteins involved in a wide variety of biological processes. the nucleolus is traditionally associated with highly conserved protein families and core cellular functions. however, numerous recent studies also involve the nucleolus in other diverse cellular processes. in an effort to characterise the nucleolar protein content evolutionarily, we investigated the fraction of human proteins of each nucleolar association group that have orthology  to proteins in other eukaryotic organisms. to ensure that we are dealing with highly accurate nucleolar association predictions, we only consider the proteins with a nucleolar association reliability index classification greater than  <dig>  as shown in figure  <dig>  the three different nucleolar association groups  display different conservation patterns. however, the most striking feature of this analysis is that in all non-mammalian organisms considered, the non-nucleolar group displays a much lower degree of conservation than any of the nucleolar association groups, and the gap between the non-nucleolar and nucleolar groups greatly increases with evolutionary distance. thus proteins associated with all aspects of nucleolar functions are much better conserved throughout eukaryotic evolution than proteins that never associate with the nucleolus.

the nucleolar-cytoplasmic group, which consists largely of proteins involved in translation , has a very high fraction of human proteins with orthologues in other organisms. this is consistent with the slow evolution and high conservation that has previously been shown for many proteins of this group  <cit> . of the  <dig> nucleolar-cytoplasmic human proteins considered, the fraction with orthology to the non-mammalian organisms considered ranges between 42%  to 69% . in contrast, of the  <dig> human proteins considered for the non-nucleolar group, between 8%  and 55%  of non-nucleolar proteins have orthologues in the non-mammalian eukaryotic organisms considered. nucleolar-enriched and nucleolar-nucleoplasmic proteins are often not as well conserved as nucleolar-cytoplasmic proteins especially in the most distant non-mammalian eukaryotic organisms considered but are significantly more conserved than non-nucleolar proteins.

in mammals, the nucleolar-enriched and nucleolar-nucleoplasmic groups have the highest fraction of orthologues with between 81%  and 95%  of their proteins having mammalian orthologues.

thus many of the central processes carried out, at least in part, by nucleoli exist in all eukaryotes considered and, compared to non-nucleolar proteins, a much higher proportion of nucleolar-associated proteins are conserved amongst eukaryotic organisms.

CONCLUSIONS
in an effort to predict and describe the nucleolar proteome, we investigated the integration of various gene and protein features and annotations in a naïve bayesian framework. to help differentiate between core-nucleolar proteins and proteins that associate with the nucleolus temporarily but also function in other compartments, the training set was subdivided into four groups: nucleolar-enriched, nucleolar-nucleoplasmic, nucleolar-cytoplasmic and non-nucleolar proteins. this classification scheme provides information regarding the nucleolar-association potential of all human proteins in a manner that is neither cell-type, nor condition-specific. an analysis of our proteome-wide nucleolar-association predictions reveals that these groups display widely varying evolutionary characteristics and biological process signatures. this classification provides a clearer picture of the protein content of the nucleolus as well as its numerous and central roles in the cell and its interaction with other subcellular compartments.

