BACKGROUND
legionella pneumophila, a gram-negative, intracellular bacterial pathogen, is the opportunistic agent responsible for a severe form of pneumonia named legionnaires' disease and the less severe flu-like pontiac fever  <cit> . the remarkable capability of l. pneumophila to colonize a wide range of natural protozoa and mammalian host cells is mostly attributed to its unique type ivb secretory system  whose components are encoded by the dot  and icm  genes  <cit> . l. pneumophila uses the dot/icm apparatus to inject effectors into the host cells to promote invasion and to modulate organelle trafficking, which in turn leads to formation of replication-permissive endosomes  <cit> .

similar to a variety of microbes, l. pneumophila undergoes a life cycle characterized by a biphasic conversion between a vegetative replicative form and a non-replicating, infectious and stress resistant transmissive form. on one hand, bacteria cultured in broth to either exponential or stationary phase display many similar attributes shared by the replicative and transmissive forms, respectively  <cit> . for example, upon the transition from exponential phase to stationary phase, l. pneumophila becomes more infectious and more resistant to various stresses  <cit> . furthermore, l. pneumophila in stationary phase also displays shortened cell body, flagellin expression, pigment accumulation and reduced sodium sensitivity. these attributes, together with virulence markers such as cytotoxicity, intracellular growth and phagocytosis, are recognized as the transmission traits of l. pneumophila  <cit> . on the other hand, the in vitro-cultured stationary-phase l. pneumophila can achieve further differentiation to the cyst-like, hyper-infectious and resilient mature intracellular form  in aquatic environment or in specific mammalian cell lines. mif is considered as an "in vivo stationary-phase form" while owning different outer membrane structure and protein composition compared with the stationary-phase form  <cit> . in addition, an in vivo transcriptome of l. pneumophila was performed and exhibited the genes strongly induced in intracellular replicative or transmissive phase, respectively, which also revealed several virulence or transmission related genes specially induced intracellularly, confirming the dissimilarity between the in vitro- and in vivo- transmissive/stationary phase  <cit> .

a complicated gene network has been implicated in the regulation of transmission traits in l. pneumophila. for example, the sigma factor rpos, the two-component system leta/lets, and the quorum sensing regulator lqsr have all been shown to facilitate the expression of transmission traits  <cit> . csra, a global repressor of transmission  <cit> , also appears to be tightly regulated by several factors such as pmra  and rsmyz   <cit> . in addition, cpxr has been found to activate transcription of several genes encoding components of the dot/icm complex as well as several dot/icm-translocated effectors  <cit> . the concerted action of these regulators not only contributes to the display of transmission traits, but also plays a vital role in the re-entry into the replicative phase  <cit> .

proteolysis of detrimental and misfolded proteins is critically important for protein quality control and cellular homeostasis  <cit> . four classes of energy-dependent protease systems have been identified throughout prokaryotes: clpap/xp, clpyq , ftsh and lon. clpp and clpq, the catalytic cores of the proteases, require clp atpase chaperones for the recognition and unfolding of substrates; on the other hand, in ftsh and lon, a single polypeptide contains both atpase and proteolytic activity  <cit> . the clpp protease and clp atpase, which are widely distributed and highly conserved in various bacteria species as well as mitochondria and chloroplasts of eukaryotic cells  <cit> , have been demonstrated to function in the regulation of stress response, sporulation and cell division  <cit> . for example, clpxp is responsible for the degradation of rpos, the sigma regulator of stress response in e. coli  <cit> . in salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium, loss of clpxp has been shown to result in the over-expression of flia and flic, which in turn induced a hyperflagellate phenotype  <cit> . in bacillus subtilis, comk/s, the two-component regulator of competence and sporulation, are tightly controlled by the successive binding and degradation mediated by meca and clpcp  <cit> . clpp also seems to regulate virulence in many pathogens such as listeria monocytogenes, streptococcus pneumoniae and staphylococcus aureus  <cit> . finally, clpp has been demonstrated to play a role in the biofilm formation  <cit> .

as a ubiquitous bacterium in aquatic environment, l. pneumophila encounters numerous stresses such as elevated temperature, low ph and starvation during both planktonic existence and intracellular replication  <cit> . we hypothesized that a rapid response to a changing environment might require an uncharacterized proteolytic system in l. pneumophila. in the present study, we explored the role of l. pneumophila clpp in growth, stress tolerance, cell morphology and virulence to amoebae host. we demonstrate that clpp affects several l. pneumophila transmission traits and cell division, and clpp might play an important role in virulence regulation.

RESULTS
clpp homologue is required for optimal growth of l. pneumophila at high temperatures
in l. pneumophila, the lpg <dig> sequence was predicted to encode a putative clpp homologue. the product of lpg <dig> consists of  <dig> amino acids and contains a highly conserved three-residue sequence ser-his-asp  that was previously reported as the proteolytic triad site of e. coli clpp  <cit> . to investigate the physiological role of clpp homologue in l. pneumophila, we constructed a clpp-deficient mutant by non-polar deletion of a  <dig> bp internal fragment encompassing the coding sequence for ser-his-asp. we first determined the impact of clpp on growth. as shown in figure  <dig>  the growth curves of wt, the lpΔclpp mutant, and the constitutive complemented strain lpΔclpp-pclpp, were similar at 25°c, 30°c and 37°c , demonstrating that clpp is not required for optimal growth at lower temperatures. however, the lpΔclpp mutant strain exhibited impaired growth at 42°c relative to the other two strains , indicating an important role of clpp homologue for optimal growth of l. pneumophila at high temperatures.

clpp homologue is required for stress tolerance in stationary phase
l. pneumophila can respond to various environmental stresses and cope with harsh conditions while entering eukaryotic hosts  <cit> . to assess whether clpp homologue may be involved in stress response, the above three strains were grown to logarithmic or stationary phase and exposed to various stress conditions. when the logarithmic-phase cells were exposed respectively to low ph, hydrogen peroxide, potassium chloride, and heat shock, the survival rates of all three strains were similar and lower than those of the stationary-phase cells . when treated with ph  <dig>  citric acid for  <dig> minutes, wt jr <dig> cells in stationary phase exhibited approximately 70% survival rate. however, only about 10% of lpΔclpp mutant cells survived . such a deficiency was rescued in the lpΔclpp-pclpp strain . this result indicated that the deletion of clpp impairs the ability of l. pneumophila to respond to low-ph conditions. similar results were also obtained in oxidative stress assay . when the cells were treated with  <dig> mm hydrogen peroxide for  <dig> minutes, the survival rate of the lpΔclpp mutant was  <dig> ±  <dig> %, much lower than that of wt cells . in contrast, lpΔclpp-pclpp cells displayed a cfu closely resembling that of wt cells . likewise, when cells were incubated in 57°c water bath for  <dig> minutes or treated with  <dig>  m potassium chloride for  <dig> hour, the survival rate of lpΔclpp mutant was lower than that of wt and the complementation strain , indicating that clpp is also required for responses to heat shock and osmotic stress. collectively, these results indicate that clpp homologue is involved in tolerance to multiple stresses in stationary-phase l. pneumophila.

clpp homologue is required for normal cell division of l. pneumophila
during stress tolerance assays, lpΔclpp generally exhibited  <dig> - to 3-fold lower colony formation efficiency compared with wt jr <dig> on bcye plates . however, all three l. pneumophila strains appeared to have similar growth rates at 37°c, 30°c and 25°c , thus excluding significant reduction in the number of living lpΔclpp cells. previously, ablation of clp protease activity has been shown to lead to abnormal cell wall formation or incomplete cell division in several gram-positive bacteria  <cit> . to examine the morphology of lpΔclpp mutant cells under normal conditions, we performed cryo-transmission electron microscopy . cells in stationary phase were frozen-hydrated by liquid nitrogen and directly observed at -172°c, and we found that lpΔclpp cell surface was surprisingly indistinguishable from that of the wt cells , contrary to our results obtained by scanning electronic microscopy  , indicating that clpp deficiency did not affect cell wall architecture under normal growth conditions.

the combined results of sem and cyro-tem showed that unlike the "plump cocoid" shape of the wt or complemented strains, stationary-phase cells deficient in clpp were elongated and incapable to divide normally . furthermore, around 62% of lpΔclpp cells were twins, 23% were hyper-filamentous, and only 15% of cells were single . in contrast, around 8% of wt jr <dig> cells were hyper-filamentous, and approximately 11% of cells were "twins" . the abnormal cell morphology was also reversed by complementation . these results together suggest that deletion of clpp lead to abnormal cell division and consequently aberrant cell morphology in l. pneumophila.

the lpΔclpp mutant is sodium tolerant
stationary-phase l. pneumophila cells have been shown to exhibit sodium sensitivity  <cit> . it has been proposed that the assembly of virulence factor translocation apparatus, such as the dot/icm t4ss complex, allows high levels of sodium to diffuse into the cytoplasm, which is lethal to the cells  <cit> . to investigate whether clpp homologue also affected sodium sensitivity of l. pneumophila, jr <dig>  lpΔclpp and lpΔclpp-pclpp strains were grown to exponential or stationary phase, diluted and plated in duplicate on bcye or bcye containing  <dig> mm sodium chloride, respectively. different dilutions of stationary-phase jr <dig> and lpΔclpp cells were also spotted on the plates. in the presence of sodium, exponential-phase cells exhibited indistinguishable sodium sensitivity, irrespective of the genotype . however, the lpΔclpp mutant displayed an approximately 300-fold higher resistance than jr <dig> in stationary phase . the loss of sodium sensitivity as a result of clpp deletion was again reversed in lpΔclpp-pclpp . the relationship between sodium resistance and clpp deletion was further confirmed by the plate-spotting assay . notably, while more resitant to sodium in both assays, lpΔclpp required two more days to form colonies on nacl plates compared to jr <dig> . taken together, these results demonstrate that the deletion of clpp enhances the sodium resistance of l. pneumophila in stationary phase with a slower growth rate, implying a possible role of clpp in virulence.

loss of clpp impaires l. pneumophila growth and its cytotoxicity against a. castellanii
to determine whether clpp homologue may function in the virulence of l. pneumophila, we performed the amoebae plate test  previously used to determine virulence  <cit> . the amoebae  host cells were spread onto bcye plates before stationary-phase l. pneumophila cells were spotted in 10-fold serial dilutions, and the plates were subsequently incubated at 37°c for  <dig> days. as shown in figure 6a, wt jr <dig> and the complemented strain lpΔclpp-pclpp exhibited robust growth even at 10- <dig> dilution when co-incubated with amoebae. however, lpΔclpp showed a growth defect resembling the phenotype observed in the negative control Δdota strain which was rendered completely avirulent by an in-frame deletion in the dota gene  <cit> . as an additional control, cells were spotted onto the plates in the absence of amoebae, and no difference in growth was observed among the four strains .

cytotoxicity is an important virulent trait of l. pneumophila and correlates strongly with the function of the dot/icm t4ss  <cit> . we next tested whether clpp homologue may affect the cytotoxicity of l. pneumophila against a. castellanii. l. pneumophila strains were used to infect a. castellanii with an moi of  <dig>   <dig> h post infection, cytotoxicity was assayed by pi staining and quantified by flow cytometry analysis  <cit> . as shown in figure 6b, jr <dig> exhibited robust cytotoxicity , whereas lpΔclpp resulted in only 17% cell death, barely higher than that of the avirulent mutant Δdota . as expected, cytotoxicity was restored in the complemented strain lpΔclpp-pclpp . these results were also confirmed by fluorescence microscopy . thus, it appeared that loss of clpp seriously impaires cytotoxicity against the amoebae host.

loss of clpp abolishes intracellular multiplication of l. pneumophila in a. castellanii
the above apt and cytotoxicity assays demonstrated an important role of clpp in virulence. next, we examined whether clpp homologue also affected the intracellular replication of l. pneumophila in a. castellanii. amoebae cells were infected with stationary-phase l. pneumophila at an moi of  <dig>  under such conditions, the infection persisted for  <dig> days and multiplication was evaluated by plating the amoebae lysate onto cye plates to quantify replication. as shown in figure  <dig>  jr <dig> and the complemented strain exhibited essentially identical replicative capability within a. castellanii cells. in contrast, both lpΔclpp and Δdota mutants showed significantly impaired multiplication. as a control, the lpΔclpp strain displayed normal growth at 30°c or 37°c in broth .

taken together, the adverse effects of clpp deletion on sodium tolerance, growth on apt, cytotoxicity and intracellular multiplication suggest that clpp homologue might play an important role in virulence regulation of l. pneumophila.

discussion
in the current study, lpΔclpp was shown to exhibit reduced growth rate at high temperatures  and impaired resistance to heat shock  compared to the wild type. the lpΔclpp mutant also displayed impaired resistance to oxidative and low-ph conditions in stationary phase. as oxidative and acid stress are generally considered as harsh and detrimental to dna  <cit> , clpp homologue may play an important role in l. pneumophila dna repair, consistent with its demonstrated function in e. coli  <cit> , s. aureus  <cit>  and lactococcus lactis  <cit> . however, while several previous studies have demonstrated growth defect as a result of clpp deficiency over a broad temperature range  <cit> , deletion of clpp appeared to compromise the growth of l. pneumophila only at higher temperatures , suggestive of a more restricted role independent of cold response.

attenuation of clpp or clp atpase activities has been shown to lead to abnormal bacterial morphology such as filamentation, aberrant cell wall structure and irregular cell division  <cit> . likewise, results from sem and cyro-tem revealed that the lpΔclpp mutant cells were elongated and defective in cell division . furthermore, sem results also implicated a role of clpp in stress tolerance in l. pneumophila. in contrast to the defective cell surface observed in sem , largely normal cell surface were found by cyro-tem in lpΔclpp mutant cells grown under normal conditions , suggesting that the chemical treatment during sem sample preparation, not clpp deletion, may have resulted in the abnormal cell surface.

how clpp affects cell division is not fully understood. in c. crescentus, degradation of the cell cycle repressor ctra by the clpxp complex has been shown to contribute to g1-s transition, and deletion of clpp blocked cell division  <cit> . in b. subtilis, cells overproducing muraa, an enzyme in peptidoglycan biosynthesis and a substrate of the clp protease, displayed a filamentous, undivided morphology reminiscent of the clpp mutant cells, suggesting that degradation of muraa by clpp might contribute to normal cell segregation  <cit> . furthermore, through a clpp-independent pathway, the b. subtilis clpx appeared to modulate the assembly of the tubulin-like protein ftsz  <cit> , which is known to be a key process in the replication and division of gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . identification of the substrate for clpp may shed light on the regulatory mechanism of cell division in l. pneumophila.

clpp proteolytic complexes play pivotal roles in protein degradation or modification  <cit> . during the transition of b. subtilis cells to stationary phase, clpp degrades massive amounts of proteins previously produced in exponential growth phase  <cit> . notably, l. pneumophila also undergoes a biphasic life cycle with mutually exclusive gene expression for replication or transmission  <cit> . while transiting from replication  to transmission , l. pneumophila activates an intricate network of regulators such as leta/s, rpos, pmra, cpxr, rsmyz, csra and lqsr  <cit> . as shown in our results, unlike the stationary-phase wild type which exhibits transmission traits, lpΔclpp mutant cells in stationary phase exhibit replicative forms such as reduced stress tolerance , cell elongation , enhanced sodium resistance , impaired cytotoxicity and growth on amoebae plates  and severely compromised intracellular multiplication in amoebae host . thus, clpp may play an important role in the transition from replication to transmission in l. pneumophila. on the other hand, several transmission traits are not affected by clpp-deletion such as pigment accumulation and transcription from the flaa  gene , suggesting that the impact of clpp on the transition to transmissive form in l. pneumophila is somewhat limited. considering that clpp always executes the post-transcriptional feedback regulation, and moreover, degrades the same substrates by cooperating with other proteases  <cit> , one explanation to such a limitation is that the degradation of clpp substrates could be compensated by other proteases in clpp-deletion mutant, thus clpp cannot govern the transition just as the global regulators such as rpos, csra or leta/s in l. pneumophila.

clpp plays prominent roles in virulence of various gram-positive pathogens such as s. aureus, s. pneumoniae and l. monocytogenes  <cit> . furthermore, clpp was reported to control the levels of key virulence factors of type iii secretory systems  in certain pathogens such as s. typhimurium and yersinia pestis  <cit> . recently, it was reported that loss of clpp attenuated the virulence of helicobacter pylori, a pathogen owning type iv secretory system   <cit> . it is interesting that clpp-deletion severely compromised the l. pneumophila infection against amoebae host . in our results, the sodium resistance exhibited by lpΔclpp mutant , which is a phenotype shared by the mutants without functional dot/icm t4ss  <cit> , together with the comparable decline in intracellular multiplication observed in lpΔclpp and Δdota mutants , suggest a role of clpp in t4ss-dependent virulence through degrading a repressor or activating an up-regulator of the substrate of clpp. one possibility is that the clpp protease has a major impact on the expression or function of dot/icm t4ss in l. pneumophila. another possibility is that clpp might be required for the expression of some t4ss substrates. in this case, loss of clpp would also severely attenuate the intracellular growth even if the t4ss is intact, just as the case of l. pneumophila sigma s factor   <cit> . thus, identification of the substrate of clpp, which is currently underway in our laboratory, would help to discern the underlying relationship between clpp and t4ss-dependent virulence in l. pneumophila.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our study shows that the l. pneumophila clpp homologue is required for cell division and several transmission traits including stress tolerance, cell shortening, sodium sensitivity, cytotoxicity, growth on amoebae plates and intracellular multiplication. the study further suggests that the clpp homologue might be important for virulence regulation of l. pneumophila.

