BACKGROUND
bulked segregation analysis  is a widely used method for rapidly identifying molecular markers linked to a trait of interest. it involves genotyping two pools  of dna samples from individual plants originating from an experimental cross. plants are assigned to one of the two bulks based on the trait of interest. the bulks are screened with a large number of markers to identify those that distinguish the bulks and, by inference, must be genetically linked to the trait locus  <cit> .

the success of the bsa approach relies on the dramatic reduction in the number of marker assays when compared to building a genetic map for the purpose of identifying markers associated with a phenotype. bsa 'collapses' the two-dimensional matrix of marker assays  into a one-dimensional vector of genotypic differences between two dna bulks. with gel-based marker technologies this vector is largely built up sequentially. highly multiplexed, hybridization-based marker technologies such as sfp, dart and snp have the potential to further 'collapse' the vector of genotypic differences between bulks into a single  whole-genome assay  <cit> .

application of hybridization-based marker technologies to bsa not only reduces the genotyping effort, but has the additional benefit of producing quantitative raw data  which are only subsequently converted into discrete genotypes  in the case of non-bsa applications. the raw hybridization data are a quantitative measure of allele frequencies  <cit>  and thus should increase the accuracy of mapping a trait locus with bsa. others have used this feature when performing bsa experiments using sfp typed on affymetrix genechips  <cit> .

while sfp are a powerful research tool for species with sufficient sequence information, their utility in the context of agricultural research and breeding appears to be fairly limited, not only because of technology-establishment and per-sample assay costs but also because polyploidy poses a serious barrier to any whole-genome hybridization approach. polyploidy and the costs of technology establishment for new species are also limiting the widespread deployment of snp among the approximately  <dig> crop species cultivated worldwide, many of which have large and/or polyploid genomes  <cit> . by contrast dart arrays, already available for two dozens of plant and fungal species  <cit> , can be rapidly developed for new species of any ploidy level for a small fraction of the investment required for sfp or snp arrays  <cit> .

in this paper we investigate the suitability of the dart platform for bsa, using as an example a polymorphism-enriched barley array with  <dig>  clones  <cit> . we first test 'dart-bsa' using a dh population that segregates for a morphological marker with known map position . in this experiment we explore several technology features that are likely to be critical for routine deployment of dart-bsa. in a subsequent validation experiment we deploy the optimized method to a different dh population segregating for al tolerance to test the performance of dart-bsa in a practical application.

RESULTS
test experiment
the steptoe/morex dh population segregates for 'pubescent leaf blades' , a morphological marker that has been incorporated into the genetic map of chromosome 3h in this population  <cit> . we used mpub to assemble contrasting bulks for a trait with known genetic location in order to evaluate the performance of dart when applied to bsa. the bulks were compared by simultaneously assaying them on the same dart array  and measuring the contrast of hybridization intensity for markers that were identified as polymorphic in a comparison between the two parents on separate replicated arrays.

selection of polymorphic markers
markers differentiating between steptoe and morex were selected based on the contrast in hybridization intensity between the two cultivars . instead of applying an arbitrary threshold we measured the variability of hybridization-contrast estimates by comparing two identical aliquots of a 1: <dig> mixture of the two parents . polymorphic markers were then selected by applying to the hybridization contrast between the parents a normal distribution-based probability threshold derived from the self comparison.

as the stringency of this marker-selection threshold was increased from 10- <dig> to 10- <dig>  the minimum parental hybridization contrast increased from  <dig>  to  <dig>  log units . the latter caused a concomitant decrease in the number of selected polymorphic markers from  <dig> to  <dig>  at the same time the proportion of markers previously mapped in the steptoe/morex population with an array containing a subset of markers  <cit>  increased from  <dig> to 55% . these numbers indicate a gradual enrichment of high-quality, 'mappable' markers at more stringent thresholds at the expense of excluding other possibly informative markers. a test of several threshold levels for their effectiveness in excluding outlier markers in a plot of relative hybridization contrast vs. map position  suggested that p <  <dig>  was an acceptable compromise between these two tendencies . this threshold was used for the rest of this study.

1a normal distribution-based threshold for log <dig>  derived from the comparison of two identical aliquots of a 1: <dig> mixture of the steptoe and morex parents.

2log <dig> 

3markers were selected from the set of  <dig>  polymorphism-enriched clones .

4dart markers were mapped on an array containing a partly overlapping set of markers.

5values are based on the dispersion of the relative hybridization contrast  or the allele-frequency difference. there was a 1: <dig> correspondence between the two .

6this significance threshold reflects the variability inherent in the array-hybridization process. it was derived from the dispersion of the relative hybridization contrast in a 'self' comparison between two identical aliquots of 1: <dig> mixture of steptoe and morex . the resulting significance threshold was bonferroni-adjusted for multiple comparisons.

 <dig> this significance threshold reflects the chance that a non-zero allele-frequency difference may occur by chance as a result of the random assortment of chromosomes  in the pooling process. it was derived by simulating the pooling process .

experimental replicates
we next tested the effect of varying the number of replicate arrays between two and eight. increasing the degree of replication resulted in the inclusion of markers that were previously not mapped, in part because the hybridization contrast between the parental alleles was small   <cit> . only a small minority of the additional markers, however, were outliers with respect to a loess curve in a plot of the relative hybridization contrast vs. map position . this result suggests that most of these markers were still genetically informative. a high degree of experimental replication seems to improve the precision of quantifying markers with a smaller hybridization contrast between the parental alleles, thus resulting in the inclusion of more markers in a bsa scan. we considered four experimental replicates adequate for the purpose of this study.

quantification of the allele-frequency difference between bulks
the contrast in hybridization intensity between the two allelic states varies from marker to marker and has to be taken into account when quantifying allele abundances in dna pools. the log <dig>  values measured for polymorphic markers in the bulk comparison were therefore scaled by division by the log <dig>  values measured in the comparison between the parents.

to link the scaled or relative hybridization contrast of a marker to the allelic composition of the bulks, we computed from the segregation data of a steptoe/morex dart map the frequency of the steptoe allele in each bulk . the difference between the steptoe allele frequencies in the two bulks was closely correlated to the relative hybridization contrast . the degree of correlation was identical to the correlation obtained in other studies using the affymetrix snp genotyping platform  <cit> . this result confirms that hybridization intensities are proportional to the abundance of dart alleles in dna pools. the relative hybridization contrast, therefore, can be used as a measure of the between-bulk difference in the frequency of the allele from the trait-donor parent.

it follows from this data that previously identified limitations of dominant markers for bsa with certain population types  <cit>  do not apply to dart-bsa, although in a non-bsa context dart markers are typically scored in a dominant manner  <cit> . any type of population that segregates for a trait of interest should be amenable to dart-bsa; be it dh, ril, bc, f <dig> or more complex populations.

linkage-detection threshold derived from 'platform noise'
before scanning the genome for markers linked to mpub we quantified the basal 'platform noise' to obtain a significance threshold for detecting linkage. the dispersion of the apparent allele-frequency difference in a comparison between two identical aliquots of a 1: <dig> mixture of the parents was used to derive a genome-wide significance threshold . the size of this threshold was a function of the extent to which markers with limited hybridization contrast between alternative alleles were incorporated in the analysis , because the dispersion of allele-frequency estimates was larger for less well-separated markers . more experimental replicates kept the threshold low even if poorly separated markers were included .

linkage-detection threshold derived from 'pooling noise'
besides quantifying the effect of platform-related noise, it is important to consider the expected variability caused by binomial sampling in the bulking process. as a result of the random assortment of chromosomes, the between-bulk difference in allele frequency may deviate from zero for markers that are not linked to the target locus, thus generating spurious linkage signals.

we established a genome-wide significance threshold by simulating the comparison of random bulks . with increasing bulk sizes, the threshold asymptotically drops toward 0% allele-frequency difference . at  <dig> plants per bulk, for example, there is a 5% probability of detecting, by chance only, at least one genomic region with an allele-frequency difference greater than  <dig> % . the thresholds reported in figure  <dig> are specific to the number of chromosomes and the type of population used in this study. for species with more chromosomes, for example, larger bulk sizes are required to achieve comparable thresholds .

genome-wide linkage scan
a plot of the allele-frequency difference between mpub bulks  vs. the chromosomal positions of the markers on a dart consensus map  <cit>  immediately confirmed that mpub was located on the long arm of chromosome 3h   <cit> . the marker with the maximum allele-frequency difference  was bpb- <dig>  a steptoe/morex map for chromosome 3h, built from markers overlapping between this and a previous study  <cit> , confirmed that bpb- <dig> was the closest marker to mpub at  <dig>  cm distance. the loess curve also peaked at this marker. these results underscore the mapping accuracy of dart-bsa.

the mpub linkage signal was highly significant, peaking well beyond both the 'pooling noise' and the 'platform noise' threshold . a comparison of two randomly assembled bulks of  <dig> plants  showed that bulks were not large enough to decrease the random fluctuations in allele frequencies to a level comparable to the apparent fluctuations caused by the baseline noise of the dart platform . the sd of the allele-frequency difference was  <dig> % in the random-bulk comparison,  <dig> % in the mpub-bulk comparison , but only  <dig> % in the self comparison.

we conclude from this data that in the case of barley, it would be beneficial to bulk up to  <dig> dh plants for dart-bsa. at this bulk size the extent of random fluctuations in allele frequencies introduced in the pooling process  become comparable to the approximate 'platform noise' of dart-bsa .

linkage decay in the vicinity of the target locus
the 'linkage signal' decayed as the distance between markers and the target locus increased . a linear-regression analysis using markers within ±  <dig> cm of mpub indicated a  <dig> % decrease per cm distance from the target locus . it is therefore possible to estimate the approximate cm distance of dart markers from the target locus based on the following formula: cm distance ≈  <dig>  × % allele-frequency difference –  <dig>  this relationship could be useful for analyzing populations derived from genetically close parents. in such situations, lower marker densities are expected and the approximate position of the target locus could be estimated from moderately linked markers based on this relationship.

gel-based markers  compromise the efficiency and precision of bsa by generating discrete allelic data in a somewhat arbitrary and hence error-prone process . the latter is problematic in situations where the bulks contain different proportion of both parental alleles, for example in case of less than perfectly linked makers or for qtl with moderate effects. the ability of dart-bsa to quantify the degree of linkage between markers and a target locus is a clear advantage in such cases.

marker density
the mpub genome scan comprised  <dig> polymorphic markers , that is, approximately one marker every  <dig>  cm. this resolution is lower than the resolution afforded by the arabidopsis sfp array  <cit> . however, sfp hybridization data tend to be quite variable, which makes a high marker density an important prerequisite for calculating robust allele-frequency difference estimates for genomic regions. more importantly, the precision with which a target locus can be mapped by bsa not only depends on the marker density but also on the number of crossover in the vicinity of the target locus. in experimental populations that are the result of a limited number of meioses the 'linkage peaks' will simply be too broad to make effective use of more than approximately  <dig> to  <dig>  markers.

validation experiment
having established that dart-bsa accurately identifies the known genomic location of a model trait, we continued to validate the method by attempting to map an al-tolerance locus in a dayton/zhepi <dig> dh population . for this purpose we 'relaxed' the conditions of analysis in two ways to accommodate more typical experimental designs. first, we pooled genomic-dna samples . second, we only pooled  <dig> plants per bulk, not an uncommon bulk size in this sort of experiments.

genomic-dna samples can be bulked directly
because dart-bsa compares the abundance of alternative alleles between bulks in a quantitative manner , it is important to make sure that individual plants contribute equally to bulks, particularly when working with small bulk sizes. presumably, the most robust way to achieve this is to bulk representations derived from individual samples of genomic dna. direct bulking of genomic-dna samples, however, produces virtually identical estimates of allele-frequency differences . it may well be tolerable to bulk equal amounts of plant material before dna extraction, although we did not test this method experimentally.

dart-bsa identifies an al-tolerance locus on chromosome 4h
the dart-bsa scan for al tolerance in the dayton/zhepi <dig> population revealed a highly significant peak on chromosome 4h, despite the elevated 'pooling-noise' threshold  due to the small bulk sizes used . the position of the peak is consistent with the location of an al-tolerance locus  on 4hl, which appears to mediate al-activated citrate secretion from roots, and has already been identified in several barley populations  <cit> .

the alt locus was previously mapped between ssr markers bmag <dig> on the proximal side and hvm <dig> on the distal side  <cit> . these two ssr markers have also been incorporated into a dart linkage map of the dayton/zhepi <dig> population where they span a small  <dig> -cm region . the marker that showed the greatest allele-frequency difference in the dart-bsa scan  co-segregated with bmag <dig>  which implies that it must have been closer than  <dig>  cm from the alt locus. the loess curve peaked another  <dig>  cm proximal of the bmag490/bpb- <dig> locus .

these results are consistent with the performance of dart-bsa in the steptoe/morex model experiment conducted under technically more stringent experimental conditions . in both experiments the position of the target locus was mapped with at least  <dig> cm precision. a third experiment not reported here identified markers linked to a disease-resistance locus that was subsequently confirmed by conventional linkage analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
given that dart arrays are already available for two dozens of plant and fungal species  <cit>  and can be rapidly developed for new species of any ploidy level with limited resources  <cit> , we extrapolate from the results of this study that dart should prove useful as a generic platform for quantitative bsa in plants. dart markers in established arrays for a number of important crops are being sequenced, thus providing instant access to sequence anchor for any dart-bsa-tagged character when sufficient genomic resources become available in the future.

