BACKGROUND
the intriguing biological versatility and the broad range of lifestyles of bacteria belonging to the genus burkholderia have given rise to interest about the genome contents and plasticity of these bacteria with a worldwide distribution  <cit> . pathogenic burkholderia have long been studied due to their importance as agents of plant and animal diseases, but special emphasis has been placed on their role as human pathogens . however, in the past decade in particular, the increasing number of studies reporting the ecological importance of burkholderia species, showing environmental benefits related to the degradation of xenobiotics, promotion of plant growth, biocontrol of agricultural diseases, and symbiotic and non-symbiotic biological nitrogen fixation, among other characteristics, has renewed interest in these widely adapted bacteria . as noted by some authors, obtaining knowledge about burkholderia is a challenging microbiological task, as the genus encompasses strains ranging from those showing excellent agricultural properties to those being capable of devastating the health of cystic fibrosis  patients  <cit> .

taxonomically, pseudomonas cepacia was originally described by william burkholder in  <dig> as the causative agent of bacterial rot in onion  bulbs  <cit> ; four decades later, seven pathogenic species previously classified as pseudomonas were transferred to the new genus burkholderia
 <cit> . there are currently more than  <dig> described species within this genus  <cit> . however, the definition of species within the genus is still one of the most challenging problems in taxonomy, requiring polyphasic approaches  <cit> . interest in solving taxonomic problems within the genus has increased in the last decade, as a variety of environmental isolates with great biotechnological potential have been isolated, studied and reported  <cit> . unfortunately, there is still no clear distinction to ensure that environmental isolates do not represent a source of human pathogenicity  <cit> . therefore, due to our poor knowledge of this genus and inability to distinguish soil and plant-beneficial strains from clinically devastating strains, a reassessment of the risk and a moratorium on the biotechnological applications of burkholderia strains, with an emphasis on the b. cepacia complex , have been suggested  <cit> .

symbiotic nitrogen fixation is a key process involved in the global input of nitrogen, and there are now over one and a half centuries of available studies on the nitrogen-fixing bacterial symbionts of legumes , collectively referred to as “rhizobia” and classified into the alpha-proteobacteria class  <cit> . the first reports, at the turn of this century, of the beta-proteobacteria symbionts of legumes of the subfamily mimosoideae were particularly noteworthy, and even more surprising was the identification of these bacteria as burkholderia
 <cit> . several reports followed these pioneering studies and confirmed that diazotrophic symbiotic burkholderia are broadly dispersed and mainly—but not exclusively—associated with the subfamily mimosoideae . symbiotic burkholderia predominate in the tropics  <cit> , with brazil and south africa most likely representing the richest reservoir of these bacteria .

analyses of ribosomal and some housekeeping genes of burkholderia species have begun to shed light on evolutionary and taxonomic issues. for example, it has been indicated that typically environmental species might constitute a separate genus  <cit> . however, a clearer picture will only emerge with the complete genome sequencing of several strains. particular interest should be paid to the comparative genomics of non-pathogenic and pathogenic strains, but there are unfortunately still very few available genomes of non-pathogenic burkholderia, especially of diazotrophic symbiotic strains.

burkholderia phenoliruptrix is a species that has been reported to accommodate the well-known xenobiotic strain ac1100t, capable of degrading  <dig> ,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid  <cit> . recently, our group was the first to describe strain br3459a as a symbiont of mimosa flocculosa
 <cit> , while bournaud and associates  <cit>  were the first to describe b. phenoliruptrix as a diazotrophic symbiont of the piptadenia group .

here, we provide a detailed description of the first complete genome of the symbiotic strain of b. phenoliruptrix br3459a , which was originally isolated in brazil from m. flocculosa and is effective in fixing nitrogen in association with this legume. in addition, this strain is outstanding for its capacity to grow in vitro at 40°c without losing its symbiotic properties  <cit> .

RESULTS
general genome features
dna pyrosequencing generated a total of  <dig> , <dig> reads, corresponding to 35-fold genome coverage, with  <dig> % gc content, 84% of coding region, and an average orf length of 989 bp. the b. phenoliruptrix br3459a genome consists of two circular chromosomes of  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> ,495 bp and one plasmid of  <dig>  bp, totalling  <dig>  mbp. the large  and small  chromosomes encode  <dig>  and  <dig>  predicted orfs, respectively, while  <dig> orfs are present in the plasmid. the chromosome i displays  <dig>  known and  <dig> hypothetical orfs,  <dig> trnas,  <dig> rrna operons, and  <dig> pseudogenes. the chromosome  <dig> contains  <dig>  orfs with known function,  <dig> hypothetical orfs,  <dig> trnas,  <dig> rrna operons, and  <dig> pseudogenes. in the plasmid,  <dig> known,  <dig> hypothetical orfs, and  <dig> pseudogenes were identified  .table  <dig> 
genomic features of
b. phenoliruptrix
br3459a


general description of the burkholderia phenoliruptrix br3459a genome.



comparison with other sequenced burkholderiagenomes
for quite some time, studies in burkholderia encompassed only species of clinical interest; however, the recent identification of nitrogen-fixing species has provided an ecological and biotechnological context for the genus  <cit> . from this perspective, b. phenoliruptrix br3459a was compared with fourteen other burkholderia species, including human and plant pathogens, mutualists and potential agricultural biocontrol agents . it has been reported that the burkholderia genus can be phylogenetically distinguished into, at least, two distinct main branches, one of which is composed of pathogens associated with the b. cepacia complex , and the other of non-pathogenic species associated with plants or related to bioremediation  <cit> . under our phylogenetic approach, a similar topology was observed in the trees inferred from  <dig> housekeeping genes from the fifteen analysed species , in addition to reconstructions using other genes and species . in these reconstructions, b. phenoliruptrix is grouped with the plant-associated beneficial and environmental species branch, which includes almost all of the currently known legume-nodulating species as well as other environmental species, while the other group includes pathogenic species. previously, based on a tree constructed using only 16s rrna gene sequences, gyaneshwar and associates  <cit>  proposed that the first group represents a new genus, for which the name caballeronia was suggested. noteworthy is that recently a new rhizobial genus—neorhizobium—has been proposed based on the analysis of six protein-coding housekeeping genes  <cit> . therefore, our robust tree built using  <dig> housekeeping genes provides strong support for the proposal of the new genus caballeronia.table  <dig> 
characteristics of the genomes of the sequenced and annotated
burkholderia
species included in study

















characteristics of the genome of burkholderia phenoliruptrix br3459a and other analysed burkholderia species.
concatenated phylogenetic reconstruction of the  <dig> housekeeping genes based on the burkholderiales core. the sequences were aligned and submitted to mega <dig> program, using the neighbour-joining method, with the jtt model. non-uniformity of evolutionary rates among sites were modelled using a discrete gamma distribution , with  <dig> rate categories. all positions showing less than 95% site coverage were eliminated. bootstrap values are based on  <dig> replicates. cupriavidus taiwanensis was used as an outgroup.



we also performed genomic comparisons of b. phenoliruptrix using bidirectional best-hit  methodology among  the chromosomes and plasmids of all burkholderia species;  all of the plasmids studied;  the chromosomes of non-pathogenic strains; and  the chromosomes of pathogenic species of interest  . the data obtained when the fifteen species were compared showed that the b. phenoliruptrix genome is most closely related to the non-pathogenic burkholderia sp. strains ccge <dig> and ccge <dig> and to b. phytofirmans psjn. burkholderia sp. ccge  <dig> was isolated from a nodule of mimosa affinis  in veracruz, mexico; while ccge  <dig> was isolated from chamaecrista absus  in tequila, jalisco, méxico ; even though both strains lacked the symbiotic genes. in this comparison, we observed that b. phenoliruptrix shared  <dig> ;  <dig>  and  <dig>  common clusters with burkholderia sp. strains ccge <dig> and ccge <dig> and with b. phytofirmans psjn, respectively. however, 4% and 34% of the b. phenoliruptrix coding genes present in the chromosome and plasmid, respectively, did not cluster with any other burkholderia sequences. of these  <dig> and  <dig> proteins not present similarity with other the other species used as comparison. interestingly, the genomic comparison between the plasmid psymbr3459a and the chromosome of b. phenoliruptrix showed  <dig> common clusters, most of which were not derived from duplication processes. this is more representative than the number of proteins shared among psymbr3459a and the other burkholderia plasmids, with the exception of the b. phymatum pbhy <dig> plasmid, which presented  <dig> shared clusters. within the total psymbr3459a repertoire of coding genes,  <dig> proteins were identified only in this plasmid.figure  <dig> 
venn diagram of the proteins shared between
b. phenoliruptrix
and other
burkholderia
species by distinct bidirectional best-hit comparisons. common proteins encoded by genes present in the chromosome and plasmid of b. phenoliruptrix in comparisons with chromosomes and plasmids of the fifteen burkholderia species; only the plasmidial sequences; chromosomes of non-pathogenic strains; and chromosomes of pathogenic strains.



in comparison with pathogenic species, 71% of the proteins encoded by genes in the b. phenoliruptrix chromosome were also found in the bcc complex, a higher percentage than that observed for b. pseudomallei 1710b . this divergence could be explained by the unusually large number of simple sequence repeats observed in b. pseudomallei, resulting in frameshift, missense, deletion and insertion mutations  <cit> , in addition to a high recombination frequency due to horizontal gene transfer  events  <cit> .

the high clustering observed between b. phenoliruptrix and bcc complex species was investigated by additional bidirectional best hit, synteny, and blast atlas comparisons. the blast atlas showed that the b. phenoliruptrix chromosome presents a large similarity with the pathogenic burkholderia, except in three major regions, which are present only in b. phenoliruptrix. one of these regions showed a prevalence of genes with general function prediction only, according to cog. interesting, this region contains an elevated gc content compared with the remaining chromosome . a similar map was obtained with b. cepacia, the pathogen b. cenocepacia hi <dig> and the symbionts b. ccge <dig>  which were the most similar species to b. phenoliruptrix in the bbh analyses, in addition to b.phymatum stm <dig>  in b. phenoliruptrix, it was found a transposase with  <dig> % of identity to b. cepacia in a region with distinct gc content . the main differences are associated with a variation of gc content, which may be indicative of a gene transfer event.figure  <dig> 
blast atlas comparison among
b. phenoluriptrix
br3459a and pathogenic
burkholderia
strains. the blast atlas comparison among: 
b. phenoluriptrix br3459a and pathogenic burkholderia strains performed by gview. the dissimilarities regions are highlighted, in addition to the most representative cog categories; 
b. phenoluriptrix br3459a and pathogenic and symbiotic burkholderia species. in highlighted, the region containing a transposase identified in b. phenoliruptrix.



the bbh showed that the pathogen b. cepacia gg <dig> contains  <dig> common clusters with b. phenoliruptrix, some of which are composed by surface antigens, chemotaxis proteins, and an elevated number of lipoproteins, translocases and proteins involved with flagellar biosynthesis. in comparison, b. cepacia gg <dig> and the symbiotic bacteria b. phymatum stm <dig> share  <dig> clusters. similar clustering was observed in both bbh; however b. phenoliruptrix showed a considerable number of proteins associated with the type iv and type vi secretion systems, in addition to pilus assembly and transposase, which were not observed in b. phymatum .

the synteny data showed that b. phenoliruptrix br3459a presents a considerable gene order in four major regions compared with the pathogen b. cepacia gg <dig>  which are more conservative than the observed to b. cenocepacia and b. ambifaria mc40- <dig>  b. phymatum stm <dig> is more syntenic to b. cepacia, although of the lower number of clusters identified, in comparison with b. phenoliruptrix. similar synteny was observed with the pathogen b. cenocepacia j <dig> . however, b.phymatum is not phylogenetically close to br3459a. the similarity between b. phenoliruptrix and the pathogenic burkholderia strains indicates that there is a need for further studies considering the potential use of non-pathogenic burkholderia strains in agriculture and bioremediation.figure  <dig> 
syntenies among
b. phenoluriptrix
br3459a and pathogenic
burkholderia
in comparison with other symbionts strains. the syntenies among b. phenoluriptrix br3459a and pathogenic burkholderia strains were performed by perl script based on bbh data. the data were corroborated with the addition of the pathogen b. cepacia and the symbionts b. phymatum and b. ccge <dig> in the comparisons. the syntenic regions were grouped by cog categories.



in the non-pathogenic burkholderia species comparison, the number of shared proteins corresponded to 95% of the b. phenoliruptrix genomic repertoire. the vast majority of the  <dig> genes found only in b. phenoliruptrixencoded for hypothetical proteins.

the metabolic pathways identified in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a were compared with those of pathogenic and non-pathogenic species according to kegg . in general, b. phenoliruptrix showed reduced number of genes associated with environmental information processing, translation and metabolism categories. although of minor magnitude, the reduction was more evident in metabolic pathways, including those related to lysine, valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation ; amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, galactose metabolism, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, citrate  cycle, propanoate, pyruvate and butanoate metabolism ; oxidative phosphorylation ; cyanoamino acid metabolism and beta-alanine metabolism ; and geraniol, limonene and pinene degradation  .

eps
first we should mention that the original strain br <dig> showed phenotypic polymorphism, with two types of colonies, small non-mucoid and large mucoid colonies, with br3459a belonging to this second group. noteworthy was that even though both mucoid and non-mucoid variants were able nodulate m. flocculosa, those induced by the non-mucoid variants were ineffective in fixing nitrogen and inferior in promoting root growth . no eps  production was observed in the parental br  <dig> and non-mucoid variants ; in addition, the strains could not grow in minimum medium and were less tolerant of high temperatures. contarily, eps production, growth in minimum medium and heat tolerance were confirmed in br3459a and other eps-producing variants. we have then analyzed with more detail eps genes in the genome of br3459a.

eps are high-molecular weight sugar-based polymers that play a role in bacterial adaptation to different stress conditions, acting as a barrier to harmful compounds and being involved in the establishment of symbiotic and pathogenic relationships with hosts  <cit> . eps production has been studied in the burkholderia genus, and at least seven different types of eps have been identified and their structures determined. some strains produce a single type of eps, while others produce mixtures  <cit> . the most common eps produced by burkholderia is cepacian, composed of a branched acetylated heptasaccharide repeat unit containing d-glucose, d-rhamnose, d-mannose, d-galactose, and d-glucuronic acid in a ratio of 1:1:1:3: <dig>  which has been identified in different species with different lifestyles .

genes involved in cepacian biosynthesis are located within the bce-i and bce-ii gene clusters  <cit> . these two clusters are present in almost all sequenced burkholderia genomes, and phylogenetic studies have revealed three distinct groups. groups i and ii include clinical and environmental isolates from the b. cepacia complex as well as animal and plant pathogenic non-bcc isolates; in all of these bacteria, the two clusters are located apart from each other. group iii harbours non-pathogenic rhizosphere and plant-associated strains in which the bce-i and bce-ii gene clusters are located together. in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a, the bce genes are clustered together in the same genomic region, thus constituting part of the group iii cluster. this attribute could be related to the division of pathogenic and non-pathogenic strains.

the biosynthesis of the eps cepacian starts with the formation of activated sugar-nucleotide precursors required for the synthesis of the repeat unit building blocks. some of the enzymes involved in this step were found in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a, such as bcea  and bcec , whose coordinated action with other bce proteins leads to the production of the nucleotide sugar precursors gdp-d-rhamnose, udp-d-glucuronic acid and udp-d-galactose  <cit> .

the synthesis of the activated nucleotide sugar precursors is followed by the assembly of the heptasaccharide repeat unit, catalysed by glycosyltransferase proteins encoded by bceb, bceg, bceh, bcej, bcek, and bcer
 <cit> . the bceb protein was found in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a, as were some proteins belonging to family  <dig> and group <dig> of the glucosyl transferases, which can be associated with this pathway.

the steps after repeat unit assembly involve the polymerisation and export of the eps to the cell surface through a wzy-dependent pathway, in which a flippase protein  exports the heptasaccharide across the inner membrane and a polysaccharide polymerase  acts at the periplasmic face of the inner membrane. the bced, bcee, and bcef proteins are also involved in these steps, and probable coding genes were identified in b. phenoliruptrix. the putative bcee protein is a wza homologue and is therefore predicted to be an outer membrane auxiliary protein that acts as a channel. the activities of bcef as a bacterial tyrosine autokinase and bced as a phosphotyrosine phosphatase  protein have been determined, and these two proteins may be involved in regulation of the amount and molecular weight of cepacian  <cit> . these genes are present in all bcc and non-bcc species, with the exception of the bcem and bceu genes, which are absent from burkholderia species in which the bce genes are clustered together, including b. xenovorans lb <dig>  b. phymatum stm <dig>  b. phytofirmans psjn and b. graminis c4d1m. cepacian may play a role in the survival against desiccation and metal ion stress for some burkholderia strains, thus being advantageous for bacteria to thrive in adverse environments  <cit> . eps also influence the stability of soil aggregates through interactions with clay particles, contributing to maintaining the mechanical and physical properties of the soil in which plant roots grow  <cit> . finally, we should mention that br3459a can grow in vitro at a high temperature   <cit> , and eps might contribute to this ability.

secretion systems
in gram-negative bacteria, type i secretion is carried out by a translocator composed of three proteins that span the cell envelope. one of these proteins is a specific outer membrane protein , and the other two are cytoplasmic membrane proteins, consisting of an atp-binding cassette  and the so-called membrane fusion or adaptor protein   <cit> . we identified some interesting proteins that could be part of the t1ss machinery, such as weak orthologs of hlyd and hlyb as well as a complete system formed by tolc, maca and macb, which could be involved in macrolide export.

the type ii protein secretion system , also known as the secretion-dependent pathway, is a two-step process in which proteins are first translocated across the inner membrane via the sec or tat pathway, followed by transport from the periplasm to the exterior via an outer membrane secretin. there are many evidences of relationships between several of the protein constituents of the t2ss, type  <dig> pilus apparatus and fla systems of bacteria and archaea  <cit> . the t2ss can be viewed as consisting of  <dig> core components: the outer membrane secretin ; a cytoplasmic atpase ; an inner membrane protein ; the major  and minor  pseudopilins, which are facilitators of atpase attachment to the inner membrane that appear, along with t2s f, to form an inner membrane platform ; the pre-pseudopilin peptidase/methyltransferase , which also acts upon type  <dig> prepilin; and a protein that might be involved in substrate recognition and/or secretin interactions . beyond these core components, there are several other proteins that are not conserved among the majority of genera, including t2s n, and t2s a, t2s b and t2s s  <cit> . all of these core proteins—with the exception of t2s o and t2s n—were found in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a.

the type iii protein secretion system  can be found in many gram-negative bacteria, pathogens and symbionts of animals and plants, mediating elaborate interactions with their hosts. these secretion systems translocate proteins that lack a signal sequence and may require specific chaperones for their secretion. the t3ss export mechanism is usually composed of more than  <dig> different proteins and includes soluble cytoplasmic proteins, outer membrane proteins, and integral membrane proteins. the t3ss enables bacteria to deliver a variety of effectors directly to the host cytosol through a needle structure, also known as the injectisome, allowing them to manipulate host cellular processes and subvert them for their own benefit  <cit> . we were unable to find proteins in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a forming the injectisome, such as the needle monomer, inner rod, needle-tip protein, translocators, ruler protein and switch proteins; however, we did identify a number of cytoplasmic proteins, outer membrane proteins, and integral membrane proteins, such as sctc, sctt, sctn, sctl, sctj, sctu, sctv, hpap, sctq, sctr, scts and sctd. regarding cellular motility, we found a complete set of orfs related to the flagellum assembly pathway .

the type iv protein secretion systems  consist of specialised macromolecule delivery machines that are ancestrally related to bacterial conjugation systems. these systems are broadly classified as type iva  or ivb , depending on whether their structural components resemble the virb/d <dig> complex of the plant pathogen agrobacterium tumefaciens or the conjugal transfer system of the self-transmissible inci plasmid, respectively  <cit> . both systems deliver proteins termed effectors directly to the host cytosol via a central pore. prototypical t4ass are composed of  <dig> virb proteins  and vird <dig>  while the dot/icm t4bss requires up to  <dig> proteins for efficient function  <cit> . in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a, we found two sets of t4ass, in the plasmid and in the chromosome, including all of the virb/d <dig> proteins except for virb <dig> 

the type v protein secretion system , also known as the autotransporter system, is the simplest and most widespread of these specialised secretion pathways. classical autotransporters are a large and highly diverse family of polypeptides composed of a cleavable signal sequence, an n-terminal passenger domain and a c-terminal translocator. the signal peptide targets the protein to the sec complex and initiates translocation across the inner membrane. subsequently, the translocator is integrated into the outer membrane, and the passenger domain is translocated into the extracellular space, where it typically acts as an adhesin, degradative enzyme, or cytotoxin or mediates another virulence-related function  <cit> . in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a, we did not identify any virulence factors in the genome.

the type vi protein secretion system  consists of a multicomponent secretory machine that delivers effector proteins to both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells in a contact-dependent manner. it is composed of a minimal set of  <dig> subunits, which are thought to form the core apparatus. there are also many accessory subunits in this system, whose functions are not yet known, though some of them might be needed for the proper assembly or function of the apparatus  <cit> . in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a, we found  <dig> proteins belonging to the t6ss, some of which appear to be membrane-associated proteins, while others are related to tailed bacteriophage components, but no function could be inferred via in silico analyses for the great majority of these proteins.

environmental stress
one outstanding property of b. phenoliruptrix br3459a is its high tolerance to high temperature, both in vitro and, as shown in additional file 9: table s <dig>  being capable of maintaining symbiotic properties in temperatures as high as 40°c. the bacterial stress response can be defined as a cascade of alterations in gene expression and protein activity to allow survival under potentially damaging conditions sensed by bacteria. in this response, the cells become stress resistant and/or eliminate the stress agent, and/or mediate the repair of cell injuries  <cit> .

bacterial growth and survival may depend on the rate at which osmotic pressure varies and on the amplitude and duration of osmotic pressure changes. there are multiple osmoregulatory systems that appear to be functionally redundant among the organisms studied thus far, which ensure optimal metabolic fitness. these systems may involve osmosensory proteins, divided into three groups: osmosensory transporters, the histidine kinase components of two transcriptional regulatory systems and mechanosensitive channels  <cit> .

some of the best-characterised osmosensory transporters are prop, betp, and the opuabc complex. prop is a proton symporter that acts as both an osmosensor and an osmoregulator involved in the early bacterial osmoregulatory response. prop shows broad substrate specificity, transporting proline and glycine betaine with similar affinities, whereas betp and opua are specific to glycine betaine  <cit> . betp carries out high-affinity uptake of glycine betaine, and the opuabc complex is involved in a multicomponent binding protein-dependent transport system for glycine betaine. these proteins can all detect osmotic pressure changes and respond by mediating osmoprotectant uptake without the assistance of other proteins. in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a, we found homologs of prop, opuaa and opuab.

regarding histidine kinase components, some of the best-characterised are kdpd and envz. the former is a member of the two-component regulatory system kdpd/kdpe, involved in the regulation of the kdpfabc operon, and the latter is a member of the two-component regulatory system envz/ompr, involved in the regulation of osmoregulation . envz phosphorylates ompr in response to environmental signals. in br3459a, we found homologs of kdpd, kdpe, kdpa, kdpb, kdpc, and three copies of envz and ompr.

the high-affinity atp-driven potassium transport  system consists of many components, such as kdpfabc  as well as the two-component regulatory system kdpd/kdpe, involved in the regulation of the kdp operon. we identified homologs of all of these proteins: kdpf, kdpa, kdpb, kdpc, kdpd, and kdpe. however, we did not find homologs of the components of the trkagh system, which is another potassium transport system, and we detected only one unrelated protein that was likely involved in potassium uptake. however, several other transporters could participate in potassium transport, such as the abc transporters. additional candidates include the mechanosensitive channels mscl and mscs, which allow the non-specific efflux of cytoplasmic solutes and prevent cell lysis, thus participating in the regulation of osmotic pressure changes within the cell. in br3459a, we found homologs of both mscl and mscs.

osmotic gradients dissipate within seconds due to water flux via the phospholipid bilayer and aquaporins , which are transmembrane proteins that display a specific three-dimensional structure with a pore that provides a pathway for water permeation across biological membranes  <cit> . both structures are involved in osmoregulation and the maintenance of cell turgor during volume expansion in rapidly growing cells, mediating the rapid entry or exit of water in response to abrupt changes in osmolarity. we found a homolog of aqpz.

the heat shock response  is defined as the cellular response to a temperature increase. a major component of this response involves the up-regulation of a set of proteins termed heat shock proteins , notably including chaperones, which help proteins to fold, and proteases, which degrade unfolded proteins. these proteins are usually regulated by a single transcription factor, such as the sigma  <dig> transcription factor in e. coli and heat shock factor  in eukaryotic cells  <cit> . a homolog of sigma  <dig> was identified.

in the cold-shock response, cspa and its homologs play a key role; these small proteins  have been identified in all types of bacteria except for archaea and cyanobacteria. e. coli harbours nine paralogs belonging to the csp family; cspa, cspb, cspe, cspg, and cspi are cold-inducible, while cspc, cspd, cspf, and csph are not. notably, the nucleic acid-binding domain of the cs proteins, termed the cold-shock domain , is the most evolutionarily conserved nucleic acid-binding domain found within prokaryotes and eukaryotes  <cit> . in burkholderia, we found only two orthologs when we subjected the sequences of the nine paralogs to blast searches, and those showing the lowest similarity were csph and cspf.

otsa is essential for the viability of cells at low temperatures and elevated osmotic strengths. this protein catalyses the transfer of glucose from udp-glucose to glucose-6-phosphate to form alpha,alpha-trehalose 6-phosphate. otsb removes the phosphate from trehalose 6-phosphate  to produce free trehalose and catalyses the dephosphorylation of glucose-6-phosphate  and 2-deoxyglucose-6-phosphate . we found two orthologs in burkholderia, otsa and otsb.

the alternative to these targeted responses to specific stresses is more global changes in metabolism and gene expression that confer protection from many types of stress. generally, these global responses have been identified under conditions of nutrient deprivation, e.g., as cells enter stationary phase  <cit> . for example, e. coli and related bacteria show increased accumulation of rpos, a specialised sigma factor, to allow cells to become more resistant not only to the stress that they encounter initially, but also to other stressful treatments. this cross-protection phenomenon is typical of general stress responses and contrasts with specific stress responses that only address the consequences of the specific inducing stress  <cit> . when the rpos system is induced, the cell is resistant to a wide range of stress and starvation treatments  <cit> . we could identify a rpos ortholog present in b. phenoliruptrix strain br3459a.

altogether, this large repertoire of genes related to stress tolerance might play roles and explain the tolerance of strain br3459a to high temperature and environmental conditions in the tropics.

symbiotic plasmid
bacteria that are symbiotically associated with legumes and capable of fixing nitrogen have been studied for over one and a half centuries. until recently, these bacteria were classified exclusively within the alpha-proteobacteria class, in the genera azorhizobium, allorhizobium , bradyrhizobium, mesorhizobium, rhizobium, sinorhizobium , devosia, methylobacterium, ochrobactrum, phyllobacterium
 <cit>  and, more recently, aminobacter
 <cit> , microvirga
 <cit> , and neorhizobium
 <cit> . it was less than 15 years ago that the first beta-proteobacteria were recognised as diazotrophic symbionts of legumes  <cit> , and since then there have been several reports of isolates of the genera burkholderia and cupriavidus from nodules of legumes, in general—but not exclusively—of the subfamily mimosoideae . however, despite the increasing interest in diazotrophic symbiotic beta-proteobacteria, genomic studies of symbiotic genes are still rare, and the present study highly contributes to reveal some unusual properties of these bacteria.

as previously described in the genome announcement of br3459a, the symbiotic plasmid psymbr3459a shows high sequence identity and considerable gene synteny with the symbiotic plasmid pbphy <dig> of b. phymatum strain stm815t, including genes related to nodulation, nitrogen fixation, auxin synthesis, hydrogenase components and acc deaminase activity  <cit> . this plasmid appears to have originated from chromosome  <dig> of b. phymatum, as shown by the phylogeny of the para, parb and acc deaminase genes . however, there is apparently a gene resulting from the fusion of para and parb that is phylogenetically related to b. phenoliruptrix, indicating that an evolutionary process has occurred in both species and not only a transfer event of the symbiotic plasmid.

in the psymbr3459a, starting with the nodulation genes, a unique copy of the regulatory nodd was found, followed by noda , nodb and nodc , nodh , nodij , nods  and nodu . as recently described in rhizobium tropici, nodc directs the synthesis of the nod factor backbone chitin oligosaccharide structure, which is deacetylated, acylated, methylated, carbamoylated and sulfated by the products of nodb, noda, nods, nodu and nodh, respectively, important features to determine more or less specific nod factors that are then exported by an abc-type transporter encoded by nodij
 <cit> .

symbiotic burkholderia species have mainly been found in association with mimosa species, including b. tuberum, b. mimosarum, b. phymatum, b. nodosa, b. sabiae, b. symbiotica and b. diazotrophica
 <cit> . further studies have shown that nodulation by burkholderia could be extended to other legumes belonging to the caesalpinoideae and papilionoideae subfamilies, - observed for b. tuberum stm <dig>  as well as for ccge <dig>  both strains showing high similarity with br 3459a. interesting, although br 3459a can nodulate some legume species, it is highly specific in fixing nitrogen with m. flocculosa , what might be related to nodulation genes. it has been proposed that the nature of the nod-factor acyl group attached by noda can contribute to the determination of host range in several rhizobial species, such as in r. tropici
 <cit> , and in our analysis of noda of br3459a is more related to b. phymatum.

another interesting feature of psymbr3459a is nodw, which is a member of a two-component regulatory system regulation of the transcription of genes involved in the nodulation process. nodw was first described as the two-component regulatory system nodv/nodw, localised to the symbiotic island of bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens usda 110t
 <cit> , also present in the b. japonicum strains semia  <dig> and usda 6t
 <cit> . b. japonicum/b. diazoefficiens exhibit soybean as their main host species, and nodv responds to the isoflavonoid genistein and then phosphorylates its cognate regulator nodw, which in turn, may be required to positively regulate the transcription of one or several unknown genes involved in the nodulation of alternative hosts . nodw was subsequently detected in plasmid “c” of the fast-growing rhizobium r. etli
 <cit> , and candidate orthologs were proposed in other rhizobial species. nodw is a strong candidate to help in the definition of host specificity, and in br3459a it also shows high similarity to b. phymatum.

the nif/fix operons involved in nitrogen fixation are also present in psymbr3459a, including nifa , nife and nifn , nifq , nifh , nifd .

we identified nif operon members such as nifb , nift, nifz, nifw , nifx , nifn , nife , nifh , nifa , nifv , nifd and nifk , and nifq . finally, we also identified fix operon members such as fixu, fixx, fixc, fixa and fixb.

the presence or absence of the main representatives of the nodulation and nitrogen-fixing proteins in b. phenoliruptrix was compared with other burkholderia . we observed that the presence of fix  and nif  coding genes was restricted to the species b. phenoliruptrix, b. phymatum, burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  b. xenovorans, b. vietnamiensis, and c. taiwanensis. within this group, an exception was found for nifh, which was also partially identified in b. phytofirmans. in contrast, nifq showed a broad distribution in the bbc complex and non-pathogenic groups. regarding the nodulation operon, noddabc was only identified in b. phenoliruptrix, b. phymatum, burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  and c. taiwanensis and was not found in b. xenovorans and. b. vietnamiensis .table  <dig> 
proteins involved in nodulation and biological nitrogen fixation in
burkholderia phenoliruptrix
br3459a



betaproteobacteria
















alphaproteobacteria











rhodopseudomonas palustris bisa53




presence and absence of the b. phenoliruptrix proteins related to nodulation and biological fixation processes in comparison with some beta- and alpha-proteobacteria . ++? proteins not identified by blast, but present in the uniprot database ; +p partial sequence identified; ++ two sequences identified for the described protein.



the fix and nif phylogenies showed that b. phenoliruptrix was closer to b. phymatum and burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  and b. xenovorans was grouped with b. vietnamiensis . however, in the 16s rrna tree, b. phenoliruptrix is also related to burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  while b. xenovorans and b. phytofirmans descend from the same ancestor, and b. vietnamiensis and b. multivorans are grouped on the same branch .figure  <dig> 
phylogenetic trees generated for the nifhdk  and nifen  concatenated amino acid sequences from the analysed
burkholderia
species and some rhizobiales species. the sequences were aligned and submitted to the mega <dig> program, using the maximum likelihood method and wag + g + i  and jtt + g  models, with  <dig> rate categories. all positions showing less than 95% site coverage were eliminated. bootstrap values were based on  <dig> replicates. cupriavidus taiwanensis was used as outgroup.
phylogenetic tree generated for the fixabc concatenated amino acid sequences proteins from the analysed
burkholderia
species and some rhizobiales species. the sequences were aligned and submitted to the mega <dig> program, using the maximum likelihood method and wag + g model, with  <dig> rate categories. all positions showing less than 95% site coverage were eliminated. bootstrap values were based on  <dig> replicates. cupriavidus taiwanensis was used as an outgroup.



nodulation is an event with ancient origin that occurs among most burkholderia strains  <cit> . it can be inferred that the absence of nodulation genes observed in b. xenovorans and b. vietnamiensis occurred in the ancestor of these species. however, greater representativeness is needed to support this hypothesis.

with respect to nitrogen-fixing genes, gene loss events were also observed in ccge <dig>  b. phytofirmans and b. multivorans. according to zhu and collaborators  <cit> , events of gene acquisition and reduction appear to represent a trait of burkholderia evolution. in a genomic context, the occurrence of at least one horizontal gene transfer  event can be observed in the majority gene families in this genus. furthermore, it has been proposed that gene loss is an event more frequently observed in closely related species  <cit> . although hgt can occur in nitrogen-fixing genes, it is not a common event in burkholderia, in contrast to observed in alpha-proteobacteria rhizobia  <cit> . however, the determination of nitrogen-fixing or pathogenic phenotypes in burkholderia appears to be influenced by several factors other than gene gain and loss events, as observed by menard and collaborators  <cit> . it has been reported that the nif cluster is present in approximately 25% of burkholderia species. for example, several b. vietnamiensis isolates from cystic fibrosis patients have been shown to express the dinitrogenase complex. however, the disease conditions may have favoured the nif deletion and the selection of variants with nitrogen-fixing ability affected  <cit> .

xenobiosis
the species b. phenoliruptrix is known for the xenobiotic properties of strain ac1100t, which is capable of degrading halophenol and  <dig> ,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid , a potent herbicide that is a component of agent orange  <cit> . experiments have shown that this strain is capable of degrading additional halogen-substituted phenol compounds, including  <dig> ,5-trichlorophenol,  <dig> , <dig> -tetrachlorophenol and pentachlorophenol  <cit> . b. vietnamiensis, another plant-growth-promoting bacterium, also displays bioremediation properties, being capable of degrading aromatic hydrocarbons such as benzene and toluene. b. xenovorans is an environmental organism of economic importance due to its capacity to degrade polychlorinated biphenyl  compounds  <cit> . in strain br3459a, we found that 4% of the putative genes in the plasmid and in the chromosomes are related to xenobiotic metabolism. significant enzymatic representations were observed for the kegg categories related to xylene, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, furfural, fluorobenzoate, chloroalkane, chloroalkene, atrazine, benzoate and aminobenzoate degradation. some enzymes involved to styrene, nitrotoluene, dioxin, chlorocyclohexane, chlorobenzene and caprolactam degradation were identified in b. phenoliruptrix.

when we analysed xylene degradation, we identified some interesting proteins involved in catechol formation through anthranilate catabolism or via benzoate degradation. examples of these proteins include some  that are part of the multicomponent enzyme anthranilate dioxygenase system, which converts anthranilate to catechol; the complete 2-halobenzoate dioxygenase multicomponent enzyme system, consisting of a heterohexamer formed by cbda, cbdb, and cbdc, which catalyses the incorporation of both atoms of molecular oxygen into 2-halobenzoate to form catechol; and  <dig> -dihydroxycyclohexa- <dig> -diene-1-carboxylate dehydrogenase , which generates catechol from benzoate. within this pathway, we also identified mhpd, mhpe and mhpf, which are the final enzymes in the meta-cleavage pathway for the degradation of aromatic compounds. we analysed the other burkholderia strains  and observed the complete 2-halobenzoate dioxygenase multicomponent enzyme system in all strains, except for burkholderia sp. ccge <dig> and b. glumae, whereas in b. pseudomallei 1710b we identified only two components of this system. bend was not found in burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  b. glumae or b. cenocepacia j <dig>  mhpdef was not identified in burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  b. cenocepacia hi <dig>  b. ambifaria mc40- <dig>  b. cenocepacia j <dig> or b. multivorans atcc  <dig>  while in b. glumae and b. pseudomallei 1710b, we did not detect mhpd.

concerning polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon degradation, we identified both subunits  of protocatechuate  <dig> -dioxygenase, which is responsible for the aromatic ring fission of protocatechuate, and both subunits  of protocatechuate  <dig> -dioxygenase, which plays an essential role in the utilisation of numerous aromatic and hydroaromatic compounds via the beta-ketoadipate pathway. we analysed the other burkholderia strains  and found both subunits of protocatechuate  <dig> -dioxygenase in all strains, whereas both subunits of protocatechuate  <dig> -dioxygenase were only detected in burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  burkholderia sp. ccge <dig> and b. phymatum.

concerning furfural degradation, almost all of the enzymes involved in this process were present, indicating the possibility that in b. phenoliruptrix, furfural is converted to 2-furoyl-coa and then to s--coa by hmfh, hmfd, and hmfabc. the action of hmfh and hmffg can also result in the formation of 2-furoate, an intermediate of 2-furoyl-coa, from 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furaldehyde, and in the final step, 2-oxoglutarate is formed by hmfe and enters the citrate cycle. we analysed the other burkholderia strains  and found the same enzymes described above in all of the mutualists strains, whereas none of these enzymes were identified in the pathogenic strains, except for hmfh in b. cenocepacia.

considering fluorobenzoate degradation, we also identified all of the enzymes involved in 3-fluorobenzoate degradation via hydroxylation, forming 2-maleylacetate as a final product, including  <dig> -dihydroxycyclohexa- <dig> -diene-1-carboxylate dehydrogenase, catechol  <dig> -dioxygenase, muconate cycloisomerase, and carboxymethylenebutenolidase, among others. we also identified a 2-halobenzoate dioxygenase multicomponent enzyme system formed by cbda, cbdb, and cbdc , which catalyses the incorporation of both atoms of molecular oxygen into 2-halobenzoate to form catechol. we analysed the other burkholderia strains  and found the enzymes cited above in all of them, except for burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  b. glumae and b. cenocepacia j <dig>  whose 3-fluorobenzoate degradation pathways were incomplete, missing  <dig> -dihydroxycyclohexa- <dig>  4-diene-1-carboxylate dehydrogenase and benzoate  <dig> -dioxygenase. notably, we detected chloromuconate cycloisomerase only in b. xenovorans; this enzyme permits an alternative pathway that could be used by this strain to degrade 3-fluorobenzoate, forming 2-maleylacetate.

regarding chloroalkane and chloroalkene degradation, we identified alcohol dehydrogenase, aldehyde dehydrogenase, haloacetate dehalogenase, and 2-haloacid dehalogenase, which are enzymes that convert 2-chloroethanol into glycolate. in this pathway, genes encoding both components of the nitrogenase complex, i.e., the iron protein and the molybdenum-iron protein, which are involved in key enzymatic reactions in nitrogen fixation, are present in b. phenoliruptrix. we analysed the other burkholderia strains  and found the enzymes involved in the conversion of 2-chloroethanol into glycolate in all of them, except for alcohol dehydrogenase, which was absent in burkholderia pseudomallei 1710b, b. glumae and b. phytofirmans. with respect to the two components of the nitrogenase complex, we did not find both of them in the majority of the pathogenic strains . additionally, we were unable to identify them in some beneficial species as well .

considering atrazine degradation, all three subunits  associated with the formation of urease, involved in urea degradation, were identified. we analysed the other burkholderia strains  and found the same enzymes described above in all of the strains. b. xenovorans was the strain in which the most enzymes were identified; thus, this species is capable of converting atrazine or ammelide into cyanuric acid through many different routes.

with respect to benzoate degradation, we identified all of the enzymes responsible for converting benzoate into beta-ketoadipyl-coa, a precursor of succinyl-coa that is processed in the tca cycle. in this pathway, almost all the enzymes required to form 2-oxo- <dig> -dihydrofuran-5-acetate  from 4-hydroxybenzoyl-coa were identified. the  <dig> -dihydroxybenzoate intermediate formed in these steps can also be converted into oxaloacetate and pyruvate by the enzymes protocatechuate  <dig> -dioxygenase , 2-hydroxy-4-carboxymuconate semialdehyde hemiacetal dehydrogenase, 2-pyrone- <dig> -dicarboxylate lactonase, 4-oxalmesaconate hydratase and 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-oxoglutarate aldolase. enzymes involved in the production of acetyl-coa by crotonoyl-coa and acetaldehyde were also found. in b. cenocepacia j <dig>  b. glumae and burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  we were unable to detect the initial steps of benzoate conversion into beta-ketoadipyl-coa; in these strains, this process most likely begins with catechol. the enzyme 4-hydroxybenzoyl-coa thioesterase, involved in 2-oxo- <dig> -dihydrofuran-5-acetate formation, was not present in any of the pathogenic strains, except in b. glumae. the enzymes involved in the conversion of  <dig> -dihydroxybenzoate into oxaloacetate and pyruvate could also not be identified in any of the pathogenic strains, except for 1– <dig> enzymes found in b. glumae and b. multivorans atcc  <dig>  however, these enzymes were also absent in some of the symbiotic strains, such as in burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  b. xenovorans and b. phytofirmans. the enzymes involved in the production of acetyl-coa by crotonoyl-coa were found in all strains. however, acetaldehyde dehydrogenase was absent in b. ambifaria mc40- <dig>  b. cenocepacia hi <dig>  b. multivorans atcc  <dig> and burkholderia sp. ccge <dig> 

when we analysed the aminobenzoate degradation category, we identified almost all of the subunits of the multicomponent enzyme toluene-4-monooxygenase , which hydroxylates toluene to form p-cresol. we also detected the toluene-4-sulfonate monooxygenase system iron-sulphur subunits tsam <dig> and tsam <dig>  involved in the toluene-4-sulfonate degradation pathway. with the protocatechuate degradation pathway, we identified the protocatechuate  <dig> -dioxygenase alpha and beta chains, which are responsible for the aromatic ring fission of protocatechuate, and 2-pyrone- <dig> -dicarbaxylate lactonase, which is involved in the meta-fission degradative pathway for protocatechuate via catalysing the reversible hydrolysis of 2-pyrone- <dig> -dicarboxylate  to a mixture of 4-carboxy-2-hydroxymuconate  and 4-oxalomesaconate . a flavoprotein, an iron-sulphur protein, cytochrome b- <dig> and a hydrophobic protein were also detected, constituting the multicomponent enzyme succinate dehydrogenase , which is related to carbohydrate metabolism, being involved in the formation of fumarate from succinate. furthermore, we identified some of the subunits of the multicomponent enzyme toluene-4-monooxygenase  in burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  b. phymatum, b. xenovorans, b. phytofirmans, b. glumae, b. multivorans and b. pseudomallei. regarding the degradative pathway for protocatechuate, we detected the protocatechuate  <dig> -dioxygenase alpha and beta chains in burkholderia sp. ccge <dig>  burkholderia sp. ccge <dig> and b. phymatum. the enzyme 2-pyrone- <dig> -dicarbaxylate lactonase was present only in b. phymatum.

antibiotic resistance
burkholderia species are unusual not only due to being among the most antimicrobial-resistant microorganisms identified to date, showing resistance to several types of antibiotics, but also because of their unique ability to use one of these antibiotics, penicillin, as a nutrient  <cit> . the genomic analysis of strain br3459a revealed a large number of antibiotic-related genes. among these genes, the ones that encode to streptomycin and novobiocin are noteworthy. we found two copies of amra, amrb and opra in b. phenoliruptrix br3459a. these proteins compose a multidrug efflux system operon, which has been shown to be responsible for aminoglycoside and macrolide resistance in b. pseudomallei
 <cit> .

when we analysed the streptomycin pathway from the kegg database, we found only few of the relevant genes in strain br3459a. in this pathway, d-glucose-6p is converted into two different products in a series of enzyme-catalysed reactions, forming streptidine-6p and dtdp-l-dihydro-streptose. only the first three steps required for streptidine-6p formation were observed in this strain. the final enzyme in this process, dtdp-dihydrostreptose-streptidine-6-phosphate dihydrostreptosyltransferase , was absent as well. we analysed the other mutualistic and pathogenic burkholderia strains  and found the same few genes described above in all of them.

regarding the novobiocin pathway, only the enzymes involved in the initial steps of converting prephenate or l-tyrosine into 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate were identified. we analysed the other mutualistic and pathogenic burkholderia strains  and found the same several genes described above in all of them, except for aspartate aminotransferase, which was identified only in b. phenoliruptrix. we were also unable to detect prephenate dehydrogenase in b. pseudomallei.

CONCLUSIONS
burkholderia is an intriguing and important genus encompassing a variety of species and strains, ranging from highly pathogenic organisms to strains that promote plant growth. in this manuscript, we describe the complete genome of b. phenoliruptrix br3459a, a nitrogen-fixing, heat-tolerant strain isolated from a nodule of m. flocculosa in brazil. it has been suggested that burkholderia species can be split in two main branches, one of which is composed of pathogens associated with the bcc complex, while the other consists of non-pathogenic species associated with plants or related to bioremediation  <cit> . in this study, a robust phylogenetic tree built using  <dig> housekeeping genes provided strong support for the definition of a new genus for the second branch, which would include br3459a. fortunately, there are increasing evidences that bacteria within the second branch would not be pathogenic, e.g. it has been recently demonstrated, by bioinformatics and functional tests, that the risk of opportunistic infection by symbiotic burkholderia is extremely low  <cit> . however, we should be cautious, as we showed that 71% of the proteins encoded by the chromosomal genes of br3459a had correspondence with the bcc complex and "pseudomallei" group. the symbiotic plasmid of br3459a showed high sequence identity with the symbiotic plasmid of b. phymatum. in the genome, interesting genes were identified in br3459a, including genes related to eps synthesis, to different types of secretion systems and to stress tolerance. an outstanding repertoire of genes with biotechnological potential was revealed, with an emphasis on xenobiotics, showing that, in addition to the key property of nitrogen fixation, br3459a could show other applications, such as in bioremediation.

