BACKGROUND
dengue viruses  are mosquito-borne viruses which, like many rna viruses, exhibit substantial genetic diversity  <cit> . this diversity can be hierarchically organized in large clusters of lineages sometimes termed 'genotypes'  within each one of the four distinct serotypes   <cit> . in the last  <dig> years, the number of denv lineages worldwide has been increasing exponentially  <cit> , along with increasing epidemic frequency and occurrence of severe forms of the disease  <cit> . dengue is now the most common human arthropod-borne viral  disease and a major public health threat  <cit> . although denv genetic variation alone is not sufficient to completely explain the incidence of severe disease or the magnitude of outbreaks, there is compelling evidence for differences in virulence and epidemic potential among denv lineages . understanding the evolutionary processes shaping the increasing diversity of denv lineages will, therefore, provide important insights into the mechanisms regulating epidemics and pathogenicity associated with genetic variation among viruses  <cit> .

the spatial distribution of denv genetic diversity generally reveals a population structure whereby geographic subdivisions reflect greater gene flow within than between subdivisions . results from a recent study indicated that such a genetic structure can be observed on a fine spatial grid  <cit> ; phylogenetic differences were detected among denv isolates recovered from schools separated by only a few kilometers in rural thailand. although multiple denv lineages co-circulated within individual schools, there was strong genetic differentiation among lineages between schools that remained stable over the 10-month sampling period  <cit> . thus, despite frequent viral migration into the area, individual schools located a few kilometers apart represented distinct denv evolutionary entities. a fundamental unanswered question concerns the relative influence of natural selection  and genetic drift  on the genetic structure of denv populations  <cit> . although it is clear that stochastic processes play a significant role in shaping denv genetic diversity  <cit> , genetic signatures of adaptive evolution have been recurrently detected in natural denv isolates  <cit> .

among evolutionary forces actively driving the evolution of arboviruses, vector-driven selection may play an important role by selecting lineages that are better suited for mosquito transmission  <cit> . for instance, the emergence of chikungunya virus  in the indian ocean in  <dig>  and subsequent spread to india and europe was attributed to the acquisition of a single adaptive mutation that enhances transmission efficiency by aedes albopictus  <cit> . this mutation confers a selective advantage in locations where ae. albopictus predominates over ae. aegypti, which is usually considered the primary vector of chikv. similarly, the emergence of a new lineage of west nile virus in north america was attributed to earlier and more efficient transmission by culex mosquitoes relative to the lineage that initially colonized this part of the world  <cit> . denv are no exception in this regard. displacement of the american  denv- <dig> genotype by a southeast asian  denv- <dig> genotype in the western hemisphere was associated with more efficient infection and dissemination in ae. aegypti of the sa than am genotype  <cit> . likewise, an invasive denv- <dig> isolate from sri lanka infected and disseminated more efficiently in ae. aegypti mosquitoes than a displaced, native denv- <dig> isolate  <cit> . interestingly, in both denv examples above, outcompeted genotypes tended to cause mild disease whereas invasive genotypes correlated with more severe disease manifestations. this supports the view that enhanced vector transmission, among other factors, may contribute to the evolutionary success of lineages that are more virulent to humans  <cit> .

the potential role of vector-driven selection in denv evolution raises the question whether the genetic structure of denv populations reflects, at least partly, that of their vectors. indeed, ae. aegypti distribution consists of a patchwork of genetically differentiated populations  <cit> . because the vector competence of ae. aegypti for denv is in part genetically determined , it has been hypothesized that the structure of denv populations may partly result from the adaptation of viruses to the local vector genotypes  <cit> . under this hypothesis, denv transmission would be more efficient by local vector genotypes  than by vector genotypes from distant populations . pathogen adaptation to local hosts has been reported in a variety of systems , including malaria parasites and their mosquito vectors  <cit> . evolution of local adaptation has been predicted when the pathogen has an evolutionary advantage over the host, such as higher mutation rate, shorter generation time, higher migration rate, and larger population size  <cit> . these conditions could undoubtedly apply to the denv-ae. aegypti system  <cit> .

an additional necessary condition for the occurrence of denv local adaptation to ae. aegypti is that the genetic structure of mosquito populations must be coupled with some degree of genetic specificity of vector-virus compatibility. in other words, denv transmission by ae. aegypti must be determined, at least partly, by genotype × genotype  interactions. such g × g interactions, whereby the infection outcome depends on the specific combination of host and pathogen genotypes, are found in many systems  <cit> . the effects of vector and virus genotypes, independently, on denv transmission by ae. aegypti are well-documented. variation in vector competence for a reference denv isolate among different geographic strains of ae. aegypti has been repeatedly reported  <cit> , and can often be directly correlated to genetic differences  <cit> . reciprocally, denv isolates have been shown to vary in their infectivity to a given mosquito strain  <cit> . results from an earlier study showing some degree of interaction specificity between laboratory strains of mosquitoes and denv serotypes and isolates  <cit>  and from another study where sa genotypes of denv- <dig> performed better than am genotypes in two field-derived populations of ae. aegypti, but not in a laboratory adapted colony  <cit>  were suggestive of genetic specificity of vector-virus compatibility. however, the occurrence of g × g interactions between denv and ae. aegypti has not been formally quantified in natural populations.

here, we measured the extent of g × g interactions between denv and mosquito genotypes that are naturally interacting in the field. we challenged three ae. aegypti isofemale families derived from a wild population sampled in  <dig> in ratchaburi, thailand with three low-passage denv- <dig> viruses that were isolated the same year from humans . following standard methods of quantitative genetics  <cit> , we estimated the extent to which the outcome of the infection is determined by g × g interactions by measuring the statistical effect of isofemale family × virus isolate interactions on several indices of vector competence, defined as the intrinsic permissiveness of a vector to become infected and subsequently transmit a pathogen  <cit> .

RESULTS
overall, vector competence was scored in  <dig> female ae. aegypti. each combination of isofemale family and virus isolate was represented by 28– <dig> individuals  divided into two experimental blocks of 11– <dig> individuals . the three denv- <dig> isolates used in this study were collected within a one-month period at three locations in thailand  and had identical passage histories . estimated virus titers in the blood meals were remarkably similar across isolates and experimental blocks, with all titers ranging within a third of a log unit per ml . this allowed us to assume that most of the phenotypic differences observed between isolates were due to genetic differences. across families and isolates,  <dig> % of females were infected, and  <dig> % had a disseminated infection. isofemale families differed significantly in wing length , indicating significant genetic variation in body size. the mean wing length  was  <dig>  ±  <dig> ,  <dig>  ±  <dig> , and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm for families a, b, and c, respectively. corresponding mean age at pupation  was  <dig>  ±  <dig> ,  <dig>  ±  <dig> , and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  days, respectively. although three data points are not enough to obtain a valid correlation, it is worth noting that the overall proportion of infected mosquitoes by family tended to be negatively correlated with their mean wing length , supporting the view that larger females are more resistant to dengue infection than small females  <cit> .

for each isolate, the date and location of collection, passage history, and blood meal titers for both experimental blocks are indicated. blood meal titers were estimated by fluorescent focus assay  in c6/ <dig> cells.

two factors had a significant influence on end-point mortality of adult mosquitoes at  <dig> days post-infection . mortality significantly differed between blocks , and marginally significantly between virus isolates . although  <dig> % of females in the first block died before  <dig> dpi,  <dig> % of females in the second block did so, possibly due to the one-day age difference. across blocks, end-point mortality was  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> % for the kpp, bkk, and rtb isolates, respectively. mortality did not depend on the family-isolate combinations .

the proportion of infected mosquitoes strongly depended on the family, the isolate, and most importantly in the context of this study, their interaction . the percentage of infected mosquitoes ranged from  <dig> % to 100% among family-isolate combinations. the interaction effect appeared to be mainly due to the combination of the rtb isolate and mosquito family b for which the proportion of infected mosquitoes was lower than would have been expected from examination of the other combinations . because the family × isolate × block three-way interaction was not statistically significant, our results indicated that the effect of the family × isolate interaction was consistent across blocks . in other words, small differences in mosquito age or blood meal titer between blocks did not affect the probability of infection in a given mosquito-virus combination.

the table shows the nominal logistic regression for the proportion of  mosquitoes with detectable viral rna in their bodies  and  infected mosquitoes  with a disseminated infection in their head/legs  as a function of mosquito isofemale families, virus isolates, experimental blocks, and their interactions.

in contrast, the proportion of mosquitoes with a disseminated infection among those successfully infected was only significantly influenced by the virus isolate . more than 90% mosquitoes infected by the rtb isolate had a disseminated infection whereas this percentage ranged from 40% to 70% for the bkk and kpp isolates . despite some degree of interaction indicated by crossing lines , the family × isolate interaction was not statistically significant, possibly due to variation between experimental blocks as indicated by the significant family × isolate × block three-way interaction . moreover, exclusion of the  <dig> uninfected mosquitoes reduced statistical power of this analysis.

viral rna concentrations in the body of infected mosquitoes and the number of fluorescent focus units  in the head/legs of mosquitoes with a disseminated infection varied substantially among family-isolate combinations, with varying ranking orders of viral isolates for each isofemale family . both variables were significantly influenced by the family × isolate interaction, with no significant difference between experimental blocks . regardless of their ranking order in a given mosquito family, the general profile of each isolate shared some degree of similarity between viral rna concentration and numbers of disseminated ffus , possibly reflecting differing viral growth capacities in different mosquito genetic backgrounds. viral rna concentration in infected mosquitoes did not appear to be correlated to the proportion of infected mosquitoes or the proportion of mosquitoes with a disseminated infection, indicating that the probability of these events may be largely independent of the efficiency of viral genome replication.

results from analysis of variance of  viral rna concentration in the bodies  of infected mosquitoes and  mean virus titer  in the head/legs of mosquitoes with a disseminated infection as a function of mosquito isofemale families, virus isolates, experimental blocks, and their interactions.

discussion
results of our experiment strongly support the hypothesis that vector competence of ae. aegypti for denv- <dig> is governed by g × g interactions. with the exception of virus dissemination success, all of the indices of vector competence we examined  were at least partly determined by the specific combination of mosquito family and virus isolate. the use of a randomized complete block design allowed us to rule out the possibility of environmental bias by confirming the consistency of family × isolate interactions effect across experimental blocks.

our conclusions are based on the premise that family × isolate interactions reliably approximate g × g interactions  <cit> ; i.e., in our design observed phenotypic differences truly reflect the underlying genetic differences between mosquitoes and viruses. the use of isofemale families to assess the genetic basis of a trait assumes that the ratio of among- to within-families variations is proportionate to the heritable variation for that trait  <cit> . this assumption is reasonable as long as environmental variation in rearing conditions or parental effects do not differ between families. we ensured homogeneity by maintaining the f0-f <dig> parental generations under standard laboratory conditions and rearing the f <dig> individuals under strictly identical conditions. non-genetic differences in virus infectivity were minimized by growing the viruses simultaneously under the same conditions and exposing mosquitoes to very similar blood meal titers . uncontrolled, slight differences in blood meal titers did not appear to influence results. for instance, the rtb isolate produced the highest average values across families for all vector competence indices, although the bkk isolate had the highest blood meal titers in both experimental blocks. although virus amplification in cell culture may have imposed a selective pressure on the original viruses, the low number of passages allowed us to assume that we still had isolates representative of wild-type viral genetic diversity. overall, it seemed reasonable to conclude that our approach provided a reliable estimate of g × g interactions in this system.

it is remarkable that we were able to detect g × g interactions using a very restricted experimental design . observing a highly significant effect of the interaction term with limited statistical power indicates that g × g interactions likely represent a strong determinant of vector competence in natural ae. aegypti populations, which display a much higher level of genetic polymorphism than was captured by our three isofemale families sampled at a single location. we expect g × g interactions to be even more prominent when mosquito genotypes from more genetically distinct populations are examined. indeed, a nested analysis of ae. aegypti mitochondrial haplotype frequencies in thailand showed that while 57% of the total variation was found within collections, 18% and 25% of that variation were found among samples collected within a distance of  <dig> km and more than  <dig> km apart, respectively  <cit> . moreover, because the three denv- <dig> isolates used in this study were all collected in thailand in  <dig>  it is likely that they are closely genetically related. we expect that g × g interactions will occur to a greater extent when the analysis includes more distantly related viral lineages or even different serotypes.

a practical implication of our results is that the conclusions drawn from one particular vector-virus combination  are not likely to be representative of other combinations. this challenges the broad-scale relevance of genetic loci associated with vector competence that were identified in laboratory-tractable systems. a recent meta-analysis showed that quantitative trait loci  controlling host resistance against one pathogen isolate were on average recovered in only 24% of the cases where infections with different isolates were investigated; i.e., each particular host-pathogen combination was based on a different set of qtl and epistatic interactions  <cit> . g × g interactions may help to explain why the qtl controlling midgut infection by a jamaican denv- <dig> isolate in highly selected lines of ae. aegypti  <cit>  did not correlate with those previously identified in field-derived ae. aegypti challenged with a puerto rican denv- <dig> isolate  <cit> . likewise, it sheds a new light on a study where denv- <dig> isolates of the sa genotype performed better than isolates of the am genotype in two field-derived ae. aegypti populations, but not in a laboratory-adapted colony  <cit> .

although additional studies are warranted to confirm the impact of g × g interactions on actual virus transmission through an infectious bite, their occurrence during denv incubation in ae. aegypti provides important insights into the mechanisms shaping denv population structure and evolution. it helps to explain why despite strong genetic bottlenecks during mosquito transmission, major denv variants are generally conserved in both vertebrate and arthropod hosts  <cit> . indeed, g × g interactions indicate that elimination of viruses that are incompatible with local mosquito genotypes may counteract the effect of genetic drift in the form of purifying selection at the population level. likewise, the observed spatial clustering of denv lineages on a restricted spatial scale  <cit>  may in fact be promoted by location-specific vector-driven selection. over time, genetic specificity of vector-virus compatibility would combine with the genetic structure of ae. aegypti populations to drive the adaptation of denv to increased compatibility with local mosquito genotypes  <cit> . interestingly, it is worth noting that in our experiment, while the three isofemale vector families were derived from samples collected in ratchaburi, all of the vector competence indices were highest, on average, for the viral isolate from that same location . although this does not constitute firm evidence for local adaptation of denv, it is consistent with the hypothesis that denv transmission may be achieved with greater success by sympatric than by allopatric vector-virus pairs. inclusion of mosquito families from different populations in a similar design will help to more definitively address this question. future research using multiple replicates of sympatric and allopatric pairs will determine the extent of local adaptation in this system. it is clear that factors other than vector-mediated population structure contribute to the evolution of certain denv lineages; i.e., 'cosmopolitan' genotypes that are found across broad geographical distributions. we speculate, however, that to some extent the spatial organization of denv populations may reflect the geographical distribution of ae. aegypti genotypes, which would be similar to what was demonstrated  for mexican populations of plasmodium vivax and their anopheles vectors  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that the vector competence of ae. aegypti for denv- <dig> is determined by g × g interactions in which potential for mosquito infection and virus transmission depends on the specific combination of vector and virus genotypes. this observation challenges the general relevance of genetic loci controlling vector competence that were identified using a single combination of mosquito and virus genotypes. the combination of g × g interactions and spatial genetic structure of vector populations is consistent with the potential for denv adaptation to local vectors. mosquito vector-driven selection may play a more important role in denv microevolution than previously thought.

