BACKGROUND
miscanthus is a perennial c <dig> grass that belongs to the andropogoneae tribe within the poaceae family, which includes important agricultural crops for food and fuel such as sugarcane, sorghum, and maize. following their introduction into the western world in the 1930s  <cit> , members of the miscanthus genus are now grown as ornamental crops in many regions of the united states due to their characteristically robust growth and attractive late-season inflorescence.

the miscanthus genus consists of approximately fifteen species, most of which are either diploids or tetraploids  <cit> . the grass is an obligate outcrosser with a large, highly repetitive  <dig>  gbp  genome that is distributed across nineteen chromosomes  <cit> . natural hybridization events between the two most predominant miscanthus species, m. sinensis and m. sacchariflorus, have been reported  <cit> . ribosomal dna evidence suggests that the large statured, cold tolerant, sterile triploid hybrid m. × giganteus  is the result of a natural hybridization event between a diploid m. sinensis  and a tetraploid m. sacchariflorus   <cit> .

plants of the miscanthus genus, especially miscanthus × giganteus, have generated interest as a source of lignocellulosic biomass for the bioenergy industry. although miscanthus has been of horticultural interest for some time, it essentially remains a genus of wild species. genetic selections for the genus have largely concentrated on traits desirable to the horticultural and landscaping industry; there have been few focused breeding efforts targeting traits that would enhance the potential of miscanthus as a perennial bioenergy feedstock. the availability of molecular tools for miscanthus will accelerate improvement of biofuel-centric traits in miscanthus. recent advances in miscanthus genomics have enabled the construction of complete genetic maps for m. sinensis. these genetic maps revealed a recent allotetraploidization event in miscanthus in which pairs of homeologous chromosomes show extensive synteny to the sorghum bicolor genome, with a single chromosome fusion accounting for the nineteen linkage groups.

deep sequencing technologies applied to gene discovery through transcriptome sequencing has efficiently increased genetic information for many non-model plant organisms such as barley, grape, wheat, and lodgepole pine . importantly, the high degree of sequence similarity and genome organization between miscanthus and sorghum make sorghum bicolor a suitable reference genome sequence for the analysis of the miscanthus transcriptome  <cit> . a preliminary study of dormant miscanthus × giganteus rhizomes was used to assess variation among available miscanthus × giganteus accessions  <cit> , but a comprehensive catalog of expressed sequences in the miscanthus genus is not yet available. we report here high-depth sequencing of expressed mrnas from a variety of m. × giganteus tissues as well as multiple accessions of m. sinensis and one accession of m. sacchariflorus. the data generated enable a robust assembly of the miscanthus transcriptome with demonstrated utility in the analysis of changes in gene expression and evolution of genic sequences within the genus.

RESULTS
sequencing the miscanthus transcriptome
to obtain a global overview of gene expression in miscanthus and maximize transcript representation of the genus,  <dig> million expressed sequence tags  were generated from eight miscanthus accessions using illumina’s sequencing by synthesis technology . to this end, we sequenced six m. sinensis accessions, one m. sacchariflorus, and the illinois clone of miscanthus × giganteus. for m. × giganteus, rna-seq libraries were constructed from eleven organs at a variety of developmental stages and sequenced separately . the m. sacchariflorus and m. sinensis libraries were either generated from a mixture of tissues pooled together or from expanding leaves with both immature and mature tissues .table  <dig> 
miscanthus
rna-seq libraries sequenced for this study











abbreviations: ro root, rz spring rhizome, rb rhizome bud, es emerging shoot, va vegetative shoot apex, sa sub-apex shoot, st stem, pa pre-flowering apex, ii immature inflorescence, mi mature inflorescence, ml mature leaf, fr fall rhizome, mixed ;


1denotes 36 bp paired-end reads.


2denotes 76 bp paired-end reads.


3denotes 100 bp paired-end reads.
sampled
miscanthus × giganteus
tissue types and relatedness of est profiles using
sorghum bicolor
gene models as references. panel a is an image identifying many of the m. × giganteus tissues used in this study. panel b displays the relatedness of the sequenced tissue types by hierarchical clustering of the expression profiles using manhattan distance and complete linkage.



tissue specific expression profile of the miscanthus × giganteus transcriptome using the sorghum genome as a reference
the m. × giganteus tissues were sequenced in two separate illumina short-read sequencing runs, both to assemble the miscanthus transcriptome  and to identify genes preferentially expressed in a single m. × giganteus tissue-type. approximately ten million reads were obtained for each tissue. although miscanthus does not currently have a completed genome the high nucleotide identity of miscanthus to sorghum <cit>  suggests that the sorghum genome can be used as a suitable reference for profiling tissue specific transcript expression in miscanthus.

reads were filtered for quality prior to their alignment to the sorghum bicolor genome. not surprisingly, more sequences were filtered from the 36 bp  compared to 76 bp reads. sixty-three percent of the adapter-trimmed and quality-filtered m. × giganteus reads mapped uniquely to the sorghum genome with a minimum of five m. × giganteus reads matching  <dig>  of the  <dig>  predicted gene models in sorghum . the transcript profile of each tissue typically detected about  <dig>  sorghum genes, ranging from  <dig>  in mature leaf to  <dig>  in mature inflorescence.figure  <dig> 
reads from each
miscanthus
tissue mapped to
sorghum bicolor. panel a displays read count matching to s. bicolor gene models for each sequenced m. × giganteus tissue uniquely, non-uniquely , or not at all; approximately 53% to 71% of the m. × giganteus reads mapped uniquely to the sorghum transcripts. panel b shows the number of sorghum gene models represented by a minimum of five m. × giganteus reads for each sequenced m. × giganteus tissue. panels c and d show similarities and differences in the profiles of sorghum gene models represented with a minimum of five reads for select m. × giganteus tissues. panel e shows a histogram of the total number of reads mapped per sorghum gene model for each m. × giganteus library. panel f shows the distribution of the number of reads mapped per sorghum gene model in the unique categories of the venn diagrams in panels c and d.



when expression profiles for each library are subjected to hierarchical clustering, the libraries tend to group primarily by organ type . however, because some libraries were sequenced at different read lengths , relative mapping efficiencies to the sorghum reference could contribute to apparent relationships among libraries. we assessed this directly by three analyses. first, figure 2a shows that libraries sequenced to 36-bp produced approximately half the proportion of reads mapping to the sorghum reference compared to the 76-bp libraries. second, when the number of sorghum gene models with a minimum of five matching reads are compared among libraries from similar tissues, a substantial number of gene models appear to be uniquely represented in only one library . this observation is particularly noteworthy for the comparison of emerging shoot  and emerging shoot , where the same rna sample was used to independently construct two libraries. although many sorghum gene models were sampled at read depths greater than  <dig>  a substantial number show lesser depth . it is predominately these low-coverage gene models that account for the apparent differences among closely related  or identical  rna samples .

while most transcripts are ubiquitously expressed in all tissues, transcripts that are differentially expressed yet abundant in at least one tissue are interesting as markers for developmental programs or tissue-specific biology. the rank products  method  <cit>  is a useful non-parametric test to evaluate the significance of differential expression by a series of fold change comparisons. rankings arise from consistencies in fold change differences between samples; as such, a series of pairwise comparisons for each individual tissue against the rest of the sequenced tissues in our study identifies high-ranking transcripts that are preferentially expressed in a tissue compared to the rest. the rp method has been used recently to help develop expression profiles for plants such as soybean  <cit> , aspen trees  <cit> , and the study of hormonal responses in arabidopsis <cit> . we employed rp to identify genes preferentially expressed in one particular tissue compared to the other sampled tissues, i.e. the “rest of the plant” .

the highly ranked genes from this analysis included many whose expression is known to be associated with biological processes that occur primarily in one of the sampled tissues. examples include photosynthetic genes like phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase  and pyruvate orthophosphate dikinase  in mature leaf, genes involved in floral organ development like apetala <dig> and pistillata in the inflorescence samples, and regulators of flowering like apetala <dig> in the pre-flowering apex  . overall, we believe that we have generated a good repertoire of gene expression in miscanthus for a number of stages and tissues. the primary appeal of this information is its potential use in the future investigation of the miscanthus genus’ unique traits and characteristics. the high rankings of genes known to be highly expressed in certain tissue types in other plant species strengthens confidence in our approach to identify genes preferentially expressed in lesser-studied organs such as the subterranean rhizome; thus, we choose to focus our validation experiments on genes preferentially expressed in the spring rhizome and associated organs .

five genes that showed preferential expression in the spring rhizome, as determined by the rank product analysis, were considered for verification in rt-qpcr assays. to ensure that we had independent biological replication of the samples used for rna-seq, new samples were collected in triplicate in spring  <dig>  rt-qpcr was conducted on five tissue types from this sampling . these five tissues were selected based on a combination of their availability at the time of sampling in early spring, their correspondence to the tissues originally profiled via rna-seq, and the potentially wide range of transcript expression based upon their physiological differences from one another.figure  <dig> 
verification of differentially expressed genes. comparison of rpkm data and rt-qpcr results for five separate m. × giganteus tissue types. rpkm values are shown as dashed lines with values on the right y-axis. relative expression via rt-qpcr is shown as bars with values on the left y-axis.



as no housekeeping genes have been tested or verified for use in m. × giganteus, five potential control candidates were deduced from the rank product data. these potential control candidates contained sorghum gene models with near-equal rpkm  values in each of the five tested tissues used in this verification. from these five candidates, the two best-performing gene models  were chosen as control genes for this study.

the rt-qpcr results correlated well with the expression patterns estimated by the rna-seq analysis , confirming that the expression variation observed from rna-seq provides a good representation of changes in transcript profiles among samples. occasionally, gene expression for the root tissue appeared higher in the rt-qpcr. we attribute this discrepancy to the differences in the growth conditions for the root tissues sampled for rna-seq and rt-qpcr. the rna-seq library was prepared from roots of greenhouse plants grown in turface, whereas the rt-qpcr analysis was performed with root tissue harvested from the same long-standing m. × giganteus field plot from which the majority of other tissue samples were obtained. in addition to the aforementioned tests, two additional leaf specific genes were assayed and both methods showed consistent results .

seasonal transcription responses in miscanthus × giganteus rhizomes
we noticed that a number of the genes identified by the rank product analysis as preferentially expressed in spring rhizomes were annotated with functions associated with the biosynthesis or signaling of plant hormones. such pathways might be expected to be highly active in rejuvenating rhizomes. to assess this hypothesis more directly, we obtained biological replicate samples from rhizomes harvested in both spring  and fall  during the  <dig> growing season and used rna-seq for transcript profiling . a gene ontology analysis of these samples shows an enrichment in spring rhizomes of transcripts associated with cell wall biogenesis, root development, and both the biogenesis and signaling of jasmonic acid . these findings confirm observations from the initial rank product analysis. in contrast, rhizomes collected in late fall show an enrichment of transcripts associated with seed maturation and dormancy. overall, the upregulation of hormonal signaling in the spring and dormancy in the fall is consistent with seasonal changes in the physiological functions of rhizomes.

quantitative trait analysis in a sorghum bicolor by sorghum propinqum population identified a 15 mb interval on sorghum chromosome  <dig> associated with rhizomatousness and cold tolerance  <cit> . it is interesting to note that many genes in this interval are highly expressed in the m. × giganteus rhizome and also are differentially expressed between spring and fall rhizomes. noteworthy among these genes are three predicted zim domain proteins  with homology to arabidopsis jaz/tify transcription factors associated with jasmonic acid biosynthesis and signaling . conversely the m. × giganteus homolog of sb01g <dig> is highly expressed in fall rhizomes . sb01g <dig> encodes a putative small hydrophobic membrane protein that belongs to a low temperature and salt responsive protein family and shows similarity to arabidopsis rci2s and maize pmp3s .

de-novo assembly of the short read data
since a reference genome for miscanthus does not exist, the sequenced short reads were assembled de novo using a combination of the abyss  <cit>  and phrap assemblers . here we use “transcriptome” to refer to a collection of highly expressed genes that are deeply sampled at ample coverage for producing robust contigs  as well as low abundance genes where sequence depth and coverage limits assembly. a key parameter in assembly of short reads is the k-mer word size, which represents the minimal exact match that is needed to combine two reads into the same contig. since low abundance genes typically assemble better with a smaller k-mer size, and highly expressed genes assemble better at larger k-mers  <cit> , we ran abyss multiple times using k-mer lengths between  <dig> and  <dig> bases. following this, phrap was used to merge the abyss assemblies. the final m. × giganteus assembly contained  <dig>  contigs longer than 200 bp and a contig n <dig> length of  <dig>  bp .figure  <dig> 
basic assembly statistics for the transcriptomes from eight
miscanthus
accessions. panel a compares assembly statistics for each accession. height of bars indicates number of contigs  and lines represent length of contigs . panel b shows the number of reads from each accession  which mapped back to either the assembly produced from that specific accession  or to the more complete assembly derived from all sequenced m. × giganteus libraries . the assemblies from individual accessions where a mixture of tissues were combined into one rna-seq library are contained within the purple circle, whereas those assemblies derived from only leaf tissue are contained within the green circles. mapped reads from each accessions are denoted as follows: “z” m. sinensis ‘zebrinus’, “a” m. sinensis ‘amur silvergrass,’ “w” m. sinensis ‘white kaskade,’ “o” m. sinensis ‘goliath,’ “s” m. sacchariflorus ‘golf course,’ “u” m. sinensis ‘undine,’ “g” m. sinensis ‘grosse fontaine,’ and “m” is m. × giganteus.



the m. × giganteus genotype was formed via hybridization of m. sinensis with m. sacchariflorus. thus, we expect that the detailed assembly produced for m. × giganteus should also be broadly useful for investigating expression variation in other miscanthus accessions. we evaluated this in two ways. first we generated libraries from a single tissue  for four m. sinensis accessions and then mapped the reads to either an assembly produced only from that accession or to the m. × giganteus assembly. leaf samples clearly have a reduced representation of the full transcriptome of m. × giganteus, as evidenced by the fewer number of contigs produced and their shorter n <dig> . this is not unexpected, as most leaf tissue reads likely come from a small number of very highly expressed genes; as a result, less abundant transcripts will be more poorly represented. importantly, when leaf-only libraries are mapped to m. × giganteus, the proportion of mapped reads rises to the level observed for m. × giganteus onto itself , suggesting that nearly all reads in the leaf libraries are in fact represented within the m. × giganteus assembly. we reasoned there might be two approaches to improve accession-specific assemblies, greater read depth of the same tissue, or the inclusion of more tissues. figure 4b shows that more than doubling the read depth of the leaf libraries had no impact on the proportion of mapped reads ; however, even a single library containing a mixture of tissues  sequenced at moderate depth yields accession-specific assemblies comparable to m. × giganteus. having established that moderate depth sequencing of mixed tissues offers the best assembly, we generated such a library from m. sacchariflorus accession ‘golf course’ and confirmed that the m. × giganteus assembly is of sufficient quality to obtain high proportions of read-mapping for both m. sacchariflorus and m. sinensis accessions.

to verify the transcript assemblies, we selected eleven genes represented in multiple miscanthus est assemblies and amplified the genomic segments from two m. sinensis doubled haploid lines, dh <dig>  and dh <dig> , as well as their parents dh1p  and dh2p   <cit> . all eleven genomic fragments amplified successfully, demonstrating the usefulness of the assemblies. pcr fragments were then cloned and multiple clones were sequenced for each of the eleven genes using sanger sequencing technology. an alignment of the sanger sequences to the est contigs confirmed that the sequence identity in the coding region was too high to consistently distinguish between the two homeologous copies solely using short reads. therefore, it appears that the assembly reported here is often a consensus of the two paralogous gene copies. two of these genes, sb01g <dig> and the putative flowering time regulator sb03g <dig> , were sequenced from different miscanthus accessions, including dh <dig> and m. × giganteus . the sequences obtained not only show clear separation of the two paralogs, but also clearly distinguish the m. sinensis and m. sacchariflorus variants within each paralogous branch . as expected, m. × giganteus carries both m. sinensis and m. sacchariflorus variants for each paralog. furthermore, allelic variation appears evident for paralog i of sb01g <dig> within m. sinensis based on clear separation of two sequences derived from the likely heterozygous dh2p parent, of which only one sequence was recovered from its homozygous descendant dh <dig>  dh1p is apparently fixed for one of these alleles.figure  <dig> 
evolutionary relationships among
miscanthus
gene fragments. maximum likelihood trees were generated for two genes; significant branches are denoted by their bootstrap value. the trees are drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured by the number of substitutions per site. panel a displays a tree drawn from the alignment of a 691 bp genomic sequence homologous to sb01g <dig>  which is a single copy gene annotated as a putative membrane component member of the er protein translocation complex. panel b displays a tree drawn from the alignment of a  <dig>  bp exonic segment of sb03g <dig>  similar to cycling dof factor  <dig> . the miscanthus est contigs  are also included in the tree. abbreviations for accession names: m. sinensis ‘igr-2011-001’ , m. sinensis ‘igr-2011-002’ , m. sinensis ‘igr-2011-003’ , m. sinensis ‘igr-2011-004’ , m. sacchariflorus ‘hercules’ , m. sacchariflorus ‘golf course’ , m. sinensis ‘goliath’ , m. sinensis ‘silbertum’ , m. sinensis ‘white kaskade’ , and miscanthus × giganteus .



a practical challenge of having many closely related para-alleles in miscanthus spp. is the propensity with which chimeric products can be generated during pcr amplification due to the aberrant pairing of incompletely amplified fragments from the para-alleles during successive pcr cycles . whereas such pcr chimeras are easy to identify with sanger sequencing of multiple clones from pcr amplicons, less rigorous methods of genotyping polyploids based on sizing of pcr-amplified fragments  are likely to have a high error rate due to the incidence of such artifacts.

annotation of the miscanthus assemblies
the similarity of m. × giganteus transcripts to the gene models and ests of closely related grass-species sorghum bicolor, oryza sativa , zea mays , brachypodium distachyon, and sugarcane was assessed with a nucleotide blast . as expected from their phylogenetic relatedness, m. × giganteus shows the largest degree of similarity to the sugarcane ests and sorghum bicolor gene models, with most matches sharing over 95% identity . although the fully sequenced sorghum genome is the closest comprehensive reference currently available for miscanthus, the genomic and/or est information for each of these species is potentially useful for functional annotation. the miscanthus est contigs were clustered along with sorghum gene models and sugarcane ests using single linkage clustering. in total,  <dig>  clusters were obtained; of these clusters,  <dig>  have a representative from all three miscanthus species. a total of  <dig> such clusters did not cluster with sorghum gene models or sugarcane ests and were studied further as putative miscanthus-specific gene models . this could be because the corresponding sugarcane est or sorghum gene model is simply not present in the database or because these genes have diverged enough from their sorghum and sugarcane homologs to no longer meet the clustering conditions. of these clusters,  <dig> do not share significant similarity to the sorghum genome and are therefore likely to be miscanthus-specific or highly divergent genes. functional annotations are lacking for these clusters, among which  <dig> have no significant match  to any sequence in the non-redundant genbank database at either the amino acid or nucleotide levels. the remaining  <dig> clusters match a grass sequences currently annotated as “unknowns”  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
comparison of the assembled
miscanthus
transcripts to gene models and ests of other grasses. in panel a, miscanthus × giganteus est contigs were compared to sugarcane transcripts , and gene models of sorghum bicolor , zea mays , oryza sativa  and brachypodium . the graph shows the number of contigs that match each grass transcript dataset with a given percent nucleotide identity. panel b represents the clustering of miscanthus contigs with sorghum bicolor gene models and contigs from the sugarcane assembled est database . in total,  <dig> clusters contain at least one miscanthus contig with no match in sorghum bicolor or in the sogi database at 90% identity over 90% of its length.



the miscanthus contigs were annotated using interproscan version  <dig>   <cit> . eighty-eight percent of contigs were assigned at least one annotation . the top twenty most common gene ontology  assignments in the three main categories  in the assembled miscanthus transcriptome are available in additional file  <dig> and provide additional evidence that we have a comprehensive collection of transcripts.

although most repeats in the genome are silenced, it is not uncommon for some repetitive elements to show expression, particularly in actively developing tissues. of the  <dig>  miscanthus contigs,  <dig>  were annotated by interproscan to contain one or more elements found in retrotransposons: integrase, rnase h, reverse transcriptase and the gag structural protein . three of these contigs  contained all four polypeptides, suggesting they could potentially represent intact functional retrotransposons. to further investigate the presence of putative repetitive elements in the assembly, we compared the assembly to the plant repeat database, which provides a comprehensive well-characterized list of the most common plant repeats  <cit> . less that 2% of the contigs matched the repeat database , and more than half of these contigs were residual ribosomal rna, likely due to incomplete removal of non-poly-adenylated rnas during the library preparation. aside from ribosomal rnas, the most common matches were typically unclassified retrotransposons, transposons, and mites of the tourist type .

CONCLUSIONS
the grasses of the andropogoneae tribe—maize, sorghum, sugarcane, and miscanthus—are among the world’s most economically important crops. an abundance of genomic resources exist for the two annual crops in this group, maize and sorghum. in contrast, the perennials sugarcane and miscanthus have lagged behind, in part because of the size and complexity of their genomes. the miscanthus transcriptome reported in this study represents a major new genomic resource for the perennial andropogoneae and will enable comparative genomic studies that advance our understanding of perenniality in grasses.

this miscanthus expression study provides a first glance at the transcriptome of active subterranean tissues collected during an annual seasonal cycle. it is interesting to note that these tissues show preferred expression of genes involved in jasmonic acid signaling, indole biosynthesis, auxin responses, abscisic acid pathways, and osmo-sensing. the transcripts preferentially expressed in the tissues underground suggest that changes in plant hormone pathways are associated with nutrient remobilization and growth in spring. jasmonate synthesis and signalling appears to be particularly active in the spring rhizomes. exogenous jasmonate has been shown to induce underground tubers in rhubarb, yams and potatoes, and to promote shoot and bulb formation in garlic grown via tissue culture . it is also interesting that three zim/tify domain containing proteins located in the sorghum rhizomatousness interval  <cit>  are highly expressed in spring rhizomes while the homolog of low temperature and salt responsive protein, rci <dig> , in the interval is expressed in fall rhizomes. zim domain proteins are transcription factors in the jasmonic acid signaling pathway, which usually function as transcriptional repressors . the role of jasmonate and other plant hormones in rhizome biology and nutrient cycling in miscanthus deserves further investigation. in general, while hormones appear to rage in spring rhizomes, genes involved in amino acid metabolism and seed maturation are high in the fall rhizomes .

as the transcriptome assembly presented here is based solely on short-read sequencing, there are situations where the paralogous transcripts are collapsed in regions of high similarity and are represented as separate contigs in regions of greater variation. it is apparent that longer read sequencing is required to produce transcript assemblies that consistently separate alleles from paralogs. nevertheless, the information on gene expression in miscanthus reported here will be valuable in exploring miscanthus biology and aid in the further sequencing and annotation of the miscanthus genomes.

