BACKGROUND
the bacterium caulobacter crescentus divides asymmetrically once during each cell cycle, yielding a sessile stalked cell and a motile swarmer cell  <cit> . these two cell types differ not only in morphology but also in their ability to replicate their genomes and to divide. the stalked cell immediately reinitiates dna replication and cell division. the swarmer cell, in contrast, is incompetent for these two processes until it sheds its single, polar flagellum and differentiates into a stalked cell. the stalked cell then passes through several predivisional stages, during which time the genome is replicated and segregated, the newly synthesized dna is methylated, and a new flagellum is synthesized and constructed at the pole opposite the stalk  <cit> ]. the asymmetry that distinguishes the two daughter cells is founded in the predivisional cell before cell separation occurs. asymmetric cell division depends upon several general mechanisms, including intracellular protein and/or mrna localization, regulated phosphorylation and proteolysis, and cell-cycle dependent transcription and translation.

the inability of the caulobacter swarmer cell to replicate dna is due in part to the activity of the response regulator ctra, which binds to sites in the origin of replication   <cit> . ctra is synthesized and phosphorylated when dna replication is approximately half-way complete; the phosphorylated protein persists in the swarmer cell after cell division  <cit> . phosphorylated ctra represses transcription of dna adjacent to the cori, that is necessary for replication initiation, and also prevents binding of the dnaa initiator protein  <cit> . when the swarmer cell differentiates into a stalked cell, ctra is proteolyzed and dna replication commences  <cit> . in addition to its role in preventing dna replication, ctra is also a transcriptional activator of many genes that affect several different aspects of caulobacter development. ctra regulates transcription of its own gene, activates early genes in flagellar biogenesis, and represses ftsz, the earliest known gene in cell division  <cit> . interestingly, while microarray analysis has implicated ctra in the control of approximately 25% of the cell-cycle regulated genes and it appears to directly regulate  <dig> operons, it does not regulate the transcription of several genes involved in dna replication  <cit> . thus, control of dna replication initiation also depends on ctra-independent transcription regulation.

transcription of many dna replication genes begins just before dna replication initiates at the swarmer-to-stalked cell transition. these swarmer-cell-silenced genes include dnaa, dnan , dnax , dnak , and gyrb   <cit> ]. the predicted promoter sequences for most of these genes align well with the published consensus sequence for σ <dig>  <cit> . as the promoters of these dna replication-associated genes appear to contain neither a ctra binding site or any obvious elements that would suggest transcription activation in stalked cells, the mechanism responsible for their cell-cycle dependent regulation remains unknown.

in this study we analyze the role of the gyrb promoter in swarmer cell-specific silencing of gene expression. we map the site at which transcription of gyrb starts and create deletions to further delineate the promoter sequences required for temporal regulation of the gene to an  <dig> bp region. using site-directed mutagenesis we further show that transcriptional silencing in swarmer cells does not appear to depend upon the overall strength of the promoter activity. in vitro experiments demonstrate that gyrb transcription does not require any auxiliary factors, suggesting that temporal regulation is not dependent upon an activator protein. however, gel-mobility shift assays demonstrate that an activity, present in c. crescentus crude whole-cell extracts and unrecognized by anti-rnap antibody, is able to bind to the gyrb promoter. one possibility is that swarmer-specific silencing is linked to the observed difference in the physical characteristics between the swarmer cell nucleoids and stalked cell nucleoids  <cit> . thus, a protein that affects the overall folding and structure of the nucleoid might also be regulating transcription. in this regard, we also assayed the effect on gyrb expression in strains containing mutations in either smc or dps, two genes encoding proteins that condense dna. however we found there was no change in the temporal pattern of gyrb transcription in strains containing deletions in either of these genes.

RESULTS
mapping and deletion analysis of the gyrb promoter
previous studies of the gyrb gene found that transcription is silenced in swarmer cells and begins when the swarmer cell differentiates into a stalked cell  <cit> . these experiments also demonstrated that gyrb is transcribed from its own promoter and is not part of an operon, this despite the fact that the predicted start codon overlaps with the upstream recf stop codon  <cit> . because the original gyrb-promoterless lacz reporter fusion used in these studies contained a relatively large region of dna upstream of the predicted start of translation, we wished to map the gyrb promoter to the minimal region capable of sustaining wild-type temporal regulation of the gene. primer extension revealed two adjacent transcription start sites, separated from the translation start site by a relatively long leader sequence of approximately  <dig> base pairs . note that in a separate study a slightly different start site, four base pairs further upstream, was also identified  <cit> . while we did not detect this start site in either the primer extension assay or in an in vitro transcription/primer extension experiment , the alternative transcription start site was taken into consideration in subsequent mutagenesis experiments.

based on the transcription start sites found by primer extension, alignment and comparison with several other known σ <dig> genes allowed identification of possible - <dig> and - <dig> promoter elements of gyrb   <cit> . the consensus is derived from σ <dig> transcribed genes that are expressed at relatively constant levels throughout the cell cycle; expression of gyrb, along with other dna-replication genes, varies during the cell cycle. in analyzing the gyrb promoter and surrounding dna, we considered two broad possibilities for gyrb transcription regulation. gyrb expression might be controlled by the activity of a swarmer cell-specific factor that inhibits transcription or by a stalked cell-specific factor that activates transcription. an -rich region, beginning approximately  <dig> bp upstream of the transcription start site, at first appeared to be a good candidate for a possible regulatory protein binding site. this region consists of two stretches of repeated thymidine residues and one stretch of repeated adenine residues, approximately phased with respect to each other on the dna strand . such an arrangement could create a bend in the dna, a secondary structure that is preferred by some dna-binding proteins and that can affect transcription independent of any additional protein constituents  <cit> . another part of the gyrb gene that might possibly contain a cis-acting regulatory site is the extremely long , untranslated leader sequence between the transcription and translation start sites. alternatively, gyrb transcription might not depend on any remote dna elements or sites for sequence-dependent dna binding proteins. as has been reported, the putative gyrb promoter appears more similar to a subset of σ <dig> genes that mirror its temporal regulation than to those genes that are constitutively expressed throughout the cell cycle   <cit> . this would seem to suggest that temporal regulation is dictated by the promoter itself rather than by a more distantly located dna element.

in order to begin dissection of the gyrb promoter, we used pcr to create deletions both upstream and downstream of the core σ <dig> promoter. we measured the transcriptional activity from these shortened promoters, each fused to a promoter-less lacz gene, by β-galactosidase activity. deletion of the upstream sequences, including the -rich region, resulted in a slight, but not statistically significant, decrease in gyrb transcription  . a similar decrease was seen when approximately  <dig> bp of the untranslated leader sequence was deleted . however, wild-type transcription levels were restored by combined removal of the leader and upstream sequences  and/or by removal of an additional  <dig> bp of the leader sequence . these results indicate that the overall strength of gyrb promoter activity depends upon at most an  <dig> bp promoter region, covering - <dig> to + <dig> bp relative to the start of transcription. the temporal regulation of the deleted promoters was then investigated by immunoprecipitation of β-galactosidase produced from each construct during growth in synchronized cultures. the expression pattern of the deleted promoter fusions during the cell cycle was similar to that observed for the full-length fusion . in all cases, transcription was barely detectable in swarmer cells  followed by a marked increase in transcription at the swarmer-to-stalked cell transition  and then a subsequent decrease in late predivisional cells  . thus, the temporal control of the gyrb gene is also dictated by the core,  <dig> bp promoter.

mutagenesis of the gyrb promoter
one attractive idea to explain the temporal regulation of gyrb transcription is that a deviation in promoter sequences from that of the σ <dig> consensus results in a expression levels that are somewhat weaker than that of constitutively expressed promoters. this property might make gyrb transcription more susceptible to a general silencing mechanism present in swarmer cells, whereas stronger σ73promoters would be expressed at normal levels. we investigated the importance of the basic architectural elements of the gyrb promoter, relative to the consensus sequence derived from constitutive σ <dig> promoters, by site-directed mutagenesis . the mutations were designed to bring the gyrb promoter into better agreement with the c. crescentus σ <dig> consensus  <cit> . the p6m <dig> mutation changed the bases ct at - <dig> to - <dig> to gc, conserved at those positions in the consensus; likewise, p6m <dig> created a t at the - <dig> position. because an alternate start site and promoter were published while these experiments were in progress, we also designed mutations based on these findings, so designated by the letter "l" in the name of the mutation  <cit> . the mutations p6ml <dig> and p6ml <dig> were aimed at increasing the consensus agreement of the - <dig> region published previously  <cit> ; p6ml <dig> targeted a proposed 13-mer motif located between the - <dig> and - <dig> region that was also previously identified  <cit> .

each mutated promoter was fused to a promoterless lacz gene and expression levels were quantitatively measured by β-galactosidase assays . the mutations p6m <dig> and p6m <dig> resulted in transcription levels that were twice that of the wild-type level, while the p6ml <dig>  - <dig>  and - <dig> were transcribed at normal or  reduced amounts. the increased promoter activity of p6m <dig> and p6m <dig> and the decreased expression of p6ml <dig> support the proposed promoter sequence reported here  as the p6m <dig> and p6m <dig> mutations increase the agreement with the σ <dig> consensus and while the p6ml <dig> mutation decreases the conformity. one possibility that could account for the increased promoter activity of the p6m <dig> and p6m <dig> mutant promoters was inappropriate expression in swarmer cells. therefore, we wished to examine the temporal transcription patterns of these promoters in order to test this possibility . surprisingly, transcription from the mutant promoters, though stronger, was still regulated in the wild-type manner during the cell cycle .

transcription of gyrb does not require an activator
because simply creating a stronger σ <dig> promoter failed to have any effect on the temporal pattern of gyrb transcription, we wished to rule out the possibility that gyrb requires a transcriptional activator for expression within stalked cells. we employed an in vitro transcription assay to address this issue, using a commercially obtained preparation of e. coli  rna polymerase . in this experiment, transcription from a promoter on a super-coiled plasmid was assayed by primer extension. transcription products were detected using both preparations of rnap, indicating the lack of a requirement for an auxiliary transcriptional activation factor . of the several start sites observed, one site was present when either rnap species was used in the in vitro assay  as well as when rna was obtained directly from cultured cells . the presence of one common start site is further evidence for the correct identification of the gyrb promoter reported here. from this experimental result, we can conclude that the sole protein requirement for in vitro transcription of the gyrb gene is the σ <dig> rnap holoenzyme.

an activity, distinct from rna polymerase, binds the gyrb promoter in vitro
because transcription from the gyrb promoter did not appear to require an activator protein, it seemed likely to us that temporal regulation of the gene during the cell cycle was not attributable to stalked cell-specific transcriptional activation. an alternative possibility is that the gene is specifically repressed in swarmer cells and in the swarmer pole of the predivisional cell, possibly by a protein that binds to the promoter. we therefore decided to use gel-mobility shift assays to look for any binding activities present in c. crescentus crude cell extracts that interacted with the gyrb promoter. a very weak shift was observed when fresh crude extract was incubated with the probe ; this shift is apparently due to the binding of rnap, evidenced by the further retardation of mobility when anti-rnap antibody was added to the incubation mixture . an additional complex was seen with increasing volumes of crude extract . this binding activity appears to be distinct from rnap binding as the shifted band is unaffected by the addition of anti-rnap antibody .

interestingly, we observed different results when we compared samples containing fresh extracts  with those containing extracts that had been previously thawed and then refrozen. the non-rnap binding activity was labile under conditions in which the extract had been subjected to one round of freeze-thaw . furthermore, when the extract that had been refrozen and thawed was used in the binding assay , the disappearance of the specific, labile protein band was accompanied by the appearance a new specific super-shifted band upon the addition of anti-rnap antibody.

the role of dna condensing proteins in the regulation of gyrb transcription
previous studies have shown that, in addition to being unable to initiate dna replication, c. crescentus swarmer cells also differ from stalked cells in their chromosomal architecture  <cit> . these experiments revealed that isolated swarmer cell nucleoids sediment faster in a sucrose gradient than those of stalked cells. one hypothesis is that the swarmer cell nucleoid possesses a different complement of dna 'condensing' proteins such as histone-like proteins. the gel mobility shift activity present in crude cell extracts may reflect the binding of a protein that alters the overall architecture of the swarmer cell nucleoid. two candidates for such an activity may be either dps or smc. in e. coli, the dps protein is induced both in stationary phase and during starvation; it is able to physically protect the nucleoid from oxidative and nuclease damage, as well as affect transcription under these conditions  <cit> . smc , is a member of the eukaryotic smc family , large, multidomain proteins that associate with each other in an antiparallel fashion. this association occurs through long, coiled-coil domains that flank a central hinge region, resulting in protein dimers that are shaped like old-fashioned hairpins. dimers of smc associate with non-smc factors to form specific complexes in eukaryotic cells, with functions in dna organization and movement, ranging from condensation to dosage compensation to repair  <cit> . experiments in bacillus subtilis have demonstrated that chromosomal dna was visibly decondensed in smc mutants  <cit> .

the caulobacter dps gene is approximately  <dig> to 55% identical and  <dig> to 65% similar to dps genes in other organisms, including burkholderia pseudomallei, bordetella pertussis and pseudomonas syringae . furthermore, a search of the ncbi cdd  revealed significant alignment with a cog  for dps/ferritin-like dna-binding proteins. the gene appears to be the first in a two-gene operon; the expected product of the second gene is a conserved hypothetical protein of unknown function. a lacz transcription fusion of a dna fragment spanning  <dig> bp upstream of the predicted dps translation start site was expressed at a low level  in late log-phase cultures . although it has been shown to be involved in dna protection and starvation and stationary-phase survival in other organisms, it seemed possible that dps might be involved in developmental events specific to the swarmer cell: the results of genome-wide dna microarray experiments showed that dps mrna is maximally present in swarmer cells  <cit> . as one way to investigate a possible role for dps in caulobacter development, we engineered a strain in which 90% of the dps coding sequence was replaced with a gene conferring resistance to gentamicin. the strain was indistinguishable from wild-type cells in logarithmic growth and morphology, and we detected no overt aberration in swarmer-cell motility or nucleoid appearance . additionally, we constructed a strain with a null mutation in smc by disrupting the chromosomal copy of the s m c gene by insertion of a gene conferring spectinomycin resistance . the deletion was confirmed by southern blot and by immunoblot with antibodies against smc .

finally, we examined the cell-cycle transcription pattern of gyrb in the smc and dps mutant strains. the temporal expression pattern of a gyrb fused to a promoter-less lacz gene was assayed by immunoprecipitation of pulse-labeled β-galactosidase in synchronized cultures of na <dig> , jg <dig> and jg <dig> . in both mutant strains, the lacz gene was transcribed in a manner comparable to the transcription observed when the same promoter fusion was expressed in na <dig>  thus, smc and dps do not appear to participate in swarmer-specific transcription silencing in caulobacter crescentus.

discussion
in caulobacter crescentus, many of the genes involved in dna replication, including dnan, dnax, dnaa, dnac, dnak and gyrb, are maximally expressed at the time that this process occurs  <cit> . thus, transcription of these genes does not occur in swarmer cells, or in the swarmer pole of predivisional cells, and begins only when the swarmer cells differentiate into stalked cells or when dna replication commences anew in the stalked cells at the completion of cell division. the means whereby this regulatory pattern is achieved remains unknown. in this study, we used gyrb as a representative gene with which to investigate the mechanism responsible for swarmer-specific transcription silencing in c. crescentus. as revealed by primer extension and in vitro transcription/primer extension assays, the transcription start site of the gene is separated from the translation start site by a fairly long leader sequence. there is apparent variation in the precise beginning of the transcript, as observed here and as reported elsewhere  <cit> . the lack of a precise transcription start site may be due to other factors that influence gyrb regulation. for example, transcription of the gyrb gene in caulobacter is induced by relaxation of the dna  <cit> , and this induction is distinct from the increased expression that occurs during the swarmer-to-stalked cell transition. it is also possible that the transcription start site varies depending upon undefined regulatory cues such as growth rate and/or growth phase of the culture.

having delineated the gyrb promoter to a minimal,  <dig> base pair region, we compared this promoter to other σ <dig> promoters and to the published consensus sequence, taking care to explore different alignments based on the several possible start sites. the alignment shown  is that best fitting the major start site obtained by both primer extension and in vitro transcription/primer extension . examination of the - <dig> and - <dig> regions of the promoter, based upon our alignment, revealed that the gyrb promoter greatly differs from the c. crescentus σ <dig> consensus sequence. this suggested an interesting possibility for a swarmer-specific silencing mechanism. we reasoned that greater deviation from the consensus sequence might make these promoters slightly inferior binding sites for the σ <dig> rnap, and thus slightly weaker. such promoters might be more susceptible to a situation in which rnap binding is partially inhibited or blocked, a possible scenario occurring in swarmer cells. site-directed mutagenesis allowed us to test this possibility by creating versions of the gyrb promoter that more closely matched the consensus sequence and therefore should, in theory at least, have been transcribed at higher levels. however, while in two cases transcription from the mutated promoters was greater than from the wild-type promoter, temporal regulation of transcription was unaffected. thus, it seems that the strength of the promoter does not intrinsically determine cell cycle regulation of gyrb.

the experiments presented here show that the gyrb promoter can be transcribed by e. coli σ <dig> rna polymerase holoenzyme in the absence of additional protein factors, suggesting the unlikelihood of temporal regulation depending solely upon an activator. however, it is possible that a stalked-cell specific transcriptional activator is required to overcome a swarmer-cell specific repression complex or dna topological conformation. when a probe containing the gyrb promoter was used in gel-mobility shift assays, two binding activities, both of which are components of crude caulobacter extracts, were apparent. one of these activities was loosely identified as rna polymerase based on the ability of anti-rnap antibody to recognize and alter the migration of this band through the gel. the other binding activity was not recognized by the antibody. this second species was vulnerable to freeze-thaw treatment, as it was only present in extract that had not been re-frozen. one might imagine a scenario in which a swarmer-specific dna protein binds to the gyrb promoter and interferes with the ability of the polymerase to access the dna.

previous experiments with another swarmer cell-repressed promoter, the dnax promoter, revealed the rrf motif, that by sequence comparison is located between the - <dig> and - <dig> elements in all of the swarmer cell-silenced dna replication gene promoters  <cit> . within the rrf of the dnax promoter, a c residue at position - <dig> appears to be involved in the temporal regulation of the gene  <cit> . a substitution of t at this position results in a more than 3-fold increase in transcription and, more importantly, in a loss of swarmer-specific silencing of dnax. additionally it was shown that the rrf motif is bound by an unknown species found in crude extracts  <cit> . the same shift was seen when dna fragments encompassing the - <dig> and - <dig> regions of several different dna-replication genes, including gyrb and dnax, were used as probes in gel-mobility shift assays. it is possible that the binding activity reported here for the gyrb promoter is the same as that observed previously with the rrf motif. if this observed binding activity were responsible for the swarmer cell-specific silencing of gyrb transcription, the one might expect that swarmer cell extracts would be enriched in binding activity. however, we were unable to detect this activity in extracts derived from either isolated swarmer or stalked cells, probably owing to limitations in obtaining a sufficient quantity of material. the relevance of these dna binding activities and a experimental definition of their binding sequences in similarly regulated promoters will need to be explored.

the condensed nature of nucleoids isolated from swarmer cells, relative to stalked cells, when subjected to centrifugation through a sucrose gradient, suggests that the two cell types differ in the proteins that affect the organization and folding of their chromosomes  <cit> . growth-phase dependent variation in the relative composition of the dna-binding protein cadre in e. coli has been documented  <cit> . a similar developmentally-regulated phenomenon might be responsible for silencing gyrb and other genes involved in dna replication in caulobacter swarmer cells. proteins such as hu or h-ns bind dna nonspecifically and have been shown to affect transcription regulation  <cit> . while neither protein binds to a specific sequence on the dna, each has a preference for certain secondary dna structures, including gaps and junctions  and -rich bends . of particular interest, h-ns represses the virf gene by binding to two sites, one overlapping the rnap binding site in the promoter and another  <dig> bp upstream  <cit> . however, repression only occurs at temperatures below 32°c because below this temperature the dna is more intrinsically bent, which allows interaction between h-ns bound at both sites. hu, the most abundant dna-binding protein in bacteria, also regulates transcription. similar to integration host factor, hu is thought to exert its influence by creating a bend in the dna and thus affecting the activity of other, more specific transcription regulators . based on searches of the published genome, we have concluded that c. crescentus does not possess a gene that might encode h-ns, nor does it appear to have a homolog of the closely related gene, stpa  <cit> . c. crescentus, does however, possess genes encoding proteins that are closely homologous to the two subunits of e. coli hu . we suspect that hu is probably not involved in the regulation of the dna replication genes since we have recently found that the abundance of both hu subunits does not change during the course of the cell cycle .

in order to determine whether or not two other well-known dna condensation proteins might affect swarmer-specific transcription, we constructed strains in which smc or dps were disrupted. there is strong evidence that the large bacterial smc protein, very different from the small dna-binding proteins discussed above, is involved in chromosome condensation and partitioning, similar to its eukaryotic homologs  <cit> . a deletion of the gene encoding smc in bacillus subtilis results in a temperature-sensitive strain with visibly decondensed chromosomes and defects in chromosome segregation  <cit> . similar results have also been reported in caulobacter crescentus  <cit> . importantly, however, temporal transcription of gyrb was unchanged in the Δsmc mutant, indicating that smc is not necessary for swarmer-specific transcriptional silencing.

the final target of our studies was the dps protein. in e. coli, dps protects dna during periods of starvation or in stationary phase  <cit> . when bound to dna, dps forms a crystalline structure that is proposed to render the dna physically resistant to oxidative damage as well as degradation by some nucleases  <cit> . dps is also important for induced dna protection during non-stationary phase growth, as dps mutants are more sensitive to hydrogen peroxide  <cit> . the nature of the caulobacter swarmer cell  makes it conceivable that the intracellular environment may be likened to that of a cell in stationary phase or starved for nutrients. thus, perhaps dps plays a different role in caulobacter. supporting this hypothesis, dna microarray experiments have revealed that the dps mrna level is greatest in swarmer cells and then decreases dramatically at the swarmer-to-stalked cell transition  <cit> . a deletion of dps, however, did not have a visible effect on the caulobacter cell cycle. also, similar to the Δsmc strains, the temporal expression pattern of the gyrb promoter was unaffected in the Δdps strain.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, these results show that a core  <dig> bp gyrb promoter sequence is sufficient to confer a cell cycle-regulated pattern of transcription. in vitro assays indicated that gyrb transcription does not require any factors in addition to rnap. thus, the transcription of gyrb is likely to be regulated by a repressor protein in swarmer cells, and not an activator protein. this repressor may be related to the dna binding activity present in crude cell extracts that bound specifically to the gyrb promoter region. deletions in the genes encoding the global dna binding proteins, smc and dps had no effect on viability, growth rate or the temporal transcription pattern of gyrb. thus, the results of this study do not provide definitive support for the idea that dna-binding proteins that alter the global architecture of chromosomal dna are involved in transcriptional repression in the c. crescentus swarmer cell. however, it is possible that the condensation of the swarmer-cell nucleoid is the result of the combined activity of two or more proteins and this may be important in influencing gyrb transcription.

