BACKGROUND
protein-dna recognition plays an essential role in the regulation of gene expression. although a significant number of structures of dna binding proteins have been solved in complex with their dna binding sites increasing our understanding of recognition principles, most of the questions remain unanswered. several studies showed that protein-dna recognition could not be explained by a simple one-to-one correspondence between amino acids and bases  <cit> , even if hypothesized hydrogen bonding patterns and definite preferences have been actually found in experimentally solved structures  <cit> . moreover regulatory proteins are known to recognize specific dna sequences directly through atomic contacts between protein and dna and/or indirectly through water-mediated contacts and conformational changes  <cit> . the degree of redundancy and flexibility seems to suggest that the recognition mechanism is ambiguous, therefore the prediction of dna target sequences is not straightforward  <cit> .

dna protein interactions can be studied using several different computational methods, which could offer several advantages compared to the current experimental methods, more laborious and slow. in the following we will indicate, for simplicity, dna-binding protein target sequences with the more specific term "transcription factor binding sequences", although the first term is more general.

computational tools for the identification of transcription factors  binding sequences can be organized in two main approaches:

• "sequence based methods" in which a central role is played by the statistical properties of the base distribution in the dna regions which are expected to be involved in transcriptional regulation .

• "structure based tools" which use the structural information on protein-dna complexes derived from x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance.

the main focus of this paper is on the second approach, although the best results will likely be obtained by tools able to combine in a clever way these two approaches.

sequence based methods
this type of algorithms can in turn be divided into two broad groups:

i) enumerative methods, which explore all possible motifs up to a certain length .

ii) local search algorithms, including expectation maximization and various flavours of gibbs sampling .

it is important to stress that this type of studies cannot be based exclusively on the statistical features of the dna regions presumably involved in transcriptional regulation, but must be complemented with independent information about gene regulation. in this respect three important sources of information may be used: the functional annotations collected in public databases, gene expression data on a global scale, and the so called 'phylogenetic footprinting'. in particular this last approach, thanks to the increasing number of sequenced genomes, has proved to be very effective in these last few years . the major problem of all these tools is the large number of false positives, above all in the case of higher eukaryotes . it is exactly to cope with this type of problem that it could be important to resort to structure based approaches.

structure based methods
these methods can be broadly divided into two classes according to a nomenclature adopted in the context of protein structure prediction  <cit> :

i) those based on knowledge based potentials ;

ii) those based on physical potentials .

seefs are energy functions derived from a dataset of known protein-dna structures. a set of features is selected ; the process often involves parameter choices, like threshold on distances or interval binning. the statistical properties of these features are compared with a-priori expectations and log-odd scores are derived  <cit> . at the most basic level, structures may be used to define contacts among dna bases and protein amino acids and, for each pair of positions, the occurrences of nucleotides and amino acids contacts are used to derive effective potentials  <cit> . moreover a statistical potential, taking into account contact geometry and spatial arrangement of contacting residues can be derived  <cit> . recently interesting developments of this approach have been proposed . the approach suffers from theoretical and practical problems. from the theoretical point of view potentials of mean force are not in general additive and the exact modelization of a-priori expectations  may be difficult for complex systems . the main practical problem is the requirement of a large number of sequences or binding experimental data since the available data may be biased towards specific classes of protein-dna complexes. moreover datasets generally do not contain unfavourable interactions between amino acids and bases since they entail protein-dna complexes that occur naturally. thus the statistical potential may predict correctly the wild type targets as opposed to incorrect ones, but it may not be as good at distinguishing among mutants.

notwithstanding all caveats usage of seefs are widespread in the field of structural predictions. provided that sufficient data are available these methods are reasonably fast and accurate, as demonstrated for instance in the field of protein structure prediction .

a more radical approach is to estimate the free energy of binding starting directly from the available  protein-dna complexes using physical effective energy functions . this approach has been successfully used in many contexts, ranging from estimation of dna- or protein-ligand binding free energy to estimation of protein-dna binding free energy . there are, however, many problems connected with the approach which are mainly due to:

i) difficulties in estimating entropic effects;

ii) difficulties in properly estimating solvation effects;

no consensus has emerged on the choice of parameters  and on the protocols that should be applied;

iii) difficulties in estimating gas-phase energy with available forcefields which are derived from the analysis of small compounds at equilibrium and do not take into account electrostatic polarization.

in order to get rid as far as possible of all these problems, binding free energies are expressed relative to a reference system and in most computational studies optimal parameters have been chosen for matching experimental data.

as far as protein-dna complexes are concerned attempts to compute binding free energies using physics based approaches have started in the 1990s. the electrostatic component of the binding free energy has been studied according to continuum methods and its dependence on temperature and salt concentration has been computed  <cit> . integration of electrostatics with other components including dna conformational free energy has been extended from dna-ligand complexes  <cit>  and protein-peptide complexes  <cit>  to protein-dna complexes  <cit> . recently wojciechowski et al.  <cit>  studied the complex of telomerase end binding protein with single stranded dna optimizing the weights of different contributions in order to reproduce binding data. the availability of the successful analytical generalized born model treatment of electrostatics solvation effects enabled computation of binding energies with hybrid molecular mechanics/generalized born surface accessibility methods by jayaram et al.  <cit> . the group of kollman developed the molecular mechanics/poisson boltzmann surface accessibility  methodology and applied it extensively to biomolecular systems .

however, when mm/gbsa or mm/pbsa energy versus time plots are presented for explicit solvent molecular dynamics simulation snapshots, fluctuations in the range of tens to hundreds of kcal/mol are found, thus posing an issue on the reliability of averages. in this respect seefs appear much more robust energy estimation methods.

in a few very recent reports interesting results have been reported concerning the capability of hybrid methods to predict protein-dna binding sites  <cit> . in this paper we focus on the application of peefs to a single dna binding protein in complex with many different dna sequences.

the availability of high resolution x-ray crystal structure  <cit>  and suitable experimental data makes the λ repressor-operator complex an interesting system for computational analysis of protein-dna interaction. the bacteriophage λ repressor protein is a small,  <dig> amino acid, protein that binds the dna as a dimer. each monomer binds to an operator half site. the amino-terminal domain of λ repressor is responsible for dna binding and the carboxy-terminal domain is primarily responsible for dimerization  <cit> . each monomer contains a typical helix-turn-helix motif found in a variety of dna binding proteins  <cit> . the free energy of binding of λ repressor for wild-type or <dig> operator dna and of all possible single base-pair substitutions within the operator have been experimentally measured using the filter binding assay technique and changes in the free energy of binding caused by the mutations have been determined  <cit> . besides being a perfect playground to test our methods, the so called "λ-switch" in which the λ repressor is involved is very interesting in itself . this "genetic" switch is tightly regulated by the λ repressor and the cro proteins. in these last years this system, due to its relative simplicity and to the availability of rather precise experimental data attracted a lot of interest and various models  have been proposed to describe its behaviour. despite these efforts in all these models there are still a few open problems which need to be understood. in particular it has been recently realized that in order to ensure the remarkable stability of the λ switch one should require a very high non-specific affinity both for the λ repressor and for cro  <cit> . such a prediction is very difficult to test experimentally but could rather directly be evaluated with the tools which we shall discuss in this paper. in fact one of the main goal of the test which we shall perform on the λ repressor will be the evaluation of its non-specific binding energy and the comparison with the prediction of the model discussed in  <cit> .

in the present work we apply different techniques to evaluate the binding affinities by means of computational methods. it is assumed that the relative free energy of binding of a protein to different dna sequences may be expressed as the sum of a molecular mechanical term, that includes the non-bonded electrostatic and van der waals contributions, and a hydration term that can be further split in a polar and a hydrophobic contribution. due to the peculiar nature of hydrogen bonds similar alternative models are tested where an energy term proportional to the number of hydrogen bonds is added.

the systems studied here differ only in one or two base-pairs and therefore the inaccuracies implicit in the assumption of rigid docking, of the solvation model, of the treatment of entropy and in lack of a complete conformational search for side chains at protein-dna interface should mostly cancel out in comparison. the aims of this paper are:

1) to provide an assessment of the accuracy of different methods and protocols by comparison with experimental data;

2) to provide a reliable estimate of non-specific binding energies;

3) to propose a protocol for the prediction of dna-binding target sequences which makes no use of sequence information.

to pursue these objectives we make use of extensive computations and address several specific issues. in particular:

i) we estimate optimal weights for different contributions to dna-protein binding free energies using different solvation models;

ii) for  <dig> single base-pair mutants we perform  <dig> ns molecular dynamics  runs and we assess the effect of md on the computed binding energies;

iii) we compute mm/gbsa binding energies for one thousand complexes where the bases of the double stranded dna are substituted according to randomly generated dna sequences in order to estimate non-specific binding free energy;

iv) we scan the entire bacteriophage λ genome with the scoring profiles obtained from free energy computations. one of the profiles is obtained making use only of the structural data available for a single molecular complex, with no sequence information.

the statistical analysis of the results show that computational methods may offer a predictive tool truly complementary to sequence-based identification of dna-binding protein target sequences. this is particularly important in view of the emergence of consensus protocols where the independence of the different methods is a prerequisite.

RESULTS
binding free energy changes between the λ repressor dimer and the dna operator mutants have been calculated using different methodologies, as described in the methods section.

mm/dddc-oons
we calculated the binding free energy between the λ repressor dimer and the dna operators, after having energy-minimized every complex using a distance dependent dielectric constant . the interaction energy between the protein and the dna, Δu, has been evaluated using four values for ε  then the solvation term Δgsolv has been determined according to the model of oobatake et al.  <cit>  using eq.  <dig>  the best scaling factors have been determined  fitting the set of experimentally measured protein-dna binding affinities and are reported in table  <dig>  the addition of a specific hydrogen bond term reduces the coefficients of the electrostatic term. the rmsd and the correlation coefficient r have been computed and a leave-one-out scheme has been adopted, in order to verify the performance of the model . the same analysis has been performed for  <dig> replicas of the dataset with one third of the set left out and used for cross-validation. the average rmsd and correlation are essentially the same reported for the leave-one-out scheme reported in table  <dig>  from the same analysis variances of the coefficients have been estimated with essentially the same results as those reported in table  <dig> 

the best correlation coefficient  model) has been obtained for ε = 4r, although values of ε = 2r and ε = 8r gave very similar results for both mm/dddc-oons and mm/dddc-oons models. except for the mm/dddc-oons model with ε = 1r, the f-statistic shows that the model is significant . the dielectric constant ε = 1r, which gives the worst results tends in many cases to overestimate binding free energy changes lower than  <dig>  kcal/mol whereas binding free energy changes greater than  <dig> kcal/mol are underestimated. a similar behaviour has been observed for ε = 2r, 4r, 8r, even if these models are able to better reproduce binding free energy changes, in particular improvements have been obtained for values lower than  <dig>  kcal/mol . the analysis of the best scaling coefficients is not straightforward because there is a strong correlation between the energy terms. for instance, for all ε models the electrostatic term is strongly anticorrelated with the oons solvation term.

moreover the estimated variance of coefficients is often very large. notwithstanding these difficulties it is worth noting that some terms appear to be particularly important. for instance each protein-dna hydrogen bond  appears to contribute - <dig>  to - <dig>  kcal/mol, depending on the electrostatic model assumed.

as expected the electrostatic term is reduced when hydrogen bonds are taken into account separately. for ε = 2r the best scaling coefficient xdddc changes from  <dig>  to  <dig>  upon removal of the term proportional to the number of hydrogen bonds.

the correlation between the different contributions is reflected in the changes, with changing dielectric model, of the oons term scaling factor, which is always strongly reduced by the scaling factor ranging from  <dig>  to - <dig> . finally the constant term which takes into account common entropic terms  and the free energy of binding of the reference complex , expected to be in the range of  <dig> to  <dig> kcal/mol, is slightly larger than expected.

mm/dddc-hp
the oons solvation term is accounting for both apolar and electrostatic solvation terms which should be already taken into account, at least partly, in the distance dependent dielectric constant. the same calculations described above have been performed using a similar approach in which the solvation term of the binding free energy is taken to be proportional to the polar/apolar accessible surface area of the molecule . the best scaling factors have been determined fitting the set of experimentally measured protein-dna binding affinities . the quality of the computed binding free energies Δgcalc has been assessed evaluating the linear correlation coefficient r and the root mean square deviation  between calculated and experimental values. in order to verify the performance of the model, a leave-one-out scheme has been adopted . the f-statistic shows that the model is significant .

all the values of the distance dependent dielectric constant which have been tested gave a quite high and similar linear correlation coefficient. the highest correlation value  was obtained for ε = 2r for the mm/gbsa model and the lowest ones for ε = 1r similar to the mm/dddc-oons model. generally, binding free energy changes lower than  <dig>  kcal/mol are overestimated whereas binding free energy changes greater than  <dig> kcal/mol are underestimated in all the cases. more accurate predictions have been obtained for ε = 2r, in particular for values lower than  <dig>  kcal/mol .

the optimal scaling coefficients are in the expected range , in particular for ε = 2r, 4r, 8r the constant term xconst is in the range 10– <dig> kcal/mol, moreover the coefficients xh and xp have the right order of magnitude of typically used surface tension coefficients for water biomolecular interface, even if the sign is incorrect. it should be noted however that there is a strong correlation  between the coefficients of most terms and the coefficient of the constant term.

also for the present model the addition of an explicit hydrogen bond term reduces the coefficient of the electrostatic term as could be expected.

these results support the conclusion that, in general, there is no advantage in using the detailed solvation models compared to the simpler polar/apolar model, as far as the binding free energy is concerned. based on the range of the scaling coefficients the two models appear of similar quality. scaled free energy components for the mm/dddc-hp model are reported in table  <dig> 

mm/gbsa
in this approach all structures have been energy-minimized using the generalized born solvent model, then the binding free energy for every molecule has been calculated according to the mm/gbsa model using the eq.  <dig>  as in the previous cases, we determined the best scaling factors  fitting the set of experimentally measured protein-dna binding affinities , then we assessed the quality of Δgcalc predictions evaluating the linear correlation coefficient r and the root mean square deviation  between calculated and experimental values. finally we verified the performance of the model, using the leave-one-out scheme . the same analysis has been performed for  <dig> replicas of the dataset with one third of the set left out and used for cross-validation. the average rmsd and correlation are essentially the same reported for the leave-one-out scheme reported in table  <dig>  the standard deviations of the coefficients are essentially the same as reported in table  <dig>  our calculation shows that the mm/gbsa model gives the best performances , although the linear correlation coefficient between calculated and experimental values differs slightly from the best values obtained from the other models. the f-statistic shows that the model is significant . computed values versus experimental data are reported in figure  <dig>  as far as the scaling coefficients are concerned , it is worth noting that addition of an explicit hydrogen bond term has a dramatic effect on the coefficients of van der waals and electrostatic terms, as could be expected, because the latter terms already take into account hydrogen bond energetics. for the mm/gbsa model  the coefficients of the electrostatic and gb solvation terms are  <dig>  and  <dig>  which correspond to a dielectric constant of ~ <dig>  surface tension coefficients xp and xh  have the same order of magnitude of the commonly used surface tension coefficient , but opposite sign. however the terms proportional to the solvent accessible surface area are strongly correlated to each other and to the constant term.

the constant term is - <dig>  kcal/mol, lower than what expected, probably as a consequence of the correlation of this term with the polar and hydrophobic surface area terms . the standard deviation of this term is however very large .

scaled free energy components for the mm/gbsa model are reported in table  <dig> 

the analysis of table  <dig> shows that the most important feature for computing the binding free energy is the number of intermolecular hydrogen bonds. the correlation of the associated energy term with the experimental free energy of binding is  <dig> . other terms are strongly correlated among each other and therefore it is difficult to single out specific contributions. the correlation between different energetic terms range from - <dig> , for gb solvation energy and coulombic energy, to  <dig> , for gb solvation energy and polar area burial energy term.

 <dig> single base-pair mutants exhibit large  unfavourable free energy of binding.
loss of hydrogen bonds contributes for  <dig> or  <dig>  kcal/mol for mutants 14cg, 8at, 8gc, 9at, 18at, 12ta, 12gc, while for other mutants the most important unfavourable contributions come mostly from coulombic and van der waals terms. it should be noted, however, that solvation terms are correlated with coulombic and van der waals terms.

this analysis is in general in line with the detailed analysis reported by oobatake et al.  <cit> , although the exact values of energy contributions differ.

analysis of molecular dynamics trajectories
the procedure used for computing binding energies may suffer from incomplete relaxation and incomplete conformational sampling. an approach that has been used in the past for sampling more conformations and reduce the effect of fluctuations is to analyse snapshots from molecular dynamics runs. in many studies no scaling factor was applied at all, with good results.

we performed  <dig> ns of md simulations for every structure in order to test the effectiveness of a first principles computation of binding free energies and to check the effect of molecular dynamics relaxation on the computed energies. we calculated the average value of every component of the binding free energy using snapshots taken every  <dig> ps, then we used the same set of fitting equations using average values to determine the best scaling factors. we chose to use the mm/gbsa model for computing binding free energies because it gave good results on the starting structures and the coefficients can be used to monitor the quality of the fitting. figure  <dig> the quality of the computed binding free energies Δgcalc has been assessed evaluating the linear correlation coefficient r and the root mean square deviation  between calculated and experimental values . results show that md simulations do not improve the prediction capabilities of the model. actually the linear correlation coefficient calculated averaging over  <dig>  ns is  <dig> , much lower than the correlation at t =  <dig>  ns. results obtained averaging over the time interval  <dig> – <dig>  ns, gave a linear correlation coefficient comparable to what obtained with other models on the starting structures  but lower than the linear correlation coefficient obtained at t =  <dig>  ns. the linear correlation coefficient between experimental values and the results obtained averaging over the time interval  <dig> – <dig>  ns, is r =  <dig> , indicating that md causes the loss of any correlation.

moreover optimal scaling factors obtained averaging over the time interval  <dig> – <dig>  ns have the tendency to lose any physical meaning . when optimal scaling factors obtained on the starting structure are used to compute binding free energies using average values, no correlation is detectable with experimental data. the value of the binding free energy change of every complex across  <dig> ns of simulation has been observed to strongly fluctuate, making it difficult to obtain an accurate estimate of it.

in order to verify whether this problem could have been circumvented using a larger conformational sampling, the simulations of  <dig> mutants have been extended to  <dig> ns, obtaining a total of  <dig> snapshots for every simulation. in particular we extended the simulations of the wild type complex and the best and the worst mutants  with negative results. although the system is most probably not fully equilibrated, it is reasonable to suspect that even longer  molecular dynamics simulations will not improve the results obtainable on the starting structures. the main reasons of failure of this approach are probably the large conformational fluctuations developing in md simulations and the combination of relatively short molecular dynamics simulations with snapshots energy evaluation using the mm/gbsa continuum model. large conformational fluctuations observed in md simulations are reflected in energetic fluctuations in the range of tens of kcal/mol, thus posing an issue on the reliability of the free energy average values. moreover, since we observed that the results could not be improved extending the simulation time, it is reasonable to ascribe the failure of the method, at least partially, to inaccuracies in the force field parametrization. actually, all force fields are based on numerous approximations, in particular nucleic acid force fields could suffer from two main problems which could give rise to inaccuracies. the first is that the target experimental data used in the optimization process are typically crystal structures of dna and rna. however, the presence of the lattice environment in crystals is known to influence the structure of dna, limiting the transferability of crystal data to solution. the second is the treatment of electrostatics which is crucial in these simulations, given the polyanionic nature of dna. in particular, the electrostatic polarization, which is an effect that can significantly reduce electrostatic interactions of partial atomic charges, is very important for accurate treatment of interactions in different environments, since significant structural changes of dna may occur in response to environment.

correct predictions
molecular dynamics trajectories were analysed similarly, using average values for the different contributions to the free energy of binding. in particular the lowest number of correct predictions has been obtained averaging over the time interval  <dig> – <dig>  ns, actually there is no cases in which both Δgexp and Δgcalc are < <dig>  kcal/mol and the number of cases in which Δgexp and Δgcalc are separated by less than  <dig>  kcal/mol has been strongly reduced.

generally, we observed that the number of cases in which Δgexp and Δgcalc are both < <dig>  kcal/mol decreases while the number of cases in which Δgexp and Δgcalc are both >  <dig>  kcal/mol remains nearly constant; however at the same time the number of cases in which Δgexp and Δgcalc are separated by less than  <dig>  kcal/mol strongly decreases, indicating that there is a reduction of the accuracy in reproducing experimental binding energies. overall this analysis is consistent with the analyses reported in the previous sections.

validation of the mm/gbsa model using the cro-or <dig> complex
the optimal scaling coefficients are likely to depend on the complex and mutants studied. in order to verify that such coefficients do not produce wild results when applied on different complexes with similar binding features we considered the cro or <dig> complexes which was obtained from crystallographic structure  after mutation of  <dig> bases. the cro protein belongs to the same family of λ repressor but to a different domain, according to scop classification  <cit>  and it has very limited similarity with λ repressor although they bind dna in a similar fashion. this system is therefore suited for testing the overall quality of the scaling procedure. also for cro a set of measurements for each mutant of the or <dig> sequence is available  <cit> . when all contributions to the binding free energy, computed according to the mm/gbsa model, are scaled by the coefficients determined on the λ repressor complexes the computed energies show a remarkable correlation coefficient of  <dig>  with the experimental values, although the binding energies are overestimated by approximately  <dig> kcal/mol. this fact could reflect differences in the entropic contribution to binding  that are likely to be different for the two systems. indeed, the crystallized cro protein is roughly only two thirds of the repressor sequence. notwithstanding the differences in overall binding energy, the binding differences for the mutants are on average reproduced by the energetic model.

as a further test, we performed the reverse analysis where the scaling coefficients are obtained on the cro-or <dig> complex and validated on the λ repressor-operator complex. also in this case the computed energies show a remarkable correlation coefficient of  <dig>  with the experimental values, although they are all underestimated by approximately  <dig> kcal/mol.

in order to verify how sensitive the scaling coefficients are to the experimental data used in the fit, we calculated the binding free energies of cro and each mutant of the or <dig> sequence according to the mm/gbsa model, using eq.  <dig>  finally we combined the two experimental datasets of λ repressor and cro and we refitted the model.

as in the previous cases, we calculated the best scaling factors fitting the set of experimentally measured protein-dna binding affinities , then we assessed the quality of Δgcalc predictions evaluating the linear correlation coefficient r and the root mean square deviation between calculated and experimental values. finally we verified the performance of the model, using the leave-one-out scheme. the best performance has been obtained for the mm/gbsa model, which gives a correlation coefficient r of  <dig>  and a rmsd of  <dig>  for cro and a correlation coefficient r of  <dig>  and a rmsd of  <dig>  for the two combined systems. the same analysis has been performed for  <dig> replicas of the dataset with one third of the set left out and used for cross-validation. the average rmsd and correlation are essentially the same reported for the leave-one-out scheme. from the same analysis variances of the coefficients have been estimated with essentially the same results as those reported in table  <dig>  as far as the scaling coefficients are concerned , by comparing the results obtained for λ, cro and the two combined systems, we can observe that the sets of values obtained for λ and λ + cro are all in the same range except for the constant term, probably as a consequence of the fact that the entropic contribution to binding are likely different for the two systems. however it is worth noting that the standard deviation of this term is very large in both cases. as far as the scaling coefficients obtained for cro, they are rather different from the others, except for xvdw and xhb, which scale the van der waals and h-bonds contributions respectively. however we observed that the electrostatic and gb solvation terms are strongly correlated to each other , as well as the constant term and the polar and hydrophobic surface area terms . the standard deviation of the constant term is also very large . overall these results validate the approach for predicting binding free energies for similar protein-dna complexes.

analysis of non-specific protein-dna binding
in order to study non-specific protein-dna binding one thousand random dna sequences have been generated and each sequence has been threaded onto the dna phosphate backbone of the crystal structure in order to obtain a set of structural models with new dna sequences. minimization was performed according to the protocol described in the methods section. we refer to to this set of complexes as to the "non-specific" set.

binding free energies for each member of the generated non-specific set have been computed according to the mm/gbsa model, using the optimal scaling factors determined by fitting the  <dig> experimental data .

we calculated the z-scores of both the random structures and the single base-pair mutants, i.e. the distribution of the difference between the binding free energy of a complex and the average energy of the non-specific set, normalized by the standard deviation of the computed energies. z-scores represent the specificity of a complex, with larger negative values corresponding to higher specificity. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of computed energies. the distribution of the z-scores of the single base-pair mutant complexes, is found at the negative tail of the non-specific distribution, indicating that these complexes are more stable than the complexes formed with a dna random sequence, as one expects. the computed energies have an average difference of  <dig>  kcal/mol and a standard deviation of  <dig>  kcal/mol, giving thus an average z-score for the single base-pair mutants of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the lowest computed energy in the set. the average non-specific binding energy seems surprisingly low  but, remarkably enough, it agrees within the errors with the value proposed in  <cit>  as a way to explain the impressive stability of the λ-switch.

it is interesting to compare the computed free energies of binding for the non-specific dna complexes with those expected based on single mutants binding energies under the assumption of additivity. the expected free energies are higher than those computed by optimal scaling of contributions. the average difference, with respect to the specifically bound sequence, are  <dig>  kcal/mol and  <dig>  kcal/mol, respectively. this has been interpreted as a consequence of the fact that adjacent multiple substitutions may introduce additional energy minima compared to single mutations in a tight complex. this result is in line with the saturation effect in observed vs. predicted binding energy that has been described by stormo and co-workers  <cit>  and recently experimentally demonstrated  <cit> . it is also interesting to note that the non-specific binding energy is comparable to the energy computed by northrup and co-workers for loosely docked complex of cro to non-cognate dna  <cit> , which implies that the mode of binding may substantially change for non-specifically bound dna sequences. this would be consistent with the capability of the protein of sliding along dna, which would not be feasible for a tight complex.

identification of putative transcription factor binding sites
the aim of this section is to understand whether the methods described here can be used for searching genomes for candidate transcription factor binding sites.

in particular we aim at verifying:

i) whether the mm/gbsa model is able to identify transcription factor binding sites in the absence of thermodynamic data about single base-pair mutants, but just knowing the recognized sequence;

ii) whether some predictions can still be afforded in the absence of thermodynamic data and of any information on recognized sequences. the latter situation could be encountered when a model of the complex is built by homology and differences in protein dna-contacting residues imply a different specificity.

identification of putative transcription factor binding sites knowing the bound sequence
the analysis in the previous section used knowledge about single base-pair mutants which is rarely available. here we ask what predictions can be made when no thermodynamic data on mutants or wild-type sequence binding is available, but the cognate sequence is available. one thousand random dna sequences were generated and the corresponding structural models were built by performing mutations on the double stranded dna in the complex crystal structure using the program whatif  <cit> . structures were energy minimized using the same protocol used for the mm/gbsa methodology. assuming that random sequences will have a larger free energy of binding compared to the bound sequence, optimal scaling parameters were sought in order to make the free energy difference in binding with respect to the naturally occurring complex equal to  <dig>  kcal/mol. this value is arbitrary, albeit not unrealistic. eq.  <dig> is solved  subtracting the row corresponding to the wild-type complex from all other rows, and fixing all the energy differences equal  <dig> . the differences in coulombic, van der waals, gb solvation energy, polar and apolar surface area and number of hydrogen bonds, with respect to wild-type complex, have been tabulated and the optimal scaling parameters have been determined.

the free energies computed on the random sequences have been used to compute single base-pair mutant free energies as described in the methods section. the single base-pair mutant energies for the wild type sequence have been reset to  <dig>   and the lowest computed single base-pair mutant binding energy has been subtracted from all other values.

the plot of computed single base-pair mutant energies vs. experimental energies  shows a good correlation  but seems insufficient for predictive purposes. however, when the bacteriophage λ genome is scanned using the corresponding free energy matrix , high-affinity binding sites are correctly recognized, and in general the energies computed using the matrix and those predicted based on addition of single base-pair mutation effects are well correlated .

we asked what is the advantage of such computation compared to the simpler model that assigns a constant energy penalty to each mutation over the specific bound sequence. in such case the correlation between the computed and reference binding energies is slightly lower, but still significant . the advantage of using computational results over a much simpler single parameter approach seems therefore very limited, although the 1% best sites predicted by the mm/gbsa energy and the simple mutation models display only 15% common sites, proving that the two methods are largely uncorrelated.

identification of putative transcription factor binding sites without knowing the bound sequence
as a last test we simulate a realistic situation in which no thermodynamic data or information on the recognized sequences are available. we considered the set of one thousand random dna sequences and the corresponding structural models built by performing mutations on the double stranded dna in the complex crystal structure as the only information available. obviously the crystallographic complex does contain information on the specific sequence because protein and dna conformations are fitting each other in the complex. if non-specific complexes were to be built by homology without knowing the exact dna sequence bound, it is likely that side chains would be placed differently with different results. finally, structures were energy minimized using the same protocol used for the mm/gbsa methodology. as in the tests above we found optimal scaling factors in order to make all  binding free energies equal to  <dig>  kcal/mol.

in order to avoid a trivial solution to the fitting problem with all coefficients equal  <dig>  except the constant term equal  <dig> , we follow a two-step procedure. in the first step we assume a reasonable value  for the constant term which must be brought to the left-hand side of eq.  <dig>  coulombic, van der waals, gb solvation energy, polar and apolar surface area and number of hydrogen bonds have been evaluated, eq.  <dig> is then solved  and the optimal scaling parameters have been determined. the lowest binding energy sequence according to the scaling parameters is determined. the row corresponding to this complex is subtracted from all other rows thus removing the constant term. in the second step the newly obtained matrix, which does not include the constant term anymore is used to find the best coefficients to make all the energy differences equal  <dig>  kcal/mol. therefore all energies are expressed relative to the lowest computed energy at the first step.

the free energies computed on the random sequences have been used to compute single base-pair mutant free energies as described in the methods section. at variance with the test performed above we do not set to  <dig>  the energies of specific bound sequence . the correlation coefficient between computed and experimental energies  for the bacteriophage λ genome is  <dig>  .

as a further test of the performance of the approach we generated the logo  <cit>  of the  <dig> best binding sequences according to the thermodynamic data on single base-pair mutants and those found with the present approach . an overall agreement between the two logos is apparent.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present work physical effective energy functions are used to estimate the free energy of binding of λ repressor to the dna operator and single base-pair mutants, for which thermodynamic data are available. thermodynamic data allow one to study the best results achievable, with the modeling approach and energy functions presented here, with models that assume that the binding energy is a linear combination of different contributions.

simple models that use a distance dependent dielectric constant and simple terms for surface area proportional energy contributions and for hydrogen bonding perform surprisingly well for values of ε ranging from 2r to 8r.

a two-parameter model for surface area proportional energy contributions performs better than the more complex model of oobatake et al.  <cit> , which was however not derived for usage in the more complex energy functions employed here.

the performance of mm/gbsa and to a lesser extent mm/gbsa model is comparable to or superior to other models. a conclusion for the mm/gbsa model is that electrostatic energies should be reduced by a proper scaling factor corresponding to dielectric constants in the range of  <dig>  this conclusion is reached also by a similar analysis of protein cro-operator mutants.

the effect of molecular dynamics on the computed binding free energies is in general negative and the reproducibility of the experimental values decreases with the increase of simulation time considered. this may be a consequence of the large fluctuations developing in md simulations which probably would require a much longer simulation time. moreover it is reasonable to take into account that the poor performance of the method can be partially caused by the errors in the force field used in md simulations. another plausible source of inaccuracy is the mismatch between the energy model and system representation used in md simulation and those used for minimization and energy evaluation. it appears therefore that it is worth to invest more time in optimizing the starting structure, rather than for sampling the conformational space by molecular dynamics simulations, or, alternatively, to adopt different strategies for sampling protein and dna flexibility  <cit> .

the analysis of non-specific complexes using the best performing energetic model with properly scaled coefficients allows to evaluate a non-specific binding energy difference, with respect to the specific bound sequence, of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  kcal/mol, definitely lower than what expected based on an additive model . this result is in line with the saturation effect described by stormo and co-workers  <cit>  and with the theoretical analysis of bakk and melzer  <cit> .

although the results presented on single base-pair mutants are not exciting, using computational methods may be very useful for identifying transcription factor binding sites.

when no thermodynamic data are available but the specific bound sequence is known the computed mm/gbsa free energies are slightly more predictive than a simple substitution profile which assigns a penalty for any point mutation.

the most interesting test performed here considers a realistic scenario where no information on the bound sequence is available. even in this case mm/gbsa energies are predictive.

this result has important consequences for the prediction of transcription factor binding sites which often use consensus methods. a prerequisite for the usefulness of consensus methods is that these are as independent of each other as possible. since most methods use common prior knowledge and often related statistical methods, independence is not guaranteed. methods which are based on completely independent principles, like those based on physical effective energy functions and free energy computations, offer a completely complementary methodology for deriving profile matrices for scanning entire genomes. the results reported here, with much caution because the structural model for the specific bound sequence is known and not modeled by homology or other methods, support usage of these methods for the identification of dna-binding protein target sequences. in view of the very recent impressive results reported by the group of baker  <cit>  it is apparent that significant improvements to the approach described in this paper may be obtained by extensive refinement and screening of protein side chain conformation at protein-dna interface.

