BACKGROUND
from the primary visual cortex , neurons acquire sensitivity and selectivity for orientation, motion direction and other visual features as emergent properties  <cit> . in the cat, more than 90% of v <dig> neurons are well tuned to stimulus orientation  <cit> . such orientation selectivity is generally considered a fairly "hard-wired" property acquired before or at the time of eye opening and maintained by patterned visual experience  <cit> . however, it was reported in the adult cat that v <dig> neurons could temporarily shift their preferred orientation following prolonged exposure  to a non-preferred orientation  <cit>  – but see  <cit> . plasticity in cat v <dig> was also reported for adaptation to spatial and temporal frequency  <cit>  suggesting that it might be a general property at this level of sensory information processing. in mammalian cortex, tuning properties were also shown to change following adaptation to speed  <cit>  and motion direction in mt  <cit>  and v <dig>  <cit> . in the present study, we took advantage of this phenomenon to examine how orientation tuning plasticity is related to time-correlated activity in v <dig> neuron pairs.

relatively small receptive fields make cells respond to an object's local features, and these individual responses require spatial binding across cortical and visual space as well as binding across types of features  <cit> . this issue is of particular importance for contour integration, a process that is thought to be mediated by neuronal synchrony  <cit>  – but see  <cit> . theoretical studies suggest that the precise synchronization of action potentials represents a potential mechanism for binding  <cit> . consistent with these theoretical considerations, a body of experimental studies showed that synchronous neural activity is correlated with stimulus properties like coherent motion and similarity  <cit> . furthermore, synchrony was reported to be strong between cells with similar feature selectivity  <cit> , due in part to specific horizontal connections between cortical domains having similar tuning properties  <cit> .

the experiments we report here examine the issue of neural synchrony and its relationship to neurons' tuning properties. to obtain a dynamic view of this relationship, adaptation-induced plasticity was used as a means of producing transient changes of preferred orientation difference among v <dig> neuron pairs. precise synchronization between neurons has been expected to dynamically reflect functional similarity of neuronal responses, that is, the closer the tuning properties become following adaptation, the stronger the synchrony. we first examined the result of our adaptation protocol. we then looked at how pairwise synchronization is modulated during adaptation-induced plasticity of orientation tuning.

RESULTS
we carried out pairwise recordings of multi-unit activity in the anesthetized cat's area  <dig> . an adaptation protocol consisting in the prolonged presentation of a non-preferred stimulus was applied in order to induce a transient plasticity of the neurons' orientation tuning properties. first, we measured the orientation tuning curve of  <dig> neurons before and following adaptation, and after a 60-minute period of recovery from adaptation. we then formed neuron pairs and measured the temporal correlation between their spike trains prior to and after adaptation-induced plasticity.

adaptation-induced plasticity
in order to determine the plasticity of orientation tuning in our cell population , curve fits were generated for all cells. the sample size  corresponds to the  <dig> cells that were recorded minus  <dig> neurons for which we could not obtain a satisfactory curve fit before and after adaptation. in our sample fits accounted for 90% of the variance in the data across conditions.

the majority of cells  displayed a shift in orientation preference. among those cells, 88%  showed a significant shift. the scatter plot of figure 2a shows on a cell-by-cell basis the distribution of shifts as a function of the difference between the cells initial preferred orientation and the adapter. attractive shifts were observed more frequently than repulsive shifts . the mean attractive shift was  <dig> ° ±  <dig> ° while repulsive shifts averaged  <dig> ° ±  <dig> ° . in this study, adaptation-induced shifts occurred more frequently for small absolute differences  between the cell's preferred and adapting orientations, as previously observed  <cit> . despite the fact that curve fitting method confers precise preferred orientation in a tuning curve, there is no significant difference in mean shift amplitudes when compared to values obtained from raw tuning curves . in our sample, neurons were strongly tuned for orientation as revealed by an orientation selectivity index close to  <dig> . adaptation had no effect on orientation tuning strength. the osi was almost unchanged after shifts in preferred orientation . in figure 2b, we investigated the potential relationship between the signal-to-noise ratio  of the spike waveforms and the shift direction and magnitude. indeed, the waveforms of cells displaying shifts could be noisier  and thus lead to lower s/n ratios. conversely, cells exhibiting more stable waveforms would show shifts with smaller amplitudes or even no changes in preferred orientation. irrespective of the direction of shifts or their magnitude, the s/n ratios are randomly distributed . this distribution indicates that s/n ratios and shifts in orientation preference are unrelated in the present investigation . the modulation of mean firing rates for the cell population that displayed a shift in preferred orientation is shown in figure 2c . attractive and repulsive shifts were pooled together to evaluate the increase of response for the new preferred orientation. a significant decrease of responses is observed for the initial preferred orientation after adaptation . simultaneously, a significant increase of the response occurs for the newly acquired preferred orientation . however, modulation of responses after adaptation appears to be limited to stimuli around the cells' optimal orientation since there is no significant change in far flank orientations .

synchrony modulation through adaptation
the schematic example of raw tuning curves in figure 3a illustrates the data points that were used to construct the cross-correlation histograms . we focused our analyses on two cases: when the cells of a pair responded to their respective initial preferred orientation , and when they responded to an adapting orientation that was common to both cells. it should be emphasized that cells may differ in their preferred orientation, but for each experiment, there was only one adapting orientation. cchs were generated for each cell's preferred orientation and for the adapting orientation, derived from the raw tuning curves.

to examine the effect of adaptation on pairwise correlated activity, the synchronization index  was measured before and following adaptation, and after a 60-minute period of recovery from adaptation. because the experiments were aimed at measuring the modulation of synchrony in relation to the preferred orientation difference, neuron pairs were selected with respect to two criteria. a pair was kept for analysis if  it had a significant si in at least one condition, and  at least one cell of the pair displayed an adaptation-induced shift in orientation preference on the raw tuning curves. consequently, from the  <dig> pairs  that were recorded, we selected  <dig> pairs  for further analyses. among those  <dig> pairs,  <dig> comprised cells having different initial preferred orientations for which sis were computed for each cell's preferred orientation . the remaining  <dig> pairs had identical orientation preference, yielding  <dig> si values. altogether, our population amounted to  <dig> values of si for the initial preferred orientation, and  <dig> for the adapting orientation.

figures 3b, c and 3d display examples of cchs for  <dig> neuron pairs showing preferred orientation differences of 0°, 45° and 90°, respectively, prior to adaptation . cells sharing identical orientation preference displayed a large zero lag peak  in the cch, and the si value reached  <dig>  . in a second example, the preferred orientation difference between the two cells was approximately 45° . in that case, the cch zero lag peak was smaller, and the si value was  <dig> . the cch of a pair whose preferred orientation difference was large yielded a non-significant zero lag peak, and the si value was  <dig>  . in addition, we verified that preferred orientation differences obtained from curve fits approximations agreed with the direct measurements from raw tuning curves prior to and after adaptation. overall, there is only a weak discrepancy in mean preferred orientation differences using one method or the other . thus, orientation differences between raw tuning curves are purposely illustrated in the cchs examples.

to ascertain that the synchronization index we used does not vary with firing rates, we investigated the relationship between firing rate and synchrony strength, before and after adaptation . at the population level the mean firing rate of neuron pairs responding to their initial preferred orientations was  <dig>  hz ±  <dig> . in control conditions, si values are unrelated to the discharges of cells at preferred orientations . following adaptation, there is a weak positive relationship between firing rate and synchrony . however, there was no significant difference between the two regressions . overall, firing rates did not affect the si in a significant way, as expected from previous studies  <cit>  – but see  <cit> .

preferred orientation difference and synchrony
the data presented in figure  <dig> was further analyzed to investigate the relation between pairwise synchrony and the adaptation-induced changes of preferred orientation difference in cell pairs derived from the curves fit approximations . using curve fits in this analysis gave us the opportunity to evaluate the effect of the adaptation on tuning properties as a continuous function of synchrony strength, rather than arbitrary classification . nevertheless, it must be emphasized that synchrony values were calculated from raw tuning curves for which exact spike numbers are known. the adaptation protocol had  <dig> effects on the preferred orientation difference  between neurons. in most cases, the preferred orientation difference increased, one cell shifting away from the other one as illustrated in figure 1b and 1f. on the other hand, the preferred orientation difference decreased in a significant proportion of cases as well , as illustrated in figure 1a and 1e.

the low level of synchronization would be associated to the initial preferred orientation difference, and the higher one would be associated to the newly acquired, smaller preferred orientation difference. in the absence of recovery, the high level of pairwise synchrony that was observed after adaptation was expected to persist. in figure  <dig>  this would correspond to a first group  with both controls  and the  <dig> min when recovery occurred, and a second group  with both adaptations  and the  <dig> min after adaptation when recovery failed to occur. to verify our hypotheses, we tested with a nested anova  the difference of the means between the  <dig> groups , and  the difference of the means within each group . our results show that when the pairs displayed a full recovery, the mean si showed a strong and significant increase after adaptation, and returned to control level. on the other hand, when pairs failed to recover their initial preferred orientation difference, their synchrony increased after adaptation as well but remained high  <dig> minutes afterwards. we conclude that there is a strong relationship between synchrony level and preferred orientation difference in neuron pairs, and that such a relationship is reflected by the effect of adaptation on both measures.

discussion
in the present study, we investigated how the synchronization strength among cortical cell pairs is modified by an adaptation protocol aimed at changing the pairwise preferred orientation difference. in a majority of cells, prolonged presentation of a non-preferred stimulus induced attractive shifts. we also find that synchronization can be dynamically modulated by adaptation-induced plasticity of tuning properties. indeed, our results show that synchronization between cells becomes stronger when pairwise preferred orientation difference diminishes. in contrast, synchrony is not modulated by adaptation in the cases where the difference between preferred orientations increases.

plasticity of orientation tuning
in our sample, most cells displayed a shift in orientation preference following adaptation. among those cells, attractive shifts were observed more frequently than repulsive shifts . this proportion is rather different from the ones reported in previous studies in v <dig>  whereas two groups described mainly repulsive shifts  <cit> , kohn and movshon  <cit>  failed to induce shifts of preferred orientation in v <dig>  while the same protocol applied in mt induced attractive shifts. these differences in the adaptation outcome, attractive vs. repulsive shifts, are rather intriguing, although an explanation can be found in the various adaptation protocols. first, if we consider the adaptation time,  <dig> seconds are apparently not sufficient to induce orientation preference shifts in v <dig>  <cit> , while 2-min adaptation induced mostly repulsive shifts  <cit> , and 12-min adaptation caused a majority of attractive shifts in the present study. dragoi et al.  <cit>  also studied the time course of adaptation and recovery. in their experiments,  <dig> out of  <dig> cells in a representative example  showed repulsive shifts that were followed during recovery by attractive shifts. these reported 'rebound' attractive shifts had about the same amplitude as the initial repulsive shifts. the time course of these 'rebound' shifts is consistent with the time course of adaptation in our experiments. thus, an explanation that takes all results into account is that the first effect of adaptation in v <dig> consists in short-term repulsive shifts and that attractive shifts build up in time. indeed, recent results showed that adaptation duration from three to twelve minutes reverses the shifts of neurons form repulsive to attractive  <cit> . given its duration , our protocol is probably more susceptible to detect attractive shifts in orientation preference. two other factors may contribute to explain the differences in our results in relation to previous studies in v1:  the use by most groups of a "topping-up" protocol, in which the adapting stimulus is presented as a reminder before each test stimulus  a possible effect of cortical location and layer  <cit> . finally, adaptation to motion direction was shown to induce attractive shifts in area mt. a simple populational model suggests that attractive shifts in mt neurons are consistent with the repulsive shifts in perceived direction observed in psychophysical experiments  <cit> . since v <dig> provides substantial input to mt  <cit> , one interesting question would be to know how tuning shifts in v <dig> potentially affect or cause shifts in area mt. overall, our results corroborate the new view of adaptation as an active process including both response depression and enhancement.

convergence of orientation tuning properties enhances synchrony
we observed a general increase of pairwise synchrony after adaptation, independently of the preferred orientation difference . this effect of adaptation may be related to orientation discrimination. indeed, cooperation  between v <dig> neurons is considered as a supplementary channel of information that is crucial for fine discrimination of orientation  <cit> .

adaptation-induced plasticity gave us the opportunity to examine the modulation of cells pairwise synchronization for various preferred orientation differences, by allowing experimental manipulation of such differences. adaptation  can considerably reorganize the boundaries of cortical orientation maps as demonstrated by optical imaging. in adult cats revealed that during adaptation-induced plasticity, orientation preference maps undergo transient changes in the millimeter-order  <cit> . in the distance range we used, it is likely that cells shifting their preferred orientations toward the adapting orientation also experienced a reorganization of the iso-orientation domains to which they belong. in the case of a cell pair with both cells having the same preferred orientation after adaptation, the two cells might be transiently part of the same iso-orientation domain. interestingly, our data indicate that time-correlated activity of neurons forced to respond preferentially to the same orientation strongly increases. to a certain extent, that is comparable to the synchronization displayed by neurons belonging to columns with like-orientation preference. indeed, following adaptation, the synchrony between cells initially belonging to different orientation columns in the control condition seems to emulate the high inter-columnar correlated activity observed between cells with similar tuning properties  <cit> . in general, we observed recovery of pairwise synchronization within sixty minutes, as well as recovery of the pre-adaptation tuning properties. however, after a sixty-minute period, some cells were still responding preferentially to the adapting orientation, and were probably still in the same iso-orientation domain, their synchronization thus remaining high. our results therefore indicate that adaptation-induced plasticity is a reversible process, with variable recovery dynamics from cell to cell.

potential mechanisms
the mechanisms underlying orientation selectivity in the primary visual cortex are still debated  <cit> . the earlier models  suggested that the selectivity of cortical cells originates primarily from the convergence of lateral geniculate nucleus  afferences  <cit> . more recent models  suggest that the lgn input is broadly tuned and that a sharpening due to lateral inhibitory connections takes place in v <dig>  <cit> . although the recurrent models seem to provide the best description of v <dig> data, both feedforward and recurrent models explain some of v <dig> neurons properties  <cit> . excitatory feedback from higher visual areas like area 21a may also play a role. chemical activation or inactivation of area 21a was indeed reported to cause major plasticity of area  <dig> neurons' orientation preference  <cit> . in adult cortices, plasticity and cortical remodeling mostly originate from higher stages outside of layer iv, the lgn recipient layer  <cit> . possible loci for plasticity would be layers ii and iii that involve vertical connections from layer iv, recurrent inputs from other pyramidal cells and/or intrinsic horizontal connections  <cit> . it was demonstrated that in visual and barrel cortices, long-term potentiation  of neurons in layers ii/iii persist beyond puberty  <cit> . interestingly, in this investigation recordings were performed essentially in supragranular layers . adaptation-induced modifications of orientation tuning in mature cortex could thus implicate thalamo-cortical as well as local and long-range cortico-cortical networks connecting neighbouring orientation columns.

moreover, intracellular studies indicate that, depending on the recorded cell, orientation tuning properties stem from a variety of combinations of excitatory and inhibitory inputs  <cit> . the latter could be related to a study by dragoi et al.  <cit>  where adaptation-induced plasticity of orientation tuning was shown to be loci-dependant: the closer a cell is to a 'pinwheel center' , the more it is susceptible to plasticity  <cit> .

it is likely, although not certain, that the mechanisms involved in adaptation-induced plasticity of orientation preference are the same as the mechanisms causing the pairwise synchrony modulation. usrey and reid  <cit>  distinguish  <dig> categories of cortical synchronous activity:  synchrony from anatomical divergence,  stimulus-dependent synchrony, and  emergent synchrony . the first category of synchrony is caused by a single source that projects a strong input  onto multiple targets. the constant application of a non-preferred orientation could reinforce thalamo-cortical synapses, and thus synchrony from thalamo-cortical anatomical divergence. however, these connections are weak and need to be synchronized to efficiently drive cortical neurons  <cit> . experimental recordings of thalamo-cotical neurons demonstrate the presence of spike patterns suggesting that synchronous spike volleys occur at the population level  <cit> . if synchronous activity extends across many thalamo-cortical neurons, time-correlated output spikes appear between spiny stellate cells in layer iv  <cit> . synchrony in the lgn can also occur via cortico-thalamic projections  <cit>  that may relay the 30– <dig> hz rhythm  generated by intracortical mechanisms  <cit> . even then, thalamo-cortical synapses, which represent ≈ 10% of a cortical cell's total inputs, are unlikely to generate the large changes in orientation preference that were reported in the present investigation. stimulus-dependent synchrony is what was measured, although some of its components  were suppressed in the shift-corrected cross-correlation histograms  <cit> . indeed, the shuffling and subtraction procedure  allow the measurement of synchrony of neuronal origin. it was suggested that correlation of v <dig> single neuron's responses arises for the most part from an orientation-tuned input that causes sharp synchronization  <cit> . in this investigation, shifts in orientation selectivity and synchrony modulation appear to be related particularly when cells were compelled to share identical orientation properties . an intuitive explanation for these findings would imply that adaptation-induced plasticity affects the ascending inputs from layer iv and the horizontal connections which link clusters of neurons displaying identical preferred orientations. early in life, synapses are extremely plastic and the development of horizontal connections may depend on time-correlated activity triggered by visual experience. in the adult primary visual cortex, synchronous activation selectively stabilizes neuronal connections within and among iso-oriented columns that fine-tune modularity  <cit> . following a prolonged adaptation, pyramidal neurons that displayed closer tuning properties are more coactivated most probably through recurrent reinforcement of their local horizontal excitatory synapses. this supplementary coactivation would enhance the synchrony between clusters of cells as long as they exhibited closer orientation tunings . considering that synchrony and both orientation selectivity and plasticity are thought to occur from intracortical interactions, mechanism involving specific horizontal connections in supragranular layers seems the more suited to explain the simultaneous changes in orientation preference and pairwise zero-lag synchronization.

CONCLUSIONS
we found that in cat v <dig> orientation-selective neurons, the prolonged  presentation of a non-preferred stimulus induces mainly response facilitation for the non-preferred stimulus and depression for the preferred one. this predominance of attractive shifts contrasts with previous similar studies. we propose that the adaptation duration is the major explaining factor: short-term adaptation causes repulsive shifts in v <dig>  but if adaptation is maintained longer, the repulsive shifts are reversed to attractive shifts.

we have also shown that synchrony reflects similarity of tuning properties, specifically orientation preference, and is modulated accordingly when these properties change following adaptation. this novel result suggests a role for neural synchronization in dynamically linking cortical regions with similar functional properties in the presence of their optimal stimulus. stimulus-dependent synchronization was shown to provide a positive information contribution  <cit>  and might represent a crucial mechanism for efficiently conveying the relevant information to latter stages of visual processing  <cit> .

