BACKGROUND
eukaryotes need to distinguish their individual chromosomes in several essential processes. for example, homologous chromosomes must be aligned during meiosis and the nuclear positioning of specific chromosomes in interphase is conserved, controlled and important for correct gene expression  <cit> . therefore, there must be certain molecules, most likely proteins, that recognise chromosome-specific features. however, few protein complexes that recognise a specific chromosome and bind at multiple points along its entire length are known. one example is the msl ribonucleoprotein complex of drosophila melanogaster, a dosage compensation factor that equalises expression of sex-linked genes between males and females – an essential process in animals with an xx-xy mode of sex determination  <cit> . in this species an autosome-specific protein has also been discovered; the painting of fourth  protein, which binds exclusively to the 4th chromosome  <cit> . the chromosome specificity of pof and msl appears to have been conserved for a long period of evolutionary history, suggesting that chromosome-specific identifying features have also been conserved and have functional significance in drosophila  <cit> . the fact that individual chromosomes can be uniquely targeted raises questions about how they are recognised. there are no known dna targets that direct the binding of either the msl complex or pof, and no sequences have previously been found that are chromosome-specific and distributed over its entire length.

the development of appropriate computational methods is essential for linking functions to linear sequences. the toolbox for finding cryptic and complex sequence targets is still developing and most algorithms require extensive optimisation or a known motif . standard methods, e.g. blast and alignment approaches used in these kinds of analyses have several limitations, for instance they are neither exhaustive nor unbiased. to circumvent these limitations, brāzma et al.  <cit>  successfully combined a pattern discovery algorithm with clustering of expression data to predict gene regulatory elements in yeast . we present here an alternative way to analyse large amounts of sequence data using multivariate statistics, combined with cytological observations and full genome annotations, to find sequence signatures composed of combinations of sequence motifs correlated to chromosomal regions without imposing any predefined assumptions. the multivariate approach is efficient in finding weak signals in large amounts of data. the method is neither biased nor heuristic, but still very fast. abe et al.  <cit>  used a related approach to study large-scale differences between distant genomes, and bultrini et al.  <cit>  used sequence motifs and multivariate statistics to find vocabularies defining intron regions in drosophila melanogaster and caenorhabditis elegans. in the study reported here, our aim was to use a multivariate approach to identify sequence signatures correlated to chromosome identity in drosophila, and if possible link these signatures to function. the d. melanogaster genome sequence   <cit>  and its annotation   <cit>  have been thoroughly revised since their first releases and the cytology of the salivary gland polytene chromosomes  provides a powerful tool for genome studies. although the d. yakuba  and d. pseudoobscura  genome assemblies are not as complete as that of the d. melanogaster assembly, they provide valuable resources for attempts to identify conserved, potentially functional sequences. the three drosophila species examined in this study  all belong to the sophophora subgenus and are hereafter referred to as dy, dp and dm, respectively. dm and dy both belong to the melanogaster species group and dp to the obscura species group. dm and dy are separated by approximately  <dig>  myr and they are both separated from dp by roughly  <dig>  myr  <cit> .

RESULTS
whole chromosome analysis
to construct data sets for a whole genome analysis, we scored all positions of all possible di-, tri-, tetra-, penta- and hexa-mers  in the genome sequence of dm, dy and dp. pca  of the scores clearly separated the muller's f-elements  from all other chromosomes along the first component . the second component discriminate the non f-element chromosomes into two groups: one containing dp chromosomes and the other containing the dm/dy chromosomes . the same pattern was observed when the di-, tri-, tetra-and penta-mers were analysed . however, a large amount of the variation in the first component can be explained by differences in nucleotide composition between the chromosomes . the sequence motifs that most strongly distinguish the f-elements contain only a/t nucleotides and are not very complex. to determine if more complex motifs can be used to separate the chromosomes, we need to remove most of the variation caused by the inequalities in their a/t contents. this was accomplished by dividing all scores by the expected scores, based on the chromosomal base composition. we then normalised the scores for all di-, tri-, tetra-, penta-and hexa-mer sequence motifs. after this normalisation the chromosomal separation was almost identical to the separation seen in the non-normalised pca  except when using penta-and hexamers.

the percentages of base pairs removed by tandem repeats finder and repeatmasker as well as the a/t content of the remaining sequences are also given. the dp chromosomes are listed in the same order as the corresponding dm chromosomes.

analysis of the sequence motifs shows that the f-element separation is no longer solely explained by a/t motifs . in the analyses using penta-and hexa-mer motifs the dp f-element is more similar to the non f-element chromosomes and the dm/dy f-elements separates more from each other . the reason for this became clear when the different genomes were separately analysed. in all three species, the f-element separated from the other chromosomes along the first component, regardless of the motif length used . in dm/dy the x chromosome was separated from the other chromosomes by the second component, although less markedly than the f-element. interestingly, the left arm of chromosome x in dp separates in the second component while the right arm clusters closer to the other chromosomes. this is in agreement with the hypothesis that the right arm of dp x is a later addition  <cit> . the left arms of dm x, dy x and the dp x are separated by the same hexamers. many of the motifs causing the strong separation of the f-elements are the same in all three species. the top scoring penta-and hexamers can easily be aligned into longer motifs , all of which are supported by hexamers in both sense and anti-sense orientation.

for further analysis, we excluded parts of the longer motifs supported by only sense or only anti-sense hexamers. it should be noted that after the hexamers included in the longer motifs, there was a clear drop in loading . this suggests that a longer motif causes overrepresentation of the top scoring hexamers in the f-element. to verify the existence and overrepresentation of these predicted longer motifs, we counted their numbers on all chromosomes. the longer motifs are clearly more common on the f-elements compared to the other chromosomes . in dm/dy the f-element motif is the same, but in dp the motif is different . we find the hexamers forming the longer motifs only in the normalised analysis. our normalisation procedure assumes a random distribution of all nucleotides. if the nucleotide frequencies on, e.g. the dm f-element would be highly influenced by micro satellites or more complex repeats, it would make the normalisation assumption invalid. however, this is not the case. when we removed all simple sequence repeats using tandem repeats finder  <cit>  or both simple and complex repeats using repeatmasker  <cit>  the chromosomal nucleotide compositions stayed roughly the same .

the sum of the hexamers making up the longer motifs per mbp are also given.

since dm is by far the most intensively studied of the three species we concentrated our efforts on the nine base pair long motif found in the dm f-element. strikingly, in the f-element this nonamer is often found in pairs, i.e. two sense or two anti-sense nonamers are often situated close to each other. furthermore, when we plotted the distances between the  <dig> motifs in the f-element we found that three different distances between them are overrepresented. considering the  <dig> nonamers as  <dig> pairs, nine are separated by  <dig>  bp,  <dig> by  <dig>  bp and  <dig> by  <dig>  bp. in the subsequent analyses, we defined a pair as two nonamers separated by no more than  <dig> bp. according to this definition, 51% of the nonamers are organised in such pairs. the remaining nonamers seem to be randomly distributed in relation to each other. only one pair on the entire f-element consists of one sense and one antisense nonamer. the nonamer pairs are even more enriched on the f-element than the nonamer . to assess whether this frequency of pairs is higher than expected by mere chance we randomised the positions of all  <dig> nonamers in a simulation repeated  <dig> million times, and calculated the number of pairs in each case. since less than 51% of the nonamers were paired in every run, we conclude that the observed nonamer pair frequency significantly exceeds the expected frequency. this strongly suggests that the nonamers exist in pairs, are important for the separation of the f-element in dm and might confer a selective advantage. the dy nonamers and dp decamers also occur in pairs .

one of the atypical features of the dm f-element is the specific binding of the protein pof. to determine if the nonamers or nonamer pairs are correlated to the binding of pof to the f-element, we mapped pof binding sites on polytene chromosomes . it is difficult to map polytene bands beyond cytological position 102e <dig> so we limited this analysis to the region 102a-102e <dig>  comparison of the sequence positions of the nonamer pairs  with the staining pattern of pof protein on the polytene f-element  showed that regions with few or no pairs correlate well with regions lacking pof binding. the genomic sequence corresponding to the cytological regions that do not bind pof comprises 59% of the sequence from positions  <dig> to  <dig> . 79% of the nonamer pairs and 61% of the nonamers are located outside these regions. we tested the significance of these results in a simulation, repeated  <dig> million times, in which we randomised the positions of the nonamers and the nonamer pairs. in all of these simulations the number of nonamers or pairs was lower than the observed numbers in the pof-binding regions.

the separation of the x chromosome seen in figure 2a,c,e is due to simple sequences such as an, tn, c/an and g/tn repeats in both the non-normalised and the normalised analysis. this finding is in agreement with in situ hybridization data showing that c/an and g/tn repeats are common on the x chromosome  <cit> . positions of the hexamers that separate chromosome x show no clear correlation to the binding sites of the msl complex defined by demakova et al.  <cit>  .

in an effort to determine the origin of the sequences causing the chromosomal separation in dm seen in both the non-normalised and normalised pca we repeated the analysis on three additional data sets. to evaluate the contribution of simple sequence repeats we masked the genome using tandem repeats finder  <cit>  and to evaluate the contribution of both simple and more complex repeats we used repeatmasker  <cit> . we also merged all exon sequences of the different chromosomes. we then analysed the four datasets simultaneously, both with and without normalisation . the resulting plots show that the enrichment of simple a/t rich sequences on the f-element  cannot be explained by differences in repetitive elements. these sequence signatures were not removed by masking simple or more complex repetitive elements, implying that they are present in all non-exon sequences on the f-element . interestingly, the f-element exons do not share these sequences, but they still clearly separate from the exon sequences of the other chromosomes. furthermore, the simple sequences that separate the x chromosome from the others distribute all over the non-exon sequences. in the pca in which we accounted for differences in nucleotide composition, the separation was similar compared to the non-normalised analysis, except that the exons of the x chromosome separated from the exons of the other chromosomes . it should be noted that the first component distinguishes between the exon sequences and the other sequences. the second component, however, separates all types of f-element sequences from the other chromosomal sequences. we conclude that the overrepresentation of some sequence signatures on the f-element cannot be attributed to either the high a/t content or the enrichment of repeated elements and that they are present in both exon and non-exon sequences. the general patterns we see are clearly not dependent on the type of sequence studied or differences in base composition.

in addition, we note that in the normalised pca the repeatmasked f-element separates more clearly from the original f-element sequence  than in the non-normalised analysis. many sequence signatures are shared by the f-elements in all four datasets. examination of the top-scoring sequence motifs clearly shows that the repeatmasked f-element lacks the nonamer motif described above . we therefore studied the output file from repeatmasker in further detail. according to repeatmasker,  <dig> % of the nonamer motifs reside within dine- <dig> elements, and thus seem to be closely linked to them. the dine- <dig> element has previously been shown by in situ hybridisation to be enriched on the dm f-element  <cit> . we also note that in the dine- <dig> sequence defined in the repbase update  <cit>  there is a duplication of approximately  <dig> base pairs, each of which contains a nonamer pair, and in both pairs the individual nonamers are separated by  <dig> base pairs.

we also masked the genomes of dy and dp using tandem repeats finder. since these genomes have not yet been annotated we could not use exons or repeatmasker. the pca results of the original sequences and the masked sequences in these species are virtually identical .

fragment analysis
in the whole chromosome analysis we identified sequence signatures that are enriched on different chromosomes, but we did not investigate their linear organisation along the chromosomes. therefore, to find sequence signatures evenly distributed over the chromosomes that are capable of distinguishing one chromosome from the others, we fragmented each of the dm, dy and dp genomes into  <dig> kb fragments. we then scored the positions of all possible di-, tri-, tetra-, penta-and hexa-mers in the  <dig> kb fragments of all chromosomes from each of the genomes. the first component of a pca of these data mainly reflects differences in nucleotide composition between the fragments. since the nucleotide composition can vary both between chromosomes and within single chromosomes we need to remove this variation in the dataset. one possibility would be to exclude the first component, but some of the variation caused by a/t skewing could still remain in the higher order components. to specifically remove the influence of variations in the base composition we created a partial least squares  model using the non-normalised hexamer scores and the a/t content as a single response. we then used the residual matrix, after removing the variance described by the first component, for subsequent pca analysis. the residual matrix is a normalised scoring matrix in which the variance in the data related to the base composition of the target sequence has been removed. the performance of the normalisation was evaluated by plotting the score values of the first component against the base composition of the fragments. as expected, the scores showed an almost perfect correlation with the base composition of the fragments .

pca of the approximately  <dig> fragments from all three species showed that the  <dig> f-element fragments cluster, and separate with minor overlaps from the other chromosomal fragments in the second component . in the tri-and tetra-mer analyses, the overlap with other chromosomes was more extensive than in the di-, penta-and hexa-mer analyses . in the first component of the hexamer pca, roughly a third of the dp fragments cluster separately from other chromosomal fragments. the third component separates many of the dm/dy x chromosomal fragments from the others, but only when using penta-and hexa-mers . the sequence signatures responsible for the separation of the f-element are not the same as in the whole chromosome analysis and cannot easily be combined into longer motifs. for a full listing of the loadings for all  <dig> hexamers for the first two components in the pca see additional file  <dig>  in conclusion, the fragment analysis showed the existence of f-element-specific sequences that not only have been conserved for approximately  <dig>  myr, but also are linearly distributed along the sequenced part of the f-elements in dm, dy and dp. based on this conservation we speculate that there are sequence signatures that have a function for f-element identity.

when we plotted the scores from the second component  against the chromosomal position we find that on average the dp fragments are shifted towards the f-element fragments . the centromere proximal regions of the non f-element chromosomes in all species are shifted towards the f-element fragments and the distal regions in the opposite direction. this pattern is not as clear in dp as in dm and dy.

in the same way as for the whole chromosome study, we repeated the fragment analysis on chromosomes from the three species after masking them by tandem repeats finder. the results from this masked dataset did not differ in any significant way from the prior analysis . for dm, we also masked the fragmented genome using repeatmasker. a combined pca with the original data, tandem repeats finder masked data and repeatmasker masked data showed that the f-element signatures distributed over the entire chromosome are not connected to either simple or complex sequence repeats . in this analysis many x chromosomal fragments separated from the other fragments.

interestingly, we note that in every pca we performed most motifs had almost identical loading to their reverse complements. this was true for both the whole chromosome analysis and the fragment analysis, regardless of whether normalisation was applied and the motif length used. baisnée et al.  <cit>  have studied the reverse complement symmetry of dna more thoroughly, but even though it seems to be universal, the underlying cause is not yet fully understood.

discussion
sequence signature analysis
in this work, we separately counted all di-, tri-, tetra-, penta- and hexa-mers  and studied their distribution in the chromosomes of three drosophila genomes using pca. short motifs  can be rapidly scored and analysed. however, the frequencies of such short motifs are strongly influenced by the abundance of simple sequence repeats. motifs longer than tetramers are less affected by simple sequence repeats, but are computationally more demanding to analyse. sometimes, when a group of sufficiently long sequences, e.g. hexamers, are found to be overrepresented in a genomic sequence, they overlap and form longer sequences with higher discriminative power, thus increasing the chance of identifying longer and more complex sequences than if shorter sequences, e.g. trimers, are used.

the frequency of a sequence motif depends on both biological and stochastic factors. the expected frequency of a specific motif depends on the base composition of the chromosome. if the four nucleotides do not have equal frequencies in all chromosomes, the results from a non-normalised analysis will reflect the effects of a mixture of biological and stochastic factors. it is often difficult to isolate the effects of such factors, but a large part of the stochastic component can be removed by dividing all motif frequencies by the expected frequencies in a normalisation step. otherwise, biologically interesting motifs may be masked by motifs that are common solely by chance. in this study, we used relatively basic normalisation procedures to account for differences in base composition. however, our multivariate approach could easily be extended to account for differences related to sequence complexity  or any kind of prior knowledge about the target sequence.

whole chromosome analysis
in many respects, the f-element in dm  is an atypical chromosome. it has an overall length of ~ <dig> mb, 3– <dig> mb of which consists of simple satellite repeats and does not contain any known genes  <cit> . the remaining portion  has been sequenced and covers the cytogenetic bands 101e-102f on polytene salivary gland chromosomes. however, the banded portion appears to be a mosaic of unique dna interspersed with moderate and low copy repetitive dna  <cit> . the f-element is largely heterochromatic in nature. the heterochromatic protein hp <dig> and the modified histone, methylated h3lys <dig>  have been found to be associated with most of the f-element  <cit> . in accordance with its heterochromatic nature, the f-element has a higher a/t content compared to the other chromosomes. a high density of transposable elements  is found in the dm f-element  <cit> . another interesting feature of the f-element is that it is decorated by the chromosome-specific protein, pof , which specifically "paints" the entire chromosome  <cit> . the f-element is an atypical autosome and has been suggested to have a closer kinship with the x chromosome than with the other autosomes  <cit> . the f-element has been suggested, partly on the basis of studies of the distant relative d. busckii, to originate from the x chromosome  <cit> . the binding of pof to the f-element is reminiscent of the binding of the drosophila dosage compensation complex to the male x chromosome, which mediates its hypertranscription . in d. busckii, pof binds to the male x, further supporting the suggested relationship between the x chromosome and the f-element  <cit> .

all chromosomes differ to some extent in nucleotide frequencies, with the f-element being extreme in this respect, having a high a/t content in all three species studied. when the raw data was analysed the f-elements in all three species separated collectively from the other chromosomes , due to differences in their contents of simple sequences containing only a and t. in dm we performed the analysis on four datasets, derived from the original sequence, and the sequences obtained after masking simple sequence repeats, both simple and more complex repeats and after removing everything except the exon sequences. the results show that the simple a/t sequences, which separate the f-element in the original data, are distributed throughout the non-exon f-element sequences and cannot be attributed to microsatellites and transposable elements. it should also be noted that the f-element exons separate equally well from the exons of other chromosomes. the x chromosome also separates from the other chromosomes, albeit to a lesser extent, due to differences in their simple sequences. the same chromosomal separation is seen regardless of the motif length used. as shown in figure  <dig>  all of the dp chromosomes are shifted relative to the dm/dy chromosomes, suggesting the presence of dp-specific signatures in addition to the chromosome-specific signatures studied here.

to detect more complex and potentially functional motifs hidden by the skewed base composition, we normalised our scores according to the base composition of each chromosome analysed. as shown in figure 1c, the resulting separation was nearly identical to that seen in the non-normalised analysis . the dm f-element was clearly separated even after removal of repeated elements from the genome . it should be noted that the first component in this pca  distinguishes the exons from non exon sequences. in the second component, however, all f-element sequences including the exon sequences, cluster together. we conclude that the f-element exons also contain f-element signatures.

the separate analysis of the three species showed that the pentamer and hexamer motifs that are most important for distinguishing the f-element can be aligned into longer sequences. examination of the top scoring hexamers clearly shows that they are part of a nonamer in dm and dy, and of a decamer in dp. these sequences are strongly enriched in the respective f-elements , although the individual hexamers in dm are not enriched in the non-normalised analysis. since dm is the only annotated species, we concentrated our investigation on the dm/dy nonamers. plotting the positions of these nonamers in the dm f-element showed that they commonly occur in pairs, separated by no more than  <dig> bp, all but one of which consists of two sense or two anti sense nonamers. the individual nonamers are enriched roughly four-fold in the f-element, while the pairs are enriched about 15-fold. the nonamers and decamers are also organised in pairs in dy and dp respectively . we conclude that even though the method is based on relatively short sequence motifs, it still provides a potent means for finding longer and more complex sequence motifs.

since pof is a protein that specifically paints the dm f-element, we tested the possibility that the nonamer or nonamer pairs may be correlated to pof-binding sites. for this purpose, we stained polytene chromosome preparations using pof antibodies. after carefully mapping the banded regions, we compared the positions of nonamer pairs to the pof staining pattern. the genomic regions with few or no pairs correlate well with regions on the f-element that do not bind pof . we hypothesise that the nonamer pairs have a function and are directly or indirectly involved in pof binding to the f-element in dm. however, this hypothesis needs to be verified experimentally. since pof will not bind to a translocated dm f-element  <cit>  the nonamer pairs are not sufficient by themselves for recruiting pof. if the pairs have a function, it is possible that some variation is allowed within the nonamer and that there are motifs of differing strength. according to our repeatmasker analysis of the f-element,  <dig> % of the nonamers are located within dine- <dig> elements. as shown in figure 2b, the hexamers forming the nonamer are important for the separation of the f-element. nevertheless, after removing virtually all of the nonamers using repeatmasker  f-element separation was retained, indicating that other signatures, apart from the nonamer, help distinguish the dm f-element.

in an extensive study of local deletions flanking a transpsoson reporter sun et al.  <cit>  showed that the genomic region  <dig> to  <dig> of the dm f-element is euchromatic. a nearby region induces gene silencing and is therefore considered to be heterochromatic. sun et al.  <cit>  attribute this to local induction of heterochromatin by the  <dig>  element. according to their model the 1360-induced heterochromatin can spread, but only ~ <dig> kb or until encountering competition from euchromatic determinants. in this context, it should be stressed that this "euchromatic" region is enriched in dine- <dig> fragments containing the nonamer pair region. we speculate that these nonamer-containing dine- <dig> fragments act as euchromatic determinants. we have previously proposed that pof is involved in a chromosome-specific gene regulatory mechanism  <cit> . it should be noted that according to our cytological mapping pof binds within this euchromatic region .

fragment analysis
in the whole chromosome analysis we identified sequence signatures that are overrepresented in different chromosomes, but we did not study the linear organisation of the sequence signatures along the chromosomes. instead, we divided each of the dm, dy and dp chromosomes into  <dig> kb fragments to check for the presence of sequence signatures that can distinguish fragments of specific chromosomes from those of other chromosomes, especially signatures distributed over the whole chromosome. for such an analysis it is important to remove all variation connected to differences in nucleotide composition. using a partial least squares  model with a/t composition of every fragment as a single response we removed this bias. strikingly, when the approximately  <dig> fragments from all three species were analysed using pca based on di-, penta-and hexa-mers the  <dig> f-element fragments clustered together . the motifs responsible for this separation were not the same as in the whole chromosome analysis. nevertheless, this demonstrates the existence of sequence signatures that are capable of separating all f-element fragments from the three different species. based on the relationship of these species we conclude that these signatures have been conserved for at least  <dig>  myr  <cit> . these conserved motifs are also linearly distributed along the sequenced part of the f-elements . the f-elements from the three species have high a/t contents and are probably all enriched in mobile and repeated elements. however, the motifs separating the f-element fragments are not connected to simple sequence repeats since masking such repeats did not alter the results. in addition, the dm f-element fragments clustered together when the original sequence was analysed together with sequences in which both simple and complex repeated elements had been masked . therefore, the collective separation of f-element fragments in the three species cannot be attributed to any known repeated elements, and we speculate that the signatures we identified have a role in f-element identification. the x chromosomal fragments of dm/dy, but not dp, can also be separated to some degree using penta-and hexa-mers.

as shown in figure  <dig>  some non f-element fragments are more similar to the f-element fragments. these non f-element fragments are the centromere proximal regions of dm/dy chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  the heterochromatic nature of the f-element in dm is well established, e.g. by its enrichment of hp <dig> and h3k <dig> methylation  <cit> . in our analysis, the proximal regions of chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> in dm/dy showed similarity to the f-element. it is interesting that an anti-meth3k <dig> antibody decorates the proximal regions of chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> as well as the f-element in dm. the proximal region of x is also stained, but to a much lesser extent using this antibody . we note that the same pattern is present in figure  <dig>  we must consider the possibility that chromatin similarities cause the partial overlap of the f-element and the proximal regions of chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> . it is difficult to fully separate chromosome-and chromatin-specific effects. sequences that have high a/t contents and are enriched in repetitive elements tend to be heterochromatic. as shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  the f-element separation was retained after normalising for differences in a/t content. furthermore, the results were not significantly different when simple sequence repeats were removed using tandem repeats finder, or when simple sequence repeats and repetitive elements were removed using repeatmasker. the findings even apply to the exon sequences. thus, we conclude that our methodology is capable of detecting chromosome-specific sequences.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that the f-elements of three species that separated roughly  <dig> myr ago share sequences that are distributed over the entire chromosomes. these sequences are not related to their unusually high a/t contents or any known repeated elements. in conclusion, our results support the existence of sequence signatures that confer chromosome specific integrity in drosophila.

