BACKGROUND
primordial germ cells  are progenitor cells that migrate from their site of specification to the site of the developing gonad where they differentiate into the gametes, sperm and egg. pgcs are normally specified during early development either by inductive cues   <cit>  or by inheritance of cytoplasmic determinants . these cytoplasmic determinants are comprised of electron dense material containing maternal rnas and proteins, collectively termed germ plasm  <cit> . transplantation experiments in drosophila demonstrated that the germ plasm is sufficient for the induction of the germ cell fate  <cit> . similarly, in zebrafish it has been shown that removal of germ plasm leads to loss of germ cell specification  <cit> . in zebrafish, the germ plasm is localized to the first and second cleavage furrows of the early embryo and this localization depends on the function of actin and microtubules  <cit> . at the 32-cell stage the germ plasm is incorporated into four cells that become the progenitors of the germ cell lineage  <cit> . during division of these progenitor cells, the germ plasm is inherited by only one daughter cell  <cit> , thereby maintaining the number of presumptive germ cells constant. however, after  <dig> hours of zebrafish development the germ plasm is segregated symmetrically, a change that coincides with an increase in pgc numbers. later in development, zebrafish germ cells contain unique granular structures organized around the germ cell nucleus. several germ cell specific proteins, whose rna is initially localized to the germ plasm, localize to these granules . germ cell specific granules are a common feature of germ cells in metazoans, including species where germ cells are specified by induction  <cit> . although the precise function of these granular structures in germ cell development remains largely unknown, several rnas and proteins localized to these structures were found to be essential for germ cell specification, survival and later development. one common marker for germ cell granules is the rna helicase vasa protein, which shows high sequence homology to the translation initiation factor eif-4a  <cit> . interestingly, while in drosophila vasa protein localizes early on to the germ plasm, in zebrafish only the vasa rna localizes to the germ plasm, while the protein is dispersed in the early embryo. presumably only zygotically produced vasa is later restricted to the germ line, where it localizes in granules around the germ cell nucleus  <cit> . in contrast to vasa for which no function in zebrafish pgc development has yet been attributed, other components of the zebrafish germ cell granules, such as the rna-binding proteins dead end  and nanos <dig>  are essential for germ-cell survival and maintenance of oocyte production  <cit> .

zebrafish germ cell granules are organized around the nucleus after the cells arrive at the region of the gonad  <cit> . little is known however about their distribution and segregation during the first  <dig> hpf of zebrafish embryonic development, in particular during cell division. understanding these processes would contribute to the understanding of the mechanisms that promote germ cell fate maintenance and those allowing for an increase in germ cell number .

accurate inheritance of organelles and cytoplasmic components is a key requirement for symmetrical cell division. current models of organelle distribution suggest two distinct partitioning strategies: a stochastic partition or an ordered one  <cit> . stochastic mechanisms rely on random distribution of multiple organelle copies that would provide each daughter cell with sufficient copies of the organelle, but not necessarily with the same total number  <cit> . for example, the large cytoplasmic area covered by the er in mammalian cells ensures that both daughter cells inherit sufficient amount of er that is adequately facilitated by a stochastic mechanism  <cit> . the chromosome distribution during cell division on the other hand, proceeds in an ordered manner in a process that involves the mitotic spindle machinery. central players in the ordered organization and segregation of cellular components during the cell cycle are the microtubule-dependent molecular motors such as dynein and kinesin  <cit> .

in this study we show that at the onset of germ cell development, zebrafish germ cell granules exhibit a strong variation of size. this appearance changes however during the first day of embryonic development when germ-cell granules become homogenous in size. the change in granule size and granule segregation to daughter cells during mitosis appears ordered and depends on the microtubule network, the function of the molecular motor protein dynein, as well as the tudor domain-containing protein, tdrd <dig> 

RESULTS
identification of the novel germ cell marker granulito
a novel germ cell marker, which we named granulito  was identified in a microarray-based screen where the transcripts of isolated wildtype pgcs were compared to the ones in which the function of dead end , a gene essential for pgc survival  <cit>  was knocked down. granulito was found to be expressed at very high levels in wild-type germ cells as compared to germ cells in which dead end was knocked down. granulito mrna is enriched in the germ plasm at the 4-cell stage and is expressed in pgcs until the end of the first day of development . this expression pattern in the germ cells is similar to that of previously described germ cell markers such as dead end and nanos <dig>  <cit> , but differs from those in that it is expressed at significant levels in somatic cells as well. granulito mrna encodes a  <dig> amino acid protein that exhibits significant homology only to proteins in the vertebrata , does not contain known protein domains and does not exhibit significant similarity to other genes. granulito-eyfp fusion protein is localized to germ cell granules in pgcs, the structure in which the vasa protein is found . to increase the confidence in the observed localization of the fusion protein, the fluorescent protein was fused both 3' and 5' of the granulito protein, ha and flag tages were generated and the open reading frame of the fusion was linked to its own 3'utr leading to the same result . to determine whether granulito plays a role in zebrafish pgc development, we knocked down its function using antisense morpholino oligonucleotides. while injection of antisense oligonucleotides directed against the 5' sequence of granulito efficiently blocked translation of granulito-eyfp-nos1-3'utr , germ cell development proceeded normally at least until  <dig> hours post fertilization . when high amount of antisense oligonucleotides was injected, embryonic development was arrested during gastrulation, while germ cell development appeared unaffected . we therefore conclude that if this protein plays a role in early pgc development, its function is either redundant with that of another gene product, or that maternally provided granulito protein  is sufficient for performing the early role of the protein. despite the apparent lack of function for the protein, the localization of granulito to the zebrafish germ cell granules could serve as a tool for investigating these structures during early stages of pgc development.

dynamic variation of germ cell granule size during early embryonic development
germ cell granules in live zebrafish embryos were previously visualized by injection of the gfp fusion constructs nanos1-gfp-nos3'utr, deadend-gfp-nos3'utr and vasa-gfp-nos3'utr  <cit> . however, mrna injection does not allow adequate visualization of granules before  <dig> hpf due to high fluorescent background in somatic cells and poor specific signal in primordial germ cells. additionally, nanos1-gfp and dead end-gfp localization appears to be diffused at this stage and not unique to granules. in order to visualize the granules at an earlier developmental stage, we generated transgenic fish expressing granulito-dsredex-nos1-3'utr under the control of the askopos promoter  <cit> . in progeny of transgenic females expressing egfp-nos1-3'utr fusion under the control of the maternal promoter of askopos, germ cells could be visualized as early as  <dig> hpf. the localization and specific translation of granulito-dsredex-nos1-3'utr in pgcs allowed us to follow germinal granules from  <dig> hpf in live embryos . at this stage and at  <dig> hpf, in most germ cells a single to few large granules were observed along with several smaller ones . as development proceeds, the proportion of small granules increases . finally at  <dig> hpf, as the germ cells are located where the gonad will develop, most pgcs show a uniform distribution of granules around the nucleus with similar small sizes. this strong reduction in granule size variation within the first  <dig> hours of development is presented in figure 1f.

given the critical role germ cell granules components play in pgc development, the question of the control over the morphology and distribution of these structures is a central one for understanding the development of pgcs. we therefore followed the granules during cell division in different developmental stages and examined the possible role cytoskeleton components and granule-specific proteins could play in this process.

dynamic localization of zebrafish germ cell granules
to elucidate the mechanism by which germ cell granules are distributed between daughter cells during mitosis, we analyzed this process during germ cell division in  <dig> hpf zebrafish embryos. to that end, we labeled germ cell granules using vasa-dsred, the nuclear envelope using laminb2-gfp and the nuclear pores using nupl1-gfp. we monitored nuclear envelope break down  and granule segregation during cell division using confocal time-lapse microscopy.

at  <dig> hpf, germ cell granules of diverse sizes are organized around the nuclear envelope of germ cells at interphase . at the onset of cell division, during early prophase, the nuclear envelope disassembles and the granules lose their perinuclear localization and scatter throughout the cytoplasm . granules may appear to transiently change their shape during nuclear envelope reorganization and recover their spherical shape when detached completely from the envelope during metaphase .

at the end of cytokinesis, granules move directly towards the forming nuclear envelope . granular movement takes place after the nuclear envelope has reassembled as visualized by the reformation of the lamin b <dig> network and the accumulation of the nuclear pore complex component nup <dig> .

these results suggest that the spherical shape of granules is not dependent on the nuclear envelope integrity. moreover, during nuclear envelope re-assembly, all of the granules regain their perinuclear localization.

ordered segregation of germ cell granules to daughter cells during mitosis
to investigate the partition of germ cell granules during cell division, we analyzed their distribution within the two daughter cells after mitosis. in all  <dig> cells undergoing mitosis that were analyzed, the granule distribution among daughter cells was equal for even numbers of granules or ±  <dig> granule for odd number of granules . however, the amount of granule material was not necessarily equally distributed. we therefore concluded that segregation of the granules in zebrafish germ cells during mitosis is not a random process but rather a regulated event that ensures segregation of similar units of this important structure.

localization of germ cell granules with respect to microtubules
the process of germ plasm assembly during oogenesis has been studied extensively in invertebrates. in drosophila, the assembly of germ plasm is dependent on the localization of oskar mrna to the posterior pole of the oocyte, a process that requires microtubule function  <cit> . similarly, zebrafish germ plasm assembly occurs during the first hours following fertilization and involves microtubules as well  <cit> . to determine whether proper localization of germ cell granules at later stages of development depends on microtubules as well, we examined the positioning of microtubules relatisve to the germ cell granules during interphase and mitosis.

during interphase, germ cell granules appeared to be adjacent to microtubular structures . furthermore, α-tubulin staining could be observed closely localized near germ cell granules .

to investigate the relationship between microtubules and granule localization in live embryos, we performed time-lapse confocal microscopy of germ cells expressing clip170-gfp fusion protein  <cit> . in this analysis we found that a cage of microtubules, which originates from the microtubule-organizing center   is formed around the germ cell nucleus. microtubules appear to traverse perinuclear granules  and can project towards more distant granules . interestingly, we observed that some distant germ cell granules do not appear to be associated with microtubules  and as such, flow with the cytoplasmic stream into newly forming protrusions . in contrast, microtubule-associated granules remain fixed in the vicinity of the nucleus . these observations are consistent with the idea that during interphase the association of the perinuclear granules with microtubular structures serves to anchor the granules in proximity to the nucleus, where they presumably exert their function.

consistent with this notion is the finding that granule structure and localization are affected when microtubule depolarization is induced. specifically, exposure of zebrafish embryos expressing h1m-gfp  along with vasa-dsred to nocodazole leads to aggregation of vasa-positive granules resulting in enlarged structures . control cells on the other hand, that are exposed to the solvent alone exhibit normal perinuclear distribution characteristic of that stage . time-lapse microscopy of embryos expressing laminb2-gfp and vasa-dsred treated with nocodazole revealed that following exposure to the drug granules fuse forming larger structures . such phenotype resulted from the complete disruption of microtubular structures, as judged by staining of microtubules and by loss of cell polarity needed for migration and motility . these results suggest that microtubules and possibly nuclear envelope components are needed for proper structural maintenance of individual granules.

next, we sought to determine whether microtubules could be involved in granule segregation during mitosis. during cell division, microtubule organization and dynamics serve to ensure proper distribution of different cellular components such as chromosomes and the golgi apparatus to the forming daughter cells  <cit> . we therefore followed the localization of granules of zebrafish germ cells during different stages of cell division with respect to microtubules. we observed that in germ cells stained for vasa and α-tubulin, some microtubular structures originating from the mitotic spindle appear to associate with germ cell granules during different stages of mitosis . when analyzing fixed material , not all granules appear associated to microtubular structures. however, this is likely to result from microtubule disruption upon fixation and rather than absence of colocalization between these structures. in support of this notion, in live embryos germ cell granules move directionally and continuously along the spindle extension  towards the forming nucleus  during division . granules elongate as they move from one cell to the other and re-adopt their spherical shape once they reach the area of the re-assembling nucleus . functional experiments using microtubule-depolymerizing agents could not be performed, since upon disruption of the microtubular network, mitosis was arrested.

as previously mentioned, granules move towards the nuclear area after the termination of cell division. to examine the possibility that contraction of the cytokinetic ring might be the driving force for relocalization of germ cell granules to the nucleus, we inhibited cytokinesis by germ cell-specific expression of dominant negative rhoan <dig>  these cells are unable to form a contractile actin ring during cytokinesis due to the lack of functional rhoa, a protein known to regulate acto-myosin contraction  <cit> . as shown in additional file  <dig>  binucleated germ cells show normal localization of germ cell granules to the periphery of the nuclear envelop at the end of mitosis. therefore, it is unlikely that the cytokinetic ring is involved in the segregation of granules into daughter cells.

localization and distribution of dynein with respect to germ cell granules
as germ cell granules are localized in close proximity to microtubules during interphase  and directionally move along microtubule tracks during mitosis , we tested whether microtubule-dependent molecular motors are involved in granule organization within the cell.

to investigate the localization of the microtubule minus end-directed motor protein dynein  <cit> , we expressed a gfp fusion of the dynein light chain  to label dynein-containing complexes within primordial germ cells. dynl2-gfp is found in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm of the germ cells , and significantly, it is also localized to germ cell granules . interestingly, dynl2-gfp shows a dynamic localization pattern in the granules, varying from ring-like structure , small dots within granules , to asymmetric accumulations at the periphery of granules . notably, dynl2-gfp is preferentially localized to larger granules . the relevance of dynein localization for granule organization is supported by findings such as those presented in figure 6b and 6c where dynl2-gfp is localized to a large germ cell granule where two centers of high dynein concentration are observed preceding the division of the granule. this observation is consistent with the idea that dynein plays a role in the distribution of granule material within the cell during interphase. the observation that dynl2-gfp localizes preferentially to large granules  is in line with the hypothesis that dynein is required for granule fragmentation.

dynein is necessary for proper germ cell granule distribution in germ cells
considering the localization of dynein to germ cell granules, we investigated the effect of dynein inhibition on the distribution of germ cell granules. for this purpose, we inhibited dynein function by overexpression of the dynactin subunit dynamitin   <cit>  in germ cells. dynamitin overexpression is believed to disrupt the dynactin complex, thereby inhibiting dynein binding to its cargo  <cit> . strikingly, in  <dig> hpf embryos, primordial germ cells in which dynein function is inhibited show a strong reduction in the number of vasa-positive granules . namely, whereas germ cells of wild type  embryos exhibit an average of  <dig> ±  <dig>  granules per cell, germ cells overexpressing dynamitin contain on average only  <dig> ±  <dig>  granules per cell . concomitant with the reduction in granule number, a dramatic increase in granule size was observed . while the average cross section area of germ cell granules in control germ cells is  <dig>  μm <dig>  , in cells overexpressing dynamitin the average area is  <dig>  μm <dig>  . these results indicate that dynein is not involved in determining the total amount of germ cell granule material in the cell . rather, dynein is involved in controlling the size of individual granules during the first  <dig> hours of zebrafish embryonic development. in addition to the effect on germ cell granules size and number, dynamitin overexpression in germ cells resulted in a reduction in the number of germ cells to 78% . we postulate that this phenotype reflects an additional role for dynein in cell division.

tdrd <dig> plays a crucial role for structural integrity of granules in pgcs
we assumed that in addition to the microtubule network and the associated machinery, granule-specific components are likely to participate in regulating granules distribution, size and number in germ cells. we chose to focus on the zebrafish tudor-repeat-containing gene tdrd <dig>  whose transcription was found to be higher in germ cells as compared with somatic cells in a microarray screen. tdrd <dig> belongs to a family of genes, some of which we found to be expressed in zebrafish germ cells . the transcript of tdrd <dig> is localized to the germ plasm and is expressed in pgcs for at least the first days of development . in drosophila, tudor function is important for germ cell specification and for the structural integrity of polar granules  <cit> .

to examine tdrd <dig> function, we initially determined the subcellular localization of the protein by expressing a tdrd7-gfp fusion protein in germ cells. the tdrd <dig> fusion is found in zebrafish germ cell granules, where it colocalizes with the germ cell granule protein marker vasa-dsred . the localization of tdrd <dig> was verified by 5' and 3' fusions, as well as by fusions to ha- and flag-tags. in addition to the nanos-3'utr, it was fused to its own utr yielding the same results .

to determine whether tdrd <dig> participates in controlling granule distribution, size or number, we used antisense morpholino oligonucleotides to inhibit tdrd <dig> translation. no effect on pgc specification, division or migration upon inhibition of tdrd <dig> translation was observed, as the number of pgcs in control embryos and tdrd <dig> knock down embryos was equal at  <dig> hpf and the pgcs migrated properly to the position where the gonad develops . moreover, early pgc markers such as vasa, nanos, dead end, h1m, as well as the expression of the differentiation marker ziwi  <cit>  were normally expressed in pgcs of tdrd <dig> knock down embryos . consequntly, embryos injected with tdrd <dig> morpholino developed into fertile males and females . however, a prominent phenotype of abnormal germ cell granule morphology was observed in  <dig> hpf treated embryos . in these embryos we observed large granules that resembled those observed in early developmental stages in wild-type embryos . in pgcs lacking tdrd <dig>  the average size of the largest granule in a cell is significantly increased . in addition, we observed an increase in the number of small granules , which is reflected by an alteration of granule size distribution in favor to extreme sizes . this phenotype was readily reverted by co-injection of a morpholino-resistant mrna encoding tdrd <dig>  confirming the specificity of the antisense oligonucleotide-induced phenotype . thus, tdrd <dig> function is important to guarantee the development of homogenous medium size granules over time and for normal number of granules in the germ cells. this phenotype was also demonstrated using granulito as a marker for germ cell granules . tdrd <dig> function appears be required in maintaining germ cell granule integrity independently of microtubules and dynein function as the distribution of microtubules and dynein is not affected in tdrd <dig> knock down pgcs .

discussion
in this study we have identified a novel germ cell component granulito. the mrna of this gene is maternally provided and becomes localized to the germ plasm, while the protein fusion localizes to zebrafish germ cell granules. knock down experiments using granulito morpholino antisense oligonucleotides failed to induce a discernible phenotype. this suggests that the function of the protein might be either masked by a redundant protein, or that granulito function is not essential during early development. alternatively, maternally-provided granulito protein could be sufficient for carrying out the role at the stages tested.

nevertheless, we have taken advantage of the newly identified gene and generated granulito-dsredex transgenenic fish to serve as a valuable tool for investigating germ cell granule distribution during very early stages of pgc development, stages that previously had been inaccessible for in vivo analysis in live embryos. we found that the morphology of germ-cell granules is transformed from large aggregates seen at early developmental stages into small granules that assume perinuclear localization in the cell. such a transition is believed to allow the symmetrical distribution of the material to both daughter cells during cell division, thereby enabling an increase in germ cell number as the cells proliferate  <cit> .

following the distribution of germ-cell granules during the first  <dig> hours of embryonic development, we observed that as pgcs proliferate, the variation in granule sizes decreases. analyzing the segregation of granules among daughter cells, we provide evidence that this process is not a random but rather follows an ordered segregation. segregation of other cellular components  also follows an ordered partition and is dependent on microtubule function. studies in c.elegans and zebrafish showed that microtubules are required for proper localization of germ plasm and germ cell specification  <cit> . here we extended these studies to stages following pgc specification and demonstrate the presence of α-tubulin within the granules and association of microtubules with granular structures. furthermore, we show that during mitosis granules are found in close proximity to microtubules of the mitotic spindle, consistent with a role for microtubules in the ordered segregation of granules during cell division.

granules are associated with microtubules during all stages of the cell cycle and seem to move along microtubule tracks during mitosis suggesting a functional interaction. we propose that microtubules of the spindle apparatus are part of a mechanism that ensures inheritance of granules by daughter cells after cell division. in this model, microtubules encounter and bind granules during centrosome repositioning in early stages of mitosis when these structures migrate towards the poles. indeed, we could detect such an interaction during early germ-cell mitosis when presumed centrosomes are divided and move towards the poles . attachment of the granules to microtubules upon disassembly of the nuclear envelope and movement towards the forming poles by spindle microtubule pull, would allow a controlled segregation of these structures during the subsequent steps of mitosis.

although we could not functionally address the role of microtubules for granule segregation during cell division due to their requirement for cell division per se  <cit> , exposure to the microtubule inhibitor nocodazole demonstrated the importance of intact microtubule organization for the structural properties of germ cell granules . the effect on granule morphology is unlikely to represent an indirect effect of the drug on nuclear envelope structure, as nuclear envelope disassembly alone during mitosis does not affect granule structure.

the notion that microtubules are important for the morphology and translocation of the granules is further supported by the finding that the motor protein dynein localizes specifically to germ cell granules. moreover, inhibition of dynein cargo-loading function by inhibiting dynein-dynactin interaction resulted in an increase in granule size and a reduction in their number . dynein is thus implicated in the breaking up granules into smaller units during development. interestingly, the novel xenopus protein germes, which is important for germ plasm morphology, germ cell survival and migration of these cells in xenopus, localizes specifically to germ plasm and directly interacts with dynein light chains  <cit> . the presence of germ plasm components that directly interact with dynein motors in xenopus is consistent with the role we propose it plays in granule morphology and distribution in zebrafish. it is therefore reasonable to speculate that dynein interacts with components of germ cell granules in zebrafish pgcs and that granules use microtubules to slide on, to be pulled and to break apart. another possible scenario of dynein-granule interaction would be the association between components of the dynactin complex like arp <dig> with actin through spectrin  <cit> . such possibility is supported by the finding that actin is abundant in germ cell granules . as described in the results, inhibition of dynein by dynamitin over expression led to a mild  reduction in the total number of germ cells, cells that undergo 2– <dig> cell divisions during the first  <dig> hours of development. if the number of cell divisions is important for the developmental age perceived by the cells, then inhibition of cell division would result in germ cells having the germ plasm morphology of pgcs at an earlier developmental stage thus contributing to the severity of the observed germ plasm morphology phenotype.

in order to identify genes that are specifically expressed in granules and are involved in granule structural maintenance, we analyzed proteins containing tudor-repeat domains that were previously shown to be involved in polar granule structural integrity in drosophila  <cit>  and mice nuage maintenance  <cit> .

similar to the drosophila tudor  <cit> , tdrd <dig> is localized to the germ plasm yet, formation of germ cells in tdrd7-depleted zebrafish embryos appears unaffected. as our experimental approach does not inhibit maternal protein function, we cannot exclude a role for tdrd <dig> protein in germ cell specification during early stages of zebrafish development.

despite normal pgc specification and migration observed in tdrd <dig> morphants, germ cell granule structure integrity is abnormal. this finding is in agreement with the findings of arkov et al. that proposed that tudor-domains serve as a docking platform for polar granule assembly in drosophila and demonstrated that specific tudor domains are required for proper granule architecture and germ cell formation  <cit> . in drosophila embryos lacking tudor function, polar granules fail to assemble and no pgcs are specified. hypomorphic alleles show reduced number and size as well as abnormal morphology for polar granules, a phenotype that might signify a common function for the zebrafish and drosophila proteins. as granule size at  <dig> hpf wt pgcs appeared larger than that in tdrd <dig> knock-down cells at  <dig> hpf , we assume that the observed phenotype is primarily caused by defects in the maturation process, although we could not exclude some tdrd <dig> function required for keeping small granules separated.

the severe disruption of granule architecture due to tdrd <dig> protein loss-of-function in early stages may hint at a critical role of the protein during later stages of germ cell development. for example, germ cells of mice deficient in tdrd <dig> initially migrate and develop normally. however, male mice are sterile due to lack of mature sperm  <cit> . in these mutants, the inter-mitochondrial cement, an essential subset of nuage in mouse, is strongly reduced. mice carrying mutant forms of rnf <dig>  another tudor domain containing protein, show a similar phenotype to that of tdrd <dig> knockouts  <cit> . rnf <dig> localizes to a new form of nuage, rnf17-granules; rnf <dig> knockouts lack these granules and the male mice are infertile as well. as embryos injected with tdrd <dig> morpholino  gave rise to fertile males and females we conclude that the early tdrd <dig> function is not essential for fertility.

since several genes contain tudor domains, tdrd <dig> could be redundant with another yet-to-be-identified gene of the same family. as presented in the supplemental figure  <dig>  we sought to identify other tudor domain containing proteins that are expressed in zebrafish germ cells. indeed, we found that following the second day of development, tdrd <dig> and rnf <dig> are specifically expressed in germ cells along with tdrd <dig>  suggesting a possible role for these genes in zebrafish germ cell development at later stages. yet, tdrd <dig> has been the only identified tudor domain-containing gene to be expressed during early zebrafish germ cell development. interestingly, it has recently been shown that tdrd <dig> mrna in zebrafish is efficiently degraded in the soma by the same mirna mechanism as for nanos <dig> mrna while being protected from degradation in pgcs  <cit> , lending further supports for the notion that tdrd <dig> is important for germ cell development.

to elucidate the role of germ cell granules architecture in germ cell development, alteration of the function of genes described here during later stages of development will be required. for example, the identification of tdrd <dig> zebrafish mutants or mouse knockouts that would allow the analysis of this effect during more mature stages of germ cell development. similarly, germ cell-specific conditional knockout of dynein may shed light on its role in later stages of germline development.

CONCLUSIONS
our study provides new insights into mechanisms responsible for proper germ cell granule architecture and inheritance during germ cell development. as similar structures are found in germ cells of different sexually reproducing animals, it would be interesting to examine whether the findings described here could be generalized to include a broad range of organisms.

