BACKGROUND
the ability to demonstrate the reproducibility of gene expression microarray results is a critical element in their adoption for clinical applications. several studies have asserted that microarray data can be "highly reproducible" if probe sequences are well-mapped to the genome and standard protocols are followed  <cit> . while largely focused on comparisons among measurement platforms, these and other studies have variously characterized many aspects of microarray performance. however, the microarray community has yet to adopt a standardized terminology and practice for characterizing performance that can facilitate clear communication among the user, developer, and regulator stakeholders.

the measurement science  community is devoted to establishing a philosophically coherent terminology and practice for characterizing and communicating measurement performance  <cit> . as the world's largest developer and publisher of international consensus standards, the non-governmental international organization for standardization  plays a critical role in disseminating this guidance  <cit> . the documentary standard iso 5725- <dig>  <cit>  details the basic concepts and estimation techniques for assessing metrological "accuracy" which is defined as a combination of two concepts, "trueness" and "precision." these concepts are formally defined in the vocabulary of international metrology   <cit>  base document and more cogently described in iso  <dig>  <cit> : trueness is the closeness of a measurement to an accepted reference value and precision is the closeness of measurement results to each other. while microarrays can generate vastly more data per sample than is typical of the processes that shaped the development of these documents, we believe that this pre-existing metrological framework can be extended to microarrays and other highly multiplexed measurement processes.

properly designed collaborative studies are one of the very best ways of obtaining the information required to characterize some aspects of measurement performance  <cit> . the three "rounds" of the expression analysis pilot proficiency test evaluated replicate samples of a pair of mixed-tissue rna pools across multiple participants from june to december of 2004; these studies provide a wealth of information relevant to the estimation of several aspects of within-platform measurement precision and among-participant measurement concordance  <cit> . while the known relationships between the two rna pools used in these studies also enable evaluation of several measures of trueness in differential expression  <cit> , we here evaluate only the metrological concepts of precision as applied to the underlying direct measurements. these concepts provide a foundation for the development of objective expectations for the consistency of microarray results. we anticipate that this foundation will facilitate improving the comparability of microarray measurements over time and place and may lead to the development of new approaches and tools for objectively demonstrating the utility of measures of differential expression and ranked lists of differentially expressed genes.

RESULTS
the precision of a defined measurement process can be characterized using three nested metrics: "repeatability," "intermediate precision," and "reproducibility." these measures of precision are defined in terms of the conditions that apply when the measurements are obtained, including: operator, equipment, calibrations, environmental conditions, and the period of time between measurements. repeatability is defined as the precision of independent measurements when all conditions are assumed constant and thus do not contribute variability . reproducibility is defined as the precision observed when all conditions are permitted to vary within allowable tolerances and thus to contribute variability . intermediate precision is a special case, where some specified factors are held constant and others are varied . a variety of analysis of variance approaches are suitable for dissecting such data. iso 5725- <dig> details the standard approach used in measurement science to characterize measurement precision for a specific measurement process from the results for a single material in a single study  <cit> .

classical precision metrics
in the context of the microarray platform measurements, the signal from each probeset of the array is a single measurement process. the iso 5725- <dig> calculations for a single process in a single study are described in methods, classical precision metrics for single studies. methods, classical precision metrics for multiple studies extends the calculations to multiple studies that use nominally identical samples. the design elements of the expression analysis pilot proficiency test studies that enable the use of these calculations are described in methods, study design.

while tedious, none of the classical precision metrics are particularly complex or difficult to calculate. however, keeping track of the nomenclature and symbols used for the various metrics can be challenging. in quick summary: let xijk represent the kth replicate measurement of a given probeset reported by the jth participant in the ith round. the usual mean, , and standard deviation, s, of the replicates estimate the value and technical variation for that probeset for the particular participant at one point in time. the value  and technical variation characteristic of the microarray platform itself are estimated by combining the  and s values over all participants; the metrological term for this expected technical variation is repeatability precision and is represented as sri. the variation among the different  estimates the between-participant precision and is represented as sli. in combination, the two sources of variation estimate the reproducibility precision which is represented as sri. these single-round estimates can be regarded as characterizing the performance of the given probeset over the  duration of the study.

when nominally identical samples are analyzed in multiple studies, the resulting multiple  and s values can be used to estimate the participant-specific expected value, , repeatability, srj, and among-round precision, swj; the combination of these two sources of variation estimate the intermediate precision over time for the participant, sij  <cit> . combining the single-round, single-participant estimates over all participants can also estimate the long-term expected value, , repeatability, sr, between-laboratory precision, sl, and reproducibility, sr; these long-term estimates can be regarded as characterizing the intrinsic performance of the platform.

precision functions
the above classical precision metrics characterize performance for individual processes with multiple nominally identical samples of one material. characterizing processes as a function of signal level can usefully identify the performance expected for "typical" samples  <cit> . for measurement methods involving one to a few tens of different measurement processes, this can be accomplished with interlaboratory studies involving a relatively small series of samples of similar matrix composition but with varying levels of the analytes of interest. if the many  of signals typical of microarrays have very different measurement characteristics, then little simplification to this classical approach is possible. however, estimation of aggregate precision functions from analyses of a single material becomes feasible if the majority of the measurement processes share similar performance characteristics. the expected performance of a "typical" probeset with a "typical" sample can be established by compositing the multitudinous individual estimates for one or a few samples.

the expression analysis pilot studies provide results for  <dig> probesets in each of two mixed-tissue pools. in the following, we characterize the various precision metrics as functions of signal level from the  <dig> unique combinations of probeset and material.

discrete precision functions
the pattern and magnitude of the various functions in all three rounds are very similar to each other, indicating that the precision characteristics of the method did not change much over the seven months between round  <dig> and round  <dig> or with the change in number and identity of the participants. this pattern of technical variability as a function of signal level  has been often observed with affymetrix microarray suite  <dig>  <cit>  -processed data  <cit> . this complex structure appears to be at least mostly an artifact of mas <dig> processing rather than an intrinsic property of the microarray platform, since it is not observed with some other data processing approaches  <cit> . regardless, variability estimated from short-term studies may underestimate the variability expected over longer periods: while <sr> for the higher signal levels is a multiplicative factor of  <dig>  =  <dig>  or about 10% relative, <sr> is a factor of  <dig>  =  <dig>  or about 30% relative. it is perhaps noteworthy that these lessons can only be learned through longitudinal study of measurements from a reasonably well defined population of participants.

continuous precision functions
while discrete functions are efficient as graphical summaries, they are inconvenient for estimating quantitative values of an expected precision at specific signal levels. for use in further calculations, such as variance-stabilized normalization  <cit> , it is desirable to represent the various precision estimates as continuous functions,  = f, where  is the estimated precision value, x is the signal level, and f is some function parameterized with a relatively small set of coefficients. while a simple four-parameter sigmoidal curve captures much of the structure for most of the discrete functions for the present data, the underlying model assumption of monotonic change as the signal rises from the detection-limit to saturation-limit is not fully adequate to describe mas <dig> behavior. rather than attempting to define and fit more complete theory-based models for particular datasets, platforms, or data processing systems, interpolative empirical functions can readily capture the observed structure. while comparatively crude and unsuitable for extrapolation, even simple polynomials of modestly high-order provide a reasonable qualitative description of the dependence as well as being easily implemented and interpreted. the lower panel of figure  <dig> displays 10th-order polynomials parameterized to the discrete between-round precisions shown in the upper panel of figure  <dig>  at graphical resolution, very similar fits to the discrete functions are provided by polynomials of order  <dig> and above.

discussion
characterizing measurement systems
the between-round repeatability, {<>,<sr>}, between-participant precision, {<>,<sl>}, and reproducibility {<>,<sr>} functions displayed in figure  <dig> provide one definition of the expected measurement precision of signals from one microarray platform, processed with particular software, obtained by a given group of laboratories at a particular point in time. comparable precision characteristics for other data preprocessing approaches can be estimated by reanalysis of these data. evaluating the expected characteristics of other platforms will require new studies, with different samples, but comparable functions can be defined given a similar experimental design and sufficient participants of comparable experience. whether it will be possible to generalize results among related microarray platforms or across data analysis systems is yet to be assessed.

monitoring performance changes over time
the present data are, however, sufficient to evaluate whether the precision characteristics of the particular platform and signal analysis method are stable over time. the discrete within-round {<>,<sri>} repeatabilities, {<>,<sli>} between-participant precisions, and {<>,<sri>} reproducibilities that are displayed by each round in figure  <dig> are redisplayed in figure  <dig> by each precision component. the forms of the functions are very similar over the three studies. curiously, while the level of within-participant repeatability shows little or no trend, the between-participant precision at signal levels above the median  appears to have degraded somewhat with time. the invariant repeatability argues against any significant change in the quality of the rna pools; this plus the distribution of microarrays from multiple lots in round  <dig> but single lots in rounds  <dig> and  <dig> argue against significant between-array variability. thus the small increase in between-participant variability may reflect the changes in the number of participants and the processing protocols that they used; it may also indicate that somewhat less experienced analysts were involved in the later rounds.

comparing participant precisions
while simple contrasts of repeatability, sr, and between-participant precision, sl,  enables identification of individual probesets that differ systematically among participants, the variation among the {<>,<s>} functions in figure  <dig> suggests that the systematic differences among the participants are not confined to just a relatively few measurement processes. comparison of the within-participant repeatability, {<>,<srj>}, and among-round precision, {<>,<swj>}, functions for each participant helps identify the nature of long-term changes.

while multivariate approaches could be used to evaluate and display the relative participant performance based on continuous versions of the short-term and long-term precision functions, the basic structure can be readily visualized from the median value of the discrete functions. figure  <dig> displays the median within-round repeatability, srj, and median among-round precision,swj. to avoid estimation artifacts, the medians are evaluated over signal levels from  <dig> to  <dig>  with three exceptions, between-round precision is limited by within-round performance. the excess between-round variability for measurement systems 1b,  <dig>  and  <dig> likely results from undocumented changes to the systems. the generally poorer precision for systems in protocol group "c" suggests that one or more factor in this group is not well controlled.

the structure visualized in figure  <dig> is congruent with the behavior of the data for the exemplar probeset affx_rat_hexokinase_5_at discussed in methods. the association of abstract trends with the behavior of a particular probeset in one sample may facilitate identifying root-causes. the analysis and display tools developed for traditional measurands thus can inform both the development and the interpretation of tools for interlaboratory studies of microarrays.

CONCLUSIONS
the established metrological framework for characterizing precision can be applied to results from microarray interlaboratory studies, enabling precision characteristics of microarray results to be expressed in a way that permits comparison to those of other measurement processes. the design of the expression analysis pilot proficiency test facilitated assessment of the nested precision metrics of repeatability, intermediate precision over time, and reproducibility – all critical figures of merit of any analytical method. such studies and figures of merit are essential tools for objective, quantitative performance assessment of individual laboratories, the population of laboratories, and microarray platforms. we believe that continuous precision functions will prove a vital tool for characterizing and comparing measurement platforms and data processing algorithms.

the tools described here for the simplest of microarray signals, are the foundation for further work addressing precision measures for differential expression and differentially expressed gene lists. figures of merit for these composite signals will support objective performance assessment of the measures behind the biological inference, the reason for performing the measurements in the first place.

