BACKGROUND
genomic knowledge allows compiling an inventory of an organism’s enzymes and thus the subsequent reconstruction
 <cit>  and simulation of its metabolic system
 <cit>  using constraint-based modeling  techniques
 <cit> . compensating the lack of detailed information on the systems parameters, e.g., enzyme kinetics, gene regulation etc., cbm has proven to be a valuable tool for genome-scale system analysis. for example, flux balance analysis 
 <cit>  has been used to predict with high accuracy the lethality of gene deletions in unicellular organisms by taking only the metabolic system’s stoichiometry, the assumption of optimal growth , and a specified growth medium into account .

duarte et al.
 <cit> , published a genome-scale representation of human metabolism based on genomic, bibliographic, and biochemical information. in contrast to metabolic representations of unicellular organisms, the following caveats play a role in the modeling of multicellular reconstructions, in general, and in particular for the human system
 <cit> :  it is difficult to define environmental conditions for a multicellular system,  usually not enough information is available about the cell-type specificity of human metabolic pathways, and  cellular objectives, a prerequisite for flux balance analysis, are hard to define and validate. the precision of cbm predictions increase with the availability and accuracy of constraints, as they aid narrowing down the potential solution space to the biologically meaningful system states. thus, integrating experimental data can help overcome the previously mentioned limitations.

in the present work, we will integrate human transcriptome data from a cohort of healthy controls and aldosterone producing adenomas  of adrenal glands from primary aldosteronism  patients
 <cit>  with the metabolic reconstruction human recon  <dig> <cit> . primary aldosteronism is a common form of hypertension with hypokalemia and suppressed renin-angiotensin system caused by autonomous aldosterone production. this data, among other data sets covered in the supporting information, will serve us to demonstrate how the metabolic contextualization dramatically increases the resolution of our perception of the data.

approach
different approaches to the incorporation of experimental data into cbm have been proposed
 <cit>  . the gimme  algorithm, proposed by becker and palsson
 <cit> , maintains flux through a proposed metabolic objective  by simultaneously punishing flux through unexpressed reactions. a threshold on the transcriptome data is used for expression classification purposes . the sum of fluxes through unexpressed reactions is termed inconsistency  and is minimized during the gimme optimization. thus, the inconsistency i gives, on the one hand, an estimate of the quality of the computed flux distribution, and measures, on the other hand, the coherence of the objective and the experimental data . we chose gimme over other methods for our analysis as  the threshold parameter used for determining gene presence-absence patterns is of particular interest to our study, and  the inconsistency measure suits our approach of quantifying the discrepancy of the measured transcript levels to a given cellular objective, e.g., aldosterone or atp production.

we will compare the inconsistency i to the metabolic coherence  introduced previously
 <cit> , which is a purely topological quantity that measures the fragmentation of effective metabolic gene networks . the coherence of metabolic gene network topology and expression patterns is quantified as follows : in order to extract effective subnetworks, we map genes with expression values above threshold directly onto a metabolic gene network of human metabolism. then, we compute the ratio of connected nodes and overall nodes in the effective subnetwork. this ratio is then converted into a z-score, by using a random distribution of expression changes as a null model . this z-score is our metabolic coherence , which measures the amount of network coherence between gene expression profiles and metabolic pathways.

the comparison between these two indices is interesting, as they highlight different properties of the network dynamics. the inconsistency index i, on the one hand, measures the level of disagreement between expression data and anticipated network dynamics. the mc index, on the other hand, measures the amount of coordinated  expressed reaction structure, which can only be observed after contextualization of the expression data.

figure
1d shows a flow diagram that describes the structure and necessary steps of our comparative analysis. based on this quantitative comparison, we will conduct a topological characterization of the individual contributions to i and show that valuable information can be extracted from them.

RESULTS
inconsistency and metabolic coherence uncover two types of metabolic behavior
using the gimme approach, can physiological insights be obtained from the adenoma transcriptome data? figure
2a shows the distribution of inconsistency values for the control and the adenoma transcriptome profiles. maximal aldosterone production was used as the cellular objective function vobj and a minimal medium composition containing glucose and glycerol, as well as a collection of amino acids and fatty acids, was implemented using the appropriate boundaries on the their respective exchange reactions . the histogram in figure
2a uncovers a bimodal distribution of adenoma inconsistency values: it consists of a group of adenomas exhibiting lower inconsistencies than the average 〈i〉 of the control group. we term them high and low inconsistency group respectively . it is important to note that these two categories  could not have been uncovered by conventional cluster analysis .

how does the purely topological metabolic coherence method compare to the previously applied gimme approach? measuring the metabolic coherence for the adenoma transcript data reveals a similar pattern . although not quite as distinct as for the inconsistency measure , two groups of high and low coherence are visible, which leads us to the following comparison of inconsistency and metabolic coherence.

comparison of metabolic coherence and inconsistency
we have shown above, that gimme, as well as the metabolic coherence, permit an interrogation of the transcriptome data in a metabolic context. both provide biological meaningful insights, which could not have been obtained by classical means of microarray data analysis. but how does gimme compare to the metabolic coherence in detail, which is a purely topological score that inquires far less parameters and assumptions?

figure
3a shows a scatterplot of the metabolic coherence and inconsistency values for all  <dig> expression profiles , using the reference medium and the threshold t= <dig> , revealing a strong anticorrelation between both measures . the dependence of the correlation on the threshold parameter t, applied to the data in order to distinguish between expressed and not expressed metabolic genes, is checked in figure
3b. the strongest negative correlation appears for parameter ranges that fit our statistical understanding of the raw signal distribution . no significant dependence on the level parameter l was found .

in figure
3d the dependence of the correlation between inconsistency and the mc on the chosen growth medium is shown. the distribution of correlation coefficients is narrow , regardless of which correlation measure is considered. this indicates that both inconsistency and mc and their correlation seem not be strongly dependent on the environmental conditions provided. furthermore, the correlation values obtained for the reference medium  seem to originate in the left tail of the distributions, suggesting a rather high correspondence with the in vivo situation.

we confirmed that the observed anticorrelation between both measures is not a feature of the adenoma data, but holds true for other transcriptome data as well
 <cit>  .

inconsistency contributions in central human metabolism
figure
 <dig> displays inconsistency contributions and flux patterns for control, hig and lig on the carbohydrate metabolism pathways of homo sapiens. striking differences between the control group and the adenoma groups become visible in this overview, e.g., the pentose-phosphate pathway seems to be activated only in the hig and lig. furthermore, the control pathway map lays out a rather consistent pattern of flux activities. though, a few exceptions arise: pyruvate dehydrogenase , the major entry point to the tca cycle, and to lesser extent hexokinase  and the pyruvate transport from cytosol to mitochondrium , exhibit high contribution strengths. it is intriguing that the contribution strengths for these particular reactions is diminishingly small in the lig case, which indicates an elevated energy metabolism for those adenomas. the hig, on the other hand, shows a large number of reactions with elevated contribution strengths homogeneously distributed over the whole map, which indicates a significantly reduced energy metabolism.
 <cit> .

individual contributions to the inconsistency
the correlation between metabolic coherence and inconsistency suggests a connection between both measures, and thus the possibility of interpreting the inconsistency values from the perspective of network topology. in order to investigate this point, we will decompose the inconsistency value into a vector of individual contributions, i.e., reactions that have been reinserted during the optimization procedure in order to achieve the targeted flux-level of the objective function. we further define the contribution strength of a reaction as the number of contributions it makes to the inconsistencies of a data set divided by the size of the respective data set.

comparing the contribution strengths of reactions in central metabolism reveals interesting changes in the physiology of lig and hig . but how do the contribution strengths vary between control, lig and hig on a global metabolic scale? the contribution strengths for a subset of all contributing reactions is shown in figure
 <dig> . the contributing reactions have been sorted according to their contribution strengths in the control group and at equal strength by the overall contributions. having already seen a few examples for differentially contributing reactions in the carbohydrate pathways, it becomes evident that there are many more to discover.
 <dig> and supporting additional file
1: text s <dig> table s <dig>  only a subset of all contributing reactions is shown due to space limitations .

on the other hand, a group of reactions with very high contribution strengths seems to contribute non-specifically and independently from the gene expression data. in the following, we want to elaborate on this set of reactions, and will use certain categories and topological markers to characterize them.

the following circumstances can lead to non-specific contributions to the inconsistency vector: 

 <dig>  a reaction is expressedin vivo but the measured gene expression intensity falls below the threshold t under most or all experimental conditions . this is a consequence of the rigid application of a universal threshold. topologically, these contributions often disrupt a chain of otherwise expressed reactions .

 <dig>  a reaction is expressedin vivo but, e.g., wrong gpr associations, missing isozymes, wrong gene annotations, erroneous data etc., make it invisible for the analysis. again, these artifacts are often characterized by an interrupted chain of expressed reactions .

 <dig>  the reaction is not expressed, but it has to be utilized by gimme due to the following reasons: 

 the stated objective function does not reflect the situation present in the cell. defining the objective functions as the output of the system, these reactions contributions should often lie close to it .

 the chosen media composition does not reflect the in vivo environment in which the experimental data has been obtained. the preliminary fba step in gimme is naive about the in vivo medium composition and uses everything provided and suitable for the maximization of the objective function. as gimme enforces a certain achievement of the objective flux predicted by fba, many of the transport reactions used by fba will also be used by gimme. topologically, these reaction contributions are characterized by lying close to the provided medium components .

 too many missing gene-protein-reaction associations , either due to non-enzymatic reaction steps or knowledge gaps, before and after the contributing reaction can lead to wrongly activated paths, as missing gpr information is not punished by gimme .

 alternative expressed routes to the objective function are available in vivo, but are not covered by the metabolic reconstruction. this leads to reaction contributions that are characterized by producing essential precursors for the objective function, and thus constitute bottlenecks in the system .

table
 <dig> lists topological and biological classifications for a selection of the  <dig> unspecific contributions as well as  <dig> selected differentially contributing reactions . the topological characterization from the enumeration above have also been applied to the specific contributions.

our network-based approach is capable of identifying similar patterns as the more sophisticated methods based on flux-balance analysis. in this way, our approach can facilitate an understanding of metabolic inconsistencies from a network perspective. it thus serves as a mediator between the topology of metabolic systems and their dynamical function. in the following we will discuss two representative sets of contributions to the inconsistency in greater detail.

*proline cycle issue; see figure
 <dig> 

**2-oxoadipate issue; see figure
 <dig> 

***tyrosine path to fumarate and acetoacetate issue; see figure s <dig> and text s <dig> 

Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate-proline cycle
proline dehydrogenase  emerges as one of the major unspecific inconsistency contributors . together with Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase , it is involved in a cycle that interconverts nadh into fadh <dig> , a necessary redox factor for the biosynthesis of cholesterol biosynthesis, the ultimate precursor for all steroid pathways and concomitantly aldosterone production. the cycle involves synthesis and degradation of l-proline, where Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate  acts as precursor as well as degradative product. in the cytosol, p5crx seems to be expressed in most of the samples, whereas expression levels for prod <dig> fall all below the gimme threshold. it is intriguing that the gene expression profiles are almost reversed in the mitochondrion, where prod2m  is expressed  and p5crxm  is not expressed. it is known that the distinct reaction steps of the Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate-proline cycle are localized over different subcellular locations
 <cit> :  the dehydrogenation of proline to 1pyr5c takes place in the mitochondrion ,  1pyr5c emerges from the mitochondrion and  is converted back to proline in the cytosol,  which is then transported back into the mitochondrion, closing the cycle. in fact, these are also the steps suggested by the observed expression patterns. so why does gimme predict the cycle to take place exclusively in the cytosol, although prod <dig> expression is clearly absent in all samples? checking the model revealed missing mitochondrial transporters for 1pyr5c , prohibiting its correct physiological operation and suggesting necessary amendments to the human model. furthermore, the reduced expression of prod2m in lig and hig constitutes an interesting deviation to metabolic signature of the control group.

2-oxoadipate pathways
2-oxoadipate  is one of the precursors for acetyl-coa , which is heavily utilized in cholesterol biosynthesis. only two paths lead to 2-oxoadipate, i.e., l-tryptophan  and l-lysine degradation . the many missing gpr associations  on the path leading from lysine to 2-oxoadipate , surely promote the usage of this specific pathway versus the alternative pathway leading from tryptophan to 2-oxoadipate , explaining the high contribution strength of aatai . the expression data suggests the absence of both catabolic pathways. however, it is intriguing to see that all subsequent steps from 2-oxoadipate to acetyl-coa seem to be expressed in the control and lig , implying that 2-oxiadipate might still be metabolized in the samples. further investigations in this direction might be promising, especially in the light of the elevated expression levels  found for glutaryl-coa dehydrogenase  and acetyl-coa c-acetyltransferase .

discussion
there is an ongoing interest in the generic
 <cit>  and network-based
 <cit>  properties of metabolic systems, though discussions of metabolic systems from a network perspective have frequently been criticized and are prone to artifacts, when one attempts to biologically interpret the observed topological properties. table
 <dig> on the other hand shows, how a topological perspective can help guide the biological interpretation of experimental data and constraint-based analysis results. classifying metabolic inconsistencies from a topological perspective allowed us to think of such inconsistencies in terms of bottlenecks, paths and branching ratios, etc. as an extension to this work we would like to formalize our approach in the future.

comparing the contribution strengths of individual reactions among the different sample categories  revealed unspecific contributions to the inconsistency, as well as a group of reactions that differentially contribute in a specific fashion. we constructed a methodological framework for the topological classification of the inconsistency contributions. therefore, topological markers were developed for the characterization of both, specific and unspecific contributions, thus enabling a thorough understanding of the context-specific flux-activity results. it turned out, that on the one hand, the specific contributions cast light on an unforeseen diversity of alterations in the physiology of adrenal gland adenomas and, on the other hand, the unspecific contributions provide entry points for the iterative refinement of the metabolic reconstruction.

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented a sequence of three results on the network-mediated correspondence between gene expression patterns and metabolic systems:  we have shown the general agreement between gimme
 <cit>  and a purely topological method from
 <cit> , both of them capable to detect distinct physiological behaviors in the adrenal gland tumors.  we have extended the gimme approach by moving from the inconsistency score to the inconsistency vector that contains the various contributions to the metabolic inconsistency.  we have been able to formulate biological hypotheses for these vector components based on comparison with network topology.

