BACKGROUND
present-day distributions of many of earth’s biotas reflect the profound influence of climatic and sea-level fluctuations during the glacial-interglacial cycles of the pleistocene   <cit> . notably, eight glacial advances since 740 ka have produced more extreme  <dig> -year environmental changes than those preceding 1 ma  <cit> . because glacial-interglacial transitions occurred in an evolutionary blink of an eye, many extant species have spent most of their recent evolutionary histories under glacial rather than short-lived  interglacial conditions  <cit> . therefore, extreme environmental changes associated with the last glacial maximum  may have been the most recent climatic factors that affected present-day patterns of biodiversity prior to the global proliferation of humans and anthropogenic environmental disturbance  <cit> .

the biogeographical consequences of pleistocene glaciations are generally thought of in terms of direct effects of glacial cover and temperature change on northern hemisphere biotas. this is because over 80% of glacial ice on earth resided in the northern hemisphere during the lgm, resulting in the destruction and reorganization of continental landscapes in both the old and new world e.g.  <cit> . while few species from glaciated areas persisted in situ by adapting to changing local environments, many were actively displaced , passively displaced , or went extinct  <cit> . indeed, abundant paleontological and palynological evidence indicates that many terrestrial species of north america and europe contracted their ranges during the lgm to one or more lower-latitude  refugia, then expanded northward to recolonize much of their present-day ranges during the warmer holocene interglacial  <cit> . this scenario is known as the 'expansion-contraction’ model of pleistocene biogeography and has reached paradigm status in biology  <cit> .

many patterns of genetic variation are consistent with predictions from a model of range contraction during glacial advance and rapid post-glacial expansion. for example, phylogeographical analyses across european flora and fauna have identified the iberian, italian and balkan peninsulas as three main southern refugia from which postglacial recolonization of northern europe took place  <cit> . in more recent work, the tools of phylogeography and ecological niche modeling e.g.  <cit>  have been joined to refine models of pleistocene expansion and contraction. such analyses have revealed complicated patterns of northern and southern lgm refugia and complex histories of speciation, dispersal, secondary contact, and demographic expansion of species within the southern refugia themselves, particularly in europe  <cit> .

there is substantial geoscientific evidence that the glacial-interglacial cycles also had substantial effects in subtropical and tropical zones, including refugial areas recognized today that were not covered by glaciers  <cit> . during the last interglaciation , wetter, warmer climate and sea levels ~4-6 m above present sea level   <cit>  created favorable conditions for expansions in many species ranges. subsequent global cooling  and aridification during the lgm caused eustatic sea levels to drop ~120-130 m lower than today  <cit> , exposing huge areas of continental shelf, areas large enough to have doubled the span of the florida peninsula to 600 km wide. for freshwater species, this increase in lgm land area also increased river lengths , which likely increased population connectivity through river anastomoses. such mixing of populations from formerly isolated drainages would have promoted dispersal and gene flow, and may have aided southward range shifts. thus while glacial stages are perceived as periods of reduced population sizes and isolation in refugia  <cit> , for some species, particularly those in fresh waters, they may have presented opportunities for coastal dispersal, leading to range expansion or shifting . the possibility for southern refugia to act as areas of long-term persistence, dispersal, and gene flow, rather than range expansion-contraction dynamics, is known as the 'southern crossroads’ hypothesis  <cit> .

the gulf-atlantic coastal plain of eastern north america presents an ideal system in which to study interactions between geology, climate and diversification of a unique biota. this unglaciated region has figured prominently in phylogeographic research, and has revealed several major genetic breaks and confirmed local glacial refugia for northern taxa and endemic coastal species  <cit> . many coastal plain species possess evolutionary lineages that have diverged in an east-to-west direction across common biogeographic barriers, including peninsular florida which separates the maritime atlantic-vs.-gulf coast biota, the apalachicola river , mobile bay, and the mississippi river  <cit> . genetically identified breaks in this region also coincide with species distributional breaks  <cit>  and thus likely reflect historical vicariance events, or recurrent vicariance coupled with extinction-recolonization of populations  <cit> . however, phylogeographical studies also indicate that species persisted through the lgm in refugia on either side of the apalachicola basin in florida and texas-western louisiana  <cit> . between these regions, there are north-south-trending zones of hybridization and secondary contact, including one of remington’s 'suture zones’ between alabama and northwest florida, indicating a meeting place for lineages undergoing northward postglacial expansion  <cit> . as is the case for the patterns in evidence for expansion-contraction dynamics in unglaciated regions of europe  <cit> , evidence for these refugia in north america has been developed mainly from terrestrial taxa, e.g. mints  and yellow-poplar . these terrestrial data suggest that other codistributed species may have experienced similar range dynamics fitting the expansion-contraction model, possibly involving similar refugia. however, while regional genetic breaks are well documented, pleistocene evolutionary responses of coastal plain aquatic biota remain relatively uninvestigated.

here, we focus on least killifish, heterandria formosa girard  <dig>  a species which presents several advantages as a historical biogeographic study system that likely exhibited distinct response to the climatic upheavals of the late pleistocene. first, these small  livebearing freshwater fish  are restricted to low-elevation coastal plain areas of subtropical humid climate zones , and the tropical everglades  <cit> . this suggests climate is likely an important factor limiting h. formosa distribution. this species is also intolerant to cold-seasonal temperatures, making it an ideal candidate for ecological niche modeling and for testing the expansion-contraction model. second, h. formosa span the florida peninsula, an important glacial-stage refugium  <cit> ; thus, it is plausible that populations were displaced to warmer south-peninsula areas during the lgm. third, h. formosa display ecological characteristics consistent with the potential for rapid population expansion over evolutionary timescales, including  rapid reproduction and short generation time ;  a range of tolerances to different abiotic conditions  <cit> , and  female capacity for livebearing and sperm storage, suggesting individuals or groups of migrating females could found populations during rapid post-lgm expansions  <cit> . fourth, h. formosa is endemic to the gulf-atlantic coastal plain and thus also offer the opportunity to test the generality of the standard regional vicariance model and phylogeographical breaks documented in other taxa.

a previous rangewide study by baer  <cit>  using allozymes inferred genetic barriers in h. formosa between the western coastal plain  and atlantic coastal plain  regions , around the suwannee river, but not between north florida and the acp. another break occurred between gulf-draining waccasassa and withlacoochee rivers, creating a clade of louisiana plus south florida samples. baer  <cit>  also hypothesized an important role for population expansion and cross-peninsula gene flow in influencing current levels of genetic variation—including recent founding of acp populations after early pleistocene high seas , supported by lower genetic diversity and a lack of isolation-by-distance only among acp populations. yet while baer’s  <cit>  study presents a broad outline for understanding h. formosa historical biogeography, the limited levels of genetic variation he found and the more modest methods available at the time limited the hypotheses that could be tested. the current analytical framework in historical biogeography, including our ability to combine ecological niche modeling  with coalescent simulations , provides a more rigorous framework for biogeographical inference in this species  <cit> .

in this study, we integrate ecological niche modeling with paleoclimatic data, phylogeography, and coalescent simulations to infer the historical biogeography of h. formosa. specifically, we use h. formosa to test the hypothesis that members of the coastal plain freshwater biota fit predictions of the expansion-contraction model  by testing for predicted patterns of late pleistocene range shifts, refugia and recolonization patterns and their spatial-genetic effects. in addition to analyzing new mtdna and ndna sequences, we re-analyze available allozyme data  <cit> , which provide a novel temporal spectrum and improve our tests of genetic diversity predictions, including latitudinal patterns not previously investigated. we show that these new data, combined with paleoclimatic modeling in an integrative approach, support a hypothesis of pleistocene range expansion-contraction dynamics in least killifish.

methods
sampling and laboratory methods
rather than exhaustively sampling every h. formosa population rangewide, we conducted higher-density sampling near the middle of the range in northern florida to get at finer-scale patterns of diversity and gene flow near the area where baer  <cit>  predicted the main genetic breaks to occur. we also sampled broadly to infer phylogeographical patterns and test rangewide models of population history. we collected 224 h. formosa individuals from  <dig> coastal sites across the species range , which we assumed represented discrete populations. specimens were collected using standard seining and electrofishing techniques, preserved in 95% ethanol, transported to the laboratory, and maintained at room temperature before dna extraction. studies of population mutation rate parameter θ demonstrate that n ≈  <dig> samples are typically sufficient for characterizing genetic diversity, though estimates are improved by recombination and more loci  <cit> . thus, wherever possible during our analyses, we used samples that met this n ≥  <dig> threshold-sampling criterion, or pooled samples across populations until this threshold was met. we included three samples of a novel taxon  collected from coahuila, mexico in our analyses. based on morphological variation we have uncovered while describing this recently discovered taxon, we hypothesize it is the lineage sister to h. formosa . we tested this hypothesis through outgroup analysis by adding  <dig> sequences from  <dig> other poeciliid lineages retrieved from genbank into our phylogenetic alignments . this yielded a total of  <dig> possible outgroup lineages.

site names , sample sizes , regional groups , and cytb haplotypes are indicated. abbreviations: al alabama, ave avenue, co county, cr creek, cr county road, fl florida, ga georgia, hwy highway, ms mississippi, par parish, r river, rd road, sc south carolina, trib tributary.

†x-variables in codes range 1- <dig>  representing each individual sequenced for this study.

we isolated dna using the qiagen dneasy <dig> tissue protocol . we amplified the mitochondrial cytochrome b  gene for each sample by pcr using hrbek et al.’s  <cit>  l14725 - h <dig> primer pair. we also sequenced nuclear ribosomal protein s <dig>  introns  <dig> and  <dig> and exon  <dig> for subsamples of 1-3 h. formosa individuals/site for up to  <dig> random sites per region within each clade , and poeciliidae sp. samples. we amplified rps <dig> using a nested pcr design, with primers 1 f - 3r. <dig> in the first reaction followed by internal primers 1 f.2 - 2r. <dig> and 2 f.2 - 3r in subsequent reactions  <cit> . primers 1 f and 3r are from chow and takeyama  <cit> . amplification conditions, sequencing reactions, clean-up, and sequence visualization followed unmack et al.  <cit> . we aligned sequences manually while viewing electropherograms in sequencher™  <dig>  . all sequences generated in this study were deposited in genbank . alignment lengths were  <dig> nucleotide base pairs  for cytb and 876 bp for rps <dig>  we supplemented these data with orthologous ingroup sequences from lake pontchartrain, louisiana  and everglades, florida  retrieved from genbank . thus, our sampling encompassed h. formosa from  <dig> georeferenced sites . in total, the final cytb database we analyzed consisted of 223 h. formosa and  <dig> poeciliidae sp. sequences that we collapsed into unique haplotypes in dnasp  <dig>   <cit> . to create a multilocus alignment, we collated individuals with cytb and rps <dig> sequences and joined them with analogous sequences from potential outgroups. except multilocus and haplotype-based tests, analyses used the full cytb database ; iteratively adding/removing samples with missing data  had no qualitative effect on results.

we also obtained data for  <dig> nuclear protein-encoding allozyme loci described in  <cit>  , representing 948 h. formosa from  <dig> sites across the range  that we georeferenced in decimal degrees. putative loci included aat, adk, gpi- <dig>  g3pdh, idh- <dig>  ldh- <dig>  mdh- <dig>  mpi, pgm- <dig>  pgm- <dig> and 6-pgd. baer  <cit>  showed these loci to be at hardy-weinberg equilibrium, so we included all  <dig> loci in analyses.

ecological niche modeling
to test the prediction that h. formosa experienced a southward lgm range contraction and a northward range expansion from lgm to present, consistent with the expansion-contraction model, we conducted ecological niche modeling using the maximum entropy  approach implemented in maxent  <dig> .3 k  <cit> . the maxent method predicts locations of suitable habitat based on environmental-climatic characteristics and identifies abiotic and biotic factors that may limit species present-day distributions. we used maxent because it exhibits high predictive performance  <cit> .

we based our gis-based niche-modeling analyses on  <dig> georeferenced h. formosa sites  collated from our field collections  and global biodiversity information facility  records. sampling covered the species known distribution and was beyond sufficient given ≥ <dig> sites permit accurate niche model construction  <cit> . from worldclim , we assembled gis coverages with a resolution of  <dig> arc-seconds  for  <dig> bioclimatic environmental predictor variables  for present-day climates , plus analogous paleoclimatic data layers reconstructing past lgm  and lig  environments. the lgm dataset  was derived from the ccsm <dig> global circulation model of the paleoclimate modelling intercomparison project phase ii . the lig dataset  was derived from climate simulations in otto-bliesner et al.  <cit> . layers were clipped to an extent of  <dig> °n-35°n and 95°w-106°w prior to analyses. unfortunately, high-resolution data on freshwater environments is not available for all three time-periods modeled, although such data would aid niche-based modeling of freshwater organisms. however, the ccsm <dig> data estimate environments over continental shelf areas exposed during the lgm; thus, we were able to reproject our full models over subaerial lgm landmass within the modeled area, which was critical for testing the expansion-contraction model. we ran niche models using different combinations of predictor variables to broadly explore the utility of different variables and their effects on model prediction. ultimately, we included all  <dig> data layers in the final modeling procedures, because models showed no evidence of over-fitting and maxent is robust to correlations among variables .

we predicted the current  geographical distribution of h. formosa, by generating an ecological niche model in maxent using the program’s default settings , except we increased the number of iterations to  <dig> to ensure convergence and we averaged results over  <dig> replicate crossvalidation runs. all data were used for model testing and training. we reprojected the resulting niche models on lgm and lig layers and interpreted areas with high-predicted lgm bioclimatic suitability as most-likely refugial areas. under the expansion-contraction model, we expected areas of predicted occurrence to be reduced during the lgm relative to lig and present-day, restricted to a southern refugium. by contrast, refugia located on either side of the apalachicola river would support vicariance-northeast colonization, and a pattern of range stability through time would support southern crossroads. model evaluation was based on threshold-independent measures of performance, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve  statistics; scores closer to  <dig>  indicate higher predictive ability and auc >  <dig>  indicates better-than-random model prediction  <cit> . we generated response curves showing the impact of each variable alone on maxent prediction, and we studied 'multivariate environmental similarity surfaces’  output by the program to assess extrapolation and effects of novel environments on prediction.

population structure and genetic diversity
we evaluated dna polymorphism levels by calculating segregating sites , h, hd, and π in dnasp for the full h. formosa cytb dataset, as well as populations and samova groups  that met a threshold-sampling criterion of n ≥  <dig>  due to many samples not meeting our n ≥  <dig> threshold-sampling criterion, mtdna data were not used to test predicted genetic diversity patterns. watterson’s estimator  of θ was calculated overall and for samova groups. additionally, we calculated uncorrected pairwise mtdna p-distances between individuals and groups in mega  <dig>  <cit> .

we analyzed the mtdna data to test for patterns of spatial-genetic subdivision predicted by the various phylogeographical hypotheses. the expansion-contraction model predicts genetic drift should have created distinct lineages subdivided between refugia—if multiple, allopatric refugia existed—especially over repeated glacial cycles  <cit> . however, if northward recolonization occurred from a single southern refuge via 'leading-edge colonization,’ this should be reflected in a genetic distinction between the two areas, separating established  from blocked interior populations/lineages  <cit> . if the recolonization wave passed through spatial constraints, e.g. coastlines, we expect to identify most recent common ancestors  through the coalescent and genetic distinctions that mark the location of barriers encountered outside of a refuge  <cit> . for what we term the 'vicariance-northeast colonization’ hypothesis , we tested for genetic barriers in the apalachicola river-region between acp-fl and wcp samples, and between the suwannee and hillsborough rivers along florida’s gulf coast . however, we expected genetic barriers to be absent within the acp  <cit> . by contrast, a southern crossroads scenario would be supported by a pattern of no phylogeographical structure  <cit> .

we tested these predictions using monmonier’s  <cit>  algorithm, implemented in barrier  <dig>   <cit> , to identify genetic 'barriers’ across a delaunay triangulation network overlaying the sampling sites, based on maximum tamura–nei genetic distances calculated in arlequin  <dig>   <cit>  . to assess barrier support, we calculated bootstrap proportions from  <dig> bootstrapped barriers generated in barrier using  <dig> bootstrapped tamura–nei distance matrices made in poptools  <cit> ; bootstrap values > <dig> indicated strong support. next, we used spatial analysis of molecular variance , implemented in samova  <dig>   <cit> , to define population clusters maximizing the proportion of total genetic variance due to differences among geographical groups . we performed samovas across k = 2- <dig> groups using pairwise differences, drawing from any of  <dig> initial random conditions. we independently tested the grouping schemes indicated by the samova and barrier analyses by conducting analyses of molecular variance  in arlequin . because barrier and samova are sensitive to small sample sizes, we pooled adjacent sites until an n ≥  <dig> threshold-sampling criterion was reached per population, yielding a 22-population subset.

we also conducted additional spatial analyses. using amova, we tested for significant genetic partitioning among drainages. here, we capitalized on our dense north florida sampling and split populations across seven drainages, including the ochlockonee , st. marks , apalachee plus goose creek bays , aucilla , suwannee , hillsborough , and st. johns rivers . we employed genalex  <dig>   <cit>  to examine predictions about patterns of isolation-by-distance, using mantel tests  <cit>  for correspondence between mtdna genetic distances  and geographic distances  among sites at rangewide and fl-region levels . we used straight-line geographic distances, not river distances, because several sites were bodies of water  that are isolated from any nearby rivers. based on our niche models , we predicted much of the range would lack isolation-by-distance; however, under vicariance-northeast colonization, only acp populations should lack isolation-by-distance  <cit> .

we tested for genetic diversity patterning consistent with the expansion-contraction model using analyses of the allozyme dataset. coalescent theory predicts that northward postglacial expansion from reduced ne should have created genetic signatures of population expansion in recently founded  populations. these include excesses of rare alleles and low-frequency mutations, reduced genetic diversity  resulting in negative latitudinal clines, and a lack of isolation-by-distance . conversely, long-term stable refugia should display isolation-by-distance and higher genetic diversity. we tested for predicted latitudinal clines in diversity by calculating expected heterozygosity  over all loci in genalex , then testing for a negative relationship with latitude  <cit>  using linear regression models in past  <dig>   <cit> . an absence of clinal diversity patterning would be more consistent with a southern crossroads scenario. we tested whether allozyme he and private allelic richness  were greater within the niche modeling-inferred refugial populations  than throughout the putatively recolonized modern range using mann-whitney and kolmogorov-smirnov tests in past . using similar nonparametric tests, we tested whether wcp or acp diversity was significantly lower than that of other populations combined, or populations within the putative refuge. and we tested for expected patterns of  isolation-by-distance using mantel tests of unbiased nei’s d genetic distances and ln geographic distances between populations, calculated in genalex at rangewide, wcp, acp, fl, and within-refuge levels.

historical demography
we tested for population expansions predicted by the expansion-contraction model  at levels of regional groups, samova groups  and local populations  using complementary cytb analyses. we considered the expansion-contraction model 'strongly’ supported where at least two statistical tests supported expansion. first, we estimated fu’s fs, and r <dig>  and their 95% confidence intervals using coalescent simulations in dnasp . to distinguish population expansion from purifying or positive selection, we tested each group, and the full cytb database, for mtdna neutrality using mcdonald and kreitman’s  <cit>  test and coalescent simulations of fay and wu’s h <cit>  in dnasp . we used poeciliidae sp. as the mcdonald–kreitman test outgroup; other potential outgroups from additional file 1: table s <dig> yielded identical results . second, we conducted mismatch distribution tests for regions/groups with no apparent subdivision  in arlequin  to see if pairwise nucleotide difference frequencies rejected sudden- or spatial-expansion models . we calculated harpending’s raggedness index  as a test statistic measuring goodness-of-fit to the mismatch distributions. we calculated the time in generations since population expansion  using estimated expansion parameters and the equation τ =  <dig> μt ; t was converted to time in years using generation time. we expected mean t and/or 95% confidence intervals to overlap the lgm.

phylogenetic relationships and coalescent-dating analyses
we expected multiple pleistocene refugia to be supported by allopatric clades/unique networks  <cit>  with strong nodal/parsimony support, whereas unique clades or intra-network structuring between refugia inferred from niche modeling and recolonized areas would support leading-edge effects  <cit> . another phylogenetic prediction is that derived haplotypes  should become geographically localized outside of refugia with ancestral network populations found within refugia  <cit> . the placement of one or more network roots outside of the inferred refugia would be consistent with a model of allele surfing  <cit>  or extinction of trailing expansion edges  <cit> . here, southern crossroads is a null model with no obvious phylogeographical patterning within a single population-lineage.

we inferred relationships among h. formosa cytb haplotypes with nodal support using maximum-likelihood tree searches and bootstrap searches  in garli  <dig>   <cit> , partitioning the data by codon position, , 3). we analyzed our multilocus dataset using similar garli runs partitioning the data into cytb codon-position subsets and an rps7-gene subset, unlinking parameters across subsets. garli runs relied on dna substitution models selected using the decision theory algorithm in dt-modsel  <cit>  . we compared garli results to phylogenetic results from bayesian coalescent-dating analyses  with similar site models. because incomplete lineage sorting can obscure intraspecific phylogenetic relationships, we derived a 'species tree’ for our cytb haplotypes using the 'minimize deep coalescences’ method  <cit> . although crude, this method increases probability of obtaining accurate population trees using even a single locus and yields insights into the degree of lineage sorting  <cit> . we also inferred phylogenetic relationships among populations from the allozyme dataset. we imported unbiased nei’s d estimates  into paup*  <dig> b <dig>  <cit>  and used them to construct a midpoint-rooted neighbor-joining tree with total-distance branch lengths. we tested the genetic distinctiveness of the resulting clades in multivariate space using principal coordinates analysis  conducted in genalex. last, we inferred networks of cytb and rps <dig> haplotype relationships with connections exceeding 95% parsimonious probability in tcs  <dig>   <cit> .

we evaluated temporal diversification by estimating h. formosa-poeciliidae sp. divergence, h. formosa population/clade divergence and other node ages using coalescent-dating analyses of our multilocus matrix in beast  <dig>   <cit> . to ensure convergence, we ran three independent searches  using identical priors and relaxed, uncorrelated lognormal molecular clocks. we linked tree models but partitioned the data into cytb codon-position subsets , 3) and an rps7-gene subset and unlinked clocks and parameters across subsets. coalescent constant population size tree priors were used. we set uniform priors on rates drawn on by the lognormal relaxed clock that, for cytb, spanned protein-coding mtdna gene substitution rates reported for teleost fishes , and for rps <dig> spanned an arbitrary range of reasonable rates  consistent with ndna rates for freshwater fishes . by including poecilia  outgroups in our analysis, we were able to add a calibration point constraining the split between p.  domicensis  and p.  vittata  to 17-14 ma based on poecilia  phylogeny  <cit>  and geological dates for the separation of cuba and hispaniola  <cit> , following doadrio et al.  <cit> . we calibrated this node using a lognormal prior . we used similar calibrations to model basal pseudoxiphophorus divergence between 11-5 ma, following agorreta et al.  <cit> , and to model the tree root age  to  <dig>  ma with an extended tail  based on the oldest fossils known for the family from the paleocene-eocene maiz gordo and lumbrera formations, argentina  <cit> . we summarized posterior parameter distributions and calculated parameter-trace effective sample sizes  in tracer . we archived our sequence alignments and maximum-likelihood and bayesian tree results in treebase .

hypothesis testing
we used coalescent simulations of mtdna in mesquite  <dig>   <cit>  to statistically discriminate among phylogeographical scenarios representing the expansion-contraction model and two alternatives. this approach guards against the possibility that stochastic coalescences might make it more difficult to detect a signature of one or more models  <cit> . population tree models in the simulations  spanned a total time  equal to tree depths of  <dig>  ×  <dig> generations, derived by converting the mean intraspecific time to the most recent common ancestor  estimate from beast from absolute time to coalescent time . we scaled branching intervals so that they summed to ttotal. we estimated overall ne for simulations  by summing female ne  estimates from θ values, calculated for each samova-inferred population using the equation θ = 2neμ . thetas were derived from θw , and from bayesian Θ estimates for samova groups, averaged from three replicate migrate-n  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  runs each using  <dig> long chain  and adaptive heating . we also estimated effective numbers of female migrants per generation  from mtdna in migrate-n. populations  were modeled using groupings of subpopulations  appropriate to each hypothesis, and we scaled population-lineage sizes  to their respective proportions of overall ne, so they summed to overall ne at all time points  <cit> . population-lineage sizes were equally distributed among tip branches  evolving from them. we conducted hypotheses testing in mesquite by simulating  <dig> mtdna gene genealogies within the expansion-contraction model under neutral coalescence. for these simulated gene trees, we calculated the 'number of deep coalescences’ , a measure of gene tree-population tree discordance arising from incomplete lineage sorting  <cit> . we evaluated model fit by comparing ndc for the 'best’ cytb maximum-likelihood gene tree to that from the simulated gene trees . we rejected the expansion-contraction model in favor of an alternative by a one-tailed significance test   <cit> .

RESULTS
ecological niche modeling
ecological niche models predicting the species lig, lgm, and present-day distributions are shown in figure  <dig> and support expansion-contraction, not vicariance-northeast colonization or southern crossroads expectations. as exected, the paleoclimatic models predicted a wide lig distribution , drastic reduction in lgm bioclimatic suitability and southward range contraction to a refuge , then northward recolonization of the modern range . the putative refugium spanned roughly ≥1500 km <dig> area in an area of inland southwest florida. the refugial area extended from the peninsula’s tip near biscayne bay  to its southwestern slope west of the immokalee rise , north to charlotte harbor  and east across the caloosahatchee valley into south-central florida . the predicted bioclimatic suitability exceeded  <dig>  . additionally, we found that acp and wcp-region suitability was similar across lig/present-day interglacial models, as was a localized but distinct break in bioclimatic suitability recovered between the suwannee and withlacoochee rivers.

highly predicted  present and lig ranges overlapped in patches around lake pontchartrain, florida’s apalachicola bay-apalachee bay and western peninsula , and the northwest atlantic coast range margin. under more conservative suitability criteria , present-day and lig-modeled ranges covered >90% of the modern range. there were virtually no false negatives, but we obtained minor false positives where h. formosa does not occur .

statistical model-evaluation analyses and comparisons of variable contributions supported these conclusions. based on auc scores from  <dig> replicates, models performed well with high discriminatory ability . average test model gain  also indicated >4-fold better-than-random prediction. the principal environmental predictor of occurrence was precipitation during warmest quarter, followed by temperature seasonality . mess diagrams showed near-coastal regions experienced more novel climates during the lgm than the lig, relative to present day, causing model extrapolation . still, novel environments were not a major issue: predictor variables most responsible for environmental novelty , e.g. isothermality, contributed ≤ <dig> % to maxent model prediction.

population structure and genetic diversity
we found substantial mean intraspecific mtdna haplotype diversity  but low mean nucleotide diversity  and surprisingly shallow genetic divergence , all of which are consistent with a recent, rapid population expansion for the species. using dnasp, we calculated an empirical estimate of θw =  <dig>  for all h. formosa populations combined. samova-group estimates of population mutation rate parameter were moderate, with θw ranging  <dig> - <dig>  .

all three methods of spatial genetic analyses recovered three locations of genetic distinctions that defined four groups  within the species range . the groupings were strongly supported by bootstrap analysis ; significant spatially explicit among-group variance partitioning ; and amovas . while samova and barrier analyses were not completely concordant, both algorithms recovered genetic barriers outside of the ecological niche modeling-inferred lgm refugium, and both inferred complex structuring between the apalachicola delta and aucilla river. these results are most consistent with leading-edge colonization or allele surfing  during post-glacial range expansion. however, they do not firmly reject vicariance-northeast colonization: barriers were identified between wcp and acp regions, but not fl and acp; groups were divided north-to-south between the suwannee and hillsborough rivers; and no acp genetic barriers were inferred.

most genetic barriers reflected breaks between drainages, and we also found significant among-drainage genetic partitioning in florida . the most striking samova-inferred subdivision was isolation of this northern florida area from all other populations . however, within northern florida, samova connected geographically disjunct lakes/ponds , womack creek , and robinson creek , and linked disjunct newnan’s lake  and tate’s hell sites . barrier recovered contiguous groups  and split the wcp from other areas ; however, given disparities with our other dna and allozyme results, and barrier ii’s placement in a sampling gap, we interpreted the wcp group as a manifestation of the limitations of our mtdna sampling.

mantel tests indicated that these conclusions were not unduly influenced by spatial autocorrelation in cytb variation , whether rangewide  or only within florida . mtdna isolation-by-distance was thus overall lacking, reflecting low diversity and alleles shared among regions/populations; for example, haplotype  <dig> was common to all three regions and most acp populations shared haplotype  <dig> . we noted a similar lack of ndna isolation-by-distance, with rps <dig> haplotype  <dig> present in each study region . these results agree with expansion-contraction predictions as well as the independently derived niche models.

consistent with expansion from the niche-modeling inferred refugium, allozyme genetic diversity  decreased with increases in latitude moving northward from the likely refugium . consistent with the inferred refugial location , allozyme diversity was above average and statistically higher within, rather than outside, the putative refuge , as judged by he . however, hp was not statistically different within-vs.-outside the putative refuge . consistent with the mtdna results, mantel tests of the  <dig> allozyme loci revealed significant isolation-by-distance in the putative refuge . we also found that isolation-by-distance was significant rangewide  and within regions  except the acp . allozyme polymorphism levels also supported the vicariance-northeastern colonization prediction of relatively lower acp diversity .

he, expected heterozygosity; hp, private allelic richness; n, number of populations compared; *p <  <dig> ; **p <  <dig> ; ns, not significant.

historical demography
historical-demographic analyses of cytb variation strongly supported predicted patterns of population expansions among regions and population groups. the r <dig> statistic was significant  and positive for the species, and for each regional group, samova group, and population analyzed . one positive fu’s fs estimate was significant , indicating a genetic bottleneck in the wcp region . further testing rejected the possibility that r <dig> and fs deviations from migration-drift equilibrium resulted from positive or purifying selection . mismatch distributions  <cit>  were mostly unimodal or smoothly descending with modal numbers of differences between haplotypes ranging 0- <dig> for wcp, acp, and samova groups . moreover, based on harpending’s r, we failed to reject models of sudden demographic expansion in all cases , indicating the coalescent model accurately accounted for observed polymorphism patterns. from τ, we inferred a late pleistocene timing of intraspecific expansions , with the onset of expansion preceding the lgm by 0-40 ka, and overlapping estimates suggesting concurrent expansions since ~33-10 ka. except in samova group  <dig>  we failed to reject lgm expansions because confidence interval included values less than 22 ka .

sample sizes and coalescent simulation results for fu’s fs, r <dig>  harpending’s raggedness index , and mutation time parameter τ calculated from a sudden-expansion demographic model. multiple tests supported population expansions for each group of populations ; one test supported a population bottleneck . population expansion dates  were estimated from τ using a per-locus mutation rate  converted from the beast cytb estimate. regional results are only presented for regions with no samova-inferred subdivision. brackets contain 95% confidence intervals; ns, not significant; **p <  <dig>  .

phylogenetic relationships and coalescent-dating analyses
within our 223-cytb dataset, we found  <dig> unique h. formosa haplotypes distinguished by  <dig> segregating sites, and two unique poeciliidae sp. haplotypes. subsampling across regions yielded a final multilocus alignment of cytb and rps <dig> sequences for 17 h. formosa and  <dig> poeciliidae sp., plus outgroups in additional file 1: table s <dig>  maximum-likelihood  and bayesian phylogenetic searches  on the multilocus alignment recovered identical topologies with a monophyletic h. formosa comprised of a single lineage lacking strongly supported  phylogenetic structure except a subclade  representing the ochlockonee river in part, aucilla river, and the suwannee river in part; otherwise, geographical structure was insignificant.

several features of the sequence data supported predictions derived from the expansion-contraction model and were not consistent with the predictions of a vicariance-northeast colonization model. for one, no deep intraspecific east-west breaks were supported. this is not because there were no deep phylogenetic breaks detected; the predicted sister relationship between poeciliidae sp. and h. formosa  was strongly supported , indicating a deep split between mexico and the atlantic plain. our 'best’ cytb haplotype gene tree  revealed shallow variation and a close ochlockonee-aucilla-suwannee relationship, and supported differentiation  of samova groups  <dig> and  <dig>  this topology differed greatly from the 'minimize deep coalescences’ topology, indicating substantial incomplete lineage sorting .

consistent with shallow variation and a single population-lineage experiencing recent expansion-contraction dynamics, cytb and nuclear rps <dig> haplotypes formed single networks  and rps <dig> sequences from the apalachicola river-apalachee bay region were separated by only 1- <dig> mutations from haplotypes spread throughout the rest of the species range. consistent with expansion-contraction, populations  in the putative lgm refuge  were mostly recovered as ancestral/basal in the inferred cytb gene tree  and network . by contrast, outside of the putative lgm refugium  we found mostly derived populations  in the gene tree  and network . the cytb network reflected the population structure inferred from the samova analysis and had two cases of star-like patterns with branches radiating out from inferred root-haplotype  <dig>  and haplotype  <dig> . also, many  network alleles were unsampled, indicating alleles potentially lost to glacial-stage extinctions.

allozyme phylogenetic analysis recovered four shallow, spatially overlapping clades that were also genetically distinct during pcoa multivariate projection, with axes  <dig> and  <dig> explaining  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the genetic variance, respectively . consistent with expansion-contraction predictions, allozyme results corroborated samova-inferred population structure, with a north-south break between the suwannee and hillsborough rivers, separating a group of northwestern plus south florida populations from all others. allozyme results also agreed with other phylogenetic results: the northwest florida allozyme clade matched the strongly supported subclade 'a’ in figure 6a. contrasting our dna sequence-based results, and consistent with vicariance-northeast colonization, neighbor-joining and pcoa recovered acp populations as a genetically and geographically distinct clade/group. however, against vicariance-northeast colonization expectations, intraspecific clades/groups were surprisingly not split east-to-west near the apalachicola river-region  or st. mary’s river, as suggested by  <cit> .

the model resulting from multilocus coalescent-dating in beast  yielded a geometric mean tmrca of h. formosa samples dated to  <dig>  ma  in the early-middle pleistocene. the tmrca estimate for subclade 'a’ was  <dig>  ma . bayesian posterior distributions for these tmrca estimates strongly rejected lgm divergence . thus, the deepest population structuring  within h. formosa appears to have initiated before the lgm. we estimated divergence between poeciliidae sp. and h. formosa at  <dig>  ma  in the late miocene-early pliocene; confidence intervals for this split were much wider than the tmrcas above but we still statistically rejected pleistocene divergence . parameter-trace ess scores > <dig> indicated thorough markov chain mixing. our beast runs estimated a geometric mean evolutionary cytb rate of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> substitutions/site/yr, and an rps <dig> rate of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> substitutions/site/yr.

hypothesis testing
by summing regional group nef estimates based on empirical mtdna θw  and Θ  estimates, we respectively inferred overall nef ≈  <dig>  ×  <dig> and  <dig>  ×  <dig>  we also inferred migration rates among samova groups ; however, bayesian posterior nefm distributions peaked at the lower limit of resolution, with 95% confidence intervals including zero. setting ancestral ne equal to the nef estimates above, we ran separate simulations testing three hypotheses modeled as hypothetical population trees :  a null, 'fragmented ancestor’ model representing the expansion-contraction model, with a single size-constant ancestral population evolving through the pleistocene before experiencing a 90% lgm reduction in ne , and subsequent colonization and diversification of local subpopulations  while simultaneously expanding from a source population ;  a 'vicariance-northeast colonization’ model with a early pleistocene ancestor split basally east-west of apalachicola river/mobile bay and acp populations arising spontaneously post-lgm  from a florida refuge ; and  a 'four-refugia’ vicariance model with samova population groups  diverging from a pleistocene ancestor. the number of deep coalescences for our 'best’ cytb gene tree fit into the population trees for each hypothesis was  <dig> for the null model,  <dig> for vicariance-northeast colonization, and  <dig> for four-refugia. results of both simulation sets failed to reject the expansion-contraction hypothesis in favor of alternative models , thus our gene tree is more consistent with a scenario of lgm population contraction and postglacial re-expansion than either of the alternative vicariance models.

discussion
our results failed to reject most expansion-contraction model predictions . indeed, several independent lines of evidence from geospatial and genetic data give concordant results consistent with this model. here, we explore these results.

ecological niche modeling suggests that h. formosa underwent range contraction to a single lgm refugium in the southwest florida peninsula, an area that underwent less environmental-climatic change than the northern parts of the species range . paleoclimatic data, climate models and pollen records indicate southwest florida maintained ~0-4°c lower temperatures, wetter tropical climates  and mixed southern pine/hardwood forest to open woodland vegetation during the lgm  <cit> , relative to today. by contrast, lgm conditions in northern florida and the 'mainland’ gulf-atlantic plains were colder/drier with extreme ~8-10°c drops in winter temperatures, 400 mm/yr lower annual precipitation, and patchy northern forest and grasslands vegetation  <cit> . combined with these data, our results strongly suggest h. formosa were extirpated from their northern range and survived the lgm in bioclimatically suitable peninsular areas, areas that, in fact, were the only parts of eastern north america that did not experience significantly colder winter and summer lgm temperatures  <cit> .

while one paleobotanical synthesis suggested this putative refugial area was nothing more than arid sand-dune scrub at the time  <cit> , other data  <cit>  indicate that at this time south florida was semiarid, containing suitable freshwater stream and wetland/marsh habitats where cold-intolerant freshwater organisms persisted. this deduction is consistent with pollen data showing aquatic macrophytes such as brasenia, isoëtes, myriophyllum, typha and sparganium occurring within the florida peninsula during the lgm  <cit> .

comparing the predicted lgm refuge of h. formosa with its much wider modern distribution , we suggest that h. formosa rapidly recolonized most or all of its preceding range to the north  during postglacial climatic 'amelioration.’ after 16-15 ka, eastern north american rivers underwent transitions from braided to meandering channel types, during which wetter-than-modern early holocene conditions may have increased wetlands and river discharge  <cit> . conditions from this time onward may thus have favored expansion into parts of the species range, even though temperature and precipitation did not stabilize near their modern levels until somewhat later, ~9-6 ka  <cit> . such northward post-glacial expansions were unlikely to have been slowed by younger dryas cooling 12-11 ka , which did not affect areas below ~38°n latitude . as a corollary, we reject vicariance-northeast colonization-predicted range dynamics and our results also seem to run counter to rangewide population stasis and connectivity expected under the southern crossroads hypothesis  <cit> ; apparently, smaller areas of the north american coastal plain  may have experienced prolonged ecological stability than in mediterranean basin coastal plains.

ecological niche modeling assumes that relationships between present distributions, abiotic factors, and ecological interactions remain more or less at equilibrium, that species physiological limits have changed less than the magnitude of changes in abiotic variables, and that biotic features of a species’ niche affect historical distribution less than large-scale changes in abiotic conditions  <cit> . we cannot evaluate all of these assumptions, nor can we exclude possible bias due to coastline effects i.e. major influence of the bermuda high-pressure zone on coastal precipitation, which was among the variables of highest  predictive importance . nonetheless, our niche-based modeling results provide meaningful insights into h. formosa biogeography. our paleoclimatic models yield highly accurate predictions, e.g. aucs > <dig>  and our results are consistent with existing ecophysiological data. for example, modern h. formosa populations reach critical thermal minima at ~10°c  <cit>  and live close to this cold-season limit in northern parts of their range. coinciding with this value, 88% of the h. formosa localities  had mean temperature of coldest quarter values ≥10°c , and this variable had sharply higher effects on maxent prediction above 10°c . given cold-season temperatures across the species entire northern range declined to - <dig> to 4°c during the lgm  <cit> , it is reasonable to infer that glacial-stage extirpation occurred passively in these areas, with drought and colder winter temperatures reducing survival. in addition, the assumption of ecological niche conservatism on these spatial and temporal scales seems justified for this species. differences in thermal tolerances among h. formosa populations from different parts of their range are minimal  compared to the temperature differences induced by climatic oscillations of the last glacial cycle above; thus differential physiological adaptation to temperature regimes likely has not had a confounding effect on our inferences. our analyses of dna sequence data and re-analyses of nuclear allozyme loci reinforce the paleoclimatic data to support expansion-contraction dynamics. in particular, the negative latitudinal cline suggests a glacial refugium in south florida and northward recolonization  <cit> . admixture in south florida due to secondary contact of diverged lineages, i.e. following 'vicariance’ expected under vicariance-northeast colonization, or recent dispersal mediated by episodic connections  can be ruled out for two reasons. first, there is a distinct lack of phylogenetic divergence and, second, seven allozyme alleles in south florida are private alleles not shared with populations in other areas. these data are also inconsistent with southern crossroads dynamics supported elsewhere, in which no clinal diversity patterns were witnessed  <cit> . that our phylogeographical results also support expansion-contraction dynamics agreeing with the niche models also suggests that the assumption of ecological niche conservatism through time is essentially correct for h. formosa.

of course, it is difficult to discount the possibility of 'microrefugia’  <cit>  in small habitat pockets elsewhere. this is because our niche-based models predict responses to prevailing macroclimatic conditions, not microclimatic conditions below the data-layer grain  or within local habitats. if any secondary refugium existed, the most likely candidate area would seem to have been the tallahassee area, where we also found one private allozyme allele.

several of our results agree with previous studies  <cit> . similar to baer  <cit>  and despite extreme distances of >2000 km between our collection localities and those in the allozyme dataset, we find h. formosa are characterized by shallow genetic divergences and a single population-lineage . combined with high hd but low π estimates, this suggests recent postglacial expansion with too limited time for recovery to allow accumulation of large sequence divergence  <cit> , and/or high historical gene flow levels. also congruent with  <cit> , we infer no genetic barriers within the atlantic coastal plain. this is consistent with baer’s 'northeast colonization’ hypothesis , which he argued was also supported by lower allozyme diversity and a lack of acp isolation-by-distance  <cit>  . heterandria formosa also contains four significantly differentiated mtdna population groups subdivided outside of the putative refugium, or between the refugium and recolonized areas . the latter break, inferred between the suwannee and hillsborough rivers , corresponds roughly to a north-to-south break between gulf-draining waccasassa and withlacoochee rivers described by baer  <cit> . this break creates a clade of louisiana plus south florida samples in our phylogenetic and multivariate ordination analyses of the allozyme-frequency data, and baer’s . this suwannee-hillsborough break thus appears robust to different data types and methods and is shallow in both studies  implying recently limited gene flow between these rivers. perhaps more importantly, the suwannee-hillsborough break falls  outside the predicted lgm refugium but is not correlated with deep phylogenetic divergence. this is consistent with the action of density-dependent processes, such as priority effects e.g.  <cit> , or allele surfing  <cit> , operating during leading-edge recolonization. given their patchy distribution  <cit>  and propensity for explosive population growth  <cit> , it is reasonable to assume that h. formosa quickly fill new habitats once they arrive and that when local patches become extinct they are recolonized from nearby populations. thus if northward postglacial expansion occurred through small numbers of colonists, alleles might have surfed along a relatively quickly expanding wave front. our niche-based models suggest postglacial genetic divergence between these rivers may have partly been maintained by lack of predicted suitable habitat between these rivers .

by contrast, we find several points of nuclear-mitochondrial discordances, indicating differences between studies. for example, allozyme and mtdna results yield mixed support for the expansion-contraction prediction that isolation-by-distance should occur within the refugium, but not outside of it, due to a longer demographic timeline and geographically restricted dispersal within the refuge. allozymic variation exhibits nearly rangewide isolation-by-distance in our study and baer’s  <cit> . baer  <cit>  also inferred populations were at or near drift-migration equilibrium, using a 2-dimensional stepping stone model with cross-peninsula gene flow. global nem estimates were high , suggesting local h. formosa populations have not evolved independently but that gene flow has importantly shaped their evolution  <cit> ; and in a second study, nem within and across two peninsular florida rivers ranged >3- <dig>  <cit> . in baer  <cit> , acp populations were exceptional, forming a relatively homogeneous monophyletic group with no isolation-by-distance consistent with recent colonization, consistent with our mtdna and allozyme findings. however, contrasting these patterns, we find: a lack of mtdna isolation-by-distance across the range; nem suggesting zero on-going mtdna gene flow ; and acp populations as indistinct from other regions . incongruent with baer’s  <cit>  allozyme results, the historical signal of the mtdna genome also does not indicate east-to-west genetic differentiation between wcp and acp regions .

such nuclear-mitochondrial discordances are traditionally explained by several factors. the first and most common explanation is balancing selection  mainly on allozymes  <cit> , some of which  are known to evolve non-neutrally. however, this is rejected outright by the data: lewontin-krakauer tests on the allozymes  <cit>  and multiple tests of mtdna neutrality  reject the hypothesis of selection operating in either genome, as does the concordant lack of deep phylogenetic structure within either marker-class. a second explanation is that these discordances arise from the contrasting modes of transmission, evolution, and resolution of these marker-types; this could plausibly explain a lack of isolation-by-distance in the mtdna, but isolation-by-distance in the allozymes. compared with haploid, maternally transmitted mtdna, allozymes are diploid and evolve roughly 10× slower with ~4-fold larger ne and coalescence times , and higher gene-flow rates  <cit> . as a consequence, mtdna provide a higher-resolution view of population structure, e.g. at finer spatial scales , and more likely reflect homogenizing effects of gene flow hence lack of isolation-by-distance. by contrast, due to lower resolution, allozymes may display isolation-by-distance in northern areas even when expansion occurred from a single southern refugium, if postglacial expansion did not involve leptokurtic  dispersal e.g. reviewed in  <cit> . regarding discordant migration patterns, allozyme nem estimates and ne estimates seem preferable in the case of h. formosa . still, their large coalescence times mean allozyme-inferred nem may reflect averages across transmission routes over four times the history of mtdna, rather than current processes. thus, we interpret our results and baer’s  <cit>  as indicating that historical gene flow  among populations nearing migration-drift equilibrium, and large ne, has influenced h. formosa phylogeographical structuring. this could partly explain the low observed genetic divergences, but can we reconcile this scenario with the isolation-by-distance findings, taken at face value? taking such a scenario as compatible with the expansion-contraction model assumes most population structure has arisen since the lgm and that sufficient time has passed for h. formosa allozyme loci to reach equilibrium. this is supported by the data if we assume nm =  <dig>  and that populations must have achieved migration-drift equilibrium since the lgm, or g =  <dig>  generations . given our nef  and ~ <dig>  ma intraspecific tmrca estimates, the number of generations required to approach equilibrium is recent, ~ <dig>  generations, and since the lgm based on the equation g = 1/)  <cit> . thus, the above interpretation seems reasonable in light of population genetics theory; equilibrium could have arisen even faster in this species, as postglacial recolonization and population expansion can rapidly generate population structuring  <cit> .

another factor potentially explaining our results is sex-biased migration. heterandria formosa exhibit strongly female-biased sex ratios due to higher male mortality rates, as demonstrated by predation trials  <cit>  and otolith ring counts . in light of this, female dispersal/gene flow should outpace male dispersal even assuming equal dispersal propensities and rates between sexes. thus, aside from differences in marker resolution, female-biased dispersal has likely also contributed importantly to nuclear-mitochondrial discordance above, specifically lack of mtdna isolation-by-distance. this is because, under female-based dispersal, females carry both mtdna and male/female nuclear genes out of populations while males are effectively philopatric , thus we expect matrilineal alleles to more likely homogenize among localities while nuclear genomes remain site-dependent  <cit> ; this would result in a relatively weaker matrilineal signal of isolation-by-distance. unfortunately, we cannot reliably empirically evaluate effects of female-biased survival and dispersal on our other genetic results given comparable metrics influenced by geographical distance  are not estimable from the mtdna and allozyme-frequency data, and low rps7-gene sampling restricts possible mtdna-ndna comparisons. last, consistent with the observation that deep coalescences appear to influence the h. formosa mtdna/gene tree , patterns of discordance between markers herein may to some extent reflect historical processes of incomplete lineage sorting in addition to the homogenizing effects of gene flow . in future studies, sampling multiple, unlinked nuclear loci will be necessary to tease apart the relative contributions of these two opposing forces within h. formosa using coalescent-based models.

in addition to the geospatial and genetic analyses above, our phylogenetic and historical-demographic results also met predictions of the expansion-contraction model. while our inferences regarding ancestral derived/populations were limited by reduced south florida sampling, phylogenetic and spatial patterns of ancestral/derived populations  between the phylogeny and network analyses congruently follow expectations derived from the model , and star-like patterns in the network suggest a history of population expansions. our argument that h. formosa fits the expansion-contraction model is also reinforced by mismatch analyses and mtdna genetic equilibrium tests , which fail to reject demographic expansion models  and thus capture genetic signatures of predicted historical changes in ne containing information about the record and timing of expansion  <cit> . the 95% confidence intervals on expansion parameter τ suggest the onset of expansions has overlapped the lgm in most population groups and regions analyzed, and lower 95% confidence intervals extending into the present may be indications that expansion is on-going or ceased only recently, e.g. in north florida . because balancing selection seems not to have been at play , low-frequency peaks in our mismatch distributions likely reflect secondary holocene expansions rather than selection .

these demographic results generally agree with genetic patterns in european taxa  that are inferred to have experienced postglacial population expansions e.g.  <cit> ; however, in our case, integrating niche-based modeling and genetic analyses provides an additional check that it is reasonable to conclude h. formosa expansion has been both spatial and demographic . interestingly, our mtdna genetic equilibrium tests only point to recent population bottlenecking within wcp samples  spanning extensive wetlands and swamps of the mississippi river delta, a major outlet of postglacial meltwater flow and alluvial deposition. this could reflect a small population surviving the lgm in one or more wcp microrefugia not identified in our paleoclimatic models; however, no evidence exists that a population-lineage experienced drift in isolation in the wcp since the lgm . we thus interpret this bottleneck as a result of founder events during postglacial recolonization.

although the distribution of h. formosa spans nearly the entire lowland coastal plain , its genetic patterns do not completely coincide with those described in several other species with overlapping present-day distributions. at least  <dig> species, including 50-67% of freshwater fishes and turtles examined to date, display pronounced east-west apalachicola phylogeographical  <cit>  and distributional  <cit>  breaks. in four freshwater fishes—bowfin  and three sunfishes —this pattern has been linked to vicariant isolation in upper reaches of different drainage basins that were reduced in size by eustatic high-stands 50-80 m asl of the pliocene-early pleistocene interglacials  <cit> . thus, major phylogenetic divergence should be expected in this region in as-yet unsampled freshwater taxa. remarkably, however, neither patterns of multilocus phylogenetic structuring or mtdna-population structuring, nor a coalescent simulation perspective on neutral mtdna evolution, support such a pattern within h. formosa. variation at protein loci in h. formosa also departs from this vicariance model, revealing shallowly diverged and geographically overlapping population groups/lineages without deep genetic breaks at predicted barriers. while the common pattern of gulf drainages containing atlantic-coast haplotypes  is present in the allozymes , neither mtdna nor allozyme data support clear east-west apalachicola splits.

our estimated tmrca suggests intraspecific diversification of h. formosa has coincided with pleistocene diversification within a. calva, which is codistributed with h. formosa in the coastal plain but ranges much more widely across eastern north america . this indicates that recent isolation within constraints of pleistocene-holocene  drainage geomorphology, e.g. drainage divides, has influenced genetic variation of both h. formosa  and a. calva. however, additional studies will be necessary to test whether these species diversification has actually been synchronous, and to evaluate finer-scale patterns relative to drainage basins. it would also be interesting to examine whether coastal plain freshwater fish species that are presently codistributed with h. formosa responded to late pleistocene disruptions in climate and sea-level with similar range-shifting responses, possibly involving refugia; however, the only species in which effects of pleistocene expansion-contraction dynamics have been rigorously tested is h. formosa . here, the eastern/atlantic intraspecific lineages  present in many freshwater taxa will likely present good candidates for testing for range expansion-contraction dynamics similar to h. formosa. for example, the eastern/atlantic lineages recovered by bermingham and avise  <cit>  exhibit <2-4% genetic divergences, indicating pleistocene tmrcas , and phylogroups or private alleles unique to the florida peninsula. while ad hoc explanations that interspecific differences in the position of the apalachicola break  resulted from unique histories of dispersal and range-shifting in response to pleistocene climatic fluctuations have been advanced  <cit> , the actual pattern of such dynamics remains an unanswered question. additional studies similar to ours of previously studied fish taxa, e.g. in  <cit> , as well as understudied aquatic plants, insects, freshwater fishes , and crayfishes from the florida peninsula will therefore permit testing the generality of the scenario of historical range-shift and population dynamics uncovered within h. formosa, as well as general predictions of the expansion contraction model  <cit> , within the gulf-atlantic coastal plain freshwater biota.

CONCLUSIONS
understanding historical responses of species to the climatic and sea-level fluctuations of the late pleistocene has emerged as a major goal of ecology, evolution and biogeography  <cit> . we find the evolutionary history of heterandria formosa indicates southward lgm range contraction and large-scale postglacial expansion, as predicted under the pleistocene expansion-contraction model  <cit> . species-specific expansion-contraction dynamics may therefore have played a more general role in shaping the evolutionary history of coastal plain biota than previously thought. by adding to considerable variation surrounding common biogeographical themes recovered among even codistributed species in this region, our results bolster growing appreciation for the complexity of phylogeographical patterning in north america’s southern refugia. our study demonstrates the benefits of taking an integrative approach to biogeographical hypotheses generation and testing  and showcases how similar approaches can be used by biologists in the future to gain further insights into the evolutionary history of the gulf-atlantic coastal plain biota, as well as the important role of this region as a dynamic refuge during the last glacial cycle. indeed, a better understanding of the tempo and mode of species responses to the pleistocene glacial-interglacial cycles will likely aid predicting and managing ecosystem responses to present-day and future climate change  <cit> .

availability of supporting data
sequences are deposited in genbank . sequence alignments and phylogenetic trees are available in the treebase repository: http://purl.org/phylo/treebase/phylows/study/tb2:s <dig> 

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
ms and jcb conceived of the project. jcb directed project design and coordination, conducted molecular laboratory work, performed genetic and ecological niche modeling analyses, archived data in online repositories, and wrote the manuscript. ms conducted field and molecular laboratory work, discussed analyses, and revised the manuscript. mllv and jt made field collections and revised the manuscript. jbj discussed molecular laboratory work and helped revise and structure the manuscript. all authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
data supplement. contains supplementary tables  and figures  and an additional description of methods and results .

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we are grateful to m f. breitman, e. castro, and j. a. wooten for helpful comments on this manuscript, and to a. l. almendra for critical assistance with ecological niche modeling analyses. we thank p. j. unmack for discussions and for graciously donating gis data and samples from hillsborough and st. johns rivers, florida. sampling was conducted under permits from louisiana, mississippi, alabama, georgia, florida, and south carolina issued to ms, jt and the university of alabama ichthyological collection . we thank a. contreras-balderas and g. hubbard for assistance with field collections. research was funded by brigham young university, including a mentoring environment grant to jbj that covered molecular sequencing costs; the university of alabama; and the florida state university.
