BACKGROUND
epithelial tissues in the mammalian airways and skin are among the largest organs and form the interface between the internal milieu of the host and the outside world. they not only protect the host against invading pathogens but also provide an effective barrier to noxious external  stimuli and dehydration  <cit> . the effectiveness of the epithelial barrier is demonstrated by the rare incidence of severe infections to the lung or skin in healthy individuals. it has become clear that epithelia also play an active role in innate and adaptive immunity  <cit> . epithelial tissues display three main mechanisms to protect the organism from infection. first, epithelial cells form an impermeable physical barrier which both prevents pathogen entry and minimizes dehydration. second, epithelial cells are capable of producing defense molecules such as antimicrobial peptides and proteinase inhibitors. finally, these cells are able to produce signaling molecules such as cytokines and chemokines. these molecules may attract or activate cells of the innate and adaptive immune system  <cit> . interaction between cells of the immune system is mediated by adhesion molecules and cytokine receptors  <cit>  that are present on epithelial cells.

host defense mechanisms in epithelial cells are coordinated by a complex program of gene expression. very powerful and sophisticated laboratory techniques such as serial analysis of gene expression   <cit>  and dna microarrays  <cit>  have been developed to assess the expression of thousands of genes at the mrna level in a single experiment. to delineate the barrier function of epithelial cells, the transcriptional change induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines was recently assessed by means of sage in two well-established culture models of epithelial inflammation using subcultures of primary bronchial epithelial cells  <cit>  and primary keratinocytes  <cit> . these independent studies showed a marked overlap in gene families expressed in response to pro-inflammatory cytokines in both cell types. upon cytokine exposure, in particular genes associated with cytoskeletal architecture and epidermal barrier function such as keratins, s <dig> calcium-binding proteins and various antimicrobial proteinase inhibitors were differentially expressed. these studies indicated that bronchial epithelial cells and keratinocytes might respond similarly to external influences to ultimately provide effective host protection. this is especially of interest because the epithelia of the skin and conducting airways are markedly different in morphology. the potential functional resemblance of these types of epithelia is also demonstrated by comparative analysis of genetic studies in patients with asthma and atopic dermatitis showing that similar patterns of gene expression may contribute to susceptibility to these diseases  <cit> . this prompted us to a conduct a comparative analysis of our previously generated gene expression in culture models of epithelial inflammation. the aim was to test the hypothesis whether bronchial epithelial cells and keratinocytes employ similar mechanisms for providing effective host defense at these epithelia.

therefore, in the present study, our previously generated sage data sets derived from bronchial epithelial cells  <cit>  and keratinocytes  <cit>  that were exposed to pro-inflammatory cytokines were compared to identify a common denominator in host defense in the different types of epithelial cells. sage libraries of resting and il1β/tnfα-exposed primary bronchial epithelial cells  were compared to sage libraries of resting and tnfα-exposed human primary keratinocytes . the in silico method tissue preferential expression   <cit>  was used for the recognition of putative cell-specific gene expression in these sage libraries. previously, this method has been successfully applied to identify novel specific markers for disease  <cit> . to verify the in silico prediction analysis of tissue specific gene expression, polymerase chain reaction was performed on seven target genes that were identified by the tpe algorithm in a panel of nine different cell types of which seven are normally present in the airways or lungs. the airway- and lung-derived nci-h <dig> and a <dig> cell lines were included since these cell lines are frequently used to study epithelial cell function. we have identified and validated a signature of specific gene expression for bronchial epithelial cells and keratinocytes. the majority of genes in this signature was previously not associated with host defense or inflammation. these results indicate that epithelia of the airways and skin exploit unified host defense strategies to protect the host, despite their morphological differences.

RESULTS
transcriptional overlap between pbec and kc and epithelial-specific gene expression upon cytokine exposure was characterized. by comparing the four sage libraries of primary bronchial epithelial cells  and keratinocytes , an overlap in tags of approximately 80% was observed indicating a high similarity in the repertoire of genes expressed by these types of epithelial cells. although remarkable commonalities were found in gene families found to be expressed by pbec and kc, the repertoire of transcribed family members differed among the two cell types . to extract a pattern of genes that is specifically expressed in epithelial cells that could likely be involved in epithelial host defense we explored which of the genes are preferentially expressed by pbec and kc using the tpe algorithm. the scatter plot in figure  <dig> displays the individual tags observed in the cytokine-exposed pbec and kc libraries. each dot represents a single tag with the corresponding tpe values for pbec and kc. in this analysis, four groups of tags were identified: epithelial non-specific tags , tags preferentially expressed by either pbec  or kc  and tags that were preferentially expressed by both pbec and kc . the expression of the  <dig> tags observed in the latter group represents putative epithelial-specific genes because a tpe score ≥  <dig> was observed in both pbec and kc . almost half of these tags corresponded to genes encoding for keratins, small proline-rich proteins, kallikreins and proteinase inhibitors . interestingly, the expression of a large proportion of these genes was found to be affected by cytokine exposure in pbec or kc  as observed in the initial sage studies . a similar picture in preferential tag expression was obtained when using the libraries of resting pbec and kc since the majority of genes do not show an on/off expression profile upon stimulation with cytokines .

to validate this in silico tpe prediction analysis, expression of seven putative epithelial-specific genes by pbec and kc was assessed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction  in nine different cell types. each cell type in the panel was exposed to medium alone or to il1β/tnfα. kc were exposed to medium or tnfα alone to maintain comparability with the original sage experiment. in concordance with the sage data and tpe analysis, expression for sprr2a was only observed in pbec. on the other hand, calml <dig> was expected to be expressed by kc alone. however, pbec were shown to be positive for this transcript as well and weak expression was observed in nci-h <dig> cells. as demonstrated by the tpe analysis krt6a, sprr1a, sprr1b, il1f <dig>  s100a <dig> all showed tpe values of ≥  <dig> in both pbec and kc libraries. the rt-pcr results in figure  <dig> demonstrates that preferential expression of sprr1b was found in pbec, kc and nci-h <dig> cells, whereas moderate to weak expression was also detected in fibroblasts, huvec, hasm and monocytes. expression of krt6a is restricted to pbec, kc and the bronchial epithelial cell line nci-h <dig>  whereas expression of this transcript was negative in all other cell types. transcription of sprr1a, il1f <dig> and s100a <dig> was only detected in primary cultures of pbec and kc and was completely absent in all other cell types.

discussion
comparative genomics approaches have the potential to gain additional insight into a biological process at the mrna expression level by integrating and combining data obtained from similar model systems. particularly, sage is excellent for this purpose since digital, scalable expression data is generated that allows comparison without the need for complex mathematical normalization methods. although the sage libraries used in the present analysis were not initially intended for comparative genomic research, remarkable commonalities in epithelial-specific gene expression were found that related to host defense.

the tissue preferential expression  algorithm was employed to recognize specific tag expression by pbec and kc under inflammatory conditions . experimental verification of selected epithelial-specific genes by rt-pcr showed a good correlation between the in silico approach and rt-pcr . the pcr setup was designed to detect true presence or absence of validation genes and was not intended to be quantitative. the observed discrepancies between sage and pcr results can be explained by the difference in detection sensitivity between techniques: rt-pcr is far more sensitive than sage in detecting low abundant gene expression.

the majority of tags of the molecular signature corresponded to genes encoding structural components of the cytoskeleton  and for proteins that are involved in the assembly/disassembly  of the cornified cell envelope in keratinocytes . components of the cross-linked or cornified envelope are linked by transglutaminases . the observation that bronchial epithelial cells express components of and assembly/disassembly enzymes forming a cross-linked envelope is relevant to our understanding of epithelial host defense in the airways. additional support for this observation is provided by abundant transcription of genes that are known to be involved in cornification in skin, including the s <dig> calcium-binding proteins  <cit> , annexins  <cit>  and cystatins  <cit>  . so far, only few studies provide evidence for the existence of a protein envelope in bronchial epithelial cells. components such as small proline-rich proteins  have been suggested to be associated with squamous differentiation  <cit> . low sprr expression has been associated with squamous cell carcinoma  <cit> , whereas high expression of sprr1b enhanced g0-arrest resulting in growth arrest  <cit> . interestingly, the families of small proline-rich proteins and s <dig> calcium-binding proteins are encoded in the epidermal differentiation complex   <cit> . proteins encoded in this region share significant sequence similarities, particularly in the glutamine- and lysine-rich regions that are involved in the cross-linking by transglutaminases  <cit> . this indicates that pbec and kc not only share structural characteristics, but may also share functional characteristics.

a disadvantage of the present study might be the differences in type of cytokine-exposure and duration of the treatment. the opposite directional changes in expression in gene families  observed could be explained either by dissimilarities in the initial model systems or by the inherent differences between pbec and kc. by using the tpe algorithm, highly cell-specific tag expression can be predicted largely independently from transcriptional levels because the more unique a tag is to a particular tissue, the less important is its level of expression. therefore, we are confident that the signature of epithelial host defense that was extracted is representative for bronchial epithelial cells and keratinocytes.

computational subtraction methods such as the tpe algorithm allow functional clustering of genes derived from large and complex genome-wide expression profiles without having full knowledge of the repertoire of genes involved in biological processes of interest. although the identified molecular signature of host defense is characteristic for bronchial epithelial cells and keratinocytes, it would be of great interest to study whether this gene expression pattern is also applicable to other types of epithelial cells, a finding that would greatly enhance our understanding of epithelial defense strategies.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our comprehensive comparison of overlapping genes across bronchial epithelial cells and keratinocytes provides novel insights in epithelial host defense strategies, in particular of the airway epithelium. combining in silico and experimental approaches is very valuable in accelerating the interpretation of genomics data and defining follow-up research. we identified an expression signature of genes that were specifically expressed by bronchial epithelial cells and keratinocytes. these genes are likely to fulfill an eminent function in epithelial host defense. based on the present findings we propose that formation of a cross-linked protein envelope by bronchial epithelial cells is an effective host defense strategy of the mucosal epithelium in the human airways. this function would be analogous to the host defense function of cornifying keratinocytes. finally, a better understanding of unified host defense strategies in different epithelia may lead to the identification of novel therapeutic targets for epithelial inflammatory disorders such as asthma and atopic dermatitis.

