BACKGROUND
genome-wide association studies  have been successful in the discovery of many novel genetic variants associated with human diseases. however, identifying the causative variant is still a daunting task, as the mechanisms through which the variants influence disease or quantitative phenotypes are often unclear, particularly when the associated genes are of unknown function or have no clear connection to disease biology. network-based approaches to prioritize candidate genes associated with human diseases have been proposed in a number of studies . they build on the idea that mutations in the same gene or mutations in different members of a gene complex, which here are defined as a set of genes sharing  functional identity, may lead to similar disease phenotypes. the functional identity of a gene complex can be co-expression patterns, or functional association of proteins in physical complexes or in pathways. this means that, once a gene complex with members involved in one disease has been identified, the other members of the complex become candidates for having a biological relationship with the same disease.

thus, a method of disease gene prioritization is to search for genes or gene complexes that have a phenotypic profile similar to the phenotypic profile of the target disease. the disease phenotype can be described as the disease characteristics such as pathogenesis and clinical features. biomedical records in the life sciences  provide reviewed facts under a wide variety of biological conditions. a global examination of biological textual data will thus establish the phenotypic profile of genes with respect to their connection to disease biology. the phenotypic profile of a gene, referred to as the gene-associated phenotype, can be obtained by large-scale text-mining of biomedical records using information extraction and retrieval techniques, and filtering the biomedical terms with specific vocabularies such as that from the unified medical language system   <cit> .

a potential bottleneck in phenotypic profiling using text-mining of biomedical records is that currently the candidate genes can be of unknown function or have no clear connection to known disease biology. however, network-based inference may partially alleviate this problem, because the phenotypic profile of a candidate gene will be based on all phenotypes linked to the genes in a protein complex that consists of physical interactions or functional associations, rather than just to the gene itself.

this poses the need for a method that can summarize the relevance signals between the disease and candidate complex as a whole. because the information to be integrated in this approach  is frequently updated and the choice is optional , it also requires a method that easily adapts to these factors. a promising method is based on a random-set scoring model used for gene-set enrichment analysis of genome-wide expression data  <cit> . it can be used to compute a score per gene or per complex representing an overall enrichment signal for the association of the candidate gene with the disease. it is computationally fast  <cit>  and it can be calibrated in a number of ways , providing a flexible and powerful way to quantify the relevance of the candidate gene to the disease.

the network-based phenotypic profile of a candidate gene depends on several factors. these include the source or the type of the biomedical records and the type of vocabularies  <cit> , such as medical subject headings   <cit>  and international classification of diseases , as well as the stringency of protein associations to define the protein complexes. these factors may affect disease gene prioritization regardless of the quantification method used. examining the influences of these factors will provide a thorough evaluation of the prioritization performance of the random-set scoring model.

the objectives of this study were 1) to implement and validate a random-set scoring model to quantify the disease relevance of genes in a network-based disease gene-prioritization approach; 2) to investigate the influence on the model of protein association validity and the type of gene-associated phenotypic profile; and 3) to apply this model to identify and rank human genes on a genome-wide scale according to their phenotypic relevance to a wide range of human diseases.

RESULTS
we implemented and validated a random-set scoring model for a network-based gene prioritization approach. this approach uses biomedical records  as phenotypic profile for candidate genes to infer their association with diseases. the candidate gene is prioritized as a gene complex based on the physical and functional protein-protein interaction  network from string . we validated our approach using the known disease and gene relationships in the omim database. several of the key factors in the prioritization approach were investigated including the influence of the ppi confidence score threshold, distinct sources of gene-associated phenotypes and different vocabularies. we also compared the prioritization ability of the random-set scoring model with two alternative network-based prioritization approaches. finally, the approach was used for a global ranking of all human genes according to their relevance for a range of human diseases in omim.

influence of protein-protein interaction  confidence scores
we investigated the influence of protein complexes defined with different confidence thresholds on the performance of our network-based prioritization approach. the prioritization was examined with various confidence scores  of protein complexes, corresponding to different levels  of ppi quality  in string. the result  showed that, at the maximum matthews correlation coefficient  , the precision of the method increased from  <dig>  to  <dig> , positively correlated with the ppi confidence scores. the sensitivity  of the method was consistent, ranging between  <dig>  and  <dig> , using various protein complexes; only when the confidence threshold was relaxed to  <dig> or restricted to  <dig> did the sensitivity increase to  <dig>  and decrease to  <dig> , respectively. we then compared the number of highly ranked causal genes for different ppi confidence thresholds . the proportion of causal genes that could be ranked in the top one  was between  <dig>   and  <dig>  . increasing the ppi confidence threshold led to a larger percentage of causal genes being highly ranked. however, with higher ppi confidence scores the proportion of causal genes that could be prioritized decreased from  <dig>  to  <dig> , primarily because of the availability of ppis dependent on the confidence thresholds .figure  <dig> 
performance of the approach using different protein-protein interaction  confidence score thresholds. the influence of different ppi thresholds on the precision  and recall  is shown. the precision  and recall  were determined for each ppi threshold  at the maximal matthews correlation coefficient .
influence of protein-protein interaction  thresholds on the prioritization of causal genes in the test sets. the proportion  of prioritized test-sets where causal genes were ranked within the top five  or top one  is shown according to different ppi confidence score thresholds .



influence of gene-associated phenotype sources and phenotype vocabulary filters
the biomedical records from three different databases  together with four vocabulary filters , gene ontology , and semantic type  defined  <dig> sets of phenotypic profiles . our overall evaluation showed that the random-set scoring model was an accurate and reliable predictor for disease gene prioritization. the area under the receiver operating characteristic  curve  was between  <dig>  and  <dig>   for all the phenotypic profiles. prioritization performance went in decreasing order for omim, pubmed, and generif. for the vocabulary filters, sty and mesh were superior to icd9cm and go in revealing disease gene associations. the best performance, with an auc of  <dig> – <dig>  , was based on using omim records or pubmed abstracts with sty or mesh.figure  <dig> 
receiver operating characteristic  curves of prioritizations using different phenotype sources and vocabulary filters. each roc curve represents the prioritization performance when combining a specific gene-associated phenotype with a vocabulary filter. the phenotype sources were omim , pubmed , and generif . the vocabulary filters were sty, mesh, icd9cm, and go .


comparison of auc , precision, and recall using different sources for the gene-associated phenotypes and phenotype vocabulary filters



sty

mesh

icd9cm

go
auc, area under the curve.

the gene prioritizations were consistent across different phenotypic profiles. for example, our model ranked 50% , 40% , and 40%  of the prioritized causal genes as the top candidates  according to the different phenotypic profiles . impressively, at least 57% of these cases were accurately predicted by all types of biomedical records. when taking only the causal genes that were ranked in the top five, the proportion was even higher . when examining the prioritization results from any two phenotypic profiles, the common set of top-ranked causal genes accounted for a minimum of 39–82% between biomedical records, and 28–91% between vocabulary filters . when applying protein complexes defined by different stringencies, the prioritization was generally more robust between two similar confidence scores than between two that were substantially different from each other  .

comparison with other methods
we compared the prioritization ability of our random-set scoring model with that of two other network-based prioritization approaches that rely on gene-associated phenotypic profiles: a bayesian prediction model proposed by lage et al.  <cit>  and a regression prediction model, cipher-dn, proposed by wu et al.  <cit> . we estimated the recall and precision specifically for these comparisons using our matching test-sets. one group consisted of 84%  of the test cases from lage et al. and the other consisted of 83%  of the test cases from wu et al. the protein networks used in these approaches were restricted to protein interaction data that did not include the co-occurrence of genes in the biomedical literature. our approach is based on protein complexes retrieved from the string database, which integrates both physical interactions and predicted protein associations based on multiple information sources, including text-mining of pubmed records for the co-occurrence of two genes. to assess the influence of gene co-occurrence in the literature, we recalculated the ppi confidence scores independent of the text-mining evidence . table  <dig> shows the prioritization performance of the three different approaches. our model demonstrated higher recall  and higher precision  than the bayesian prediction approach. when adding the predicted interactions based on text-mining of the biomedical literature, the superiority of our method became more obvious. our approach worked almost equally as well as the regression prediction approach  when the evidence from text-mining was included. when the protein complexes were defined excluding the text-mining evidence, we observed a decrease in recall whereas precision remained largely unaffected.table  <dig> 
comparison with other network-based approaches



testing sets
evaluation metrics
random-set scoring model
bayesian/regression method
*ppi, protein-protein interaction.



global ranking of human genes according to their disease relevance
we performed a genome-wide phenotypic screen  on  <dig>  human genes to predict their relevance to a range of disorders represented in the omim database . for many of these disorders, the molecular basis is known and does not represent a unique locus. we pinpointed the responsible causal gene for the corresponding disorder as the top candidate in 8% of known heterogeneous relationships. we observed that 66% of causal loci were ranked in the top 1% across the whole genome for causality with the associated disorder. our genome-wide predictions provide a global ranking list, thus suggesting novel yet-to-be-validated candidate genes for a large number of human disorders.

we identified  <dig>  genes that were ranked at least once as the top candidate gene for another range of  omim phenotypes for which no susceptible loci have been identified. the gene most frequently  top-ranked  was catechol-o-methyltransferase .

to evaluate the ability of our gene-prioritization model to identify known disease genes as well as to identify unknown susceptibility factors, we selected two neurodegenerative disorders: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  and parkinson disease . for both disorders, several causal genes have been identified although additional genetic risk factors remain to be found  <cit> . the positions of recognized disease genes according to the prioritization model for each disease were identified. thus, ten als-associated genes sod <dig> , fus , ang , tardbp , als <dig> , vapb , optn , vcp , mapt , c9orf <dig>  were prioritized among the top 1%, while an additional four genes , fig  <dig> , dao , spg <dig>  were among the top  <dig> %. one gene sigmar <dig> position 2809) occurred among the top 15%, while only one of the known als-associated genes, ubqln <dig> , failed to be highly prioritized by our approach. for pd, the six top-ranked genes, atp13a <dig> , lrrk <dig> , pink <dig> , park <dig> also known as prkn , park7also known as dj <dig> , and snca  are all recognized disease genes, whereas additional genes linked to pd, uchl <dig> and htra <dig>  were ranked in positions  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively  <cit> . among the highly prioritized genes in which mutations have not yet been identified, we observed a number of highly interesting genes, including ccs , rnf19a , derl <dig> , and xrn <dig>  for als, and klk <dig> , slc6a <dig> , and tppp  for pd. the possible pathogenic roles of these genes are dealt with in the discussion.

discussion
we have implemented and validated a network-based disease gene-prioritization approach using a random-set scoring method. this approach prioritizes candidate disease genes using protein complexes and text-mining of the biomedical literature. we examined the influence of the key parameters of the approach, including the quality of the ppi information and the use of different sources of gene-associated phenotypes and vocabulary filters. our implementation has a great transparency as it relies on publicly available data including ppi from the string database and biomedical publications from the national center for biotechnology information  databases. we used our approach to conduct a global ranking of all human genes for phenotypic association with a broad range of human diseases. these results provide a unique resource for the biological interpretation of results from gwas, and will help understand how the associated genetic variants influence disease or quantitative phenotypes. overall, we have shown that our network-based approach provides a powerful and flexible tool to identify and rank candidate disease genes.

assessment of our network-based gene-prioritization approach
comparison of the random-set scoring method with the bayesian prioritization model  <cit>  and the regression prioritization model  <cit>  sheds light on the overall performance of network-based gene-prioritization approaches. the ppi data used in our study was from string, which is a public and comprehensive database that integrates various molecular interactions from other repositories including mint   <cit> , hprd   <cit> , and bind   <cit> . by applying the original string data, we ensured the transparency and reliability of our approach. the string data includes both physical interactions and functional or predicted interactions derived from, for example, text-mining of the biomedical literature. the usefulness of text-mining of the biomedical literature in string is to enable searching for the co-occurrence of two biological entities  in a textual context, and thereby establish an association between them. in contrast, the text-mining of the biomedical literature used in this study for gene prioritization was to convert a text record into a list of disease-relevant biomedical terms that phenotypically characterize the linked gene. these are two different applications of text-mining techniques for biomedical text data. our result indicates that the use of text-mining in identifying the co-occurrence of two genes in biomedical text could provide new knowledge on ppis, which could improve disease gene identification.

our scoring method is very similar to gene set enrichment analysis  commonly used in expression analyses where gene-level scores  are used for detecting the enrichment signal. in our procedure the gene-level scores are correlations measuring the similarity between text  linked to the gene and text linked to the disease. a summary statistic is subsequently computed by averaging the correlations of the genes to the disease phenotype in the complex. the averaging is superior when the gene being tested contains many gene-associated phenotypes that weakly correlates with the target disease phenotype. this characteristic is in line with the hypothesis that complex diseases or traits are influenced by multiple genes and other environmental factors. furthermore quite a number of studies comparing various gsea approaches and gene set summary statistics show that the mean/sum statistics used in our procedure yield overall very good results  <cit> . we believe that contrary to other highly parametric bayesian approaches, that our random-set scoring method is a simple, but robust approach for disease gene prioritization.

influence of gene-associated phenotypes
our approach has the option of choosing different types of biomedical records for gene-associated phenotypes, including those from omim, pubmed, and generif. we showed that the source influenced the performance of the model. the use of omim records resulted in the highest recall and precision when tested on the human diseases present in the omim database. this was not surprising because, using omim, the phenotype for the genes and the disease comprised the same type of data; omim is the primary source of phenotypic descriptions for human diseases in similar network-based prediction approaches  <cit> . however, these other studies did not examine the effect of using other types of biomedical literature. omim records are curated text that reviews the relevant references, of which the majority is indexed publications in the pubmed database. pubmed comprises nearly half a million gene-phenotype associations that involve more than  <dig>  human genes. this suggests that pubmed articles and abstracts provide global phenotypic information for gene prioritization on a genome-wide scale. our results also support the importance and validity of pubmed as the best source of gene-associated phenotypes apart from omim. a great advantage of pubmed  is that it is not restricted to human studies, but also includes other organisms; the phenotypic and genetic discoveries based on experimental models  can provide great insight into human diseases. pubmed may capture the phenotype-genotype relationships more comprehensively than omim does. this has important implications for disease gene prioritization in livestock species  <cit> , for which only a limited number of phenotypic descriptions have accumulated in disease databases , although many more gene-associated phenotypes may exist in literature databases such as pubmed or generif. the performance evaluation using the set of known causal genes from omim could be potentially overestimated even if the associations between a test gene and diseases  were excluded from validation study. this is because the pubmed abstracts may contain the information that a test gene is involved in a test disease . in addition the prioritization could perform modest in discovering novel disease genes, because these genes may have limited information in terms of phenotypes and ppi. some study suggested using an older version of phenotypic source  and newly discovered causal genes, which would give less biased estimation of the method  <cit>  alternatively, one can probably adjust the semantic similarity between phenotypes according to the publication years to control the bias.

influence of the ppi interaction score
protein complexes defined by high confidence ppi scores increased the precision of our network-based disease gene-prioritization approach. thus, our results support the fact that the genes likely leading to similar disorders are strongly connected. meanwhile, the recall was maintained for most ppi confidence score thresholds . however, further increasing the confidence threshold reduced the number of genes for which a candidate complex could be identified. the influence of protein confidence score thresholds was stronger on non-causal genes than on known causal genes in test. this is likely because known disease genes are usually better characterized and more frequently studied, and therefore have more known protein-protein interactions. particularly, those disease genes which are also essential genes show a strong trend to encode hub proteins  <cit> . despite the high stringency, we could have included more ppis, particularly those non-physical functional associations predicted in string. in practice, this may help detect less-studied disease genes. it is important to note that our method is not limited to genes with known ppis, although our validation was entirely dependent on the interaction partners of the causal genes. as long as the gene itself has one or more gene-associated phenotypes, we could quantify the association with any disease phenotype. this is a clear advantage compared with some existing network-based disease gene-prioritization approaches. in particular, as more information about gene function and ppi data become available, we expect that network-based approaches will become ever more accurate and sensitive in their ranking of candidate genes.

global ranking of genes for human diseases in omim
we used our approach to generate a global ranking of all human genes according to their relevance to a large set of human diseases. these results provide a unique resource for the biological interpretation of results from gwas and will help understand how the associated genetic variants might influence disease or quantitative phenotypes. in addition, the global ranking profile  may help to identify a set of genes encoding for the proteins in the protein complex that have co-susceptibility/resistibility to a common set of disorders, and similarly, disease clusters that share relevant/irrelevant genes.

for a more detailed assessment of the ability of the gene-prioritization model to identify disease genes accurately, as well as to identify unknown susceptibility factors, we selected two complex disorders for closer scrutiny: als and pd. als is a neurodegenerative disease, usually of adult onset, caused by the loss of motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord. als is clinically characterized by progressive muscular paralysis, leading to respiratory failure and death usually within five years of diagnosis. a subgroup of als patients develops frontotemporal dementia. als is predominantly a sporadic disease, while 10% of cases are familial. to date,  <dig> genes and two chromosomal loci have been linked to als, two genes with als-frontotemporal dementia, and one gene with als-parkinsonism-dementia complex  <cit> . ideally, a prioritization model should rank all known causal genes in the top positions, which is essentially what we observed. inspection of the prioritized genes showed that ten genes associated with als occurred among the top 1%, four genes were among the top  <dig> %, one was in the top 15%, and only one gene was poorly prioritized. importantly, the model also prioritized several genes that have not yet been annotated as being associated with als. one such gene was ccs, which encodes a copper chaperone for cu, zn-superoxide dismutase  <dig> . ccs is essential for sod <dig> activity because it delivers the copper cofactor to the enzyme and promotes oxidation of an intra-subunit disulfide bond, which is important for the structural stability of sod <dig>  sod <dig> mutations are responsible for up to 20% of the hereditary forms of als, and a hallmark of both familial and sporadic cases of als is aggregates of misfolded sod <dig> protein  <cit> . ccs-null mice have markedly reduced sod <dig> activity and, like sod1-knockout mice, exhibit reduced fertility and an increased sensitivity to paraquat  <cit> . furthermore, ccs-deficient mice showed an increased loss of motor neurons after facial nerve axotomy, similar to sod <dig> mutants  <cit> . intriguingly, loss of ccs did not affect the time of onset or progression of motor neuron disease in sod <dig> mutants, whereas in contrast, over-expression of ccs in a sod1-mutant background strongly accelerated neurological disease. this occurred without the formation of insoluble sod <dig> aggregates, but generated a markedly mitochondrial pathology, suggesting that ccs may modulate disease progression by affecting the subcellular distribution of sod <dig> between the cytosol and mitochondria  <cit> .

another putative disease gene that might be linked to als is xrn <dig>  which was ranked at position  <dig>  the xrn <dig> protein possesses 5′–3′ exoribonuclease activity and is involved in the termination of transcription. behind the elongating rna ii polymerase, the nascent transcript forms rna-dna hybrid structures , in particular in the g-rich pause sequences downstream of the poly signal. the r-loops are subsequently resolved by the rna/dna helicase activity of senataxin, which is encoded by the als-related disease gene setx
 <cit> . this is a critical step because it allows the xrn <dig> exoribonuclease to degrade the transcript from the free 5′ end generated by cleavage of the rna at the poly site, leading to transcriptional termination and the release of free rna polymerase ii  <cit> . the neurodegenerative mechanisms associated with mutations in setx, and possibly also xrn <dig>  are presently not understood. it is noteworthy, however, that xrn <dig> has been shown to interact with tdp <dig>  which is also involved in various aspects of rna transcription and processing  <cit> . mutations in the gene encoding tdp <dig>  tardbp, have been found in both familial and sporadic als  <cit> . together, these observations support the notion that aberrant rna processing plays a role in als pathogenesis  <cit> .

failure to fold newly synthesized proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum  can result in the accumulation of misfolded proteins in the lumen, which activates er stress signaling to protect the cell from the adverse effects of protein accumulation or aggregation  <cit> . for example, protein mutations may prevent their correct folding, which leads to retrotranslocation of the terminally misfolded proteins into the cytosol, where they are subjected to ubiquitin-dependent degradation in the proteasome, a process known as er-associated degradation . however, prolonged activation of er stress may induce cell death by apoptosis, and the er stress response has been shown to be involved in the pathogenesis of a number of different diseases, including sod1-related als  <cit> . interestingly, two of the genes that were prioritized by our pipeline, derl <dig> and rnf19a, are implicated in the erad response to sod <dig> mutations. thus, derl <dig> or derlin  <dig>  is most likely a component in the channel responsible for the retrotranslocation of proteins across the er membrane, and derlin  <dig> has been demonstrated to interact specifically with mutated sod <dig>  apparently leading to the inhibition of erad and the induction of apoptotic death in motor neurons  <cit> . likewise, the rnf19a gene product dorfin  is also implicated in protein degradation by virtue of its ubiquitin-ligase activity. dorfin selectively ubiquitinates and degrades mutated sod <dig> in a dorfin-mediated ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, thereby protecting neuronal cells against the toxic effects of mutated sod <dig>  <cit> . furthermore, overexpression of dorfin in a mouse model of als reduced the number of sod <dig> aggregates in the spinal cord, reduced motor neuron degeneration, and increased the life-span of the mutant mice  <cit> . finally, dorfin colocalizes with valosin-containing protein  in lewy body-like inclusions composed of ubiquitinylated protein aggregates in both als and pd. the two proteins interact and the atpase activity of vcp contributes to the ubiquitin ligase activity of dorfin  <cit> . notably, mutations in vcp are associated with als  <cit> . taken together, the tight association of derlin  <dig> and dorfin with the er stress response and degradation of mutant sod <dig> makes them strong candidates for als susceptibility.

pd is characterized by slow movements, rigidity, impaired balance, and tremor at rest, and the pathological hallmarks include degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and accumulation of protein inclusions or lewy bodies within nerve cells of the substantia nigra and several other brain regions  <cit> . in addition to correctly identifying known disease-linked genes, our computational approach prioritized three unrecognized genes among the top ten candidates. among these was klk <dig>  also called neurosin, which encodes a serine protease primarily expressed in nervous tissue. interestingly, neurosin is able to degrade alpha-synuclein, which is a major constituent of lewy bodies in the brains of pd patients as well as one of the known disease genes. thus, fragmentation of alpha-synuclein by neurosin inhibits the polymerization and aggregation of alpha-synuclein, suggesting that neurosin may play a role in pathogenesis  <cit> . our model further suggested an involvement for slc6a <dig>  a dopamine transporter, an obvious candidate risk factor considering that pd is associated with the loss of dopaminergic neurons. indeed, loss-of-function mutations in slc6a <dig> have recently been linked to a complex movement disorder involving infantile parkinsonism and dystonia  <cit> . finally, the tppp gene, encoding the tubulin polymerization-promoting protein or p25alpha, was top-ranked on the candidate gene list for pd. the tppp gene is specifically expressed in the brain; its exact biological function is unknown but it seems to modulate the organization and dynamics of the microtubular network by interacting with tubulin  <cit> . interestingly, p25alpha is primarily expressed in oligodendrocytes; however, abnormal expression has been observed in affected nerve cells in pd and lewy body dementia. furthermore, p25alpha promotes the aggregation of alpha-synuclein and co-localizes with alpha-synuclein in neuronal lewy body inclusions. this indicates that dysregulated expression of tppp may contribute to an increased risk of pd  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have implemented and validated a network-based approach to prioritize genes for human diseases based on their phenotypic profile. we have devised a powerful and transparent tool to identify and rank candidate genes. our global gene prioritization provides a unique resource for the biological interpretation of data from genome-wide association studies, and will help in the understanding of how the associated genetic variants influence disease or quantitative phenotypes.

