BACKGROUND
under normal circumstances, self-tolerance mechanisms ensure the host's immune system does not react against self antigens  <cit> . when these self-tolerance mechanisms fail, autoimmune responses occur, which may culminate in the development of autoimmune disease. experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis  is an animal model of t cell mediated autoimmune diseases in general, and multiple sclerosis  in particular  <cit> . the animal disease is mediated through a network of cells ; encephalitogenic t helper cells are activated in the peripheral lymph nodes following immunization for eae, and migrate to the central nervous system  where they induce activation of microglia, macrophages and dendritic cells   <cit> . the resultant inflammation causes demyelination of neurons, prompting the presentation of myelin basic protein  to additional encephalitogenic t cell populations in the cervical lymph nodes  by migratory dcs. the spontaneous recovery that occurs following autoimmune episodes is associated with a major reduction in the t cell infiltrate in the cns  <cit> . recent evidence indicates that encephalitogenic cd4th <dig> cells undergo selective t cell mediated regulation; cd <dig> t regulatory cells  help dcs in priming cd <dig> t regulatory cells  that induce selective apoptotic elimination of cd4th <dig> cells  <cit> . the dcs mediate down-regulation of the autoimmune response through the expression of qa- <dig> , which facilitates the priming of cd8treg cells, for subsequent killing of encephalitogenic cd4th <dig> cells  <cit> .

the exact location of killing of the encephalitogenic cd4th <dig> cells, and thus down-regulation of the autoimmune response by cd8treg cells, is unknown. one possibility is that dcs migrating from the cns, potentially carrying both mbp  and t cell receptor  derived peptides, are simultaneously priming both cd4th <dig> and treg cell populations  <cit> , and that regulation of autoimmunity is taking place around the dc. effector cd4th <dig> cells contain framework region  <dig>  and complementarity determining region 1/ <dig>  peptides within their tcr molecules, and once efferocytosed by a dc, there is a probabilistic chance that the dc will present the fr <dig> and cdr1/ <dig> peptides on mhc class ii molecules. tang et al  <cit>  suggest that the cd8treg response is cross-primed by dcs that have efferocytosed apoptotic cd4th <dig> cells and present tcr-derived peptide to both cd4treg and cd8treg cells  <cit> . kumar and colleagues  <cit>  found that cd4treg cells may then become activated by binding to the fr3-mhcii complex of an antigen presenting cell . conversely, cd8treg cells recognise tcr-derived peptides relating to the cdr1/ <dig> regions, which have been cross-presented on mhc class i molecules.

the spatial and temporal features of eae lend themselves well to being modelled using an agent-based approach. in this paper we investigate the effect of regulation of cd4th <dig> cells by cd8treg cells through use of a simulation , which we have previously developed to support investigation into eae  <cit> . we investigate three hypotheses, the first hypothesis is that a significant portion of cd4th <dig> and cd8treg cell priming occurs simultaneously around the same dcs. the second hypothesis  is that the timing of qa- <dig> expression by dcs has a significant effect on the size of the cd8treg effector cell population. the third hypothesis  is that spatial competition between cd4treg and cd8treg cells around dcs on which they prime, has a significant effect on the size of the cd8treg effector cell population. we have performed a number of in silico experiments to further understand the priming dynamics of cd8treg cells by dcs against these three hypotheses. in order to establish control simulation dynamics, we have reproduced the baseline generated from development of the simulator  <cit> . figure  <dig> illustrates the relevant cell populations within the simulator under control conditions.

although much is known on the mechanics of antigen-presentation  <cit> , it is unknown whether the individual dc can simultaneously prime both encephalitogenic cd4th <dig> and treg cell populations. if so, then key regulatory action might be taking place around the dcs that prime these populations. the first experiment therefore examined priming dynamics of cd8treg cells in relation to the antigenic peptide presentation by dcs to ascertain whether an individual dc can prime both encephalitogenic cd4th <dig> and cd8treg cells in parallel. the second and third experiments investigate the manner that help  can modulate the regulatory immune response. the time required for cd4treg to license the dc for qa- <dig> expression, and spatial competition between cd4treg and cd8treg priming on the same dc, may in fact have a limiting effect on the magnitude of the cd8treg cytotoxic t lymphocyte  response. in the control simulation, it takes approximetaly  <dig> hours for cd4treg cells to mature into effectors and license dcs for qa- <dig> expression. manipulation of the time at which dcs express qa- <dig> may affect the timing of cd8treg cell priming and activation, with earlier expression of qa- <dig>  permitting populations of cd8treg cells more time for proliferative activity within the lifetime of dcs on which they prime. similarly, manipulation of the spatial competition between cd4treg and cd8treg cells for binding space around dcs, may also affect cd8treg dynamics. both cd4treg and cd8treg cells can prime on the same dcs, and therefore compete for spatial access to dc. since cd4treg cells may begin priming immediately upon dc maturation, with cd8treg cells waiting for the dc to be licensed, cd4treg cells would be expected to occupy a greater fraction of the total space around the dc. if spatial competition is a limiting factor in cd8treg population expansion, then an increase in the competitive strength shown by cd8treg cells, would enhance the resulting ctl response, as a greater number of cd8treg cells would be primed.

RESULTS
effective regulation does not require cd4th <dig> and cd8treg to prime on the same dc
we examined the peptide presentation profiles for dcs in silico using artimmus, and showed that the vast majority  do not present antigenic peptides, and of those that do, the overwhelming majority  present either mbp or tcr-derived peptides, but not both. in fact, only 1% of dcs within the simulation present both mbp and tcr-derived peptides.

when imposing mutually exclusive presentation on dcs , where a dc cannot simultaneously present both mbp- and tcr-derived peptides, we find a small reduction  in the number of dcs presenting tcr-derived peptides, and a small increase in the number of dcs presenting mbp-derived peptides . this leads to an approximate 10% reduction in the priming of cd8treg cells within the system, which leads to an approximate 5% reduction overall in the total number of cd4th <dig> cells which are killed by the cd8treg population. next we examined the effect of mutually exclusive presentation on priming dcs within the cervical lymph node  where dcs prime both populations of t cells . we find a small, but not scientifically significant, reduction in the cd4th <dig> killing facilitated by cd8treg cells with respect to control simulations . this indicates that enforcing mutually exclusive antigenic presentation has no scientifically significant effect on the regulating capacity, and as such, we conjecture that killing does not take place around the dc.

timing of qa- <dig> expression by dendritic cells modulates the regulatory response
the control simulation uses two-way signalling between dcs and cd4treg cells. cd4treg cells are activated through a mhcii-fr <dig> complex , and once they become effector cells, if a cd40-cd40l bind is also formed , the cd4treg licenses the dc to express qa- <dig> . expression of qa- <dig> leads to the activation of cd8treg cells , and subsequent apoptosis of cd4th <dig> cells. this raises the question of how variations in the timing of cd40-cd40l interactions may modulate the cd8treg ctl response.

the limiting nature of time required for dc licensing on the cd8treg response was investigated through delaying the time upon which a dc can express qa- <dig>  and thus gain the ability to prime cd8treg cells . in this context, timing of qa- <dig> expression, means the expression of optimal levels of qa-1/tcr-peptide complexes  on the surface of dcs enabling the priming of the cd8treg. this qa- <dig> expression delay has been defined within the simulation as the median time taken for a dc to become licensed by a cd4treg under control conditions . we removed the cd4treg population from our experimental simulations to allow manipulation of the time delay before qa- <dig> is constitutively expressed, and upregulate qa- <dig> expression on dcs after a pre-specified period of time following their maturation. we demonstrate a medium-level increase to the peak population of cd8treg cells  following the shorter delay in qa- <dig> expression . conversely, simulations employing an increased delay to qa- <dig> expression  demonstrate a large, and scientifically significant, decrease in the peak population of cd8treg cells with respect to control dynamics . as would be expected, this demonstrates a large, and scientifically significant decrease between the two delay periods . this indicates that the timing of qa- <dig> expression by dcs has a significant affect on modulating the regulatory cd8treg ctl response.

spatial competition between cd4treg and cd8treg cells around the dendritic cell modulates the regulatory response
along with the temporal dynamics, the nature of help from cd4treg cells within this system also imposes a spatial effect on cd8treg priming. simulations employing modified cd8treg spatial occupancy rules, which allow cd8treg cells to occupy space regardless of the cd4treg that may already reside there , demonstrate that the peak population of cd8treg cells has undergone a large, scientifically significant, increase relative to the control simulation . this indicates that spatial competition between cd4treg and cd8treg cells has a significant effect on modulating the regulatory cd8treg ctl response.

CONCLUSIONS
we have sought to investigate, through simulation, whether cd4th <dig> and cd8treg cells need to be primed on the same dc, and whether temporal and spatial mechanisms may regulate the cd8treg ctl response within eae. as beeston et al  <cit>  have firmly established that cd8treg cells induce the killing of encephalitogenic cd4th <dig> cells, our first hypothesis was that a significant degree of priming of these two cell populations occurs simultaneously around the same dcs. observation of dc peptide presentation profiles has established that only 10% of dcs that are able to prime t cells simultaneously prime both cd4th <dig> and cd8treg populations. furthermore, given our criteria for scientifically significant results, a-test scores indicate that no significant difference in the ability of cd8treg cells to regulate the cd4th <dig> population arises from this manipulation. we therefore conclude that the killing of cd4th <dig> cells as induced by cd8treg cells does not critically rely on these t cell populations being primed on the same dcs, and conjecture that it is probable that killing of cd4th <dig> cells does not take place around the dc, as such we reject the first hypothesis.

the second hypothesis concerned the timing of help provided by cd4treg cells, through the time at which qa- <dig> was expressed by dcs. we have found that delaying qa- <dig> expression by dcs has a significant effect on the cd8treg effector cell population. we therefore conclude that the timing of qa- <dig> expression by dcs modulates the regulatory response, and as such accept the second age of licensing hypothesis, that the time delay in licensing is significant in modulating the regulatory cd8treg ctl response. the third hypothesis concerned the binding space available around dcs, because although cd4treg cells license dcs to provide critical help for the recovery from autoimmune response, their physical presence may limit the size of this cd8treg ctl response. by relaxing spatial competition for cd8treg, allowing them to occupy space and gain access to dcs regardless of cd4treg presence, we found a significant effect on the cd8treg effector cell population. we therefore conclude that spatial competition between cd4treg and cd8treg cells around the dc modulates the regulatory response, and as such accept the third spatial saturation hypothesis.

results from the experiments regarding temporal dynamics and spatial dynamics suggest that both factors could serve to control the ctl response through altering the size of the cd8treg cell population. through this work, it is evident that although cd4treg cells are required as part of the regulatory response via their capacity to provide help, they also exert a restraining influence on the population size of cd8treg cells by virtue of their modulation of cd8treg-dc interactions through spatial competition. although these results are grounded specifically in the eae system, we believe the spatial and temporal constraints that cd4th help  imposes are applicable to ctl responses in general, and have significance in the design of treatments based on manipulating the ctl response. for example, by providing artificial help to dcs  that prime cytotoxic t cells, the cd4th cell-imposed delay in licensing can be removed, invoking an earlier ctl response of larger magnitude. if the cd4th population were to be abrogated and suitable artificial cytokine and signalling surrogates administered, the spatial restrictions that help imposes, could be alleviated to effect a larger ctl response.

taken together the analysis from these experiments show that cd4th <dig> cells and treg cells do not need to be primed by the same dc in order for down-regulation of the autoimmune response to occur. they have also shown that regulation of ctl responses  appears to be limited by the nature of help provided by cd4treg cells, and the spatial competition that results around priming dendritic cells. although simulation results cannot, as yet, be confirmed using in vitro or in vivo testing, our work has shown that temporal dynamics of qa- <dig> expression and spatial competition around dcs is very important for the modulation of the ctl regulatory response.

