BACKGROUND
the lack of species-specific data on antimicrobial use has been recognised as a major problem when trying to identify the relationship between use and the development of resistance  <cit> . several countries publish annual data on the overall use of antimicrobials in the treatment of animal diseases  <cit> . however, those data only provide consumption figures on a general level. more detailed information is needed in order to understand better the relationship between consumption; indicating the general exposure of microbial flora to antimicrobials, and resistance. information on the use of antimicrobials in different animal species on an indication basis would also make it possible to evaluate how recommendations and prudent use guidelines for antimicrobial use are being followed.

some studies have been carried out to collect more specific information on the use of antimicrobials in animals. for example, chauvin et al.   <cit>  described continuous monitoring of antimicrobial use in french poultry production. busani et al.   <cit>  conducted a telephone survey to evaluate how italian veterinarians followed guidelines for the judicious use of antimicrobials. some reports exist from canada and the united states on data collected from dairy farms  <cit>  and data based on wholesaler statistics from norway and sweden estimating antimicrobial usage for mastitis are available  <cit> . to the best of our knowledge, only denmark collects detailed data on a continuous basis, recording information about the use of antimicrobials for different food-producing animals  <cit> .

a cross-sectional prospective survey was previously successfully carried out to investigate indication-based use of antimicrobials in humans in finland  <cit> . our aim was to collect data using a similar method, to analyse the distribution of indication-based antimicrobial use among different animal species and to evaluate how the recommendations for antimicrobial use are being followed by veterinarians. the questionnaire was modified to include veterinary-specific issues . here we report the results as a descriptive analysis of indication-based use of antimicrobials in cattle in finland.

RESULTS
response rate and numbers of animals treated
a total of  <dig> of  <dig>  veterinarians responded to the questionnaire . the representativeness of respondents was tested for type of practice, geographical area, gender, year of graduation, degree and field of specialisation. those who responded represented the intended sample well. the only statistically significant difference was noted in gender: female veterinarians responded more actively than males .

during the one-week survey, the responding veterinarians used  <dig> kg of antimicrobials, most of this for cattle , pigs , dogs  and horses . the distribution of the different groups of antimicrobials for each species is illustrated in figure  <dig> 

the  <dig> veterinarians that responded filled out questionnaires for a total of  <dig> animals. cattle were most commonly treated , followed by dogs  and cats . six veterinarians treated solely cattle and were responsible for the treatments of  <dig> % of all bovine cases. the remaining veterinarians also treated other animal species. as cattle were the species receiving most treatments, results from the survey are given using cattle as an example species.

antimicrobial usage in cattle
during the study period, a total of  <dig> cattle were treated with antimicrobials. the most common diagnosis was acute mastitis , followed by dry-cow therapy , subclinical mastitis  and acute enteritis . the remaining treatments  were distributed among  <dig> indications with the number of animals treated falling below  <dig> in each indication . the proportions of different antimicrobials used in cattle are presented in figure  <dig>  of a total of  <dig> treatments for mastitis, one third  were prescribed by telephone to pharmacies. in dry-cow therapy almost half of the prescriptions were of this type  and all were intramammary treatments. for  <dig> cows  an injectable preparation was prescribed by phone and seven of these were from the same herd.

acute mastitis
most veterinarians  based the diagnosis of acute mastitis on clinical signs, results from the california mastitis test  and bacteriological culture . most of the cows  had shown clinical signs of mastitis for 0– <dig> days before treatment. eighteen percent  showed some signs for 4– <dig> days before any treatment was initiated. the treatment regimen was documented for  <dig> animals . either parenteral treatment by intramuscular injection  or intramammary treatment  was used. a combination of parenteral and intramammary treatment was used in the remaining cases . thirteen animals  were simultaneously treated with  <dig> or  <dig> parenteral preparations.

the most commonly used antimicrobial for parenteral treatment was benzyl penicillin . fluoroquinolones  were used in  <dig>  cases. some cows were also treated with trimethoprim-sulfonamides , oxytetracycline  or spiramycin . of the  <dig> cows that received intramammary treatment, a product containing ampicillin and cloxacillin was the most commonly used . another frequently used product contained cephalexin and streptomycin .

the duration of treatment was recorded for  <dig> cows treated parenterally and for  <dig> cows with intramammary treatment. in both groups the prescribed treatment length  was  <dig> days .

subclinical mastitis
a total of  <dig> cows were diagnosed as having subclinical mastitis during the study period. in  <dig> cows , bacterial culture was used for diagnosis. most of the cows  were treated with intramammary preparations alone. as for acute mastitis, the most commonly used intramammaries were those containing cephalexin and streptomycin , followed by ampicillin and cloxacillin . the prescribed duration of treatment ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> days, and the median duration was  <dig> days.

dry cow therapy
cows were selected for dry cow therapy on the basis of bacterial culture of milk in 41%  of the cases. in  <dig> more cases, the veterinarian reported the use of the cmt as a diagnostic tool.

the vast majority of the dry cow therapies were intramammary treatments . of the  <dig> intramammary dry cow treatments, either cloxacillin alone or combined with ampicillin , or a β-lactam combined with an aminoglycoside  was used. a little over half of the medications were dispensed via telephone prescriptions .

discussion
this cross-sectional prospective survey, using a method adapted from human medicine  <cit> , represented a useful method for collecting information on the indication-based use of antimicrobials in animals. the response rate of almost 40% can be considered reasonably high, taking into account that completion of a survey questionnaire represents an additional burden for busy practitioners. the respondents represented the original sample very well , which shows that the weighted stratification was successful.

the questionnaire functioned well. however, we identified a few items that could be added to obtain more information. for example, the weight of the animal should be recorded to calculate the actual dose used for the treatment. information on the results from bacteriological cultures would improve the evaluation of how the guidelines were followed by the veterinarians. antimicrobial drugs administered or dispensed  could be combined in order to simplify the form. having an electronic form could make the survey more user-friendly and also facilitate compiling the information supplied.

mastitis was by far the most common indication for the use of antimicrobial agents in our study, as 79% of all the cows were treated for mastitis. this is consistent with previous studies  <cit> . acute mastitis was most commonly treated within the first three days following the onset of clinical signs, but sometimes a cow was treated no earlier than 4– <dig> days after the appearance of the clinical signs. the urgency of the treatment should depend on the severity of the infection. in a recent study, a 24-h delay was found not to affect the therapy response of clinical mastitis with mild to moderate clinical signs  <cit> . the median length of treatment prescribed by the veterinarians was  <dig> days for all routes of administration. this is in line with the recommendations, which suggest a course of treatment of 3– <dig> days, independent of the treatment regimen used  <cit> . however, performing follow-up on owner compliance to complete the started or prescribed course of treatment was beyond the scope of this study.

the recommended practice in acute mastitis is to perform a clinical examination and the cmt and to take a milk sample for bacterial culture. empiric treatment is initiated and directed towards the most probable causative pathogen  <cit> . this survey showed that only 37% of veterinarians used the recommended methods to make treatment decisions . in the majority of cases  of subclinical mastitis, veterinarians used bacteriological diagnosis to target the treatment, as treatment could be postponed until results from the bacteriological culture were available. dry cow therapy was based on bacteriological results in only 41% of cases. bacteriological diagnosis as a basis for mastitis treatment could be used more frequently than was indicated in this survey.

national guidelines for the use of antimicrobials in animals have been provided by the finnish veterinary antimicrobial advisory group of the ministry of agriculture and forestry  <cit> . in finland, half of acute mastitis cases are caused by staphylococci and streptococci  <cit> . the national guidelines suggest that acute mastitis caused by streptococci and β-lactamase-negative staphylococci should be treated with benzyl penicillin. in our survey, systemic treatment with β-lactams, mainly benzyl penicillin, was used for acute mastitis in the majority of cases. drug selection thus accorded well with the recommendations, but the route of administration did not. systemic treatment of acute mastitis is still common practice in all nordic countries  <cit> , despite the lack of evidence of its superiority over intramammary treatment  <cit> . about 30% of acute mastitis was treated using concomitant parenteral and intramammary treatment. better efficacy of this regimen could be expected for deep infections such as mastitis caused by staphylococcus aureus, but in mild to moderate clinical mastitis intramammary treatment is mostly sufficient  <cit> . consumption of antimicrobials is much higher if parenteral or combination treatment is used for the routine treatment of mastitis.

fluoroquinolones, which are the drugs of choice for severe coliform mastitis, were used in 11% of parenteral treatments for acute mastitis. about twelve percent of acute mastitis cases in finland are caused by coliforms  <cit> , so the use of fluoroquinolones reflected this proportion if targeted at these cases. the use of fluoroquinolones, particularly in food-producing animals, should be kept to a minimum to avoid the emergence of resistance  <cit> . cattle are food-producing animals, which limits the variety of drugs that are approved for the treatment of infectious diseases. in finland, the use of antimicrobial agents is further restricted by national regulations so that, for example, the use of 3rd and 4th generation cephalosporins in cattle is not permitted.

in order to further evaluate how closely the guidelines were followed when treating an individual patient, the results of bacteriological cultures would have been needed.

CONCLUSIONS
this cross-sectional prospective survey proved useful in collecting indication-based data on the use of antimicrobials in animals. the response rate of veterinarians was 39%, which can be considered satisfactory. the most common indication for antimicrobial use was mastitis in cattle. benzyl penicillin was the most commonly used drug. the first-line treatment of mastitis was in accordance with the national guidelines, except for the route of administration. the use of bacteriological diagnosis to target treatment was sub-optimal.

