BACKGROUND
abdominal segment deformity disease  has been reported in cultured whiteleg shrimp penaeus  vannamei in thailand, malaysia and indonesia  <cit> . the affected shrimp have deformed abdominal segments accompanied by muscle necrosis and degeneration, and also show the presence of non-enveloped viral-like particles  in muscles, gills and ventral nerve cords. shrimp viruses such as infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus   and infectious myonecrosis virus  previously known to cause physical deformity and muscle abnormality in shrimp were ruled out as causative agents of asdd by negative findings using specific polymerase chain reaction  and in situ hybridization methods.

since asdd has no effect on shrimp growth rate or survival, it has been considered a relatively minor problem in terms of economic loss in comparison to lethal shrimp viruses such as white spot syndrome virus . however, the value of distorted shrimp is approximately 10% less than normal shrimp and farmer losses are proportional to the fraction of a crop that is affected  <cit> . the impact can be significant, especially when market fluctuations lead to low profit margins. thus, further investigation into the cause and possible prevention measures was justified to improve production efficiency. because the initial investigation of asdd revealed the presence of viral-like particles, it was of interest to determine whether any virus or viral-like agent could be identified from diseased shrimp. in this report, we describe the presence of a retroviral-like element that appeared to be causally linked to axonal degeneration leading to muscle atrophy and distorted abdominal segments in p. vannamei. since the agent appeared to be transmitted from broodstock to their offspring, recommended precautionary strategy should focus on immediate management and monitoring of broodstock and, if possible, long-term selection of stocks free of the element.

RESULTS
shotgun cloning
from shotgun cloning, a dna library of  <dig> clones was obtained. after screening by dot blot hybridization using shrimp dna dig-labeled probe,  <dig> clones were immediately discarded because of strong cross hybridization with a dig-labeled dna probe from normal shrimp. of the remaining  <dig> clones,  <dig> gave weak hybridization signals with the same probe while  <dig> did not hybridize. sequencing of these  <dig> clones followed by blastn and blastx searches revealed that  <dig> had significant homology to shrimp immune genes,  <dig> to mitochondrial or nuclear genes of penaeid shrimp and  <dig> to hypothetical proteins of various other organisms . the remaining 31clones showed no similarity to known sequences and only  <dig> clone of 1316 bp had a deduced amino acid sequence  with homology to a virus-like, pol protein  of a non-ltr retrotransposon of the gastropod mollusk biomphalaria glabrata  and to a sequence of drosophila melanogaster . its nucleic acid sequence also shared high identity  with a p. vannamei expressed sequence tag    and less identity  to a p. monodon est . no significant homology was found for other retrotransposable elements previously described from penaeid shrimp  <cit> . for convenience herein, this clone and its extended sequence by race will be referred to as abdominal segment deformity element .

rapid amplification of cdna ends 
by the race technique, the original asde sequence of  <dig>  bp was extended to  <dig>  bp. analysis of the extended sequence by orf finder  indicated  <dig> putative orf . the deduced amino acid sequences of orfs  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> gave significant homology to known sequences at genbank using blastp. that of orf  <dig>  gave a hit  for a carpenter ant  hypothetical protein that contained a conserved giy-yig endonuclease domain characteristic of penelope-like retrotransposons  <cit> . in addition, a tblastn search of crustacean est records for this orf gave a hit from p. vannamei hepatopancreatic cdna  and from p. monodon post larvae . orf  <dig> gave a hit with an amphipod protein of unknown function  and with and est sequence of p. vannamei . orf  <dig>  gave blastp hits for pol regions of non-ltr retrotransposons containing conserved domains for reverse transcriptase  in b. glabrata and d. melanogaster, as described above , but it also gave tblastn hits for est records of p. vannamei  and p. monodon . orf  <dig>  gave a hit with a putative pol protein of the lepidopteran danaus plexippus  and an est record for p. vannamei . orf  <dig>  gave a blastp hit for an rnaseh in a pol-like protein from the mud crab scylla paramamosain , and a tblastn hit with est records of p. vannamei  and p. monodon .

although the other putative orf  gave no significant hits using blastp, they gave strong hits with shrimp mrna sequences using a tblastn search of crustacean est sequence records at genbank. for example, orf  <dig> gave hits with p. monodon  and p. vannamei . similarly, orf <dig> gave hits with p. vannamei  and p. monodon .

phylogenetic analysis of reverse transcriptase
the pol-like proteins include three conserved domains for endonuclease/ exonuclease/ phosphatase, for reverse transcriptase and for rnaseh. since the rt domain is somewhat more conserved in amino acid sequence than other retrotransposon sequences, it is usually selected for phylogenetic analysis and so it was here too.

phylogenetic analysis was carried out based on the deduced amino acid sequence of the reverse transcriptase domain of asde and  <dig> major clades of non-ltr elements, including several previously reported from penaeid shrimp  <cit> . the tree was constructed using the neighbor-joining method and revealed that asde was most closely related to thei clade of such elements . this clade is represented by idm and idt elements from drosophila <cit> , by bgi and bgr from the freshwater snail biomphalaria glabrata <cit>  and by the non-ltr element lsnonltr <dig> previously reported from p. stylirostris <cit> . by contrast, the reverse transcriptase region of non-ltr retrotransposon pm <dig> from p. monodon fell in clade rte together with those of lsnonltr <dig> from p. stylirostris and lvgenay <dig>  lvgenay <dig> and lvest  <dig> from p. vannamei <cit> .

a multiple sequence alignment was carried out for reverse transcriptase domains 4– <dig> of asde and with other elements from clade rte and clade i which contained the non-ltr retrotransposons from the penaied shrimp . the alignment revealed homology and conserved amino acid residues of two clades. the gqg conserved sequence of reverse transcriptase domain  <dig> of both clades were located at the same position while the  <dig> aspartic acid  residues of domain  <dig> aligned differently for the two clades.

pcr, rt-pcr, southern blot and northern blot
the pcr tests with dna extracts and rt-pcr tests with dnase-treated rna extracts from asdd and normal shrimp revealed that all the shrimp were positive for the rt domain by both detection methods. the positive result by pcr suggested that the asde target sequence was present in shrimp dna extracts while the positive result by rt-pcr indicated that an rna form of asde  was also present in the extracts. for rt-pcr, strong reactions were observed in 5/ <dig> normal shrimp and 6/ <dig> asdd shrimp . however, the mean density of the bands for the normal shrimp and the asdd shrimp were not significantly different .

proposed incorporation of the asde sequence into the shrimp genome was supported by southern blot analysis of the rnase-treated genomic dna isolated from asdd and normal shrimp digested with various restriction enzymes  . these enzymes had  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> cutting sites, respectively, within the asde sequence. in all the tests, undigested genomic dna gave positive hybridization with the dig-labeled probe, and some enzymes  gave no additional hybridization bands. however, digestion with the restriction enzymes bamhi, psti and sali gave one or more additional hybridization bands. for example, digestion with bamhi gave an additional positive band of approximately  <dig>  kb, indicating that it contained the probe target sequence . the fact that this band was not present in the undigested dna indicated that it was released from the total dna by restriction enzyme digestion. based on the diagram in figure  <dig>  the size of this fragment corresponded to an expected restriction enzyme fragment of  <dig>  kb containing most of orf <dig>  all of orf <dig> and a portion of orf <dig>  unfortunately, attempted cloning and sequencing of the fragments represented by these additional bands from the restriction enzyme digests failed, and no chimeric sequences clearly composed of asde and host shrimp sequences were obtained.

pcr using primers to cover the whole asde sequence with dna extract templates gave a pcr amplicon of approximately 4 kb only. however, sequencing of the cloned product revealed poor sequence identity with the 5 kb asde sequence obtained by 3′ and 5′ race . however, both pcr and rt-pcr assays for the putative orf of asde from the appropriate dna and rna templates from asdd shrimp gave one product each for orf  <dig> and another product each spanning orfs  <dig> to  <dig> . no rt-pcr products were obtained for orfs  <dig> and  <dig> in either reading direction. these results indicated that no single dna or rna target that contained all  <dig> of the asde orf existed in asdd shrimp. attempts at northern blots with rna extracts from asdd shrimp failed to give the expected hybridization band at 4098 kb corresponding to the rt-pcr product covering orfs  <dig> to  <dig> of asde as described above, probably because of too little transcript to be detected by the method used.

in situ hybridization
the in situ hybridization results revealed a purple precipitate in all  <dig> normal and  <dig> asdd shrimp tested and showed cytoplasmic localization in tubules and spheroids of the lymphoid organ, in hematopoietic tissue, in gills, in the ventral nerve cord, in globuli cells of the eyes and in connective tissue of the ovary and testis . for most of these tissues, intensity of the positive reactions varied from specimen to specimen, but without significant differences between the two shrimp groups. however, for the abdominal ganglia, positive reactions were found in the cytoplasm of neurons of asdd specimens only, not in specimens of normal shrimp .

as in previous results, semi-thin sections of the abdominal ventral nerve cord revealed an irregular pattern of fibre arrangement  <cit> . here, additional anomalies were observed in the cytoplasm of neurons of the abdominal ganglia of asdd shrimp. these included numerous small cytoplasmic inclusions accompanied in some neurons by fragmented cytoplasm. these features were not observed in the ganglia of normal shrimp .

transmission electron microscopy
under tem, numerous viral-like, non-enveloped, icosahedral particles of 20–22 nm diameter were found in the cytoplasm and processes of glial cells, as in a previous report  <cit> . this study revealed additional abnormal ultrastructure of an axon from asdd p. vannamei . normal axons of penaeid shrimp are immediately surrounded by a microtubular sheath, inside a submyelinic space filled with an amorphous gel  <cit> . the microtubular sheath provides mechanical support for the axon, while the submyelinic space electrically insulates the axon, as well as provides some flexibility for it. unlike normal features, the axons from asdd p. vananmei became more-electron-dense, deformed, fragmented, and surrounded by disorganized and degraded microtubular sheaths. these degenerative changes were similar to those of degenerative axons observed in the crab ucides cordatus following axotomy  <cit> .

broodstock analysis and nlrs transmission to larvae
table  <dig> shows results of the preliminary study of pcr and rt pcr of young and old broodstock. four out of  <dig> of the old broodstock but only  <dig> out of  <dig> of the young broodstock were positive for nlrs by both one-step pcr and rt-pcr and the difference was statistically significant  by chi-square analysis . in the young broodstock, the remaining specimens were either one-step, pcr-positive only, one-step rt pcr-positive only or both-negative. by nested pcr, however, all of the broodstock specimens were positive. by stereomicroscopy, mysis  <dig> from the young and old broodstock showed 30% and 50% prevalence of gross signs of asdd , respectively. detection of nlrs in pooled mysis  <dig> from both broodstock sources were positive for nlrs by both 1-step pcr and 1-step rt-pcr.

results of polymerase chain reaction  and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction  tests specific for the nlrs sequence using nucleic acid extracts from penaeus vannamei broodstock pleopods and from pooled samples of their larvae . the broodstock specimens were utilized for either four or sixteen weeks in a hatchery.

in addition to this test, a random sample of  <dig> male shrimp was subjected to pcr assays for nlrs using dna extracted from spermatophores and all gave positive results for nlrs by nested pcr. since the shrimp sperm are spiked and do not have flagella, they contain no mitochondria and thus possess only chromosomal dna. thus, the results confirmed the presence of nlrs in shrimp genomic dna and its heritability.

discussion
in this study, shotgun cloning followed by race led to the discovery of a new non-ltr retrotransposon-like element  <cit>  named asde in p. vannamei showing gross signs of abdominal segment deformity disease . the sequence contained an rt domain that shared homology with rt domains of non-ltr retrotransposable elements similar to long interspersed nuclear elements  that constitute the most abundant classes of transposable elements in vertebrates  <cit> . l <dig> retrotransposons comprise 17% of the human genome and may play a role in modulating gene expression  <cit>  even at the somatic level  <cit> . for example, human l <dig> was shown to alter the expression of neuronal gene sox <dig> in the rat hippocampus neural stem cells in vitro and to influence neuronal somatic mosaicism in transgenic mice in vivo <cit> . a similar phenomenon has been reported for drosophila, where neural expression and mobility of retrotransposons can promote somatic neural diversity that may contribute to individual behavioural changes and/or neurological disorders  <cit> . by inference, it is possible that asde may alter the normal function of neurons in the abdominal ganglia of asdd shrimp. another example of a transposable element is the penelope retrotransposon-like element peg <dig>  that causes muscular hypertrophy in callipyge sheep by changing the expression of linked genes  <cit> .

normally, the reverse transcriptase domain is the conserved region most commonly found in retroelements and used to construct phylogenetic trees. phylogenetic analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence of the reverse transcriptase domain of asde revealed homology to the i clade of non-ltr retrotransposons including idt, idm, bgi, bgr and lsnonltr <dig>  <cit> . the transcriptionally active bgi element has been reported to be widely distributed in new world and old world snails  <cit> . intriguingly, bgi is flanked by 5′ and 3′ non-coding regions that show 80% identity to a schistsosome snail parasite and suggesting that it may have been acquired by horizontal transfer from the parasite to its snail hosts. although the deduced amino acid sequence  of asde gave the best blastp hit  at high coverage  for the pol protein of a non-ltr retrotransposon from a snail, it shared only low  amino acid identity, indicating that they are only distantly related.

a study of non-ltr retrotransposons of penaied shrimp  <cit>  revealed that elements from p. monodon, p. stylirostris and p. vannamei were mainly grouped in an rte clade  while fewer elements were classified in clades cr <dig> and i. after several unanswered inquiries, we were unable to obtain sequences of  <dig> additional shrimp est contigs  of p. vannamei <cit>  for inclusion in our phylogenic tree. however, we can assume that they would have fallen in our clades for cre <dig>  and rte-like  and lvestcontig7+ <dig> as they did in the previous publication  <cit> .

in summary, none of the previously reported non-ltr elements from shrimp fell in the same clade  as nlrs and none have been reported to be associated with particular shrimp phenotypes. this is true also for insects, where most of the work on retrotransposale elements has been focused on evolutionarly analysis. on the other hand, it has been reported previously that environmental stress can increase expression of such elements in shrimp  <cit> .

curiously, putative orf  <dig> of the asde sequence showed high homology to a giy-yig catalytic endonuclease domain of penelope-like transposons  that belong to a clade of retrovirus-like transposable elements phylogenetically separate from the non-ltr transposons  <cit> . this initially suggested that asde might be a chimeric construction of two different types of retro-transposable elements. however, the failure to amplify a single 5 kb transcript containing the giy-yig sequence together with the pol-protein-like sequence suggested that the giy-yig sequence and the pol-protein-like sequence were not linked as appeared in the originally concatenated asde sequence obtained by 3′/5′ race. this was confirmed by sequence comparison between asde and a 4 kb fragment amplified by pcr using primers designed from the 5′ and 3′ ends of asde. the sequence of the amplified fragment showed high homology to asde at both ends but contained no giy-yig element. in addition, good homology to the non-ltr region of asde was found only for the 3′ end of the rt portion and the adjacent downstream rhaseh. altogether, the data indicated that the 4 kb amplicon arose from a different location in the host shrimp genome where only a portion of the non-ltr region of asde was duplicated. fortunately, the region with high homology to the asde reverse transcriptase  domain did not match well with the target we used to detect the rt by pcr and rt-pcr, nor with the sequence of the corresponding cdna probe that was used for its detection in blots and in situ hybridization assays. from this point onward, we will refer to the giy-yig penelope-like sub-element of asde as pens  and the non-ltr-like sub-element as nlrs .

nlrs is clearly not a retrovirus  <cit>  because its genome structure does not include  a gag protein, a pol region containing a protease , a reverse transcriptase  and an rnaseh, and finally an envelope  protein, and because its rt sequence is phylogenetically related to those of non-long terminal repeat  retrotransposons. in addition, it fits in the i clade of non-ltr elements because of its rt domain homology  and because the rt domain is followed by an rnaseh domain  <cit> . of the retrovirus-like retrotransposons known, viral families have been described only for the long terminal repeat  retrotransposon types ty1-copia   <cit>  and types bel and ty3-gypsy   <cit>  whose genome structures contain  a gag protein, a protease  and an integrase   <cit> , all three of which are absent from the asde sequence. although it is possible that extension of the asde sequence on the 3′ side of its rnaseh sequence might eventually reveal in and env sequences, the 5′ side of the rt sequence contains neither pr or in sequences.

this information, together with the fact that putative orf  <dig> to  <dig> could be amplified from both dna and rna templates of asdd shrimp while the complete 5 kb of asde could not, and the fact that chromosomal dna could hybridize with the rt probe specific for nlrs suggested that nlrs was a host chromosomal element. this would be consistent with the characteristics of non-ltr retrotransposable elements reported from other eukaryotes where they are believed to be transmitted exclusively vertically  <cit> . this inferred that nlrs was not a representative of any retrotransposable construct with a single rna genome that might be capable of producing viral-like particles such as those seen in the families retroviridae, metaviridae or pseudoviridae. this, in turn, suggested that the viral-like particles in the neuronal cells positive with the asde-rt probe did not arise directly from the asde element, leaving their origin open to speculation.

the situation regarding the causal role of nlrs in asdd was complicated by our fortuitous discovery of the unconnected pens in the asde construct. since a penelope transposon has been shown to be causally involved in muscular hypertrophy in callipyge sheep  <cit> , it is reasonable to ask whether the similar pens from shrimp might also be associated with asdd. to answer this question, it would be necessary to compare the expression of both of these asde sub-elements in the neuronal cells that show pathology in asdd shrimp and in aging broodstock together with their asdd offspring. if the affected neuronal cells of only asdd shrimp were positive for the nlrs probe and negative for the pens probe, it would support the proposal for unique association of nlrs with asdd. if both probes were positive in neuronal cells of only asdd shrimp while normal shrimp showed only negative results for the both probes in neuronal cells, it would indicate that both elements were associated with asdd. other possible results would lead to different conclusions. for the first two outcomes, elimination of nlrs from breeding stocks would eliminate asdd, whether pens was an associated, component cause of the disease or not.

in summary, the preceding information indicates that nlrs has structural similarity and homology to vertically-transmitted non-ltr elements, that an nlrs probe in southern blots shows positive hybridization with total shrimp dna and with an expected  <dig>  kb bamhi digestion fragment released from it, and that a full-length transcript of nlrs is present in spermatophore dna of both normal and asdd shrimp. thus, nlrs can be transmitted from grossly normal parental shrimp to their offspring, but anecdotal information from shrimp farmers indicates that althgough muscle deformity persists, it does not increase in prevalence with cultivation time . the occurrence of a homologous sequence in the p. monodon est database suggests that this element may be an ancient acquisition in penaeid shrimp and that homologues may occur also in other species of the genus.

what remains to be explained is why there tends to be higher expression of nlrs transcripts in well-used female broodstock of p.vannamei than in newly used female broodstock and how higher expression can lead to a higher proportion of deformed offspring. the tools we have developed can be used to quantify nlrs transcripts in young and old broodstock in response to stress from various environmental changes that occur in shrimp hatcheries  <cit> . they can also be used to study the consequences of increased expression of nlrs transcripts. judging from what has been reported previously for increased expression of line- <dig> elements in neuronal cells of vertebrates and drosophila <cit> , the effects will probably be complex and involve nlrs-mediated alteration of neuronal-cell gene expression leading ultimately to muscle deformity. how this effect could be carried over from the broodstock to development of the offspring is an intriguing question, especially since it results in a specific rather than random type of abnormality.

CONCLUSIONS
although both normal and asdd shrimp gave positive results for the asde sub-element nlrs by pcr and rt-pcr, in situ hybridization assays for nlrs gave positive signals only in the cytoplasm of neurons of asdd shrimp, and this was accompanied by neuronal degeneration in the abdominal ganglia. there was a positive relationship between the long-term use of female brooders, the increased expression of nlrs rna transcripts and an increased prevalence of asdd in their progeny. thus, we hypothesize that nlrs transcripts are up-regulated by stress in broodstock females and that this causes asdd in their offspring by a currently unknown mechanism. the possibility of a causal, co-involvement with pens should also be investigated.

our recommendations for immediate control of asdd include avoidance of long-term broodstock use and use of pcr screening to exclude broodstock that give positive reactions for nlrs. if the latter is not possible, rt-pcr could be used to exclude female broodstock that give 1-step rt-pcr reactions for nlrs. ultimately, if nlrs-free stocks can be identified, the objective would be to eliminate nlrs from breeding stocks. the sequence information and pcr tools provided here will help in this work and in further study of nlrs and pens. they will also be useful for examination of other cultivated shrimp species should they exhibit similar muscular deformity.

