BACKGROUND
antimicrobial peptides  participate in the first line of defense of a wide variety of organisms ranging from prokaryotes to mammals . in humans, aps are essential components of innate immunity where they play key defensive and immunomodulatory roles  <cit> . to exert their antimicrobial action, aps have to bind first to their target cell membrane. the cationic nature and amphiphilic structure characteristic of the vast majority of aps enable them to interact specifically with negatively charged components of the microbial cell envelope . aps that are active on gram-negative bacteria typically bind to lipopolysaccharide , a negatively charged molecule present in the outer membrane of these microorganisms  <cit> .

binding of aps to lps causes the displacement of the divalent cations  that under physiological conditions stabilize the outer membrane via cross-bridging of neighboring lps molecules. when aps act at concentrations higher or equal to their minimum inhibitory concentrations , they typically kill their target cells within minutes. at subinhibitory concentrations, aps alter the cell permeability barrier, thus making bacteria sensitive to agents that would be excluded by an intact outer membrane  <cit> .

deciding what type of assays is more appropriate to characterize the biological activity of aps in vitro is not straightforward. the literature reveals that sometimes researchers measure the bactericidal activity of aps under conditions that do not allow bacterial growth  <cit> . others study the interaction between aps and their cell targets in buffers of varied ionic strength  <cit>  or measure the mic in culture media with non-standardized divalent cation content  <cit> . moreover, for the calculation of the mic by broth microdilution-based assays, some investigators emphasize the importance of using microplates made of polypropylene  <cit> , whereas others perform their assays on automated turbidimetric systems  <cit> , the latter being preferred by those dealing with high-throughput screening of antimicrobial compounds.

methods used by researchers studying ap-dependent membrane permeabilization are even more diverse and include assays monitoring leakage of cells , the uptake of various probes into the cell envelope  <cit>  and indirect assays such as those measuring sensitization of the target cell to lysozyme  <cit>  or to hydrophobic antibiotics  <cit> .

studies focused on the systematic characterization of aps are hampered by the lack of standard guidelines for testing these compounds. in the present report we investigated whether the information provided by methods commonly used for the biological characterization of aps is comparable, as it is often assumed. for this purpose, we determined the bacteriostatic, bactericidal, and permeability-increasing activity of synthetic peptides analogous to the lps-binding region of human lactoferricin by a number of the most frequently used methods and carried out a comparative analysis. our model organism was pseudomonas aeruginosa, a gram-negative opportunistic pathogen resistant to many antibiotics.

in the present work, we demonstrated that information provided by methods commonly used for the biological characterization of aps differ significantly depending upon changes in the test medium, growth conditions and bacterial species selected for the analysis.

RESULTS
characteristics of synthetic peptides
synthetic peptides  homologous to lf <dig>  an  <dig> amino acid peptide analogous to the lps-binding region of human lactoferricin  <cit> , were designed to contain the following modifications: deletions, substitutions in the hydrophobic core, spacial constraint, elongation, charge increase, removal of charged amino acids and variation of amphipathicity. representatives of these modifications are shown in additional file  <dig> 

the vast majority of the peptides were found to lack significant hemolytic activity and cytotoxicity when tested at  <dig> μg/ml on human red blood cells and hela cells, respectively .

comparison of methods used for susceptibility testing of antimicrobial peptides
all peptides were first screened for bactericidal activity under low ionic strength conditions on resting bacteria. for this purpose, we exposed bacterial cells in phosphate buffer  to increasing concentrations of peptides and performed viable cell counts. experimental designs similar to this are found in reports dealing with the biological characterization of peptides . these experiments were performed on escherichia coli, pseudomonas aeruginosa and bordetella bronchiseptica, three gram-negative pathogens differing in sensitivity to aps. as illustrated in additional file  <dig>  representatives of the main peptide classes exhibited a potent bactericidal activity on the three test organisms that was similar to that of polymyxin b .

the buffer used in the previous experiments was devoid of ca2+ and mg2+, two divalent cations known to contribute to outer membrane stabilization. to study whether their presence had an effect on the susceptibility to peptides, we repeated the assays using pb supplemented with  <dig> mm ca2+ and  <dig> mm mg2+ . as shown in additional file  <dig>  these conditions lowered the bactericidal activity of almost all the peptides and this was observed in all bacterial strains. however, the magnitude of the decrease varied markedly depending upon the peptide and strain. thus, whereas supplementation with ca2+ and mg2+ abrogated the activity of the peptides on both b. bronchiseptica and p. aeruginosa, such an effect was notably more modest in e. coli. in contrast, the activity of pmb was not significantly affected by the divalent cations.

to study the effect of using metabolically active bacteria in the assessment of antimicrobial activity, we determined the mic and the minimum bactericidal concentrations  of several peptides according to clinical and laboratory standards institute  guidelines. for these assays, we used two different types of mueller-hinton  medium differing in divalent cation concentration, namely, cation adjusted , and non adjusted  provided by the same manufacturer. an increase in divalent cation concentration led to higher mics in most cases and caused mbc rises of similar magnitude  in e. coli and b. bronchiseptica . regardless of cation concentration, metabolically active p. aeruginosa cells proved to be fully resistant to the peptides .

since the non-cation adjusted mh allowed ranking of the peptides by their mic and mbc , we used this medium to test whether automated turbidimetry-based system and conventional methods yielded similar results. as shown in additional file  <dig>  both the conventional and the automated method led to similar mics  for the majority of the peptides. only in the case of peptide p <dig>  when tested on e. coli and peptides p <dig> and p <dig> on b. bronchiseptica, a significant difference was detected in the mic values of the two methods, although no method proved to be consistently more sensitive than the other. the growth of the p. aeruginosa strain was not inhibited even by the highest peptide concentration used, thereby hindering any meaningful comparison between the methods. in contrast, b. bronchiseptica was found to be much more sensitive and e. coli displayed an intermediate level of sensitivity. in almost all cases, peptides mbcs were almost identical to their corresponding mics, thus indicating that the compounds are bactericidal at their mics.

interference of plasticware in susceptibility assay
it has been reported that cationic peptides have affinity for certain plastics , and as a consequence some authors disfavor the use of microplates made of such material. to investigate this potential interference, we studied whether the composition of the microplate  affected the antibacterial activity of selected peptides differing in length, hydrophobicity and net charge when tested on e. coli atcc  <dig> 

as shown in additional file  <dig>  the only peptide whose mic improved in polypropylene plates was p <dig>  however, the mbc of this compound was not significantly affected by the type of material used and peptide p <dig>  which had an identical net charge and very similar primary structure , displayed the same mic in both materials whereas its mbc was lower in polystyrene. only one peptide  improved its mbc when using polypropylene instead of polystyrene. in global terms, the composition of the microplate did not affect significantly the mic or mbc assessed either on growing or on resting cells.

of note, pmb had a higher activity  when assayed in polypropylene but other lipopeptides such as c12lf <dig>  a n-terminally acylated analogue of lf <dig>  <cit>  displayed the opposite behavior  indicating that acylation is not necessarily linked to affinity for polystyrene.

comparison of methods for measuring bacterial cell wall permeabilization
since lps plays a key role in outer membrane stability and all our peptides are analogous to the lps-binding region of lactoferricin, we hypothesized that they could alter the outer membrane permeability of gram-negative bacteria. thus, we investigated whether some of the techniques used to measure bacterial permeabilization provide comparable information when applied to aps. as test organism, we used p. aeruginosa, which in preliminary experiments allowed discrimination between good and poor permeabilizers better than that of e. coli.

first, we studied the ability of the peptides to sensitize p. aeruginosa to novobiocin, a hydrophobic antibiotic that cannot reach its intracellular target  due to its inability to cross an intact outer membrane. to quantify the synergistic effect, we calculated the ratio of novobiocin mics in the absence  and in the presence of subinhibitory concentrations of the peptides. specifically, for a combination to be considered synergistic mic of each agent when combined have to be at least 4-times lower than that of the corresponding agent alone  <cit> .

p <dig> was the most active compound since it caused a 4-fold decrease in novobiocin mic when added at  <dig>  μg/ml, a concentration at least  <dig> times lower than its own mic . interestingly, peptides with a highly charged c-terminus such as p <dig>  and p <dig> also showed synergistic activity at low concentrations. nevertheless, the most potent permeabilizer was peptide p <dig> which caused a 1024-fold drop in novobiocin mic and also had the lowest mic. however, this permeabilizing activity was only detectable at concentrations close to the peptide mic.

to correct for the differences in peptide mics, we calculated the fractional inhibitory concentration  index  for all the peptide-novobiocin combinations . peptides with the lowest fic indices  did not correspond necessarily to those having permeability-increasing activity  at low concentrations. this was the case, for instance, for peptide p <dig>  on the other hand, the best compounds as judged by their fic indices, peptides p <dig> and p <dig>  combined good permeabilizing activity at low concentration with a synergistic potential that progressively increased with peptide concentration. similarly, p <dig> and p <dig> which were among the best permeabilizers based on mic ratio also had low fic indices.

in addition to this indirect method, we used a direct assay which measures the ability of peptides to promote the entry of a hydrophobic fluorescent probe  into the cell membrane. this method identifies potent permeabilizers as those causing rapid npn uptake leading to a high level of fluorescence. preliminary experiments revealed that, to detect significant fluorescence increases, it was necessary to reach a peptide concentration in the cuvette of  <dig> μg/ml. hence, this concentration was consistently used for the comparative analysis. as shown in additional file  <dig>  peptides causing the slowest and less prominent npn-uptakes  corresponded to those classified as poor permeabilizers by the novobiocin-sensitization technique. interestingly, those combinations identified as synergistic by the latter method  also led to significant npn rises, and peptides with high mic ratios had the most potent npn-uptake promoting activity. however, the direct  assay was clearly less discriminative than the indirect method as it failed to rank the permeability-increasing ability of peptides differing in up to  <dig> times mic ratios .

peptide-mediated potentiation of antibiotics other than novobiocin
to study to what extent novobiocin-enhancing activity is valid as a criterion to screen for a broader permeabilizing ability of a given peptide, we combined peptide p <dig>  a compound with a rather modest fic index, with representative of antibiotic classes differing in mechanism of action. for these experiments we used the wild type p. aeruginosa strain pao <dig>  whose mechanisms of antibiotic resistance have been extensively studied  <cit> . as shown in additional file  <dig>  p <dig> formed synergistic combinations  with all the antibiotics except for fusidic acid. this synergism was detected even at concentrations  <dig> times lower than the peptide mic  in the case of rifampicin. notably, subinhibitory concentrations of peptide p <dig> brought down to clinically useful levels the mic of the majority of antibiotics including rifampicin , erythromycin , amoxicillin , nalidixic acid , ampicillin  and novobiocin . these compounds differed markedly in their octanol-water partition coefficient , suggesting that p <dig> is similarly useful at sensitizing p. aeruginosa to antibiotics regardless of their hydrophobicity. results similar to these were obtained with peptides having fic indices lower than p <dig>  thus suggesting that the novobiocin-sensitization technique may serve to screen for global antibiotic-sensitizing activity.

overexpression of multidrug efflux pumps such as mexab-oprm confers p. aeruginosa with a high level of antibiotic resistance  <cit> . to study whether observations made with the wild type strain hold true when using strains with enhanced antibiotic resistance, we performed the antibiotic sensitization experiments using paolc1- <dig>  an isogenic mutant of pao <dig> carrying a mutation that results in overexpression of mexab-oprm. as shown in additional file  <dig>  the paolc1- <dig> mutant displayed a level of susceptibility to antibiotics significantly lower than that of the wild type strain no matter the presence of p <dig>  in fact, low peptide concentrations failed to sensitize the mexab overexpressing mutant and even at the highest concentration p <dig> was unsuccessful at bringing the mic of most antibiotics down to clinically useful levels.

discussion
when testing the activity of antimicrobial compounds in vitro it is important to use standardized conditions that allow meaningful assessments. in this way, the activity of a given compound against different microorganisms or of different compounds against the same microorganism can be compared. for this reason, there are accepted guidelines to measure the in vitro activity of classical antibiotics. since guidelines for the susceptibility testing of cationic peptides are unavailable, we have compared methods commonly used for the analysis of antimicrobial and permeabilizing activity of aps.

a hallmark of aps is that their activity is antagonized by calcium and magnesium reflecting competition between divalent cations and aps for binding to lps  <cit> . interestingly, we found that the degree of antagonism between the peptides and the divalent cations in low-ionic strength medium greatly differed depending on the bacterial strain. thus, addition of divalent cations counteracted in most of the cases bactericidal activity against p. aeruginosa and b. bronchiseptica, but did not confer protection on e. coli. this observation probably reflects that divalent cations more effectively crosslink p. aeruginosa and b. bronchiseptica lps than their e. coli counterpart. consistent with this hypothesis, pseudomonas is known to be exquisitely sensitive to ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid  and its outer membrane is more easily perturbed by chelators of divalent cations than that of e. coli  <cit> . these results clearly illustrate the importance of performing the susceptibility testing of novel peptides on several unrelated test strains differing in sensitivity to aps, as opposed to using only one organism.

we also found that testing under static conditions in low-ionic strength solvents results in a vast overestimation of bactericidal activity and precludes discrimination among peptides. furthermore, these conditions are probably far from the physiological environment in the human body. it has been reported that most body fluids, including sputum, airway surface liquid, and serum/plasma contain concentrations of divalent cations between  <dig> and  <dig> mm  <cit> . in fact, addition of  <dig> mm mg2+ and ca2+ to our low-ionic strength medium sufficed in many cases to abolish the peptide bactericidal activity. moreover, cells maintained in buffers lacking any carbon source cannot deploy energy-dependent defense mechanisms, such as those efflux systems that can pump cationic peptides out of the cells  <cit> . likewise, the activities of several types of aps have been shown to be influenced by transmembrane potential which in turn requires active cell metabolism  <cit> . nevertheless, testing under low-ionic strength conditions may be useful to increase the level of sensitivity in an initial screening of bactericidal activity as previously shown  <cit> .

our study indicates that susceptibility testing of aps using cation adjusted mueller-hinton is probably the most stringent screening method. however, as we showed, this method may overlook some potentially interesting peptides such as compounds intended to be used not as antimicrobials but as antibiotic-sensitizing agents. indeed, a way to increase the sensitivity threshold and hence the discriminative potential of this type of screenings is to use non-cation adjusted mueller-hinton as test medium.

it has been claimed that cationic peptides of disparate nature bind polystyrene  <cit>  whereas other authors reported binding of nisin and enterocin to polypropylene  <cit> . even though peptides selected for our analysis differed up to three times in hydrophobicity and up to twice in net-charge, we obtained similar results in polystyrene and polypropylene. therefore, it appears that such factor is not relevant for all polycations. in fact, none of the studies reporting affinity of several classes of cationic peptides for plasticware  include lactoferricin derived peptides, the type of compounds used in the present work.

concerning permeability assays, our results are consistent with the notion that good permeabilizers do not necessarily correspond to compounds with potent bactericidal activity. this has been shown to be the case with the enzymatic derivative of pmb, pmb nonapeptide, whose antimicrobial activity is markedly reduced with respect to pmb while, as a permeabilizer, it retains the potency of its parent molecule . observations similar to ours have been reported by others using agents of disparate nature including spermidine and other polyamines . we also showed that the former have several advantages over the latter including the possibility of calculating useful quantitative parameters such as the fic index and the mic ratio, as well as better discriminative potential and ease of performance. in turn, fluorescence-based techniques provide rapid results and thus can be used to identify the most promising candidate compounds in initial screenings of synergistic activity.

finally, careful selection of the test strain for screenings of antibiotic-sensitizing activity is of key importance, as our results show. thus, most of the peptides permeabilized e. coli outer membrane , whereas only the most potent permeabilizers were active on wild type p. aeruginosa. however, even these compounds were barely synergistic when tested on a mutant strain overexpressing the mexab-oprm efflux system, a phenotype very frequent in clinical isolates of p. aeruginosa  <cit> .

in summary, we tested an array of related peptides using a range of methods that allowed us to best characterize their biological activity. by using these methods, we identified peptides that although not highly bactericidal under stringent conditions, were endowed with potent permeability-increasing activity at subinhibitory concentrations. we also found that some of them efficiently sensitized p. aeruginosa not only to hydrophobic antibiotics, as already reported for other cationic compounds  <cit> , but also to hydrophilic ones.

CONCLUSIONS
although testing under static conditions in low-ionic strength solvents may be useful to increase the level of sensitivity in screenings of bactericidal activity, it overestimates such activity and precludes discrimination among peptides. in contrast, cation adjusted mueller-hinton is the most stringent screening medium but it may overlook potentially interesting peptides. the use of non-cation adjusted mueller-hinton offers a good compromise between sensitivity and discriminative potential. regardless the testing conditions, the composition of the microplate  did not affect the peptides antibacterial activity.

permeability assays based on sensitization to hydrophobic antibiotics provide overall information analogous – though not quantitatively comparable- to that of tests based on the uptake of hydrophobic fluorescent probes. for screenings of permeabilizing and antibacterial activity, careful selection of the test strains is critical since it greatly affects the conclusions of the study.

a number of peptides proved to have potent permeability-increasing activity at subinhibitory concentrations and efficiently sensitized pseudomonas aeruginosa both to hydrophilic and hydrophobic antibiotics.

