BACKGROUND
accurate descriptions of protein function usually arise through repeated cycles of laboratory experiments and publication, followed by expert annotation by database curators . this is, of course, a time consuming process. computational sequence comparison methods are then typically applied to extend these annotations to related proteins from the same or a different organism. if adequate precautions are taken  <cit> , this annotation transfer rapidly brings added value to what would otherwise be a large collection of unannotated sequences. unfortunately, a substantial proportion of proteins from fully sequenced organisms remain unannotated after the application of manual and automated annotation methods; for the human proteome this fraction is approximately 40% . furthermore, many of the existing annotations are only partial, and one must also remember that proteins can have more than one function.

high-throughput technologies are helping to provide additional sources of information that can be used to predict protein function, typically through the detection of physical protein-protein interactions, or the analysis of gene expression patterns. ultimately, however, a protein's amino acid sequence dictates its behaviour once it has been synthesised, and so methods for deducing function directly from sequence are needed. alignment-based sequence comparison methods have already been mentioned as a suitable approach, but these have limited use at large evolutionary distances where annotation transfer can be unreliable. it should also be noted that alignment techniques generally require the conservation of whole domains and are tuned for optimal performance on water-soluble globular proteins. structure-based function prediction  also places an emphasis on whole globular domains.

many aspects of protein function have been attributed to sequence features that are generally found outside globular domains, including signals for subcellular targeting, degradation, calmodulin binding and post-translational modifications  <cit> . recently, disordered regions of proteins have been receiving more attention and are no longer considered functionally inert  <cit> . these observations highlight the need for computational techniques that can link short regions of sequence and/or the global properties of proteins directly to function, without recourse to alignments or domain family databases.

so far, only a few researchers have begun to address this problem  <cit> . both used a set of precalculated sequence features to describe each protein in their dataset. these features were then used to predict membership, or otherwise, to predefined functional classes. in king et al.  <cit> , the features included single amino acid and dipeptide frequencies, protein molecular weight, aliphatic index, hydropathicity and predicted secondary structure. annotation keywords for a protein and its homologues were also incoporated into the classification scheme. the target functional classes were taken from a hierarchical scheme used at that time for genome annotation by the sanger centre. jensen et al. omitted the amino acid frequency and keyword information but additionally included predictions of various post-translational modifications, transmembrane helices and protein targeting  <cit> . the initial study by jensen et al.  <cit>  attempted to predict a set of  <dig> general functional classes proposed by tigr and the six enzyme classes of the ec scheme. their subsequent study  <cit>  used  <dig> categories from the gene ontology  <cit>  as targets, and found that reasonable predictions could be made for  <dig> of them. it is important to note that neither of these studies involved the discovery of novel sequence motifs/features more extensive than adjacent amino acid pairs.

in this study we address the issues of sequence feature/motif discovery and functional categorisation simultaneously. this is achieved using a co-evolutionary algorithm which produces two types of protein classifiers. the first classifier is fed with a single amino acid sequence and predicts membership of a functional category which has been assigned by the second classifier on the basis of swiss-prot annotation words. the sequence classifier makes use of one or more evolved regular expressions which are used to detect the presence or absence of sequence motifs. the annotation classifier simply uses boolean logic to combine the presence or absence of certain words in the annotation. we call this a "self-supervised" data mining approach in which a moving target is used to train the sequence classifiers. this is in contrast to standard supervised learning approaches where the target is fixed and predetermined, and unsupervised learning where no targets are involved.

the results we obtain reinforce the widely held view that sequences hold intrinsic information about subcellar localisation  <cit>  since we find the strongest correlations between sequence features and annotation words that describe subcellar compartments. we also find that sequence features can be linked to some general functions, such as biosynthesis and transcription, which cannot be completely explained by large overlaps with the cellular compartments in which they occur . the behaviour of the predictors we obtain can be analysed and the sequence features associated with various functions are presented. finally, future development and applications of this new approach are discussed.

RESULTS
discovery of sequence-to-function relationships
briefly , a non-redundant set of  <dig> proteins was generated such that no two sequences share more than 10% sequence identity. each protein is tagged with one or more words from its uniprot/swiss-prot annotation, hereafter referred to as "annotation words". the data is split into training and testing sets of  <dig> and  <dig> proteins respectively. our "self-supervised" evolutionary learning approach is then applied to find sequence-to-function relationships. it does this by simultaneously searching for sequence- and annotation-based classification rules which overlap as far as possible on the training set proteins, as illustrated in figure  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows the outcome and progress of a few hand-picked runs. an example of an evolved sequence-to-function predictor is given in figure  <dig>  this predictor has found a correlation between the annotation of a protein with the words "rna" or "nuclear"  and an arithmetic inequality based on sequence pattern frequencies . the evolved predictor shown in figure  <dig> has "chosen" a single annotation word target , and the sequence classifier again uses several sequence patterns, including one three-residue pattern .

the plots in figure  <dig> show the progression of the correlation between the functional class predicted from sequence and the functional class assigned based on annotation words as the evolutionary search proceeds. the performance on the test set proteins tends to lag behind the training set performance, however it does usually follow an upward trend. the averaged results from  <dig> independent runs  are shown in the upper part of table  <dig>  the mean correlation coefficient between predicted and real functional class for the test set proteins is only  <dig>  but this is significantly greater than the correlations obtained from two control experiments . in one control, sequences are shuffled with respect to their annotation words . in the second control, each amino acid sequence is shuffled in a residue-wise manner prior to training . in our previous work  <cit> , where we used a similar approach to discover sequence features associated with the nuclear localisation of proteins, the mean correlation coefficient obtained from single predictors was  <dig>  . why is the performance with the new self-supervised method so much worse? in this work, we made two major changes to the approach, which are described below.

firstly, during dataset construction, there are no special quality controls imposed on negative examples . in our previous work, the non-nuclear proteins in our training and testing sets had to have some positive annotation for another cellular compartment, which helps eliminate proteins whose nuclear localisation status is unknown. this is standard practice in protein function prediction . therefore the datasets used in this study have a lower contrast between positive and negative examples, and lower prediction accuracies are expected. indeed, when the methods used in this work are applied to the higher-contrast dataset in ref.  <cit> , the mean correlation coefficient rises to  <dig>  .

the second change in our approach is that the search algorithm is encouraged to find sequence-order dependent features . this actually decreases the performance of the evolved predictors, but we are prepared to accept this in order to find potentially interesting sequence motifs. when the mechanism encouraging sequence-order dependent feature discovery is switched off, the mean correlation coefficient rises to  <dig>   when using the higher-contrast training data as described above. this is close to the  <dig>  correlation obtained in ref.  <cit> , indicating that the two methodological changes account for the lower prediction performances presented here.

function predictors obtained directly from our self-supervised approach unfortunately do not have either the specificity  or sensitivity  to be useful to biologists. however, the value of our approach lies in the discovery of potentially novel sequence-to-function relationships. at a later stage, more accurate predictors can be obtained by removing the sequence-order dependency, by the use of jury predictors, and by constructing higher contrast datasets with the help of expert biological knowledge to define both positive and negative examples.

so which sequence-to-function relationships are discovered with this technique? the most common annotation words used to form functional categories are also shown in the upper half of table  <dig>  the cellular compartments dominate this list, as would be expected from previous studies which have explored the relationship between sequence and subcellular localisation  <cit> .

beyond cellular compartments
to explore the relationship between sequence and more specific functions we performed another  <dig> runs where the major cellular compartment words had been removed from the vocabulary used to generate annotation classifiers. two other small changes were made to the protocol as detailed in methods. one hand-picked predictor is shown in figure  <dig>  one of the longer and perhaps more interesting regular expressions is  { <dig> }  , which can be interpreted as "matches between  <dig> and  <dig> q's followed by e, f, m, q or w followed by a, d, e, i, m, n, p or w". patterns similar to this will be discussed in the context of transcription later in this paper. the corresponding performance plot in figure  <dig> shows the test set correlation rising  as the run progresses. the mean correlations for these experiments are shown in the lower half of table  <dig>  there is a larger gap between the training and testing correlations which indicates more overfitting but, as with the first set of  <dig> runs, the mean test set correlation  is significantly greater than either of the two controls . the results indicate that some aspects of function are encoded in sequence features that are detectable and generalisable with this approach. the  <dig> most common annotation words used to define functional categories are listed in the lower half of table  <dig>  the relationship between the top three words: "inhibits", "biosynthesis" and "transcription" and the compartments "secreted", "cytoplasmic" and "nuclear" will be discussed in a following section.

intra-family motifs
if our training and testing datasets are constructed with a less strict sequence identity cutoff, our algorithm is able to discover motifs that are present across multiple sequence family members. for example, using a 50% cutoff we find that the h-r-d motif is frequently associated with the term "kinase" . encouragingly, the kinase h-r-d motif has been mentioned several times in the literature  <cit> . however, intra-family motifs are not the subject of this study, and a strict 10% sequence identity cutoff is used throughout.

the predictor map
we next analyse the behaviour of all  <dig> self-supervised predictors  by comparing the binary outputs of their evolved sequence_classifier subroutines on the  <dig> test set sequences. thus each predictor is represented by a  <dig> element binary vector, and these are clustered using kohonen's self-organizing map   <cit> . the som is a competitive spatial clustering technique which effectively "flattens" high-dimensional data onto the low-dimensional grid, preserving relationships in the input data as far as possible. the aim of the clustering is to group together predictors which produce positive predictions for similar subsets of the test set. figure  <dig> shows the  <dig> predictors projected onto an  <dig> ×  <dig> som. the number of "a-" and "b-type" predictors which cluster to each grid node are shown in black text. below this, the frequently occuring annotation words in the annotation_classifier subroutines are shown in coloured text . the non-random distribution of the annotation words is clear, for example many "secreted" predictors map to the upper left corner of the map, "inhibits" predictors to the upper right corner, and so on. while this clustering conveniently summarises the different predictor behaviours, it is actually more informative to study the frequencies of the annotation words belonging to the test set sequences which are positively predicted by the predictors in each cluster. therefore figure  <dig> also shows shaded inset boxes which list the annotation words whose observed frequency in positively predicted proteins is three or more times the expected background frequency .

we now discuss an example to aid the interpretation of figure  <dig>  the grid node located in row two, column seven has  <dig> predictors allocated to it. a majority  use the word "transcription" in their annotation_classifier subroutine, and six of the  <dig> use the word "development". these two words are usually present in the same logical expression "transcription or development" . the corresponding over-represented test set words  include "repressor", "repression" and several other dna-related words. transcription is well known to involve activator and repressor proteins/domains and the development of multicellular organisms is largely controlled at the level of transcription. therefore the over-representation of "repressor" and "repression" indicates that these  <dig> predictors are correctly predicting involvement in transcription or development for some of the previously unseen test set proteins. interestingly, "ubiquitin" is also over-represented in the positive test set sequences. we have since found evidence in the literature that ubiquitination is indeed important in transcription  <cit> .

note that although the more common annotation words  do not appear in the shaded inset boxes of figure  <dig>  there is still generally good agreement between target annotation words and over-represented test set annotation words for each cluster of predictors.

prediction of function vs. compartment
distinct positioning on predictor map
do our self-supervised function predictors actually predict specific functions ? or are they simply predicting targetting to a subcellular compartment in which a particular function is predominant ? this question can in part be answered by studying figure  <dig>  for instance, there is a cluster of "transcription" predictors at row two, columns 6– <dig> which is distinct from the large group of "nuclear" predictors at the bottom of the map.  this indicates that a different set of proteins are positively predicted by these two different clusters of predictors. likewise, there is a separation between the "secreted" predictors  and the "inhibits" predictors . on the whole we see separation between the "a-type" runs  and the "b-type" runs , but this could be a consequence of the minor differences in the protocols of these runs . therefore we chose to produce a set of fixed-target function predictors under identical conditions so that fair comparisons can be made.

fixed-target function predictors
a fixed-target predictor is produced with the standard supervised learning approach and is implemented simply by hard-coding the annotation_classifier subroutine with one or more chosen annotation words. to illustrate this, the hard-coded subroutine for a "secreted" predictor would look identical to the evolved subroutine shown in figure  <dig>  the targets were chosen manually by examining the predictor map  for the functions most commonly used by the self-supervised approach . for each target function, a combined jury predictor is made using the outputs of  <dig> independently evolved classifiers. the consensus prediction score for a given sequence is simply the fraction of the classifiers which "voted positive". the performance of these fixed-target predictors is summarised in figure  <dig>  with accuracy vs. coverage shown at different score thresholds. for most target functions, the accuracy increases as the threshold increases, with a corresponding decrease in coverage. this plot shows that the accuracy of prediction to cellular compartments  is generally higher than the accuracy of function predictions .

correlations between function predictors
there are three ways to analyse the overlap between function and compartment. first we can look at consensus prediction scores produced by different predictors on the same set of proteins. table  <dig> shows the correlation coefficients between the prediction scores of various pairs of predictors over the  <dig> test set proteins. to give an idea what the maximum expected correlation might be we have included three additional jury predictors which are copies of three selected cellular compartment predictors . these three copies give the highest correlations as expected. the next-highest correlation comes from the "nuclear" vs. "transcription" comparison; the actual distribution of scores is shown in figure  <dig>  from this we can conclude that proteins with a good "transcription" score generally also have a good "nuclear" score, but proteins with good "nuclear" scores do not always have good "transcription" scores. this agrees with the commonsense dictum that "a protein can be nuclear without being transcription-related but it can't be transcription-related without being nuclear". these results suggest that the predictors have some ability to differentiate between transcription-related function and nuclear localisation. clearly though there is also considerable overlap between the behaviour of the predictors.

the correlation between prediction scores for "inhibits" and "secreted" is also quite strong ). again it seems that a high score for the function is usually accompanied by a high score for the compartment. the scores for "cytoplasmic" and "biosynthesis" also correlate well , but the distribution in figure  <dig> indicates that biosynthetic proteins are not simply a subset of cytoplasmic proteins .

swapped training and testing targets
the second approach to determine if predictors can distinguish between function and compartment is to compare the performance of predictors trained on function but tested on compartment and vice versa. this is shown for the "nuclear" & "transcription" pair in figure  <dig>  again using accuracy vs. coverage plots . the plot shows that the "nuclear" prediction performance  is roughly the same, regardless of the target used during training . this could be expected, again from the common knowledge that "all transcription proteins are nuclear". when tested on "transcription" prediction performance, however, the predictors trained specifically for this function perform better, suggesting that sequence features specific to "transcription" have been learnt.

when comparing predictors trained and tested on the different combinations of "secreted" and "inhibits" ), we see that the function-trained predictor is better at predicting the compartment than the compartment-trained predictor when the coverage is between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . this is surprising, but could be explained by a large overlap between the function and compartment and the presence of more specific sequence features associated with the function. when tested on the ability to predict the function "inhibits", the function-trained predictor performs better than the compartment-trained predictor at low coverage . however, we have to be cautious in this region of the plot because of the small number of predictions used to calculate the accuracy.

in figure  <dig> the only predictor which has a gradually increasing accuracy curve is the one which is trained and tested on "biosynthesis" . this suggests that, with the current approach and dataset, "cytoplasmic" cannot really be predicted at all. we should stress, however, that the test set prediction accuracy for the "biosynthesis" predictor is poor . reasons for the comparatively poor performance of our approach have already been discussed. the key observation here is that there is a detectable seqeunce-to-function signal for proteins annotated with the word "biosynthesis", which is independent from the  signals correlated to cytoplasmic localisation.

sequence features
the third approach is to look in more detail at the sequence features discovered/used by the predictors. the initial step in this analysis is to determine which are the positively and negatively influencing regular expressions  in an evolved sequence_classifier subroutine. in some cases this would be easy to do by eye ), but often genetic programming produces complex expressions that are difficult to read and may behave in a non-linear fashion ), for example). as described in the methods, we estimate local derivatives for each of the regular expression terms in the evolved subroutine with respect to its output over the training set proteins. then all the evolved regular expressions belonging to a predictor  are scanned against the test set sequences. each residue in the test set is initially assigned a zero score, but each time a regular expression matches a residue, its score is updated by a positive or negative amount . finally we extract the highest and lowest scoring sequence fragments from the sequences for further analysis.

we should point out that the sequence feature analysis does no more than summarise the correlation of sequence features to annotations in the training data. we know that our algorithm overfits the data to some extent, therefore we checked all four cuts of the training/testing data for evidence of over-fitting. only the "stable" sequence features, discovered in all four  training sets are presented below.

the fixed-target predictors of "nuclear", "transcription" and "dna" annotations make use of an interesting repertoire of sequence features. as expected from our knowledge of nuclear import signals  <cit> , all three predictor types look for tracts of lysine and/or arginine  typically  <dig> to  <dig> residues in length. these k/r features seem to be most important for the "dna" predictor ), representing around 30% of the highest scoring sequence fragments. we also observe a dependence on tracts of negatively charged glutamate and aspartate  residues for predictors of "nuclear" and "dna" ). acidic domains similar to this have been associated with protein-protein interactions in the nucleus  <cit> , in addition to various non-nuclear roles  <cit> .

the most clear-cut distribution can be seen for polyglutamine-containing  features. these are most important in the "transcription" predictor , moderately important in the "nuclear" predictor and not at all important for the "dna" predictor ). poly-q tracts are known to be involved in transcriptional activation . transcriptional activation domains are generally involved in stabilising/assembling the transcriptional machinery . the molecular details of polyq interactions are unclear, despite considerable interest in neurodegenerative diseases, such as huntington's disease, in which mutant polyq-expanded proteins are associated with late-onset neuronal death.

closer manual inspection of the high scoring sequence fragments from the "transcription" predictor showed that the polyglutamine tract tends to be flanked by the following residues : d, r, h, a, n, k, s, l, e, p, t. the flanked polyglutamine feature is very strongly associated with the "transcription" predictor ). these flanking residues tend to have either small or charged sidechains, with the exception of leucine which is bulky and hydrophobic. the biological significance of the flanking amino acids is not yet clear.

an interesting n-terminal sequence feature also appears to be important for just the "nuclear" and "dna" predictors ). this feature is characterised by a negatively charged amino acid  following the n-terminal methionine.

the predictors of "secreted", "inhibits" or "antibacterial" do not exhibit clear differences in terms of the positively influencing features. a possible positive feature associated with all three predictors is the presence of a cys, gly or pro and a lys or arg ; this feature constitutes 20% of the high scoring fragments . there are clear differences in the negatively influencing sequence features. lysine and glutamate have a strong negative influence on "secreted" predictors , but not on predictors for "inhibits". predictors for "antibacterial" show that glutamate and aspartate are negatively influencing , but there is no such role for lysine. negative sequence signals are difficult to explain, however, and are not discussed further.

the sequence features having a positive influence on the predictors for "cytoplasmic", "biosynthesis" and "catalyzes" are summarised in figure  <dig>  no obvious alignable motif could be identified from the high-scoring fragments, but this was not expected because most protein families have distinct 3d structures and the active sites of enzymes tend to be formed from non-contiguous residues. however, short high-scoring fragments identified by the "biosynthesis" and "catalyzes" predictors typically contained one or more aromatic residue ). histidine is well known as an active site residue due to its ability to reversibly accept hydrogen ions and to coordinate with metal ions. phenylalanine and tryptophan have been shown to be important in maintaining the geometry of the active site through stacking interactions with other aromatic moieties, including catalytic histidines  <cit>  acidic residues , which are also well known to participate in catalysis, are important for all three predictor types, but most prominent in the "cytoplasmic" predictor. proline  is linked to "biosynthesis" and "catalyzes", but is not well known as an active site constituent. in fact, according to the the imb jena image library site database  <cit> , proline is ranked 19th out of the  <dig> amino acids according to the number of times it occurs in active sites . interestingly however, proline ranks 7th according to its occurrence in the environment surrounding known active site residues . the general agreement between our sequence-based analysis and the structure-based survey leads us to suggest that proline has an important accessory role in maintaining the geometry of active sites.

are sequence-to-function relationships discovered?
we conclude that at least two functions, "transcription" and "biosynthesis", are associated with specific sequence features that are not simply a consequence of overlapping subcellular localisation. the most compelling evidence comes from the accuracy vs. coverage plots in figure  <dig> where the training and testing targets were swapped, and figure  <dig>  where different contributing sequence features were found for each type of predictor. we draw further encouragement from the previously documented functions of some of the sequence features found automatically by our method .

CONCLUSIONS
existing function prediction methods are forced to take a simplified view of protein sequences, for example by considering amino acid composition, secondary structure predictions and the presence of known motifs. the preparation of input data for these methods is therefore heavily dependent on human knowledge and expertise. in this study we show how an open-ended evolutionary algorithm can automatically discover features in unprocessed amino acid sequences that correlate with protein function. our algorithm is also unique in the way it self-selects target functions while it learns these sequence features.

the most complex feature discovered so far is the "flanked polyglutamine tract" associated with transcription, but many other features are much less specific, for example the "containing proline" feature associated with catalysis. our algorithm is designed so that every sequence-to-function predictor makes use of at least one sequence order-dependent feature. however, this feature can either be positively or negatively associated with the function, and may escape our attention if it is not clearly represented in the high  scoring sequence fragments. sometimes the sequence order-dependent features are a consequence of overfitting to the training data. there is clearly room for improvement so that more numerous and higher quality sequence features can be discovered for a variety of functions.

feature discovery is currently limited by two interrelated factors: the size of the non-redundant protein dataset and the completeness of their annotations. our dataset is relatively small because we have only accepted sequences with high-quality human annotations which contain at least one of the  <dig> most frequent words. we could increase the amount of annotated training data by including homology-based electronic annotations, as used by both king et al.  <cit>  and jensen et al.  <cit> . we also estimate that a less stringent sequence identity cutoff of 30% would increase the dataset size by around 25%, although at this level, some "pollution" by family-related functions would be introduced  <cit> . however, in order to make the biggest impact on dataset size and quality one might use the gene ontology   <cit>  to describe protein function. firstly, the combined coverage manual and electronic go annotations is quite good . secondly, the hierarchical structure of go provides a more consistent description of protein structure at many different levels. the word-based approach we have used is easy to follow, but it is of course limited because words are often ambiguous out of context. in contrast, the go annotations benefit from the correct judgements of expert annotators.

the free-text uniprot/swiss-prot annotations we used may have one advantage, however. they contain information about ligands, cofactors, modifications and interaction partners that is not  available in go. for example, proteins targeted by ubiquitination may not be flagged as such in go, but these are certainly suitable targets for sequence feature discovery. further information about interaction partners could be drawn from databases such as kegg  <cit>  or the full-text literature.

it is also interesting to look at the evolved annotation word combinations which define the target functions. in the original set of  <dig> "a-type" predictors we saw  <dig> instances of the combination "nuclear or dna" and  <dig> instances of "nuclear or rna".  the association of "nuclear" with "dna" and "rna" is perhaps not surprising. our algorithm has presumably learnt that if proteins are not annotated with the word "nuclear"  then the word "dna" is also a good indication of nuclear localisation. likewise, most rna processing takes place in the nucleus. interestingly, "ubiquitin" also co-occurs with "nuclear" quite frequently . compared to the co-occurrence of these two terms in the training set annotations  this seems quite high, and we suggest that from the sequence perspective there is a stronger functional linkage between the two terms than was previously known. recent experimental studies have indeed shown that ubiquitination has an important role in transcription  <cit> . we have not presented a detailed analysis of the annotation word combinations because it is difficult to factor out the overfitting to the training data , and because we would need to run many more experiments to estimate the co-occurrence frequencies accurately. however, the rudimentary analysis presented above does clearly illustrate the knowledge discovery potential of our method.

as discussed earlier, the low prediction accuracy of the evolved function predictors can be explained partly by the low-contrast training data we used. another equally plausible explanation is that there might not always be a simple one-to-one relationship between sequence features and annotated protein functions. however, given training data of sufficient quality and quantity, we believe that novel biology can be discovered from amino acid sequences with a method such as this. we do not doubt the importance of three-dimensional structure in protein function, rather we suggest that linear motifs and features may be responsible for more biology than is currently thought. parallels can be drawn with the recently discovered role of micrornas in gene regulation; it is reasonable to suggest that all biological systems have evolved to use low information content components wherever possible.

our artificial evolutionary approach for sequence feature discovery is a kind of in silico combinatorial screening experiment. the current implementation is non-physical and is based on regular expression matching. although the evolution of the regular expressions is highly flexible, effective pattern discovery depends on the stepwise improvement and expansion of an initial simple pattern, with each step providing an increase in fitness. certain patterns may therefore not be reachable unless the representation is changed , larger populations are used, or some prior information is incorporated . these are therefore considerations for future work.

finally, we briefly discuss a future application of self-supervised function predictors. our recent unpublished results show that the clustering of proteins using amino acid frequency vectors can be improved significantly by appending the binary outputs of  <dig> different evolved function predictors to the vectors. most of the clusters obtained are enriched in one or more biological functions, therefore it is possible to assign/suggest functions for novel or uncharacterised proteins which fall into these clusters.

