BACKGROUND
the olive fruit fly bactrocera oleae   is the most harmful pest of olives worldwide  <cit> . primarily known as a cause of significant yield loss in almost all of the countries of the mediterranean basin , this monophagous pest is currently also present in new areas of cultivation, such as south africa and north and central america  <cit> . the olive fruit fly is able to reduce crop yield in several ways  <cit> . adult females injure drupes through their oviposition on the ripening fruits. the newly hatched larva will grow as a fruit borer, excavating a tunnel in the mesocarp until pupation. larval feeding causes yield loss primarily by pulp consumption and inducing premature fruit dropping. additionally, infested fruits present an alteration of their organoleptic features that makes them unsuitable for direct consumption, transformation or pressing  <cit> . although the availability and quality of host fruits, along with climate, represent important triggers of b. oleae outbreaks, it has been estimated that the average crop loss is in the range of 5–30% of the total olive production, even with intense chemical control measures  <cit> . conventional management methods rely on insecticide applications to control the fly after monitoring the adult population  <cit> . unfortunately, similarly to many other pests, populations of b. oleae have acquired insensitivity to insecticides  <cit> . moreover, classical biological control programs have not been successful, particularly in that they fail to consistently provide adequate levels of control across the range of climates and of cultivated olive varieties  <cit> .

despite the severe impact on yield, comprehensive studies on the olive response and on resistance mechanisms to the fruit fly are still lacking. olive cultivars differ in the degree of susceptibility to fruit fly infestation  <cit> , but the factors underlying this trait are still controversial  <cit> . a strong tolerance, defined mainly by assessing the severity of the infestation, has been reported in some cultivated varieties  <cit> . however, even the so–called “resistant” cultivars may suffer considerable attacks under intense infestation pressure  <cit> . it is likely that the differential susceptibility to the fruit fly may involve a number of morphological, physiological and phenological parameters, which include mechanical obstruction, fruit composition and the amount of chemicals involved in plant direct and indirect defence  <cit> . unfortunately, studies aimed at the description of the molecular response of the olive to b. oleae are also much needed to understand the mechanisms and the players of olive defence, eventually improving stress resistance, increasing yield and facilitating the molecular selection of olive varieties more suitable for integrated pest management.

to gain a more thorough understanding of the consequences of the olive–fruit fly interaction, we studied the molecular response of the fruits at the transcriptional and proteomic levels. due to the limited information on the olive genome, a pcr approach on subtracted cdna libraries was used. the pcr–based suppression subtractive hybridisation  technique was developed for a sensitive comparison of mrna expression patterns between two cdna populations  <cit> . this methodology has been successfully exploited to analyse plant responses to biotic or abiotic stress and changes between different developmental stages or tissues  <cit> . although the ssh method has been widely used in the animal, prokaryotic and human fields, it is particularly useful for species that lack genomic data  <cit> . in parallel, a bi-dimensional electrophoresis analysis of protein extracts was used to identify specific proteomic changes in drupes with larval feeding tunnels. gel-based proteomic studies have been extensively used to investigate protein expression changes in plant tissues during responses to biotic or abiotic stress and to highlight molecular signatures in genotypes with higher levels of resistance to insects or fungi  <cit> . our transcriptomic and proteomic analyses allowed us to reveal the molecular bases and related signalling pathways induced in the interaction between olive and its most damaging biotic pest.

RESULTS
construction of the subtracted library and sequence analysis
a subtracted library was constructed to identify olive genes whose expression is affected by b. oleae infestation. the cdna library was obtained using rna from fruits with larval feeding tunnels as tester and from undamaged fruits as driver. blue/white selection and restriction digestion identified  <dig> recombinant colonies out of  <dig> . after filtering for size by restriction analysis , the recombinant plasmids were sequenced and the clones with low information content were removed. the average length of the  <dig> cloned olive sequences was 303 bp, from a minimum of 69 bp to a maximum of 766 bp. to obtain unique sequences , we performed an assembly using the cap <dig> program, which identified  <dig> singletons and clustered the remaining  <dig> sequences in  <dig> contigs, made up of  <dig> to  <dig> overlapping ests. the resulting non-redundant unigene dataset, following an in silico automated translation, was compared against available databases to find similarities with known sequences. only three clones matched already available olive sequences. matches with e-values lower than 10e- <dig> were used to assign a putative function to the transcripts. overall,  <dig> % of the unigenes putatively code for proteins with significant similarity to annotated proteins in other organisms; these unigenes were named based on the homology . the remaining  <dig> unigenes  were considered to be functionally unidentified. unigenes with a blastx e-value higher than 10e- <dig> were then compared with nucleotide databases. fifty-two sequences revealed a significant similarity . specifically,  <dig>  ests were annotated, choosing as the search set the non-redundant nucleotide collection  at ncbi. a significant similarity for another  <dig> clones was found by analysing the olive transcribed sequences at the olea est db. all of these sequences are listed in additional file  <dig>  the proportion of sequences that were not annotated may be explained by the relatively small average length of the ssh fragments, the presence of fragments including utr regions, which typically correspond to less-conserved regions of genes, or both. these two features are likely to be introduced by the subtraction technique  <cit> , which favours the cloning of relatively short fragments with lower degrees of conservation. the average length of the non-described sequences significantly differed from that of the annotated entries . however, over 71% of the ssh clones whose putative translation product could not be annotated nevertheless showed similarity with other plant transcripts. approximately half of these clones found a match exclusively in the olea est database, suggesting that the lack of a functional annotation relative to a set of inducible genes, is also due to the existence of sequences that are specific to the olive tree.

gene ontology analysis of the non-redundant unigene collection was performed using the blast2go software, considering the limited information available regarding the olive genome. the sequences were classified into two ontology categories, namely, “biological process” and “molecular function” . interestingly, in the category “biological process”, the most frequent entry was “response to stress”, followed by “catabolic process”. the most frequent “molecular function” was hydrolase activity  <cit> . among the annotated sequences in the ssh library, we identified several ests whose homologues in other species are associated with plant responses to biotic stress, such as proteins of the hydrolase family and proteinase inhibitors.

expression analysis of ests involved in plant defence
the b. oleae-inducible expression of a selection of unigenes was also investigated by quantitative real-time pcr , as a verification based on an independent experimental method and material  <cit> . to this end, we selected from the library  <dig> unigenes representative of different biological processes, such as abiotic and biotic defence response, signal transduction, phytohormone signalling and transcriptional regulation. furthermore, we included in the analysis two transcripts putatively coding for unclassified proteins . the qrt-pcr experiments were performed using rnas isolated from infested and control drupes of the cultivar ‘moraiolo’ harvested in a different year. the real-time rt-pcr data indicated that ests exhibiting significant similarities to trypsin protease inhibitor ii, trypsin/chymotrypsin inhibitor, pathogenesis related protein  <dig>  and chitinase i were the most highly inducible sequences by larval feeding . the high inducibility of tpi ii was also confirmed in drupes of a different cultivar, ‘leccino’ .

the go term associations for the gene product were retrieved and selected from the best blast matches at the amigo website . f: molecular function. p: biological process.

identification of two full-length coding sequences and stress-response transcriptional analysis
as part of this study, we identified the full-length coding sequences of two genes highly inducible by larval feeding and further characterised their involvement in plant-insect interactions. the cdna fragments of prp <dig> and chitinase were used as starting point for 5′ and 3′ race-pcrs. the assembly of the rescued cdna fragments allowed us to identify the full-length coding sequences of  <dig> and 687 bp for the olive chitinase and pr <dig> genes, respectively. moreover, the 3′ utr and part of the 5′ utr were also cloned. these genes were named oe-chitinase i  and oe-prp <dig> .

the assembled cdna sequence of oe-chitinase i was 947 bp with an orf coding for a polypeptide containing  <dig> amino acids with a theoretical pi of  <dig>  . this protein product has the highest sequence identity  with chitinase 1b of vitis vinifera  and contains a conserved domain typical of the chitinase  <dig> superfamily. the lack of an n-terminal chitin-binding domain  implies that oe-chi i belongs to the class ib/ii. proteins belonging to the chitinase  <dig> family are enzymes whose function in plants is primarily associated with the defence response to fungal and insect pathogens. bioinformatics revealed the presence of a 19-amino acid n-terminal signal peptide and the lack of a vacuole targeting signal, suggesting that oe-chi i is secreted into the extracellular space. multiple alignment of the amino acid sequence to other plant chitinases revealed the presence of several conserved residues, most notably three catalytic residues, four sugar-binding sites and two signature patterns of the chitinase  <dig> family .

the assembled cdna sequence of oe-prp <dig> was 926 bp with an orf coding for a polypeptide containing  <dig> amino acids . this protein product has the highest sequence identity  with ntprp <dig> from nicotiana tabacum . the predicted oe-prp <dig> protein contains a basic secretory protein  domain, which is believed to be typical of proteins involved in plant defence mechanisms against pathogens. bioinformatic analysis indicated the presence of a 24-amino acid n-terminal signal peptide. multiple sequence alignment revealed the presence of five regions that are highly conserved among members of the pr <dig> family of pathogenesis-related plant proteins  <cit>  .

the transcriptional profile of these two genes was further investigated. we analysed the relative gene expression in fruits with b. oleae oviposition punctures or with feeding tunnels. furthermore, we determined their response to wounding, one and two days after treatment . considering that intraspecific variations in herbivory-induced signalling events and secondary metabolites exist among different plant populations  <cit> , this work was performed in a different cultivated variety, ‘leccino’. our results indicated that both oe-chitinase i and oe-pr <dig> transcripts accumulate in response to fruit fly punctures and confirmed their strong activation in drupes with larval feeding tunnels. furthermore, the wounding experiments showed that these genes are also inducible by mechanical damage. both genes had their higher transcriptional level at 24 h after treatment and interestingly, at this time-point, their level of expression of was similar to that recorded in olives punctured by the fruit fly. these data also suggest that other factors, most likely those related to the feeding habit of the larva, should be present to achieve the full induction of both genes in drupes with feeding tunnels.

identification of differentially expressed proteins
a proteomic approach was used to ascertain the qualitative and quantitative modifications in the protein expression profile of olive fruits due to larval feeding. protein extracts were prepared from infested and control fruits and subjected to 2-de analysis. software-assisted densitometric analysis of the resolved gels allowed a comparison of the respective proteomic repertoires. a representative coomassie-stained gel from the control olives is shown in figure  <dig>  the average proteomic maps showed  <dig>  and  <dig>  spots, respectively, with a 77% similarity. the statistical evaluation  of the relative spot densities detected  <dig> spots as differentially present in fruits subjected to larval attack, with at least a twofold difference with respect to the control. eight spots showed increased abundance levels in insect-infested fruits, whereas the remainder exhibited the opposite trend. these spots were excised from the gels, digested with trypsin and subjected to nanolc-esi-lit-ms/ms analysis. a database search with data deriving from the ms experiments allowed a positive identification of  <dig> spots. the list of the identified proteins is reported in the additional file  <dig>  together with their quantitative variations. for  <dig> spots, ms analysis demonstrated the occurrence of a single protein component within the analysed sample. conversely, multiple polypeptide species  were detected in each of the remaining  <dig> spots, as result of their concomitant electrophoretic migration. the identified sequences were compared against the available sequence databases to find similarities with known plant proteins; the entries with the highest scores are reported in the additional file  <dig>  according to go classification, the differentially expressed proteins are primarily involved in carbohydrate metabolism, redox processes and defence responses.

discussion
in the ssh library approximately 40% of the unigenes identified in the ssh library could be functionally annotated. although a comparison between different works is difficult because of the increasing number of sequences in the databases, this proportion is lower than those reported in similar works about model plant species  <cit> , yet it is similar to other reports on species whose genomes have not yet been sequenced  <cit> . interestingly, the functional characterisation of the library indicated a higher representation of ests involved in the plant response to stress, including those related to biotic stress, such as wounding and pathogen attack, or abiotic stress, such as high or low temperature, drought and nacl. moreover, we identified transcripts involved in the production, signal transduction or response to hormones and molecules  that are related to plant resistance to herbivorous pests. a similar number of sequences of the library matched uncharacterised olive transcripts, suggesting that the olive response to b. oleae also involves novel or undescribed genes. the functional annotation of the library showed that a critical barrier for working with the olive is the dependence on models of biochemical pathways, gene ontology repertoires and genomic information that are primarily based on model species  <cit> . these results also demonstrated that the ssh approach was an appropriate strategy to study the olive response. furthermore, although many cellular processes and pathways inherent to pest resistance are evolutionarily conserved in plants  <cit> , the library analysis suggested that the plasticity of signal transduction networks and the variety of defence compounds may be particularly pronounced for olive. this assumption is conceivable, considering not only the difference between this tree and model plants but also the strong co-evolutionary relationship of the specialist b. oleae with olive fruits. we anticipate that the uncharacterized unigenes may represent a reservoir of candidate defence genes and that their study may allow further insights into the mechanism of olive defence.

the proteomic analysis identified  <dig> proteins as differentially expressed after insect attack. two of these entries were also identified in our transcriptomic dataset. as a percentage, the matching rate is similar to other studies based on the proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of non-model tree species  <cit> . furthermore, considering that the low correlation between sequences deriving from mrna or protein analytical approaches is usually explained by post-transcriptional, translational and/or post-translational regulation processes  <cit> , our data are suggestive of the importance and the possible magnitude of post-transcriptional events for gene regulation during pest defence  <cit> . finally, this comparison also shows that transcriptomic and proteomic data are complementary in plants, as in other organisms  <cit> .

as plants present a variety of strategies against insects  <cit> , it is expected that several molecular processes are involved in the defence mechanisms against the olive fruit fly. functional annotation indicated that b. oleae larval feeding significantly diminished the abundance of various proteins related to photosynthesis and altered the amount of those related to carbohydrate metabolism, which included a reduced expression of serine hydroxymethyltransferase, which is important for photorespiration in mitochondria  <cit> , and of enzymes related to carbohydrate catabolic processes. the downregulation of genes coding for photosynthetic proteins or the decline in the photosynthetic rate in attacked plants has been observed for different herbivores that feed on leaves  <cit> . it is interesting that we observed a similar effect on sink organs, thus supporting the proposition that primary metabolites could also function as signals in pest defence pathways  <cit> . a stress-related promotion of drupe maturation should also be taken into consideration  <cit> . transcriptomic analysis also demonstrated that unigenes responding to stress represent the largest functional class of upregulated olive genes during b. oleae attack. under this condition, proteomics revealed increased accumulation of beta-glucosidase , major latex proteins, which have been already reported as defensive proteins against insects  <cit> , phosphogluconolactonase and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase. a possible defensive role of the latter enzymes has been suggested  <cit> . taken together, the data indicated a metabolic shift towards defence during larval feeding  <cit> . olive direct defence employs a variety of inducible factors, which include genes that are known to be important in the determination of the plant resistance to herbivorous pests, such as those coding for proteinase inhibitors or hydrolytic enzymes ; however, pr genes are also activated. approximately one-third of the functionally annotated unigenes are homologues to genes first described to be involved in plant–pathogen interactions. overlap in the signalling pathways regulating pathogen-plant and insect-plant interactions has been reported in several instances  <cit> . for the olive, such overlap is reasonable considering that b. oleae has long been known to be associated with different bacterial species  <cit> .

the production of compounds involved in direct defence should be mainly dependent on a network that includes reactive oxygen species and phytohormone signalling. the results from the transcriptomic and proteomic analyses were consistent in showing a remarkable enrichment of genes and proteins involved in the regulation of the redox status , thus indicating that ros production should be a relevant component of induced olive defence. the reduction of some proteins involved ros metabolism is indicative of the plant cell effort to maintain homeostasis under stress condition, preventing direct damage from the possible production of highly reactive cytotoxic compounds  <cit> . in the future, it will be interesting to ascertain if ros production in drupes is also a consequence of the oxidative damage of membrane integrity due to lipid peroxidation. the functional classification indicated the presence of clones that are expected to be members of gene families involved in jasmonate signal transduction  or phenylpropanoid metabolism  pathways, both of which produce compounds that, in plants, range from physical and chemical defence against biotic stressors to signal molecules involved in local and systemic signalling  <cit> . overall, as was also reported for the interaction between the fungus s. oleaginea and olive  <cit> , our data show an overlap of different pathways for the fruit fly response and denote that the olive responses to pathogens and herbivores should share a number of components at the signalling level  <cit> .

considering the unfeasibility of studying the olive-fruit fly interaction in controlled conditions, we recapitulated the expression analysis of twenty genes in drupes harvested in a different year. the real-time assay confirmed the differential expression of many but not all clones, as in other studies  <cit> , implying that the extent of drupe responses to larval feeding may depend on the amount of damage inflicted, on environmental conditions at the time in which insects feed on plants, and on plant resource availability and allocation  <cit> . it is therefore relevant that, in replicate years and in two different cultivars, the most prominent gene activation was detected for trypsin inhibitors. nonetheless, even though we could distinguish the transcripts of the two trypsin proteinase inhibitors in our qrt-pcr experiments, we cannot fully exclude the possibility that we monitored the activity of more than one transcript because serine inhibitors in plants belong to a large multigene family. in several plant species, proteinase inhibitors of the serine, cysteine and aspartic families are highly activated by larval feeding. serine proteinases are the most relevant enzymes detected in the gut of lepidoptera, coleoptera, hemiptera, homoptera and diptera  <cit> . however, bioassays using serine protease inhibitors against diptera are more limited than in other insect orders. it has been shown that the gut proteolytic systems of larvae of the mediterranean fruit fly  rely mostly on basic proteinases, with trypsin-like serine proteinases being the most important  <cit> . for these reasons, we argue that trypsin inhibitors should be a major element of drupe defence reaction. an in vivo assay against the olive fruit fly using purified inhibitors would clarify whether these molecules could be established as a novel insect control strategy, based on bio-compounds, on targeting the production of insect digestive enzymes by rnai  <cit> , on the selection of highly expressing olive genotypes, and on their combination.

among the ssh-enriched cdna clones, two sequences, coding for a chitinase and a prp27-like protein, were selected for further functional characterisation. we isolated their full-length cdna and studied their expression in response to biological  and physical  stress.

the oe-chi i protein has the two signature motifs of family  <dig> of the chitinases. chitinases have long been considered a significant component of plant defence because of their direct action against chitin-containing pestiferous and pathogenic organisms. furthermore, some of these enzymes are also involved in developmental processes or are associated with abiotic stress. the presence of a putative signal peptide and the gene expression analysis strongly support a role in drupe defence for oe-chi i. specifically, taking into account the magnitude of gene activation, it is tempting to speculate that oe-chi i may not be exclusively involved in biological processes activated by “generic” mechanical damage but that this gene plays a specific role in the onset of the reaction against larval feeding. although chitinases in plants are primarily associated with fungal resistance, there are various reports documenting their activation in plants following pest attack  <cit> . interestingly, a chitinase was found to be specifically activated by the application of colorado beetle regurgitant, and the gene had the highest expression level after a continuous infestation  <cit> . further work, primarily directed towards the characterisation of the oe-chi i protein product, will be performed to understand its possible effect against phytophagous pests  <cit> .

the oe-prp <dig> gene was named after its high similarity to the nicotiana tabacum ntprp <dig>  which codes for a secreted protein belonging to the pathogenesis-related  <dig>  family  <cit> . homologues of ntprp <dig> have been found in a wide variety of flowering plants and because of their transcriptional activation in response to pathogen infection and various elicitors, these genes are classified as encoding pr proteins. however, the roles of the members of the pr <dig> family have not been fully elucidated, especially because these genes are activated by various forms of stress   <cit> , and their constitutive expression in transgenic plants does not necessarily lead to an increased resistance to pathogens  <cit> . it has been proposed that pr <dig> members may act in defence responses with relation to either cell wall metabolism or signal transduction  <cit> , which would be consistent with the rapid activation of oe-pr <dig> after wounding. furthermore, oe-pr <dig> is induced by b. oleae feeding and punctures, implying an involvement in insect defence. this result is not completely unexpected, as ntpr <dig> is also induced by ja and ethylene  <cit> , and recently, the accumulation of an ntpr-like protein was reported during bacterial infection of grape  <cit> . although the mode of action and specificity of the pr <dig> family remain to be determined  <cit> , our data support a possible broad function of members of this group in the early stages of defence, rather than as antibiotic components directly acting against invading pathogens.

CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first investigation of the transcriptome and proteome of olive drupes attacked by b. oleae. the data from complementary approaches were useful to allow the identification of molecular players and to outline the biological functions, cellular processes and pathways associated with the drupe defence reaction. this work also revealed interesting genes that could have important roles in olive resistance and, eventually, be useful for the development of novel control strategies.

