BACKGROUND
next-generation sequencing technology has provided pioneering opportunities for deciphering novel mechanisms of gene/genome regulation through sequencing and analysis of the cdna libraries generated from the whole transcriptome of specific populations of rna in experimental cells and tissues . in addition to transcriptional regulation, alternative splicing  of the primary transcripts of protein-coding genes represents one central post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism in shaping the transcriptome diversity and proteome complexity of higher eukaryotic genomes. high throughput transcriptome sequencing revealed that almost 94% of genes are alternatively spliced in humans  <cit> . in plants, alternative splicing was estimated to be 60% in arabidopsis, 52% in soybean, 40% in cotton, 40% in maize, and 33% in rice intron-containing genes . however, alternative splicing was not extensively studied because of the underestimated introns in fungi  <cit> . in recent years, highly developed high-throughput sequencing has revealed more introns than previously anticipated  <cit> . in contrast to the predominant exon-skipping events in animals, plant and fungi as events were reported to be predominantly involved in intron retention, while the other as forms are rare .

as controls almost all aspects of biological processes in mammalian cells and is involved in many human diseases , it is logical to expect it plays a role in biological functions of fungi. pscrxlr <dig> was the first example of a non-effector transformed to a functional effector protein by alternative splicing in pseudoperonospora cubensis  <cit> . umrrm <dig> is probably involved in cell growth, morphogenesis, and pathogenicity in ustilago maydis, which was reported to be regulated by as  <cit> . in addition, genes involved in virulence in fungal pathogens were reported to be regulated by alternative splicing  <cit> . however, the influence from as on the transcriptome output in the lower eukaryotic genomes is still limited.


verticillium species are among the most devastating fungal pathogens that cause vascular wilt worldwide in a broad range of plant hosts including economically important crops such as cotton, soybean and tomato, but no effective chemical pesticides are available due in part to its soil-borne nature  <cit> . the recent release of the draft v. dahliae genome sequence  <cit>  enables a genome-wide investigation of genes and molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenicity of v. dahliae.

here we used deep sequencing technology to profile the transcriptomes of two v. dahliae strains. two different methods were applied to generate cdna libraries for illumina sequencing platform, showing the expression of over 95% of the annotated genes under the in vitro vegetative growth condition. using computational algorithms developed in this study, we showed that about 50% of the intron-containing genes of v. dahliae were potentially under alternative splicing regulation. in addition to the large amount of intron retention as events expected, we revealed over a thousand of as events covering most non-intron-retention as types. combined with the functional clustering results of the as genes, our results strongly suggest that this plant fungal pathogen has acquired sophisticated as mechanisms to maximize its protein encoding potential and to control essential biological functions such as mycelium development, sporulation, signal response etc., and thus very likely as contributes to the pathogenicity after the fungus encounters its hosts.

RESULTS
transcriptome landscape of v. dahliae and the likely enrichment of secondary structures in 5′ untranslated regions
to explore the as in v. dahliae, two closely-related v. dahliae  isolates were subjected to next-generation sequencing. the cdna was prepared from the polyadenylated rna and subjected to the high-throughput sequencing using illumina gaiix platform. we obtained a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  millions of cdna reads from the two strains, respectively, which unambiguously mapped onto the sequenced regions of the annotated genes   <cit> . both strains showed a major distribution of the reads in the protein-coding regions , and the remaining reads matched the non-coding regions including 5′ utr, 3′ utr and intron .

among the  <dig>  annotated v. dahliae genes,  <dig> genes  obtained expression evidence, with  <dig> and  <dig> genes being detected in v991w and v991b, respectively . the average sequence depth per base of all gene regions reached  <dig> , and the sequence coverage reached 50% for about two third of genes. the quantitative expression level of each gene was represented by the number of reads per kilo base of exonic region per million  mapped reads in all genes, showing that the majority of the v. dahliae genes was expressed relatively low-abundantly . we noticed the sequence depth at the 5′ and 3′ utr regions were significantly higher than that of the cds regions, which seems to be a global phenomenon . the sequence depth in the intronic regions was higher than expected too. this result could be caused by the enriched local rna secondary structure in non-coding regions, which were more susceptible to rnase iii digestion and selectively enriched in the cdna libraries .

in order to validate the results obtained using the rnase iii fragmentation of polya-mrna, we constructed another set of cdna libraries from the same v. dahliae strains using the ion fragmentation method instead . the total rna was prepared from a different batch of microbe cultures to represent an independent biological repeat. a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  millions of sequence reads were obtained for the v991b and v991w strains, with an overall mapping efficiency of  <dig>  and  <dig> %, respectively. in both cases, the unique mapped reads were about 98% of the total mapped, and about a quarter of which were mapped to the intergenic region . the intergenic transcripts were not from the specific genomic regions but rather genome-wide . the total reads mapped to the genic regions were  <dig>  million for these two strains, which were 6-fold of the first set of data. only  <dig> more genes  were detected in the second one , suggesting an adequate sequence depth of the first one. the increased sequence depth substantially increased the gene coverage , while the rpkm values were substantially the same in both sets of data as expected , which further supported the confidence and quality of both datasets.fig.  <dig> expression profile of the annotated protein-coding genes in the v. dahliae genome. a the strategies used to generate the two sets of transcriptome data in this study. b distribution of the mapped reads in different regions of the expressed genes. c rna-seq reads coverage of all expressed genes. base coverage of each mrna by the mapped cdna reads was first calculate, and the number of genes was then plotted against the coverage from  <dig>  to  <dig> . d the expression level of all expressed genes represented by rpkm. rpkm stands for mapped reads per kilo base of mrna per million reads. e distribution of the mapped reads across the first 1000 kb of the supercontig  <dig> of the v. dahliae genome




interestingly, the second dataset showed a drastic increase in the sequence depth in the cds region, and a sharp decrease in the 5′ utr region. a less extent of decrease in the intronic and 3′ utr regions was observed . these results supported a hypothesis that the 5′ utr of this fungal pathogen are more enriched in local secondary structures.

the prevalence of intron retention in the v. dahliae transcriptome
survey of the v. dahliae genome reveals that  <dig> % of the protein-coding genes  contain at least one intron, predicting an important layer of genome regulation conducted by as. the  <dig>  introns cover  <dig> % of the genome sequence. the average intron length was 100 bp and the intron-containing genes harbor an average of  <dig>  introns. the annotated exons  have an overall average length of  <dig>  bp, and intron-split exon of  <dig>  bp . these features are quite different from the well-characterized human pathogen cryptococcus neoformans, which has an average of  <dig>  exons of 255 bp and  <dig>  introns of 67 bp  <cit> .fig.  <dig> the prevalent regulation of mrna output by intron retention  in v. dahliae. a structure features of v. dahliae genes. the statistics of the length distribution of all introns  and exons , as well as the exon composition of each gene are shown. rt-pcr validation of ir events detected by the current iras algorithm from both datasets ; from the 2nd but not the 1st dataset ; from the 1st but not the 2nd ; from neither . we developed an algorithm to visualize the alternative splicing events in each gene. for each gene, cdna reads mapped to unique genomic locations were plotted and numbered, and the type of alternative splicing and the dataset in which the as was detected were indicated. one full example was shown in , and the ir containing region used for rt-pcr is detailed above the electrophoresis gel. to simplify the presentation and emphasizing the read layout in the as region, we show the structure of the gene containing the as event at the top diagram with the known exons being boxed in cyan, the intron in blue line and the utr regions in purple boxes. the as is enlarged below with the positions of pcr primers being indicated as black arrows, the nucleotide length composing the spliced products being numbered, and the alternative exons boxed in green. the black scale  and numbers below indicated the genomic location. the sequence reads spanning the splice junctions are shown below the scale. the red and blue lines indicate the reads from v991b and v991w, respectively. for junction reads, the unmatched intronic region are shown in thinner green line; the fully aligned reads are shown below. in a few cases, the read layouts from both dataset are shown, with the results from the 1st dataset being boxed . a representative electrophoresis gel of the rt-pcr validation result corresponding to each pair of primers is shown. two batches of total rnas were used for rt-pcr validation; the loading order of v991b and v991w was different




in order to globally assess the intron splicing feature of v. dahliae genome, we used the tophat algorithm to identify all splice junctions  generated by splicing of primary transcripts when the pathogen was grown to the late log phase in vitro. in the first dataset, tophat mapping of the combined sequence reads from both v. dahliae strains detected  <dig> % of the annotated exons and  <dig>  of the known intron-associated sj. the detection power was increased to  <dig> % of the exons and to  <dig> %  of the known sjs in the second dataset. although the sj detection efficiency depends on the sequence depth, the 6-fold increase in the sequence depth but slight increase in the detection of known sj indicated that the sequence depth has reached a good saturation in this study. therefore, the inability of detecting over 40% known sjs indicates that a large population of introns may not be spliced under the vegetative growth condition, which predicts a large number of intron retention events.

our preliminary results showed that current available softwares were not suitable for detecting the fungal alternative splicing events . we developed an algorithm iras  to identify intron retention alternative splicing events. the algorithm had been improved through iterate matching of the iras results and the layout of mapped cdna reads on each gene , with the final parameters being stated in methods. the iras counts on the presence of intron-exon border read and the mean base depth of the retained intron being at least 20% of the flanking exon. a total of  <dig> and  <dig> of ir events were detected from the first and second v. dahliae transcriptome datasets;  <dig> of them were overlapped indicative of their reliability .table  <dig> statistics of alternative splicing  events and genes in v. dahliae transcriptomes



a3ss
221/372
230/378
308/466
582
256
 <dig> %
515
243




a5ss
150/221
139/232
211/294
379
163
 <dig> %
357
161













cassette exon
35/61
47/62
62/89
104
49
 <dig> %
98
50








the results of both datasets were shown in pair, in the 1st/2nd format. the number of the events or genes overlapped  between the datasets is indicated

three major types of non-ir as events were bolded




we validated over a dozen of intron retention events using rt-pcr analysis . these events represent four different classes of ir events. the first class includes those detected in both datasets, which are the  <dig> overlapped ir events shown in table  <dig> . the second represents those detected only in the 2nd dataset, but not the 1st, and the third represents those only in the 1st . the fourth class represents those identified by less stringent criteria in the previous version of iras, but not the final version presented here . we demonstrated that all these classes were positive for rt-pcr validation. these results suggest that intron retention could be much more prevalent than shown in table  <dig>  it is also noteworthy that some of these ir events differed in their intron inclusion frequency, which suggested as would contributed to the different characterize of the two strains.

intron retention could be resulted from polyadenylation of the primary transcripts without splicing of the existing intron, or specific retention of some intron but not the other in a gene. statistical analysis showed that for the genes containing two or more introns, most ir events were intron-specific . intron retention could alter the protein coding potential of a gene by breaking the coding sequence, and may also interfering the mrna stability by introducing premature termination codons . statistical analysis shows that  <dig> of the non-last-intron ir events could result in ptcs ; the point will be discussed below.table  <dig> intron retention  and premature termination codons  in v. dahliae genome




hundreds of novel intron types involving a pair of new splice sites: cassette intron and intronic intron in the v. dahliae transcriptome
the long-exon feature of the current v. dahliae genome could be specific for v. dahliae or resulted from an insufficient annotation of introns. searching for the novel introns residing in the annotated exons, over three hundreds of new spliced introns were identified from the two datasets, which did not appreciably alter the long-exon feature . the length distribution of these new introns were similar to the known , and many spliced completely . meanwhile, nearly two thirds  of the exonic introns were also identified as ir events, demonstrating that splicing of these introns are alternative. when we set the reading frame of this exonic intron containing gene from the annotated start codon and through all upstream exons followed by the new intron, stop codons were only present in two of these introns, which thus excluded the possibility that these introns resulted from mis-annotation of the v. dahliae genes. therefore, we conclude that these exonic introns are intrinsically part of the coding sequence, and could alternatively act as non-coding introns which we named as “cassette intron”, a counterpart of “cassette exon” standing for the intronic coding sequence. apparently, splicing of cassette intron results in mrna coding for a shorter protein than that of the unspliced. in addition, it is noteworthy that the nucleotide length of about 45% of these introns is not multiple of three, predicting that the downstream coding frame will be altered when the intron is spliced. therefore, cassette intron represents a new type of alternative splicing event that profoundly alter the mrna output from fungal genes.fig.  <dig> cassette intron and intronic intron involving a pair of novel splice sites. a the newly identified exonic introns. the statistics of their length distribution ; rt-pcr validation of one representative of these introns . b exonic introns involving extended utrs. c intronic intron. labels are similar to those in fig. 2





when we investigated the cdna reads layout on the genome, we found that there were also cases of exonic intron with most of the intron residing in the known exon, and a small fraction extending into the 5′ utr region . this type of splicing resulted in 5′ utr-containing mrna isoforms having truncated 5′ coding sequences. we validated two of these special exonic intron in genes encoding zinc finger-type rna polymerase ii transcription factor and aminopeptidase y, and found in both cases, alternative mrna isoforms were generated, one containing the intron and one lacking . these results suggest that exonic intron may play an important role in regulating the 5′ coding sequences of fungal genes.

in addition,  <dig> intronic introns were detected from the transcriptome as well . from the structure view, the intronic introns are nested introns. from the view of splicing consequence, the coding potential of the new mrna isoform resulted from the usage of intronic intron splice site is altered.

over one thousand of v. dahliae alternative splicing events involve in at least one known splice site and an alternative splice junction
we then analyzed the more common as events involving alternative splice junction, using the annotated known splice junctions as the reference. tophat novel sjs includes all potential sjs other than the annotated sjs, which could be produced from the alternative splicing of a pre-mrna involving one or two novel splice sites, or splicing of the known splice sites in an alternative way. our first and second datasets detected  <dig> and  <dig>  novel sjs, respectively. the confidence of these sjs was validated by plotting the number of reads supporting each of the identified sjs in the two v. dahliae strain. a large fraction of the novel sjs was supported by  <dig> or more reads .

improved annotation of the 5′ and 3′ utr of the v. dahliae genome
we noticed that many novel sjs were located in the intergenic regions . it could be possible that some intergenic sjs were derived from the unannoted utr regions. we therefore re-annotated the utr regions according to the expression information of the second transcriptome data containing rna direction information. the new annotation resulted in  <dig> and  <dig> of new 5′ and 3′ utrs, respectively; it also extended  <dig> and  <dig> of the existed 5′ utrs and 3′ utrs, respectively. this information was added to the previously published gff  file and created an improved gff used for further study . v. dahliae genes with utr annotations were increased from  <dig> to  <dig>  interestingly, although the previously annotated 3′ utrs are generally longer than 5′ utrs, most expressed utrs are within 100-nt, which is similar to the intron length .fig.  <dig> the complex alternative splicing patterns. a re-annotation of the 5′ and 3′ utrs of v. dahliae. b overlap of the genic novel sjs among the transcriptomes of v. dahliae strains v991b and v991w of both datasets. c-e results of rt-pcr validation of typical alternative splicing events involving one alternative splice sites: alternative 3′ splice sites ; alternative 5′ splice site , and cassette exon. f the combinatory alternative splicing involving both a5ss and exon skipping. labels are similar to those in fig. 2





the new annotation information allowed us to obtain  <dig> and  <dig> genic novel sjs shared by both v. dahliae strains from the 1st and 2nd transcriptome dataset, respectively. a total of  <dig> novel sjs were detected in all four v. dahliae transcriptomes . these results suggested that fungus cells may actively utilize alternative splicing events involving alternative splice sites to exert its genome regulation task.

ajas algorithm identified over one thousand alternative splicing events
we developed an algorithms ajas   to identify the qualified alternative splicing events from the genic tophat novel sjs. the ajas events were classed into seven canonical types including alternative 5′ splice site , alternative 3′ splice site , cassette-exon , exon skipping , mutually exclusive exons , mutually exclusive 5′ utrs  and mutually exclusive 3′ utrs ; and into two combinatory types including the combination of alternative 3′ splice site and exon skipping , and the combination of alternative 5′ splice site and exon skipping  . a total of  <dig> and  <dig> of ajas events were detected from the 1st and 2nd transcriptome datasets, respectively. strikingly,  <dig> of them were identified from both datasets, supporting the confidence of ajas events . the two largest types of ajas events were alternative 3′ and 5′ splice site, representing ~ <dig> and ~35% of the total ajas events, respectively. about 10% of the ajas are cassette exon, i.e. alternative exons residing in annotated introns. as detailed below, these ajas events were highly validatable by rt-pcr.

it is noteworthy that  <dig> of the ajas events were detected in all four transcriptome datasets . compared to the total number of genic tophat sjs, over a half of them were identified as true alternative splicing events, which indicate that tophat novel sjs are reliable sources for identification of alternative splicing events in fungal transcriptome.

most alternative spliced isoforms were validated by rt-pcr
we picked up  <dig> ajas events for rt-pcr validation,  <dig> of them were validated by rt-pcr, which includes the most abundant a3ss, a5ss and cassette exon , as well as the less frequent 5pmxe, and 3pmxe, as well as exon skipping  . there were two major reasons for the failure of detecting the expected bands corresponding to ajas events, as well as those to the iras events described above. first, the expression level of the related mrna isoform was too low to be detected by rt-pcr analysis, as reflected by the low number of supporting cdna reads. in addition, the potential sequence variation between the reference genome and the genome of the experimental strains at the primer regions might result in no pcr product.

among the validated alternative splicing events, there were quite a number of them detected in the 2nd dataset but not the 1st due to the lower sequence depth. these included the two a5ss events shown in fig. 4f, 3pmxe  and es  . moreover, the 5pmxe  validated by rt-pcr was detected by a previous version of ajas, but not by the current one . these results together demonstrate the reliability of ajas alternative splicing events shown in this study and the large impact of ajas events in regulating the mrna output of the fungal pathogen.

the combinatory alternative splicing contributes to the mrna complexity in v. dahliae
interestingly, during the course of developing the ajas algorithm, we found the presence of more complex alternative splicing events involving the combination of es with a5ss , or with a3ss . we therefore included the as patterns in the current ajas algorithm, and identified a total of  <dig> of these as events. these combinatory events were highly validatable. it is surprising to find that one verticillium gene  applied four different 5′ splice sites and two different 3′ donor sites to produce up to five mature mrnas , which probably represent one of the most efficient alternative splicing case reported so far. this gene encodes a hypothetical protein, and such a splicing pattern is conserved in both v. dahliae strain, indicating a house keeping function of this splicing pattern.

during the validation process, we also found some other combinatory alternative splicing events, including the combination of cassette exon with a5ss and with ir .

alternative splicing does not appreciably contribute to the fungal mrna levels
the alternative spliced mrnas containing premature termination codons  within an appropriate distance to the last exon-exon junction tend to be linked to the nonsense mediated decay  machinery in mammals  <cit> . it has been estimated that one third of the naturally occurring, alternatively spliced mrnas are targets of nmd  <cit> . the link between alternative splicing and nmd is emerging recently in plants  <cit> . most of the as genes harbor only one alternative splicing event in v. dahliae, generating a simple mrna isoform profile. among  <dig> genes containing intron-retention as events, we found  <dig> containing ptcs that are potential targets of nmd . a total of  <dig> of these genes were among the  <dig> differentially expressed genes  in the 1st and/or the 2nd datasets, which shows no statistical significance over the non-ptc containing genes .

to address the question, we asked the association of as event detection in the differentially expressed genes between the two v. dahliae strains. as clearly demonstrated in fig.  <dig>  when an as event was overlapped with deg, they were predominately detected in the v. dahliae strain showing higher expression level of the gene, indicating that the association is strongly depended on the transcription discrepancy. the as genes showing the reverse expression pattern indicated ptc-associated genes were not significantly influenced by nmd pathway. overall, we concluded that the steady-state level of polyadenylated mrna in fungal pathogen dominantly reflects the transcriptional regulation, while as regulation could exert its function primarily by regulating the mrna and protein isoforms.fig.  <dig> the correlation between alternative splicing and differential gene expression. the correlation between differentially expressed genes and intron retention events ; and alternative splicing involving one alternative splice site . among the differentially expressed genes between v991b and v991w identified in each of the two datasets, those containing at least one of the indicated alternative splicing events are indicated. left-1st dataset, right-2nd dataset. the as events detected in one strain but not the other, or in both strains are indicated by different symbols. horizontal axis  indicates the express level of each gene; vertical axis  indicates the fold change of a gene expression level between v991b and v991w. each dot represents one differentially expressed gene




alternative splicing is predicted to extensively regulate fungal functions
as shown above, a total of  <dig> as events were detected from the first and second transcriptome datasets of the two v. dahliae strains. these events were well overlapped  and quite reliable. they were located in over four thousand genes. the majority of these genes contain one detected as event. the genes from the 1st dataset were mapped to  <dig> biological function terms of go, including  <dig> of biological process terms,  <dig> of molecular function terms and  <dig> of cellular components. the high node scores of as genes included many terms of biological processes, cellular components and molecular function, suggesting the as mechanism regulates molecular activities and biological functions in fungi.

comparison of as gene terms with high node scores with their counterpart deg gene terms revealed a substantial difference . genes under alternative splicing regulation are enriched in mycelium development, multicellular organism development and anatomical structure development. meanwhile, as genes are more enriched in gene expression, protein and rna metabolic processes than deg genes.fig.  <dig> alternative splicing regulation of the biological processes of v. dahliae. a representative of biological functions controlled by alternative splicing in the plant pathogen. all the biological process terms with a node score larger than  <dig> were selected for presentation, and the node scores of corresponding terms were also plotted. asterisks indicate the terms preferentially controlled either by transcriptional regulation or alternative splicing. b go analysis of the alternative splicing genes by using the whole genome as a background. to fit the size, the plot was split into two parts 




when the go terms of the whole genome were used as a background, as genes were readily clustered into several distinct biological pathways . these include the mitochondrial membrane-proton transport-atp synthesis pathway, anatomical structure morphogenesis, sexual reproduction-sporulation-development pathway, small gtpase mediated signal transduction pathway, protein transport-localization pathway and rna metabolic pathway. these data collectively support a concept that alternative splicing regulation is wired into the fungal genome expression and regulation network and potentially controls most biological activity, process and function of v. dahliae, with a strong preference to control the regulatory biological functions highly related to the life cycle of the pathogen after it infects the plant host.

discussion
alternative splicing is a key mechanism for protein diversity from a given gene and for proteome complexity of a given genome under a specific condition. analysis of the  <dig>  full transcripts of the human pathogen c. neoformans resulted in the identification of  <dig> alternatively spliced genes   <cit> , whereas the similar approach has resulted in the discovery of about one or two hundreds of alternative splicing events in the plant pathogens u. maydis and magnaporthe grisea  <cit> . deep sequencing of the transcriptome of the plant pathogens aspergillus oryzae and fusarium graminearum revealed over a thousand and two hundreds of such events, respectively  <cit> . these two deep sequencing studies both showed that about 90% of the alternative splicing events are resulted from intron retention; the later study validated several as events, including three cases of intron retention and one case of alternative 3′ splice site choice  and a couple of them under the developmental regulation.

the transcriptome profile of v. dahliae in different growth conditions were investigated previously, and the alternative splicing was studied by using splicingviewer  <cit> . the study showed that over 95% of as events were intron retention, only ~1% of as events were exon skipping, a3ss or a5ss events in v. dahliae, respectively. though three ir events were supported by rt-pcr, other forms of as events were not validated. herein, our study developed specific algorithms to accurately reveal the alternative splicing events in the fungal pathogen v. dahliae. four different transcriptome data were generated by deep sequencing, being used to better annotate the 5′ and 3′ utrs of the protein coding genes and for identification of the previously unannotated introns in all genic regions. alternative splicing by intron retention and those associated with novel/alternative splice junctions has been separately classified. and the accuracy of the characterized alternative splicing events was manually checked by comparing to the cdna read layout figures generated for each gene; the results were used to revise and improve the algorithms. the high efficiency of rt-pcr validation of the as events further confirmed the accuracy of the algorithms.

this study has shown that about 50% of the multi-exonic genes of v. dahliae genes are under alternative splicing regulation, including  <dig> intron retention,  <dig> alternative 3′ ss,  <dig> alternative 5′ ss, and  <dig> cassette exon and tens of other complex alternative splicing events. though ir is still the major as events in v. dahliae, the ratio of other types of as events reaches up to ~30%, which emphasized a more comprehensive and diversified mechanism of as regulation involved in transcriptome diversity. moreover, over three hundreds of exonic introns have been identified, which were classified as an important new type of alternative splicing. for the first time, we reported the presence of combinatory alternative splicing patterns in v. dahliae, further underling the phylogenetic importance of fungus in developing alternative splicing mechanism.

CONCLUSIONS
the study has shown the prevalent roles of alternative splicing in shaping the transcriptome and proteome complexity of the lower eukaryotes. taken together the identification of dozens of complicate alternative splicing patterns involving the combination of two different alternative splicing events in v. dahliae, we conclude that the wilt pathogen v. dahliae has an important phylogenetic role during the development of alternative splicing mechanism. consistently, the as frequency and distribution of different as patterns in v. dahliae transcriptome is strikingly similar to that of arabidopsis and rice detected by comprehensive est analysis or transcriptome sequencing, with the preferred patterns in order of ir, a3ss , a5ss  and cassette exon/exon skipping  <cit> . functional clustering of the genes under alternative splicing regulation showed that this layer of genome regulation play critical roles in fungal development and reproduction, signal transduction, mitochondrial functions and many other biological functions including both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional processes.

