BACKGROUND
studying gene expressions and understanding how alternative mrna splicing manifests in a biological system are as essential as elucidation of its underlying regulatory mechanisms  <cit> . rna-seq has received much attention as a revolutionary tool for transcriptome analysis  <cit> . its massively-paralleled sequencing approach provides paramount advantages over traditional array-based technologies in three key aspects. first, unlike microarrays, rna-seq has virtually no background signal. it also has no upper limit for transcript-level quantification, which corresponds to the numbers of fragments sequenced. as a result, rna-seq has a very wide dynamic range compared to microarray. second, the paired-end  reads – two short sequencing reads separated by a fixed distance - provide information on how two exons are connected. with millions of paired-end reads, analysis of transcript isoforms from a complex transcriptome becomes possible  <cit> . finally, rna-seq does not rely on a priori probe information, thereby allowing novel transcripts discovery, cross-validation of gene predictions and genome annotations.

genomic alignment tools such as bwa  <cit>  and bowtie  <cit>  can map massive amount of reads onto a reference genome with high efficiency. however, sequences matching multiple locations along the reference genome are handled arbitrarily. under such circumstances, these ‘multireads’ are randomly assigned to one of the possible locations. another package, erange, rescues these arbitrarily mapped reads by assigning them in proportion to those uniquely mapped reads  <cit> . yet both approaches might distort the abundance of reads that are mapped to paralogous gene families, regions of low sequence complexity or high sequence conservation, thereby affecting virtually all subsequent analysis  <cit> .

paired-end  information improves alignment precision in genome assembly  <cit> . the insert size – the separation between two reads in a pair chosen during the sequencing procedures – is an important constraint to help determine the locations of pe reads. the inferred size based on reference mapping should equal to the insert size if no splicing occur within the region that is flanked by two reads within a pe pair. however, such information is of little use when splicing takes place.

reads spanning two neighbouring transcribed regions cannot be fully mapped onto the reference and are considered as “unmapped” reads. splicing-aware aligners were thus specifically developed to rescue this unmapped yet expressed, biologically relevant information. early splicing-aware mapping algorithms started by constructing an artificial splice-junction library using annotated exons, followed by read mapping  <cit> . subsequent tools such as g-mo.r-se  <cit>  and tophat  <cit>  perform a global search of splice junctions. however, g-mo.r-se is limited by its inability to handle pe reads, whereas tophat depends on canonical splice codes.

splitseek  <cit> , supersplat  <cit> , and splicemap  <cit>  were recently proposed to perform truly global and unbiased spliced-read mapping. these methods, however, rely on an arbitrary read-count method to assess the reliability of a putative splice junction. as a result, the sequencing depth of an experiment has a tremendous effect on splice-site discovery. recently, wang et al. proposed a statistical measure of splice sites using a minimum mismatch approach to a database of artificially joined exon-boundary sequences  <cit> . this approach, however, highly depends on the accuracy of existing exon annotations.

in this study, we have proposed a maximum likelihood estimation  method based on a geometric-tail  distribution of intron lengths to determine the alignment positions of pe reads. this probabilistic model deals with splice junctions between reads, or those encompassed in one or both of a pe reads . by utilizing a priori knowledge, this is a biologically-inspired method to assess the quality of splice junctions. based on this model, multiple alignments of reads within a pe pair can be properly resolved.

RESULTS
gt distribution
gt distribution has been widely used in the approximation of length distribution for the de novo prediction of biological sequence elements, in particular exons and introns. however, fitting geometric distribution of whole-genome intron length has always been suboptimal due to the complex mechanism of gene splicing. there are mainly two types of introns: short ones and long ones, which centered at approximately 100bp and 1000bp, respectively  <cit> . n-tuple could provide a better fitness using a well-defined n, especially when intron length is small. this allows a better estimation of the tail part by means of a geometric distribution. however, over-fitting would happen when using n-tuple. a smoothing method proposed by burge  <cit>  could reduce over-fitting. we used an arbitrarily large tuple up to  <dig> bp to estimate the distribution of genome-wide intron lengths.

as shown in figure 2a, the blue dots represent different intron lengths, and the red line represents the smoothed probability. two peaks can be observed around 40bp and 100bp. a large portion of intron lengths span from  <dig> to  <dig> bp, and then declines slightly until  <dig> bp.

insert-size distribution
current next-generation sequencing platforms such as roche  <dig>  abi solid, and illumina genome analyzer all employ pe sequencing techniques. fragments with a defined size were isolated and subjected to downstream sequencing steps. a rough estimation of the insert size was usually given during the sample preparation steps. a more precise measure could only be inferred from mapping results.

we adopted the concept of “regular pair” defined in bwa, which has extreme values filtered from each 256* <dig> pairs. we used the uniquely mapped pe pairs to estimate the distribution . insert-size distributions in the two datasets s <dig> and s <dig> approximated a normal distribution, and they were used to calculate the convolution probabilities.

multiread analysis
non-uniquely mapped reads  refer to those matching multiple locations along the reference genome. bwa uses a random selection method to tackle multireads, which might introduce errors. multireads can be classified into three groups according to their characteristics: 1) expressed repetitive elements, 2) transcripts from distinct loci that share great similarity with other counterparts, and 3) one or both reads from a pe pair derived from splicing events, and yet happened to have a full match found on the reference. group  <dig> can easily be handled according to its high occurrences and annotations, while groups  <dig> and  <dig> are difficult to resolve simply by alignment. the gt-based estimation we have proposed here could help mitigate such selection. we took groups  <dig> and  <dig> into account by running abmapper  <cit>  on repetitive reads that could be mapped for more than  <dig> times onto the genome. when tracing back these reads to the mapping result by bwa, we found all these reads were tagged with “xt:a:r”, and bwa randomly selected the locations of these multireads.

gt-based models shared at least 88% of the mapping locations with bwa. the two sets differed by 6-10%. inconsistency between the two sets of results was subsequently evaluated based on gene expression levels. expression level of a given gene was calculated using a normalized read-count method, which involves summing the total number of reads mapped to the gene followed by normalization with the gene length. based on the assumption that a multiread is more likely to be originated from a highly expressed region than from a lower one, we consistently observed more than 60% of the reads in the ‘different’ groups in all three of our gt-based models that showed higher expression levels than those from bwa . these results have demonstrated that the gt-based model is likely to be more accurate than bwa in the selection of multireads position.

splice-site comparison
splicemap and tophat were used to evaluate the accuracy of gt-based models in splice-site detection. we did not use splitseek in our comparison because it only supports solid data. splicemap and tophat were applied to the same datasets  and the results were compared to the alternative splicing and transcript diversity  database  <cit> . the astd database is the largest depository of experimentally-verified splicing events. junction sites from the gt-based models were compared to those identified by tophat and splicemap. we defined that two putative splice sites, one identified by the gt-based model and the other identified either by tophat or splicemap, are a match if positions of the two are within 8-bp from each other. the gt-based models, tophat, and splicmap shared a large number of common splice junctions . the unmatched sites between the gt-based models and tophat or splicemap were then further compared with the astd entries using the same criteria.

in all three conditions, gt-based models clearly exceled in the detection of putative splice junctions: with 53% and 49% more reported sites compared to splicemap and tophat, respectively . as shown in figure  <dig> , over 60% of unmatched junctions could be confirmed by the astd. these astd-confirmed junctions constituted approximately 22% of the total predicted splice junctions based on the gt-model. these results indicated that both tophat and splicemap have missed at least one-fifth of true splice junctions.

some splice junctions reported by our gt-based model, tophat and splicemap were not in the astd, either because the splice sites were not deposited in the astd, or the splice sites were false positives. we therefore performed an exhaustive search on all splice junctions reported by the gt-based model against the human est database. we found that the gt-based model achieved a remarkable 96% accuracy in finding true splice junctions . therefore, a majority of the splice junctions reported by the gt-based model and were unmatched to the astd were indeed true splice sites.

CONCLUSIONS
rna-seq has advanced the field of biological research. it has increasingly been used for transcriptomic analysis of model organisms as well as disease models in human. for non-model organisms, however, since gene annotation is often incomplete or completely absent, there is insufficient data for gt distribution estimation. in such cases, gt distribution will have to be estimated with an evolutionary-related species.

in this study we have shown that the gt-based model, which employs an empirical distribution of intron lengths, has an edge over the current mainstream methods such as tophat and splicemap. two main reasons behind this advantage are  abmapper, the spliced-aware mapper that has much higher sensitivity and identify far more putative splice sites than other tools  <cit> ; and  the gt-based model itself, which is capable of multireads mapping and splice-site inference. we have shown that combing these two factors would lead to the discovery of 50% more est-validated splice sites than existing tools.

