BACKGROUND
high-throughput dna sequencing, microarray-based mrna expression profiling, proteomics experiments and protein-protein interaction assays have been yielding large and complex datasets that need to be integrated with functional information at the gene- or genome level. large scale expression profiling using microarrays is among the most popular experimental approaches in genome biology and therefore optimized methods are available for all key analytical steps. they include raw data pre-processing, quality control and normalization  <cit> , identification of differentially expressed genes during static or time-course conditions  <cit> , gene clustering  <cit>  and searching for significant over- or under-representation of functional annotation in expression clusters  <cit> . the bioconductor project provides numerous software packages developed in r that are devoted to high-throughput analysis tasks  <cit> . however, installing and running them requires extensive programming skills that are not yet commonplace among life scientists. to alleviate this problem, programs with a convenient graphical user interface  have been developed that facilitate functional analyses in most cases limited to annotation by the gene ontology  consortium  <cit>  or restricted to a set of genomes  <cit> . other tools correlate expression with chromosomal localization  <cit> , protein-protein interaction  <cit>  or pathway data  <cit> .

in an attempt to combine analysis steps many web-based applications have been developed  <cit> . they are free and do not require maintenance work. however, their accessibility and speed depend upon web-traffic, server availability and the specifications of the analyses procedure. moreover, web-based systems usually provide pre-configured and inflexible approaches to data analysis and often do not include advanced options to combine different types of high-throughput data. in order to address these issues and to allow for integrated exploration of different types of data we have developed the annotation, mapping, expression, and network  program that enables users to explore and analyse multifaceted high-throughput biological data. it includes a suite of tools and algorithms for which parameters can be fine-tuned and analysis steps ordered as required. amen covers array data management, analysis and interpretation in a manner similar to expander  <dig>   <cit> . however, our software includes more options to combine different types of data and enables users to import, not only genome annotation and transcriptome-, but also proteome and interactome data without species restrictions.

implementation
the amen software architecture consists of four layers implemented in tcl/tk   <cit> . the first layer provides modules for uploading, formatting and pre-processing expression, annotation, chromosomal mapping and protein-protein interaction data. the second layer is the user-friendly gui of the main application window that employs popup menus for project, upload data, tools, views and options functionalities . six panels provide access to lists of items such as probe ids, genes, proteins , and data from rna/protein profiling experiments , genome annotation , protein-protein and protein-dna interaction , chromosomal localization  as well as the output of the statistical module . function buttons below each panel enable users to scroll item lists , mark items , change the content of a panel , change item names  or change the file content . selected items in each panel highlighted in yellow are combined into different workflows by the user. for example, selecting mouse genes  showing differential expression in testis  and peak signals in somatic sertoli cells  compared to mitotic , meiotic  and post-meiotic  germ cells  and spermatogenesis data   yields a graphical display of rna profiling signals generated by the module controlled via the views > expression data > profiles menu . selecting protein network data  enables users to display interaction patterns . selecting chromosomal localization  and statistical items enables users to correlate expression and mapping information or to reveal a link between transcriptional patterns and roles in biological processes . in the background, the third layer automatically creates and runs scripts for the statistical computing environment r which execute statistical calculations and clustering methods implemented in bioconductor packages. the fourth layer displays the output based on tk scripts and the graph rendering software graphviz.

our program requires tcl/tk, r and graphviz programs available for all frequently used operating systems such as ms windows, unix, linux and mac os x to be pre-installed. detailed downloading and installation instructions are accessible via the sourceforge website. we also provide a windows version of the software that pre-installs tcl/tk, r and graphviz embedded into it. note that amen supersedes gocluster, a much simpler tool previously developed in our laboratory  <cit> . we have decided to discontinue gocluster because it lacked key analysis features and the cost for further development and maintenance outweighed the benefit for our lab and the community. we emphasize that amen is frequently updated because this software is a key tool for our ongoing biomedical studies. its structure greatly facilitates the implementation of new modules. indeed, a single tcl code line is sufficient to include additional functionalities into the main gui.

RESULTS
data uploading
the typical workflow involves five types of modules available in the current release: data uploading and pre-processing, statistical filtration, clustering, functional mining, and visualization. data are imported and combined within an analysis project using the main application window . it includes six panels corresponding to different input data: items , expression signal, functional annotation,  interaction, chromosomal location and statistical data. during this process items  are automatically associated with other data types . this interface makes it easy to access the data and to design an optimal analysis procedure. data are input as text files in tab-delimited compatible format to ensure compatibility with all operating systems.

group data
users can upload pre-selected lists of items  or they can obtain such lists via statistical filtration, clustering, and/or visualization modules .

expression data
currently, expression data quality control and normalization modules are implemented for commercial affymetrix high density oligonucleotide microarrays  and illumina gene expression beadarrays. methods for background correction, variance stabilization and normalization methods are mas <dig> , rma, gcrma and rsn  <cit> . it is also possible to upload pre-normalized expression datasets as long as they are represented as tab-delimited matrices whose rows and columns contain main items  and experimental condition names, respectively.

annotation, interaction and mapping data
functional information for transcriptome , proteome , interactome  and chromosomal mapping analysis  is imported and converted into the appropriate file format using a straightforward procedure  <cit> .

statistical filtration
these modules output lists of significantly differentially expressed items  identified within a given set of samples. users can select transcripts showing strong variations across experimental conditions via threshold parameters including expression level cut-off, standard deviation or fold-change. furthermore, a similarity search module helps retrieve groups of co-expressed transcripts using a specific user-defined pattern. once a set of target transcripts is identified, the permutation , moderated t-test  and non-parametric rank-based statistic methods are employed to determine if changes in signal intensity are reproducible and significant. these methods are implemented in multtest, samr, limma and rankproducts r packages, respectively  <cit> . false positives are taken into account by adjusting p-values according to the hommel  or benjamini/hochberg  multiple testing correction methods  <cit> .

clustering
clustering methods are used to classify items based on their overall degree of similarity across the experimental conditions. these algorithms are notably critical for the identification of genes that are co-expressed , co-regulated  or that play roles in a particular biological process. users can choose between three hierarchical clustering modules: hclust , agnes  and diana   <cit> . four supervised partitioning methods include k-means  <cit> , pam , fanny  and clara   <cit> . we also included two unsupervised clustering modules called mclust  and hopach  that automatically determine the number of clusters in a given dataset  <cit> . finally, to estimate the quality of the classification or to help identify the optimal number of clusters that yields the best separation of different expression patterns the silhouette plot method is available  <cit> .

functional mining
expression clusters are validated and further analysed by searching for over- or under-represented functional annotation terms associated with the items  in these clusters using hypergeometric or binomial statistical tests. p-values are adjusted using multiple testing correction methods as described above. functional information is most often provided by the go consortium  <cit>  but, in principle, amen can process data from any source of information present in the uploaded annotation files such as interpro protein domains, biochemical pathways, chromosomal mapping data or other information provided by the user.

note that ontology vocabularies have a hierarchical structure such that an item  is associated with multiple redundant terms. to reduce the annotation term output we employ the ontology specific information rate : osir = /n, where n and m are the numbers of items associated with a given over-represented term  and associated to its subordinate over-represented terms  respectively. the minimal osir threshold value is typically set between  <dig>  and  <dig>  which means that if less than 5% or 20% of the genes associated with a given parent node are not related with its child nodes, the parent node is eliminated.

data visualization
four types of visualization modules are currently implemented. first, users can display expression data as false color-coded heat maps or as graphs . second, a color-coded graphical module to display significantly over- or under-represented functional annotation terms among clusters . it is possible for this output to contain data from multiple experiments and simultaneously display as distinct columns. alternatively, it is possible to display over-represented go terms and their related parent nodes as directed acyclical graphs. third, a module is included to create chromosome ideograms according to the international standard on cytogenetic nomenclature  . this functionality helps reveal correlations between expression patterns and chromosomal mapping of selected target items. it includes iscn ideograms together with heat maps of expression data and histograms showing observed and expected numbers of genes in a given region. finally, the complete set of graphviz tools to draw network graphs of protein-protein or other types of interactions is available . nodes representing biological items  are color-coded to facilitate the interpretation of relationships between expression clusters, sub-cellular location and interaction data.

the visualization modules output interactive and clickable images providing detailed information for each cluster and gene that can be manually selected for further analysis. they also provide manual zooming  and panning features enabling users to focus on specific results of interest. finally, users can employ the scalable vector graphics format  for viewing with all web browsers and further processing with svg editors such as inkscape or adobe illustrator  <cit> .

data export
amen provides a module to export selected lists of items as an html table file which can be opened and further processed in spreadsheet applications such as ms excel. users can select different types of annotation, mapping and expression data and determine their order within the file to be exported.

application of amen
the program was critical for our study of the testicular expression program in human and rodents where a clear correlation between germline expression and reproductive function was established  <cit> . note that this study included work on the negative correlation between meiotic gene expression and x-chromosome localization . furthermore, we have used amen to compare testicular transcriptome and proteome data and to explore the protein-protein interaction network of gene products differentially expressed between testicular somatic and germ cells  <cit> .

ongoing work includes the expression signature of high infertility risk associated with undescended testes , high-throughput analysis of mrnas and proteins present in residual bodies  as well as enrichment of functional annotation among the target genes of abf <dig>  an essential budding yeast dna binding transcription factor , and ume <dig>  a regulator involved in mitotic repression of meiotic genes in s. cerevisiae . our software is thus suitable for molecular systems biological data analysis combining data on dna, mrna and proteins across different species.

comparison to other solutions
since amen is a freely available standalone molecular systems biology analysis tool we have compared it to typical examples of such software and not to web server-based applications that, in our opinion, are often less flexible and less complete than locally installed programs. most available local solutions are r packages such as affylmgui and illuminagui which provide quality control , pre-processing, statistical tests and clustering applicable to affymetrix genechip and illumina beadarray data, respectively  <cit> . brb-arraytools is an ms excel plug-in providing advanced statistical tests for the identification of differentially expressed genes, go term enrichment and the option to expand functionalities using external r-scripts  <cit> . amda provides various qc, normalization, statistical and clustering functionalities and also includes a gui, as well as go term and kegg enrichment  <cit> . as compared to these solutions our software has useful additional features such as an elaborate main application window facilitating work-flow management, sophisticated graphical output of  go term enrichment, cross-microarray platform compatibility, proteomics data import functionality, protein-protein and protein-dna network data processing, and chromosomal localization and enrichment . finally, the graphical output of amen is interactive and enables users to sub-select and save lists of items.

future development
amen is regularly updated with new functionalities and modules. we intend to include, in the near future, data management for molecular pathway databases such as the kyoto encyclopaedia of genes and genomes  in order to display metabolic pathways combined with protein-protein interaction and expression data  <cit> . we also plan to implement additional data pre-processing and normalization algorithms for the most recent generations of all-exon  <cit>  and tiling microarrays  <cit>  as well as a novel principle component analysis  statistical module. finally, we will integrate amen with mimas  <cit> , our own solution for array data management and annotation to provide our laboratory and the community with a complete package for storing, describing, analysing and interpreting high-throughput data.

CONCLUSIONS
amen facilitates the design and execution of optimized procedures for processing, analysis and interpretation of multifaceted high-throughput data. key advantages include: an intuitive gui, flexible design of transcriptome and proteome analyses strategies; and convenient interactive graphical output of results on expression signals, chromosomal mapping, functional annotation and network interactions. the modular structure allows for easy extension and customization. we will continue development and support of amen as an integral part of our long-term biomedical research program. the source-code is freely available for members of the bioinformatics community who wish to add their own functionalities.

availability and requirements
• project name: amen

• project home page: 

• operating system: platform independent

• programming language: tcl/tk, r, graphviz

• other requirements: activetcl version  <dig> . <dig> , r version  <dig> . <dig>  graphviz version  <dig> . <dig> or higher

• license: gnu gpl

authors' contributions
fc initiated, developed the software and drafted the manuscript. mp contributed to the concept and wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
comparison of amen and other solutions. comparison of features implemented in amen and other standalone solutions for high-throughput data analysis and interpretation. corresponding references are given in the main text. an asterisk indicates that the program includes a given feature while a minus is put when the functionality is lacking.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we thank a. lardenois, j. moore and a. gattiker for stimulating discussions, o. collin for beta testing on mac os x and r. houlgatte for critical reading of the manuscript. this work was supported by the institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale , the swiss institute of bioinformatics  and région bretagne grant no r07077nn. funding to pay the open access publication charges for this article was provided by inserm.
