BACKGROUND
proteins that arise through gene duplication can become novel proteins through fixation of beneficial mutations  <cit> , but because beneficial mutations are generally rare, the partitioning of ancestral functions among duplicated genes by neutral evolution, or subfunctionalization, has been considered the primary process for the evolution of novel proteins  <cit> . to date, many duplicate genes have been demonstrated to evolve following this model of subfunctionalization, and this model thus has become widely accepted in the context of duplicated gene evolution  <cit> .

nonetheless, how a more adaptive or specialized protein property evolves after subfunctionalization is poorly understood, mainly due to the limited resolution power of current analytical methods, which seek to detect positive selection on individual amino acid substitutions involved in adaptive molecular evolution. such methods can recognize substitutions expected to be driven by strong selection, many of which are usually function-altering substitutions at important amino acid sites, such as enzyme active sites or viral epitopes . however, adaptive substitutions by relatively moderate or weak selection may not be recognized by these methods. therefore, to detect adaptive protein evolution under a much wider range of selection pressure, a novel approach is required. in this study, we utilized a comparative evolutionary approach to this problem, focusing on differences in the high-dimensional properties of a protein, specifically the electric charge, encoded by a pair of duplicated genes.

as a model protein system for this study, we chose an important enzyme involved in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, phosphoglucose isomerase . the gene encoding this enzyme  is present as a single copy in tetrapods, whereas two copies exist in most groups of ray-finned fishes  <cit> . the fact that these duplicated pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> genes in fishes are expressed in different organs  <cit>  implies that these fish-specific duplicate pgi genes are subfunctionalized with respect to their expression, and are thus good candidates for the model of subfunctionalized genes. for ray-finned fishes, a reliable phylogenetic framework, which is essential for comparative evolutionary analyses, is available due to recent progress in molecular phylogenetic studies  <cit> . in addition, the basal lineages of ray-finned fishes, including semionotiformes  and amiiformes , have only one pgi locus  <cit> . this single-copy gene may be the direct descendant of the ancestral unduplicated pgi in ray-finned fishes, and thus can be considered an appropriate outgroup gene for comparison between the duplicated pgi genes.

the pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> genes, which were expected to be subfunctionalized in their expression, also differ in the net electric charge of their encoded proteins  <cit> . the electric charge of soluble proteins such as pgis is a structural property brought by a large number of multiple amino acid residues and is involved in the adaptive evolution of several soluble proteins , such as an acquisition of protein thermostability  <cit> . therefore, the evolution of electric charge in the duplicated pgi proteins is an interesting subject to investigate regarding the evolution of novel protein properties after subfunctionalization.

in this study, we examined first whether the spatial expression patterns of duplicated pgi genes in ray-finned fishes are compatible with predictions based on the subfunctionalization model of duplicate gene evolution. next, by focusing on the electric charges of the pgi proteins, we analyzed the underlying evolutionary process producing novel protein properties after gene duplication through ancestral sequence inference using the maximum likelihood  method based on a reliable phylogenetic framework of ray-finned fishes, and also using three-dimensional  structural information on the protein.

RESULTS
duplication and subfunctionalization of the pgi genes in teleost fishes
our molecular phylogenetic analyses of vertebrate pgi genes showed that the pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> genes in teleost fishes resulted from a gene duplication event that occurred before the radiation of teleosts but after the separation of basal non-teleost ray-finned fishes . the pgi duplication appears to have derived from the ancient teleost genome duplication  <cit>  because the phylogenetic position of the pgi duplication confirmed here is the same as that of the estimated teleost-specific genome duplication event  <cit> , and gene content around the pgi locus in the human genome is partly conserved in the corresponding regions of both zebrafish pgi loci  , which rules out the possibility of a tandem or single-gene duplication of the pgi in teleosts. this condition allows us to study the duplicated pgi genes without considering interlocus concerted evolution, which complicates the analysis of functional divergence in duplicated genes.

a reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction -based expression analysis showed that the pgi gene in non-teleost ray-finned fishes was expressed in all tissues examined , confirming that this gene is the direct descendant of the ancestral unduplicated pgi with no tissue specificity, as in tetrapods  <cit> . in contrast, the teleost pgi- <dig> gene was expressed mainly in internal organs, including the liver, heart, gill, brain, and kidney, and weakly in the muscle, whereas pgi- <dig> was expressed mainly in the heart and muscle. the differential expression patterns of pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> support the concept of subfunctionalization  <cit> , which is the complementary loss of subsets in the expression organs of the ancestral gene. thus, the pgi gene family in ray-finned fishes is an appropriate model for studying molecular evolution after subfunctionalization.

evolution of the electric charges of duplicated pgi proteins in teleost fishes
the pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> genes in teleosts, which are subfunctionalized with respect to their expression, differed significantly in the predicted electric charge of their encoded proteins . the estimated isoelectric points  of pgi- <dig> were  <dig> – <dig>  , and those of pgi- <dig> were  <dig> – <dig>  , with no overlap. in contrast to this clear difference, the pgi enzyme active sites in both isoforms  were totally conserved among all fishes and tetrapods examined . moreover, no significant difference was observed in peptide length or predicted overall hydrophobicity between the two isoforms . the estimated pi values for the ancestral pgi in non-teleosts were intermediate .

1the predicted overall hydrophobicity  and pi values of the pgi proteins were estimated based on the amino acid sequences translated from the cdna sequences of pgi genes using the protparam tool  <cit> 

2differences in number of positively and negatively charged residues in each pgi protein

between pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig>   <dig> amino acid sites differed by the presence or absence of hydrophilic charged residues , which mainly contribute to net protein charge . these sites were not fixed for a unique charge state in the examined pgi- <dig> or pgi- <dig> proteins, except at position  <dig> . furthermore, only a few unique charged sites were shared among two or more genealogically related isoforms: five in pgi- <dig>  and two in pgi- <dig> . these observations imply that very few specific amino acid residues were acquired in the early ancestral proteins and involved in the differences in electric charges between current pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> 

the underlying process of the electric charge evolution of the pgi proteins can be inferred by ml sequence reconstructions  <cit>  based on the recent ray-finned fish phylogeny  <cit> . we applied this approach and show the results in figure 2a. our results suggest that after gene duplication, pi values in the pgi- <dig> clade gradually decreased, whereas those in the pgi- <dig> clade increased. next, we assigned charge-changing substitutions  to the tree branches based on pairwise sequence comparisons among the inferred ancestral sequences or between the extant and ancestral sequences along the tree topology. this result of assignment  showed that the charge-changing substitutions were inferred to have occurred in excess  of that expected  for parsimonious evolution in electric charge differences between pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> . figure 2c also shows that the charge-changing substitutions have occurred in both directions  on most branches at various amino acid sites  . an analysis using parsimony yielded similar results .

statistical analyses of the spatial clustering of inferred amino acid substitutions
based on 3-d structural information on the pgi protein molecule, we further examined whether the inferred charge-changing substitutions were actually involved in the evolution of electric charge. the results of this analysis on the inferred substitution sites and number of substitutions are shown in figure 3a and 3b, respectively. figure 3a shows that the inferred charge-changing substitution sites after the pgi gene duplication  were concentrated at the surface of the pgi molecule, in contrast to the inferred charge-neutral substitution sites  that contribute little or nothing to net protein charge. the inferred number of charge-changing and charge-neutral substitutions that can potentially occur at identical sites also followed the same trend .

however, because water-soluble proteins such as pgi are generally surrounded by a hydrophilic shell containing a high density of polar residues, it is natural to expect the charge-changing substitutions to occur more frequently on the surface without any selection. considering this expected mutation bias, further analysis was performed . this comparison of theoretically expected and ml-inferred numbers of charge-changing and charge-neutral substitutions imply that charge-neutral substitutions have occurred more frequently than expected at the molecular surface , consistent with the general observation that molecular evolutionary rates are faster at the surface than in the interior portions of water-soluble proteins  <cit> . however, what is most important in this table is that the proportion of charge-changing substitutions concentrated at the surface of the pgi molecule is much greater than that expected by chance . these charge-changing substitutions do not appear to be derived from differential neutral evolution of base composition or codon usage between pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> genes, as demonstrated by the fact that gc content and codon usage frequencies are not significantly different between pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> .

* p values are from two-tailed exact tests.

discussion
the results of phylogenetic analysis, rt-pcr-based expression analysis, and sequence comparison of pgi genes in teleost fishes suggest that after subfunctionalization of the duplicated pgi genes in the ancestor of teleost fishes, the electric charges of the pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> proteins diverged. this evolution can be interpreted according to the sub-neofunctionalization model of gene evolution  <cit> , which proposes that the partitioning of function between the duplicated genes alters the selective environment at each locus, resulting in structural fine-tuning or adaptation of the encoded proteins by positive selection. that is, the divergent evolution of the electric charges in the duplicated pgi isoforms is the consequence of specialization for the specific function  or distinct cellular environment of tissues where each isoform is predominantly expressed , as suggested for other water-soluble proteins  <cit> .

the present comparative evolutionary analysis implies that since the gene duplication event, the electric charges of the two pgi isoforms changed steadily through many charge-changing substitutions in both directions of charge change; only a few charged amino acid sites were specific to pgi- <dig> or pgi- <dig> . such charge-changing substitutions concentrated at the surface of pgi molecule  were inferred to have occurred much more frequently than expected in the parsimonious evolution of electric charge difference between the two isoforms . from these observations, two possible scenarios are proposed for the evolution of protein charge in duplicated pgi isoforms: protein charges in pgi- <dig> decreased gradually, while those in pgi- <dig> increased; alternatively, charge divergence between pgi- <dig> and pgi- <dig> was completed soon after the duplication and before the radiation of teleosts, followed by maintenance of the protein charges under purifying selection, while stochastic charge-changing substitutions by drift occurred among lineages. in either scenario, we can conclude that the surface charge evolution of pgi proteins was not driven by strong selection on individual amino acid sites leading to permanent fixation of a particular residue, but rather was driven by weak selection on a large number of amino acid sites and consequently by steady directional or purifying selection on the overall structural properties of the protein, which is derived from many modifiable sites. this mode of molecular evolution agrees with the understanding that most proteins are substantially tolerant of a broad spectrum of substitutions and thus may harbor many amino acid sites available for evolutionary modification  <cit> . our study provides the first plausible evidence of adaptive protein evolution through such selection.

the mode of molecular evolution proposed in this study would be difficult to find using existing methods that detect strong selection for particular substitutions. we applied such an analysis to identify positively selected sites after pgi gene duplication using diverge version  <dig>   <cit> ; however, the results were not clear . further analysis using the program codeml  <cit>  did not detect the acceleration of the rate of nonsynonymous substitution, not showing selection for amino acid changes . even if, in general, a significant excess of amino acid change is detected, such methodology itself cannot rule out possible confounding effects, or alternative interpretations, particularly the relax of purifying selection  <cit> . in a previous study, an analysis using the program honnew  <cit>  also failed to detect selection for charge-changing substitutions in teleost pgis, leading to the conclusion that the charge change in the duplicate pgis of teleosts may be selectively neutral  <cit> . the mode of molecular evolution presented here, in which diverse evolutionary resolutions exist at the level of a primary sequence that corresponds to a certain selective pressure on a protein property, may be relevant to various cases of adaptive modification in proteins, such as hydrophobic properties, molecular size, and electric charge. this may be an important pathway underlying physiological adaptation, along with protein evolution by simple amino-acid changes, gene deletion or silencing, and possibly cis-regulatory changes  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we provide the evidence that relatively weak selection on a large number of amino acid sites drives the evolution of novel charge-state of duplicated phosphoglucose isomerases, which are subfunctionalized in teleost fishes. such mode of adaptive molecular evolution, which was hardly recognizable by existing analytical methods aiming to detect strong selection on individual amino acid changes, may play a substantial role in the evolution of novel proteins.

