BACKGROUND
knowing the closest relatives and natural composition of the genus cucumis l. is important because of ongoing efforts by plant breeders worldwide to improve melon  and cucumber  with traits from wild relatives  <cit> . next to tomatoes and onion, melon and cucumber may be the most widely cultivated vegetable species in the world  <cit> . economic interest from breeders also led to the sequencing of the complete chloroplast genome of c. sativus  <cit> . evolutionarily, cucumis organellar genomes are unusually labile  <cit> , and major chromosome rearrangements are thought to have taken place during the evolution of cucumis. cucumis sativus is the only species in the genus with a chromosome number of n =  <dig>  which is thought to have evolved from a presumed ancestral karyotype with n =  <dig>  but details of this reduction in chromosome number have remained unclear. thus, the genus cucumis holds great interest as a system in which to study the evolution of organellar and nuclear genomes, and there are also several ongoing efforts to map the genomes of c. melo and c. sativus  <cit> .

ongoing work on cucurbitales and cucurbitaceae  <cit>  has resulted in the generation of sequence data for a dense sample of taxa that together represent 21% of the family's  <dig> species and 95% of its  <dig> genera . robust phylogenetic trees for cucumis might also shed light on the ancestral areas of c. melo and c. sativus. it is thought that c. sativus originated and was domesticated in asia, while c. melo is though to have originated in eastern africa  <cit> , but with secondary centers of genetic diversity in the middle east and india  <cit>  and perhaps also china  <cit> . the center of cucumis evolution is thought to be africa  <cit> .

the circumscription of cucumis dates back to linnaeus  <cit> , with the most significant modern change being the separation of cucumella chiovenda in  <dig>  which has become generally accepted  <cit> . the two genera differ only in the shape of their thecae, those of cucumella being straight or slightly curved, those of cucumis strongly curved and folded. within the genus cucumis, two subgenera are generally accepted, subgenus melo , with most species in africa and a chromosome n =  <dig>  and subgenus cucumis , which is confined to asia and has chromosome numbers of n =  <dig> and n =  <dig>  <cit> .

molecular phylogenetic studies of cucumis have sampled up to  <dig> species of cucumis for chloroplast restriction sites and nuclear isozymes, nuclear ribosomal dna from the internal transcribed spacer  region, microsatellite markers, and a combination of rapds and chloroplast markers  <cit> . with one exception, these studies included only recognized species of cucumis. a further handicap was that the sister group of cucumis was unknown, so that trees could not be rooted reliably. only garcia-mas et al.  <cit>  sampled a potential relative, oreosyce africana, material of which they received under the name cucumis membranifolius hook. f. and found embedded among species of cucumis . morphological similarities, however, argue for adding more representatives from african and asian genera to phylogenetic analyses of cucumis. besides cucumella, dicaelospermum c. b. clarke, mukia arn., muellerargia cogn., myrmecosicyos c. jeffrey, and oreosyce hook. all share key traits with cucumis . the most recent morphology-based classification of cucurbitaceae  <cit>  includes five more genera in the tribe cucumerinae, to which cucumis belongs. no representatives of cucumerinae were included in previous molecular studies of cucumis.

because of the doubtful morphological separation from its supposed closest relative, cucumella  <cit> , and the insufficient sampling of other potentially related genera, the status of cucumis as a monophyletic genus has remained equivocal. here we address the three questions, is cucumis monophyletic? what is the closest relative of cucumis? and what are the closest relatives of cucumber and melon?, using a two-pronged approach that involves chloroplast sequence data for all relevant genera of cucurbitaceae and combined nuclear and chloroplast data for species of cucumis, cucumella, dicaelospermum, mukia, muellerargia, myrmecosicyos, and oreosyce. analysis of the combined data unexpectedly revealed that a monophyletic cucumis lineage includes an australian/asian clade in which cucumber, c. sativus, is nested. this then raised the questions about the timing of the australian connections, which we address with molecular clock dating.

RESULTS
the non-monophyly of cucumis and why it remained undiscovered; comparison with earlier molecular phylogenies
parsimony  and maximum likelihood  analyses of combined sequences from the chloroplast genes rbcl and matk, the chloroplast intron trnl, and the spacers rpl20-rps <dig> and trnl-f, under the gtr + g + i model yielded a topology  that was congruent with that obtained from the nuclear internal transcribed spacer region . chloroplast and nuclear data were therefore combined, and a parsimony tree from the combined data with mp and ml bootstrap support is shown as fig.  <dig> . in the family-wide analysis , cucumis is sister to muellerargia . the genera cucumella, dicaelospermum, mukia, myrmecosicyos, and oreosyce are embedded among species of cucumis . the remaining genera of cucumerinae sensu c. jeffrey  <cit> , cucumeropsis naudin, melancium naudin, melothria l., posadaea cogn., and zehneria endl.  group far from cucumis . this fits with their geographic concentration in the new world : melancium is a monotypic genus from brazil, posadaea a monotypic genus from tropical america, and melothria has ten species in central america and south america. however, cucumeropsis, with a single species from tropical africa, and zehneria, neoachmandra, and scopellaria, with  <dig> species in tropical and subtropical africa, madagascar, asia, new guinea, and australia  <cit>  overlap with the natural range of cucumis.

                               <dig> 
numbers in bold indicate sequences newly generated for this study. herbarium acronyms follow the index herbariorum available online at the new york botanical garden's web site. bg = botanical garden. sections and series of cucumis are from  <cit> .

the sister genus to cucumis, muellerargia, consists of one species in madagascar and one in indonesia and queensland. both are herbaceous trailers or climbers with straight or apically reflexed anthers and softly spinose fruits. muellerargia has never been recognized as closely related to cucumis  <cit> , perhaps because it is extremely poorly collected, with but a few specimens even in major herbaria: the madagascan species, muellerargia jeffreyana keraudren, is known from three collections , and permission was not granted to sacrifice material for this study. it is morphologically similar to the indonesian-australian species m. timorensis cogn.  <cit> . the poor documentation of the genus in herbaria also led to the australian species being described at least three times; first as muellerargia timorensis cogn., then as melothria subpellucida cogn., and then as zehneria ejecta bailey  cogn.).

the cucumis species relationships found here differ from those found in earlier studies  <cit> . an unrooted nuclear isozyme tree  <cit>  showed c. sativus as the genetically most distant species, while c. melo was sister to an african clade. the neighbor-joining tree from nuclear its sequences of garcia-mas et al.  <cit>  was rooted on citrullus lanatus and cucurbita pepo, and showed c. sativus as the first-branching species in the genus, while c. melo was sister to a large african clade. finally, the chloroplast tree of chung et al.  <cit>  also was rooted on citrullus and showed c. sativus and c. hystrix as sister to c. melo . by contrast, the data presented here  indicate that  the deepest divergence in cucumis is between c. hirsutus and c. humifructus on the one hand and all other species on the other,  c. sativus  and c. hystrix are closer to dicaelospermum and mukia than they are to any species of cucumis, and  c. melo  is sister to a clade comprising dicaelospermum, mukia, c. sativus, c. hystrix, and a new species from australia .

there are several possible explanations for the contrasting findings of the earlier phylogenetic studies. first, the use of distant outgroups might have "attracted" the long-branched  c. sativus, pulling it to the base of the tree. garcia-mas et al.  <cit>  and chung et al.  <cit>  used citrullus lanatus and/or cucurbita pepo as sole outgroups. both taxa are many clades, and millions of years of evolution, removed from the cucumis clade  and therefore add long branches to neighbor-joining and parsimony analyses  <cit> . the inclusion of these long branches could have caused long-branch attraction between them and c. sativus.

a second reason why previous molecular phylogenetic studies were unable to test the monophyly of cucumis and to infer the sister clades of cucumber and melon is that they did not include a sufficiently broad sample of taxa. for example, rigidly testing the monophyly of cucumis section melo required sequencing all of its species, c. melo, c. hirsutus, c. humifructus, and c. sagittatus. results  show that c. hirsutus and c. humifructus, rather than being close to c. melo, are sister to all other species of cucumis sensu lato, that is, including all five genera nested in cucumis.

another possible reason for apparent differences between earlier topologies and the phylogeny found here is insufficient signal in the data and misidentified material. comparison of the its sequences of garcia-mas et al.  <cit>  to our its sequences showed that the sequence labeled cucumis membranifolius in genbank  and oreosyce africana in the published paper , does not represent oreosyce africana. the sequence came from a seed provided by the north central regional plant introduction station in ames, iowa, and since there is no voucher, its identification cannot be verified. we also could not reproduce the topology and bootstrap support obtained in the original paper  <cit> , partly probably because the phylogenetic signal in the data is weak, resulting in many equally likely trees. garcia-mas et al.  <cit>  included sequences resulting from direct sequencing as well as sequences obtained by pgem-t easy vector cloning and found sequences from multiple accessions generally grouping by species. our cucumis its sequencing confirmed these authors' assessment that its lineage sorting is not a problem in cucumis. the two c. ficifolius sequences obtained by garcia-mas et al.  <cit>  that do not group  come from different plants and may simply represent different species; however, since the material is unvouchered, the identifications cannot be checked.

implications for the evolution and biogeography of cucumis
the phylogeny from the combined nuclear and chloroplast data  implies that the deepest divergence lies between the common ancestor of c. hirsutus and c. humifructus and the stem lineage of the remainder of the genus. from the geographic ranges of the species of cucumis sensu lato  and its sister genus muellerargia , the area where cucumis may have originated cannot reliably be inferred. strict and semi-parametric molecular clocks indicated that the deepest divergence in cucumis may date back to 48– <dig> my and that the split between the c. melo lineage and its australian/asian sister clade is only slightly younger. the divergence of c. sativus from c. hystrix may be about  <dig> my old and that of their common ancestor from the ancestor of dicaelospermum and mukia maderaspatana about  <dig> my. the bulk of the african species appears to have evolved more recently. the absence of a fossil constraint within cucumis, however, cautions against over-confidence in the molecular clock estimates.

based on the tree , the earliest divergence events in cucumis likely took place in africa. however, contrary to the traditional classification  <cit> , which groups c. melo with the african c. hirsutus, c. humifructus, and c. sagittatus, melon is closest to an australian/asian clade  that comprises an undescribed australian species  <cit> , species currently placed in mukia , dicaelospermum ritchiei from western india , and cucumis sativus and c. hystrix from india, china, burma, and thailand. in addition to the two species we sequenced, mukia comprises three others  <cit> , its overall geographic range extending from indo-china southeast to java, borneo, and the philippines, and west through india, pakistan, and the yemen into sub-saharan africa. given the geographic distribution of its extant closest relatives , c. melo itself could have originated somewhere in asia and then reached africa from there, rather than originating in africa as traditionally assumed  <cit> . notably, indian melon landraces exhibit the largest isozyme variation among asian melons  <cit>  and australia is a center of complex morphological variation of c. melo  <cit> .

the evolution of morphological traits relevant for cucumis breeders, for example fruit type, habit, and sexual system, will need to be reinterpreted based on the phylogenetic relationships presented here. most of the  <dig> described species in the cucumis clade are monoecious perennials, and the monoecious sexual system and perennial habit may be the ancestral condition from which an annual habit and dioecy appear to have evolved several times. however, the sexual system and habit of key taxa, such as dicaelospermum, muellerargia, and the as yet undescribed species from australia  <cit>   are not reliably known because species are under-collected and have not been studied in the field. of the  <dig> species of cucumis not yet sequenced, most are monoecious perennials; only c. kalahariensis a. meeuse and c. rigidus sond. are dioecious and perennial. species currently placed in mukia  <cit>  and cucumella  <cit>  are mostly monoecious and perennial. the evolution of smooth fruits from spiny fruits, a traditional key character in cucumis, and the mode of fruit opening are much more plastic than formerly thought. for example, in oreosyce africana and muellerargia timorensis the fruits open explosively [ <cit> ; i. telford, beadle herbarium, armidale, personal communication, feb. 2007); in c. humifructus, fruits mature below ground and are then dug up and the seeds dispersed by antbears, orycteropus afer  <cit> ; in the new species from australia , the developing fruit is pushed into rock crevices by the elongating pedicel and also matures below ground; and in myrmecosicyos messorius the fruits are tiny and apparently dispersed by harvesting ants around whose nest entrances the species grows.

CONCLUSIONS
based on congruent nuclear and chloroplast phylogenies we conclude that a monophyletic cucumis comprises an old australian/asian clade that includes cucumber and at least eight other species, most of them currently placed in mukia. the new insights about the closest relatives of melon and cucumber have implications for ongoing genomics efforts. it is known that cucumis organellar genomes are unusually labile. thus, in c. sativus, rbcl has been transferred from the plastome to the mitochondrial genome  <cit> , and huge amounts of degenerate repetitive dna have accumulated in c. sativus mitochondria  <cit> . the seven meiotic chromosomes of c. sativus are larger than the  <dig> of its wild sister species or progenitor c. hystrix  <cit>  and consist of six metacentrics and one submetacentric chromosome  <cit> . to infer the genome rearrangements that must have taken place during the evolution and domestication of c. sativus, analyses of co-linearity will be required between the cucumber lineage and its closest relatives dicaelospermum ritchiei and species of mukia. finally, the possibility that c. melo may have evolved in asia and reached africa secondarily needs to be tested.

