BACKGROUND
comparing the initial stages of neural induction and gastrulation in avian and murine embryos highlights evolutionary conservation of mechanisms responsible for directing the early events of embryonic development. during these stages, the appearance of the two organisms is quite distinct: the chick embryo forms from a flat disc whilst the mouse develops from a cylindrical epiblast. both species possess extraembryonic endodermal tissues whose fate is to contribute to structures such as the yolk sac stalk but not to the embryo proper  <cit> . in the chick, these tissues include the hypoblast and the endoblast  <cit> , whereas their mouse counterparts are most likely the anterior visceral endoderm  and the rest of the visceral endoderm , respectively. the avian hypoblast is molecularly and functionally homologous to the mouse anterior visceral endoderm  in that both act to restrict the site of primitive streak formation  <cit>  by inhibiting nodal signalling.

to analyse the function of the ave in mouse, transgenic techniques can be employed to create a gain-of-function, producing embryos expressing a gene of interest under the control of an ave-specific enhancer. loss-of-function analysis is achieved by generating null mutations in the ave through the injection of wild-type es cells into mutant blastocysts  <cit> . recently the chick has become amenable to gain- and loss-of-function experiments through electroporation of expression constructs and morpholinos or rnai molecules targeted against specific mrnas  <cit> . however, loosely associated cell populations such as the hypoblast do not respond well to this technique leaving it without means of genetic manipulation. consequently, the role of genes expressed in the hypoblast, and the conservation of their regulation with those in the mouse ave, have been impossible to test directly.

here we describe a method based on lipofectamine-mediated delivery of dna into the hypoblast. the hypoblast responds efficiently to this treatment and a  <dig> – <dig> hour exposure to the transfection medium results in strong expression of reporter constructs. this method is used to analyse the activation of a mouse otx <dig> enhancer previously shown to drive expression exclusively in the mouse ave prior to primitive streak formation and is later active in the anterior definitive endoderm  and anterior mesendoderm  <cit> . the enhancer shows a similar pattern of activation in the chick suggesting a conserved mechanism for the regulation of otx <dig> expression in murine ave and avian hypoblast.

RESULTS
the hypoblast can be transfected within  <dig> hour and starts expressing within  <dig> hours
previous experiments using lipofectamine to introduce dna into embryonic tissue have involved the injection of a lipofectamine-dna mix directly into the region of interest  <cit> . however, at pre-primitive streak stages, the hypoblast and embryo both disintegrate quite rapidly after this treatment. the problem with conventional cell culture lipofection protocols is that they require more than  <dig> hours' exposure to the reagent to obtain a high transfection rate. the hypoblast traverses the embryo in a matter of hours and a three-hour period might affect its function and integrity.

to optimise transfection efficiency whilst minimising hypoblast degradation and length of transfection time, two factors were altered: the lipofectamine-complex:dmem ratio, and transfection time. this is presented in table  <dig>  since the hypoblast inhibits primitive streak formation  <cit>  and directs the movements of the prospective fore/midbrain  <cit> , a 'successful embryo' was classified as one in which the embryo developed with a normal axis extension and orientation. as shown in table  <dig>  the optimal outcome was achieved using conditions e and f but because of the shorter time of transfection, e was prefered. all subsequent experiments were performed under these conditions.

different combinations of transfection period and lipofectamine-complex were tested. the efficiency of transfection is based on the number of embryos in which fluorescence could be detected following overnight culture. the 'level of expression' is an estimate of the proportion of cells expressing the reporter. finally, the normality of the embryos  with fluorescent hypoblasts was judged as embryos that developed with a normal axis extension and orientation and in which the hypoblast developed in a characteristic fashion.

to estimate the timing of translation initiation from the point of transfection, a luciferase reporter contruct was created using the ubiquitous chicken β-actin promoter . pcab-luc was transfected into the hypoblast. localised luciferase expression was detected after 1– <dig>  hours of filming . from this point on, the signal increased in strength and followed the anteriorly-directed movement of the hypoblast .

lipofectamine selectively transfects hypoblast cells
whole embryos, epiblast alone or hypoblast alone, all taken at stages xii-xiii, were tested for their susceptibility to lipofectamine transfection. the optimal conditions, as ascertained above, were used to transfect tissues with a gfp reporter under the β-actin promoter . following transfection, epiblasts and hypoblasts were grafted onto host embryos and all embryos were incubated overnight. in embryos treated as a whole, expression of gfp was detected occasionally in the yolky cells of the extra-embryonic area opaca . grafts of transfected epiblasts exhibited expression in one instance out of  <dig> embryos, and then in only two cells . in contrast, hypoblasts were transfected successfully . it is therefore likely that all expression seen in embryos following a graft of a transfected hypoblast arises from the initial transfection of this tissue rather than from transfer of the lipofectamine-dna complex into the epiblast.

transfection of reporter constructs does not affect hypoblast movements or fate
the reporter-expressing hypoblast develops in a characteristic fashion, spreading across the entire area pellucida at pre-primitive streak stages and then being displaced in a posterior-to-anterior direction to become located in a crescent shaped region  beneath the prospective rostral neural plate at full primitive streak stages , and can still be found in this position at headfold and somite stages . embryos with transfected hypoblasts developed to a maximum of stage hh <dig> . at this stage labelled cells surround the whole head region of the embryo as they are incorporated into the yolk sac stalk  <cit> . this is similar to the fate of the visceral endoderm in mouse  <cit> .

mouse otx <dig> ave enhancer drives expression in the hypoblast
to test whether regulatory mechanisms driving gene expression in the mouse ave are conserved in the chick hypoblast, we used an otx <dig> enhancer  shown in the mouse to be active exclusively ave at pre-primitive streak stages and later in the ade and anterior mesendoderm  <cit> . a vecis-otx2-gfp construct was transfected into the hypoblast and gfp expression was detected from the earliest time point  and persisted during all stages analysed . this is beyond the stage at which otx <dig> is normally expressed in the hypoblast  <cit>  . the persistence of fluorescence is most likely due to the long stability of this protein. however, to rule out the possiblity that the enhancer promiscuously drives expression throughout the embryo, it was introduced into the embryonic epiblast and the area opaca of stage hh <dig> embryos by electroporation. expression of gfp was restricted to the head region of the embryo  and with a caudal boundary of the midbrain-hindbrain border , reminiscent of the normal pattern of expression of otx <dig>  no expression was detected in the area opaca or in the embryo caudal to the hindbrain. in one case hindbrain expression was detected , which again could be the result of persistent gfp in cells that originally expressed otx <dig> 

discussion
the method described here makes the chick extraembryonic endoderm amenable to genetic manipulation and to the study of the activity of enhancers directing expression to this tissue. several genes are known to be expressed in the hypoblast including cerberus , wnt angagonists dkk <dig> and crescent, fgf <dig> and otx <dig>  <cit> . fgf and retinoic acid signalling as well as wnt- and bmp-inhibition, have also been implicated in the ability of the hypoblast to induce expression of otx <dig>  sox <dig>  cyp26a <dig> and erni in the epiblast  <cit>  but it has not been possible as yet to demonstrate their requirement by loss-of-function experiments. the technique described here will enable gain- and loss-of-function experiments to be performed to assess the role of the hypoblast in crucial events prior to and during gastrulation. it has so far been possible to graft beads coated in various factors or cells secreting proteins to interfere with signalling pathways. however, the advantage of the method described here is that it allows tissue-specific targeting thereby avoiding difficulties in interpretation of an epiblast- versus hypoblast-mediated effect. furthermore, it allows transcription factors to be overexpressed, or knocked down with a morpholino or by rna interference. using a luciferase reporter, protein translation was shown to be initiated within  <dig> hours of transfection, which would allow the hypoblast to express the gene before the primitive streak starts to form.

the characteristic movement of the hypoblast, from a position underlying the entire embryonic epiblast to becoming restricted to the germinal crescent, is recapitulated here with transfected hypoblasts, which undergo normal movements. following the longest periods of culture, some labelled cells of the hypoblast are found in the prospective yolk sac stalk, consistent with the results of rosenquist  <cit>  and comparable to the fate of mouse visceral endoderm  <cit> .

the transfection technique was also used to assess the activity of an element that drives otx <dig> expression in the anterior visceral endoderm in mouse  <cit> . this element was found to be active in the chick hypoblast and to drive expression of gfp indicating a common mechanism for otx <dig> activation between the two species. using this technique, further comparative analysis of regulatory elements could be performed.

CONCLUSIONS
the method proposed here enables introduction of dna into the avian extra-embryonic endoderm. the chick embryo culture system is ideal for imaging real-time expression of fluorescent proteins. the procedure itself does not adversely affect the embryo and allows genetic manipulation of the hypoblast. furthermore, the conservation of regulatory elements can now be tested. we show that a mouse otx <dig> enhancer, active in the ave, can also drive expression in the hypoblast, revealing a conservation of elements driving gene expression in these tissues in the two species.

