BACKGROUND
papaya  is an important crop cultivated in tropical and subtropical areas and the ripe fruit has a soft and sweet pulp with high amounts of pro-vitamin a and antioxidants  <cit> . papaya is a typical climacteric fruit, with striking colour changes, a rapid rise in ethylene production, and substantial pulp softening; it also responds to exogenous ethylene and 1-mcp applications  <cit> . the physico-chemical changes during papaya ripening are dependent on the expression of specific genes, and the identification of ripening-related genes involved in the activation of biochemical steps relevant for fruit quality is of both scientific and commercial interest.

in order to understand the network of ripening genes in fleshy fruits, transcriptome studies are valuable tools. in the case of fruit such as tomato, microarrays have been used extensively  <cit> . however, for less well studied fruits, transcriptome analyses are based on ‘home-made’ microarrays, such as the μpeach <dig>  array  <cit> , or classical transcript profiling by differential display-pcr or cdna-aflp  <cit> . with the development of high-throughput sequencing, several species have had their genome sequenced including the hawaiian variety of papaya fruit  <cit> . commercial oligo-chips are not currently available for these organisms and comprehensive rna sequencing can still be costly often prohibiting routine experiments. however, a cross-species  microarray is an alternative approach that has been successfully used to study the transcriptomes of non-model organisms  <cit> .

papaya is a member of family caricaceae within the brassicales, the same order as the ‘model plant’ arabidopsis thaliana, which has been the object of many microarray experiments based on commercially available oligo-chips. because the two species are relatively closely related, the use of arabidopsis arrays to hybridize rna from papaya should provide information on the transcriptome changes during ripening in papaya fruits.

in the present study we report the use of rna from unripe and ripe papaya to probe the affymetrix arabidopsis genechip ath1- <dig> to profile ripening–related gene expression in papaya. the expression pattern of a number of genes likely to be related to fruit quality was validated by quantitative real-time pcr, and the data from papaya cross-species microarray was compared to microarray data from tomato  and grape . a comparative biology approach was then used to compare the putative proteins from papaya and protein sequences from arabidopsis and other fleshy fruits in order to obtain information on the differences between these organisms in respect to evolutionary role in fruit ripening. the expression of transcription factors was divergent amongst three species, and xspecies data indicated transcription factors  that may be involved in the control of papaya ripening. comparison of the expression patterns of ripening-related tfs and down-stream effectors such as cell wall genes between papaya, fleshy fruits and arabidopsis indicated both common and unique features in these higher regulatory networks governing ripening.

RESULTS
transcriptome characteristics of papaya fruit ripening: use of xspecies microarray
a probe-masking strategy utilising hybridization of papaya genomic dna was used to identify probes with low or non-specific hybridization. the number of probe-pairs retained for analysis decreased rapidly  as the dna hybridization threshold was increased. in comparison the number of probe-sets reduced at a slower rate, which was consistent with the results obtained with other species  <cit> . the number of differentially expressed genes  was calculated at each threshold and the mask value of  <dig> returned the highest number of differentially expressed putative genes  . the hierarchical clustering of the log <dig> values of these probe-sets intensities resulted in the discrimination of eight main clusters  with different expression patterns. clusters ii, iii, iv, v and vi, with  <dig> probe-sets, were up-regulated, while  <dig> probe-sets from clusters i, vii and viii were down-regulated during ripening. clusters i, ii and iii was composed by genes with high levels of expression while clusters vi and viii enclosed genes with the lowest levels of expression during papaya ripening. clusters iv, v and vii enclosed genes with the highest differences in gene expression when log <dig> intensities were compared between unripe and ripe fruit.

papaya probe-sets were separated into gene categories using the pageman software and up-regulated probe-sets were organized according to the correspondent arabidopsis gene ontology  function . as was expected in a climacteric fruit, there were a wide range of genes up-regulated during fruit ripening, including those involved in primary metabolism  and energy transport and these findings are consistent with the high demand associated with ripening and the peak in co <dig> production  . genes encoding proteins involved in lipids, protein, and hormone metabolism, as well as cell signalling, signal transduction, and the response to biotic and abiotic stress were also up-regulated .

†log <dig> of average signal value ripe divided by average signal value unripe.

††names of the genes analyzed by qpcr-real time.

comparative genomics of fruit ripening in papaya vs. tomato and grape
in order to visualize the probable cell functions altered in papaya and to compare them to those of another climacteric fruit  and a non-climacteric fruit , the bins of differentially expressed probe-sets for papaya , tomato and grape  were run using the mapman software  <cit> . the aim was identify sets of expression profiles that might be conserved between or unique to climacteric and non-climacteric fruit. data chosen for analysis focused on the main changes associated with the ripening process, such as the comparison between red and mature green tomato and post-véraison and pre-vérasion grape.

a schematic overview of ripening regulation and some of its cellular responses  showed a high proportion of up-regulated transcription factors  in papaya  . when probe-sets from papaya experiments were analysed in terms of go molecular function ,  <dig> probe-sets  accounted for genes responsible for nucleotides and nucleic acids binding, translation initiation factors and ribosomes constituents. table  <dig> shows the main up-regulated tfs in the three species regarding the three different ripening experiments.

† log <dig> of average signal value ripe divided by average signal value unripe;

†† microarray data downloaded from http://ted.bti.cornell.edu ;

††† microarray data downloaded from http://biomedcentral.com ;

* nm: no match with tair sequences.

the cellular response to ripening in these three fruits was also different, especially to biotic and abiotic stress and redox regulation . while tomato responses were the increase of genes related to abiotic stress and decrease of those related to biotic stress, grape responded in an opposite way . nonetheless, papaya responded to ripening in a similar way to tomato, with abiotic genes being expressed in the same time course than tomato ones.

† log <dig> of average signal value ripe divided by average signal value unripe.

†† microarray data downloaded from http://ted.bti.cornell.edu .

††† microarray data downloaded from http://biomedcentral.com .

* nm: no match with tair sequences.

validation of gene expression and comparative biology between papaya and fleshy fruit organs
in order to validate the xspecies experiment, the expression of  <dig> probe-sets that were satisfactory aligned to arabidopsis genes were analysed by qpcr throughout papaya ripening. papaya genes were named according to the arabidopsis functions and grouped together, as shown in figure  <dig>  quantitative analysis revealed a-gal, exp, fruct, lip <dig>  acx, arp, enol, hsp <dig> and erf <dig> were induced during ripening, while arf <dig>  cell, mev, lip, pme <dig>  pme <dig>  pl, rap <dig>  xet, erd <dig>  erd <dig> and axr were decreased during ripening. contrasting results between qpcr and xspecies experiments were observed for three genes .

comparative analysis of the translated amino acids sequences for all genes analysed from qpcr experiments indicated some papaya putative proteins were more similar to those from species with fleshy fruits than to the arabidopsis ones . in general, proteins from primary and secondary metabolism  and transcription factors  appeared to be phylogenetically closer to those from species with fleshy fruits, whereas abiotic stress  and cell wall metabolism  proteins are more closely related to those from arabidopsis. contrasting results were observed for proteins with high degree of conservation, such as enol, rap <dig>  hsp, acx and pl, where homology was determined primarily by non-conserved regions and less by conserved domains. because cell wall related genes shared greater homology with arabidopsis, a comparison of gene expression in ripe papayas was conducted using a published arabidopsis microarray study of gene expression in  <dig> or 11-day-old hypocotyls   <cit> . these data  also indicate that this set of genes had comparable gene expression levels and might act on cell wall polymers in a similar way.

† log <dig> of average signal value ripe vs. unripe for papaya and log <dig> of average signal value 11-day-old hypocotyls vs.  <dig> days for a. thaliana.

†† microarray data downloaded from http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-10-505-s <dig> pdf .

††† number represented by qpcr analysis.

discussion
in this study we investigated the transcriptome of ripening papaya  <cit>  using fruits at two contrasting physiological stages and the affymetrix ath1- <dig> genechip for arabidopsis in an xspecies microarray  <cit> . the number of differentially expressed probe-sets was consistent with the results obtained with other species  <cit>  but was fewer than those from regular microarray experiments, especially with regarding comparative analyses between unripe and ripe fruits  <cit> . although xspecies results have less power than a regular microarray experiment and technologies such as rnaseq performed by next generation sequencing , the technique was able to identify important genes related to metabolic processes involved in papaya ripening. surprisingly, despite papaya and arabidopsis being members of the order brassicales, only cell wall-related genes shared a greater homology among the genes studied. this may reflect shared metabolic pathways which differ from other fleshy fruit. fleshy fruits showed greater homology between transcription factors which might indicate shared transcriptional regulatory networks.

deduced roles of ripening-related genes in papaya
primary metabolism
the high energy demand at climacteric ripening was evidenced by the up-regulation of genes related to krebs and tca cycles , cytochromes , and hexose metabolism . similarly, genes involved in lipid metabolism, were also affected. these included cell membrane lipases , and up-regulation of genes responsible for the synthesis of unsaturated fatty acids . down-regulation of the mev gene  suggests the main precursors for volatiles production and carotenoid biosynthesis could be produced by the mep pathway inside the plastids during papaya ripening  <cit> . fabi et al.  <cit>  identified another transcript related to mev gene, suggesting mevalonate accumulation prior ripening.

transcriptional regulation
when the probe-sets were analysed in terms of go molecular function , a high number of genes responsible for nucleotide and nucleic acid binding, translation initiation and ribosomes constituents were observed, indicating control of ripening at both the level of transcription and translation. five members of the myb family, which is important for ripening since myb genes are known to regulate secondary metabolism and colour accumulation  <cit> , were differentially expressed during ripening. since colour of papaya pulp is correlated with accumulation of carotenoids  <cit> , papaya myb tfs might show distinct role in other metabolism during ripening.

three closely-related erf/ap <dig> genes had diverse expression throughout papaya ripening, with an ap <dig> gene  and an erf gene  being up-regulated . while some genes from ap2/erf family are related to improving arabidopsis resistance to abiotic stress  <cit> , others have been shown to be responsible for controlling tomato ripening  <cit> . specific apetala <dig> genes  are expressed throughout normal tomato ripening and slap2a gene may balance the activities of positive ripening regulators as a negative feedback loop. moreover, a previous study showed an apetala <dig> gene subclade iiic  is involved in regulation of apple pulp softening during cold storage and/or ethylene treatment  <cit> . in fact, papaya erf <dig> and rap <dig> putative proteins share higher similarity to diverse apetala <dig> proteins from apples and tomato  rather than the slap2a protein from tomato.

three genes members of auxin signalling pathway , a hormone that impairs ripening  <cit> , were identified in our experiments. whereas arp was the only up regulated gene during ripening, arf <dig> was phylogenetically close to slarf family, the auxin response factors from s. lycopersicum . these data suggest that ripening in papaya involves auxin signalling, in common with other fruits  <cit> .

many different tfs are involved in control of ripening in fleshy fruits. in tomato, master regulators include mads-box , sbp-box , hbbox  and nac genes  <cit> . strawberry ripening involves a sep1/2like gene   <cit> , and for banana a sep3like gene   <cit> . in bilberry, accumulation of anthocyanins is controlled by an squamosaclass mads-box tf vmtdr <dig>  orthologous to the tdr <dig> gene in tomato  <cit> . papaya shows range of tfs which are homologous to these master regulators and show ripening-related changes in gene expression . despite each species seeming to have specific sets of ripening-related transcription factors, their exact functions in papaya fruits remain to be elucidated.

cell wall-related genes
papaya pulp softening shows a remarkable change during ripening, and this is thought to be due to the activities of cell wall hydrolases  <cit> . seven putative cell wall-related genes were differentially expressed: four related to pectin hydrolysis , two related to cellulose hydrolysis and rearrangement  and one related to cell expansion . mostly genes related to pgs and expansin were up-regulated while those related to pmes, pls and glucosidases were down-regulated.

the up-regulation of an α-galactosidase gene  observed in our experiments is consistent with previous data reported by soh et al.  <cit>  and nogueira et al.  <cit>  on ripening of papaya fruit. on the other hand, changes in pectate lyases  were detected, but the reduced levels contrast with the expected role of the enzyme during ripening. in other fruits, such as bananas  <cit>  and mangoes  <cit> pl is thought to contribute to the pectin disassembly that leads to the pulp softening of ripe fruits. pectin methylesterases were also apparently down-regulated during ripening. solubilisation of pectin in ripe papayas may be governed principally by the action of polygalacturonases on previously de-esterified pectin chains  <cit>  in addition to the action of α-galactosidases. cellulose and hemicellulose processing in the papaya pulp could not be inferred from our results, since the genes related to hydrolysis and rearrangements of cellulose  were down-regulated during papaya ripening, in contrast to the up-regulation in ripe tomato and strawberry  <cit> ; respectively). gaete-eastman et al.  <cit>  observed expansin gene expression was up-regulated during ripening in mountain papaya and it was inversely correlated to pulp texture. this pattern of expression is in agreement with the expansin gene from ‘golden’ papaya . papaya exp is related to the gene products encoded by faexp <dig>  pcexp <dig> and ppexp <dig> from strawberry, pear and peach, respectively  <cit> ; figure 6). all of these genes are up-regulated during fruit ripening, suggesting conservation of gene action in the softening of a range of fleshy fruits species. however in some instances cell wall changes in papaya resembled events in non-fruit tissues. an arabidopsis microarray study  <cit>  investigating gene expression during  <dig> or 11-day-old hypocotyls  showed a transcription profile, at least for some of the cell wall-related genes, that was highly similar to that found in ripening papaya . this reveals interesting characteristics of cell wall remodelling which may have evolved from the same ancestral brassicales.

response to stress and plant defence
no representative differences in expression of probe-sets related to ‘response to stress’  were observed, and only two out of six ‘plant defence response’ probe-sets were up-regulated. however, genes from other go classes may be considered based on their putative functions. acyl-coa oxidases  are members of ‘lipid metabolism’ go, and have a key role in the jasmonic acid  biosynthesis, an important compound in protection against pathogens and insects  <cit> . the up-regulated papaya acx gene could contribute to the defence system during ripening, since it showed a 5-fold increase in transcript abundance. papaya acx protein shared high similarity with that from tomato, where a peroxisomal acx protein is critical for the β-oxidation through ja biosynthesis and systemic wound signalling, indicating this gene might also be responsible for ja biosynthesis in papaya  <cit> . two putative papaya erd <dig> and erd <dig> genes  were down-regulated. these proteins are methyltransferases that respond positively to abiotic stresses such as cold treatment and prolonged mild osmotic stress  <cit> .

analysis of the papaya transcriptome reveals that like tomato there is overexpression of heat-shock protein  genes. heat-shock proteins can work as chaperones in protein folding; under stress conditions they can re-establish normal protein conformation  <cit>  and degrade damaged or misfolded peptides  <cit> . genes normally associated with response to abiotic stress are often seen expressed in ripening fruits  <cit> .

chitinases and thaumatins were over-expressed in grapes, conferring plant protection against saprophytic organisms  <cit> , but down-regulated in tomato instead  <cit> , none of these genes were differentially expressed in papaya. only some genes related to protein inhibition and those of so-called leucine repeat proteins , which are very important in defence against pathogenic fungi  <cit>  were induced. regarding redox regulation, ascorbic acid  accumulates in these three fruits  <cit> , but only papaya cross-species microarray revealed genes related to ascorbic acid biosynthesis: the up regulated monodehydroascorbate reductase and an l-galactose dehydrogenase genes.

CONCLUSIONS
the heterologous hybridization microarray was successfully applied in the study of transcripts changes associated to papaya fruit, a commercially relevant crop from a non-model organism. the ripening of papaya represents a time-course of cellular metabolism changes, characterized by differential expression of numerous genes involved in primary metabolism, hormonal signalling, transcriptional regulation, abiotic stress and cell wall metabolism. among the genes identified are transcription factors  of the mads-box, nac and ap2/erf gene families, which are master regulators in other fruits indicating conservation of function for ripening control genes across different taxa. moreover, data revealed cell wall-related gene expression was more similar to arabidopsis hypocotyl development profiles than those from other fleshy fruit perhaps revealing characteristics of cell wall remodelling mechanisms specific to the brassicales.

the phylogenetic relationship between transcription factors of fleshy fruits might indicate shared transcriptional regulatory networks. although data presented in the manuscript is not enough to indicate how climacteric and non-climacteric fruits evolved, and some genes specific to papaya or those specifically expressed in fleshy organs might have been overlooked with the heterologous microarray, other approaches, e.g. rnaseq, are likely to contribute to new perspectives on how different fleshy fruits respond to ripening.

