BACKGROUND
campylobacter spp. remain one of the most frequent bacterial causes of foodborne gastroenteritis world-wide  <cit> . poultry, and specifically consumption of undercooked poultry and mishandling raw poultry, is an important source of campylobacter to humans  <cit> . the prevalence of broiler flocks colonized with campylobacter spp. varies, ranging from 5% of flocks to more than 90%  <cit> . once a flock is exposed, the bacteria spread rapidly throughout the flock, and most of the birds become colonized and remain so until slaughter  <cit> . due to the difficulties in eliminating contamination of carcasses in slaughter plants, the control of campylobacter in broiler flocks and production of birds free from colonization at slaughter, is essential for preventing human cases  <cit> .

many researchers  <cit>  have contested that the most likely source of campylobacter to broiler flocks is the environment . both campylobacter-positive and -negative flocks can be present in different houses on the same farm during the same growing period  <cit> , illustrating that it is possible to prevent campylobacter from entering a broiler house. thus, it might be hypothesized that certain characteristics of a broiler house, or management practices at the house-level, might influence the likelihood that a flock will be exposed to the bacteria. house-level factors associated with an increased risk of colonization include: concrete floors   <cit> ; feed dispenser in the anteroom   <cit> ; evidence of mice  <cit> ; absence of, or ineffective, hygiene barrier or biosecurity measures  <cit> ; roof fans   <cit> ; a static ventilation system   <cit> ; two or more persons taking care of the house  <cit> ; non-cement floors  <cit> ; and poor maintenance of house surroundings  <cit> . in iceland, flock-level risk factors have been studied  <cit> ; however, to date, the association between broiler flock campylobacter status and the attributes and management practices of broiler houses in iceland has not been studied.

the strong association between the increased incidence of human campylobacteriosis and increased consumption of fresh chicken meat in iceland in the late 1990's prompted a longitudinal study of the poultry industry  <cit> . the ultimate goal of the full project was to identify the means to decrease the frequency of broiler flock colonization with campylobacter, thereby reducing the burden of foodborne illness associated with poultry consumption. our objective in this study was to identify house-level risk factors associated with the colonization of broiler flocks with campylobacter spp. in iceland.

RESULTS
descriptive summary
there were  <dig> flocks raised in the summer seasons, and of these,  <dig>  tested positive for campylobacter. the  <dig> flocks originated from  <dig> houses on  <dig> farms. the median number of flocks per house was  <dig> . ten houses did not have any positive flocks; the number of flocks raised in these houses ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  with the majority having ≥  <dig> flocks per house. the distribution of the proportion of positive flocks per house is shown in figure  <dig>  almost half of the house-level variables were consistent for all flocks raised in the same house during the study period. these included all of the drainage variables except for the floor drain method, heating of the broiler house floor, floor material, house water distribution system, sharing a common wall or entrance with another house, floor level, changing boots before entry to the house, use of geothermal water for cleaning, floor area, and cubic space. the median number of flocks per farm was  <dig> . three of  <dig> farms did not have any positive flocks; these were primarily the smaller farms that raised between  <dig> and  <dig> flocks.

of the  <dig> positive flocks,  <dig>  were slaughtered in  <dig> catch lot ,  <dig>  were slaughtered in  <dig> catch lots , and  <dig>  were slaughtered in  <dig> or  <dig> catch lots . for flocks with more than one catch lot, the number of days between the first and last catch lot was relatively short , and  <dig> % of the flocks with multiple catch lots were positive in samples collected from the first catch lot. on the basis of catch lot sampling, out of  <dig> positive catch lots,  <dig>  were positive in all  <dig> pooled samples,  <dig>  were positive in  <dig> pooled samples,  <dig>  were positive in  <dig> pooled samples, and  <dig>  were positive in only  <dig> pooled sample.

statistical analysis
random effects
the intra-class correlation coefficient  of a null model with only a house random effect was  <dig>  ; the icc of a null model with only a farm random effect was  <dig>  . when both random effects were included together in a null model, the variance of the farm random effect  was substantially higher than the variance of the house random effect . based on these observations, a random effect at the farm level was included in all models to control for clustering.

subset analyses
variable screening was carried out within subsets of potential risk factors; a separate multivariable analysis was used for each subset. in general, only one to three variables from each subset met the significance criterion of p ≤  <dig>  . the following predictors met this criterion and were made available to the comprehensive model: ventilation type; roof drain method; heating of broiler house floor; floor cracks fixed between flocks; ceiling; insect and rodent control; boots cleaned and disinfected before entry to the house; split room entry to the house; use of geothermal water for cleaning; and floor area. no significant interaction or quadratic terms were identified.

a variable excluded from the subset analysis due to the small number of observations  in one or more categories.

b variable retained after the subset analysis  for inclusion in the comprehensive model.

c variable excluded from the subset analysis due to high correlation  with other variables  in the same subset.

d categories  of a variable were combined for the subset analysis due to the small number of observations  in one or more categories, and/or to group biologically meaningful categories together.

e variable excluded from the subset analysis due to the occurrence of cells with very low frequencies of observations when the variables were in the model together.

a variable retained after the subset analysis  for inclusion in the comprehensive model.

b variable excluded from the subset analysis due to high correlation  with another variable in the same subset.

comprehensive model
the final model contained four significant  predictors. the risk of campylobacter colonization was predicted to increase when the flock was raised in a house with vertical , or vertical and horizontal  ventilation shafts, when the producer's boots were cleaned and disinfected prior to entering the broiler house , and when the house was cleaned with geothermal water  . the distribution of these variables among broiler houses is shown in table  <dig> 

alog likelihood = - <dig> , aic =  <dig>  random farm effect: ρ =  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  likelihood ratio test of ρ = 0: p =  <dig> 

model diagnostics
to assess the effect of performing model diagnostics on the final model without a random effect, we compared the parameter estimates of our final model to the same model without a random effect at the farm level, and found that the estimates remained stable. the icc  of the final model was extremely small, indicating that there was very little clustering at the farm-level after accounting for the variables in the model. thus, performing diagnostics on the model without the random effect was deemed to be acceptable. the final model included  <dig> covariate patterns. the pearson χ <dig> goodness-of-fit test was not significant  indicating that we could not reject the null hypothesis that the model fit the data. there was one covariate pattern that had a standardized pearson residual of  <dig>  . ninety out of  <dig> flocks  with this pattern were positive for campylobacter, and the predicted probability of a positive flock was 39%. flocks with this covariate pattern were raised in houses with vertical ventilation, the producer's boots were always cleaned and disinfected prior to entering the house, and geothermal water was used to clean the houses. although this covariate pattern had the largest leverage  and delta-beta  values, it also had the highest number of observations , thus, its moderate influence on the model was not of great concern.

additionally, there was a covariate pattern with a standardized residual of - <dig>  . the observed percentage of positive flocks with this pattern was 38% , and the predicted probability was 42%. flocks with this covariate pattern were raised in houses with both vertical and horizontal vents, boots were always cleaned and disinfected prior to entering the house, and geothermal water was used to clean the houses. this covariate pattern had the second highest leverage value , delta-beta value , and number of observations , thus, its influence on the model was of little concern.

discussion
our study has identified four house-level risk factors associated with the colonization of broiler flocks with campylobacter spp. in iceland, out of a possible  <dig> explanatory variables. the higher icc of a null model with a random effect at the farm level, compared to a null model with a random effect at the house level, suggests that there was more variation in flock campylobacter status between farms than within farms. thus, it was not unexpected that only a few house-level predictors remained statistically significant in the final model. in addition, our approach of screening variables within subsets enabled us to look at potentially complex relationships between predictors of a similar type, and identify those that were most strongly associated with flock status. for example, in some subsets , including more than one predictor in the model led to unstable parameter estimates with high standard errors, therefore, only one predictor from the subset could be offered to the comprehensive model. within other subsets, there was strong collinearity between variables, or between one variable and one category of another variable. for example, all six houses  in which the roof and floor drains merged, also had roof drains that opened into a septic tank with overflow into an underground bed . in these subsets, only one of the two variables could be included in the analysis; the predictor resulting in the model with a smaller akaike's information criteria  value was chosen. additionally, there were several variables in which the responses were extremely one-sided; almost all producers cleaned the ventilation system after every flock and changed boots before entering the house, and all but one broiler house in iceland have concrete floors . these variables were eliminated from the analysis because it was unlikely that there would be enough power to detect such small differences.

misclassification could have been a potential source of bias in our study. for some variables, it was necessary to combine categories if there were only a small number of observations in one or more categories. however, we expect this bias was small because we grouped only those categories that were biologically-related, and only when a wald's test indicated that the categories were not statistically different from each other. in addition, eliminating predictors due to problems with collinearity or unstable parameter estimates might have affected our final results. however, we found that predictors that were strongly associated with flock status in the subset analyses, were also statistically significant in the final model. thus, it is likely that our screening process was effective in identifying the most important of the house-level predictors.

for flocks with multiple catch lots, more pooled samples were obtained, and we considered whether this might have increased the likelihood that the flock would be positive for campylobacter. in a previous analysis of flock-level factors  <cit> , the number of catch lots was not a significant risk factor for the colonization of icelandic broiler flocks with campylobacter, after controlling for flock size. most of the positive catch lots in our study were positive in all four pooled caecal samples, inferring high sensitivity of the methodology for the sample type. on a flock basis, 84% of the positive flocks yielded campylobacter in all samples collected, and of the positive flocks with more than one catch lot, a high proportion were positive on the first catch lot. several standard management practices in iceland might have contributed to these findings. beginning in  <dig>  before the start of the study period, the icelandic poultry industry adopted a high standard of cleaning, chemical disinfection and drying of live haul crates and trucks, under the assumption that bringing crates covered with faecal material into broiler houses for partial depopulation was an important source of contamination to the remainder of the flock. unlike other countries, iceland does not have commercial catching crews that travel from farm to farm. the workers on each farm catch their own birds and follow their own biosecurity rules. in addition, the reason for collecting and slaughtering a flock in multiple catch lots differs in iceland compared to other countries. in iceland, the practice is based more on slaughter line speed capacity in the abattoirs; only the largest flocks  are slaughtered in three or four catch lots, typically over three or four consecutive days. for flocks slaughtered in more than one catch lot, the average interval between catch lots is quite short. the practice of thinning  is rare in iceland, and is typically done only during the christmas season. during the winter, the prevalence of campylobacter in broiler flocks is very low . therefore, because of the relatively short time interval between shipping catch lots, the low within-flock prevalence used in our sample size calculation to detect early stages of colonization, the high sensitivity of the isolation method, and the high proportion of catch lots that were positive in all samples, we expect that there was little variation with respect to the risk of false negative classification between flocks slaughtered in single and multiple catch lots.

wild birds captured on broiler farm premises frequently carry campylobacter jejuni  <cit> . campylobacter prevalence has been shown to be higher on farms with frequent sightings of wild birds than on farms with few wild birds  <cit> . a previous study in the uk  <cit>  has found that vertical ventilation systems are associated with positive flocks. in the present study, in an effort to determine if wild birds might be a source of campylobacter to broiler flocks, we classified the ventilation system on each broiler house according to its type , and integrity . an underlying assumption of our classification was that wild birds might be more likely to perch on vertical ventilation shafts, and, if those vents were open, the flock might be more likely to be exposed to the bacteria, either directly , or indirectly . from the subset analysis, we found that after controlling for ventilation type, the integrity of the ventilation system was not a significant risk factor for flock colonization . however, the risk of colonization was predicted to increase when the flock was raised in a house with vertical, or vertical and horizontal ventilation shafts compared to horizontal vents. there are a few possible reasons for these findings. first, our classification of ventilation type might not have been refined enough . although researchers in sweden  <cit>  did not find an association between campylobacter occurrence and air outlets  or inlets , the authors stated that their conclusions might have been uncertain because confounding  and clustering were not accounted for in the analysis. secondly, there might be some mechanism related to the type of ventilation system other than wild birds that contribute to flock colonization. our finding of a protective effect of horizontal shafts might be related to the thoroughness of house sanitation, as it has been suggested that horizontal fans are more accessible for proper cleaning and disinfection  <cit> . a brief exploration of interactions between ventilation type and each sanitation variable revealed a significant positive interaction between vertical ventilation shafts and the use of bacterial disinfectant and/or fumigation, although, we did not include this interaction in the comprehensive model due to highly inflated and unreliable parameter estimates. finally, the effect of ventilation type might be related to other potential sources of campylobacter such as flies. researchers in denmark  <cit>  have shown that flies captured within  <dig> m of a broiler house carried campylobacter, and that per volume of ventilation air,  <dig>  times the number of flies entered the house through a roof inlet than through wall inlets. considering our findings, and those of hald et al. , further investigation in this area is warranted.

the risk of campylobacter colonization was predicted to increase when the flock was raised in a house in which the producer's boots were cleaned and disinfected prior to entering the house. using univariable analyses, several researchers  <cit>  have not found an association between flock colonization and routines for cleaning and disinfecting footwear. others  <cit>  have noted an increasing percentage of campylobacter-positive flocks with a decreasing hygiene score , although the hygiene score itself was not statistically significant. campylobacter jejuni has been isolated from farmer's boots  <cit> , and from a footbath containing tap water at the broiler house entrance  <cit> . several studies in the uk  <cit>  have shown that the effective use of boot dips prior to entering the houses either delayed or prevented colonization. although our results were inconsistent with other studies, researchers in sweden  <cit>  noted that farmers were frequently careless about boot dipping . thus, our results might reflect the improper use of boot dips by icelandic producers, or, ineffective disinfectant solutions. an alternative explanation for the positive association might be related to the wording on our questionnaire. producers were asked about cleaning and disinfection before entering the house . in retrospect, this question might not have been precise enough and we cannot be certain about what specific practices were represented or the consistency of recording. nevertheless, the finding of an increased risk of colonization should encourage producers to assess the use and effectiveness of disinfectant boot dips, and their general cleaning and disinfection procedures prior to entering broiler houses.

our study has shown that the risk of campylobacter colonization was higher when the flock was raised in a house cleaned with geothermal  water. the isolation of campylobacter from surface water  <cit>  and puddles  <cit>  adjacent to broiler houses, points to possible environmental sources of campylobacter to broiler flocks. although not all geothermal wells were on-farm , potentially, farm-based geothermal wells could have warm surface water pools, which might serve as campylobacter reservoirs for birds, flies and other insects, and for the broiler flocks. however, several researchers  <cit>  have found that isolation rates and/or survival of thermophilic campylobacter spp. from various water sources were highest when the water temperature was between 2°c and 10°c, and lowest when the temperature exceeded 15°c. thus, the reason for the positive association between campylobacter status and the use of geothermal water for cleaning remains unclear. in norway, the prevalence of campylobacter in three surface water sources  was strongly associated with the number of indicator bacteria  in the water  <cit> . therefore, in our study, geothermal water might be a surrogate for farm location and associated environmental pressures for campylobacter . to our knowledge, this is the first time this risk factor has been identified in the literature, and it will be of interest to ascertain if this predictor is recognized in future studies and to determine the mechanism of its effect.

CONCLUSIONS
our study has identified four risk factors related to broiler house attributes and house-management practices, for the occurrence of campylobacter in broiler flocks in iceland; vertical or vertical and horizontal ventilation shafts, cleaning and disinfecting boots prior to entering the broiler house, and the use of geothermal water for cleaning houses. we found that horizontal vents had a protective effect, therefore, extra care should be taken when cleaning vertical vents, and producers should ensure that the disinfectant used has an appropriate bactericidal effect for campylobacter. alternatively, the increased risk associated with vertical ventilation shafts might be related to the height of the vents and the potential for vectors such as flies to gain access to the house. this is an area that warrants further research, and further refinement in the classification of vertical and horizontal systems might be necessary for this purpose. for newly constructed houses, horizontal ventilation systems could be considered. boot dipping procedures, including the frequency and thoroughness of dipping boots, the frequency of changing the dip, and the effectiveness of the dip against campylobacter should be examined on farms experiencing a high prevalence of campylobacter. future studies are warranted to ascertain how geothermal water increases the risk of colonization, and to determine if this factor is a surrogate for micro-climatic conditions or agro-environmental pressures on the farm and surrounding region.

