BACKGROUND
elucidating the transcriptional response of cells to xenobiotic compounds like drugs or environmental contaminants is of primary importance for understanding the physiological effects of such compounds. however, exposure to xenobiotic compounds often induces a complex transcriptional response comprised of specific  activated programs) and unspecific regulatory mechanisms. dissecting these responses and identifying the transcriptional profiles associated with each individual effect is essential for explaining specific and possible side effects of drugs or for predicting toxic responses of environmental contaminants.

one of the most studied tfs involved in the response to environmental pollutants or xenobiotic compounds in general is the aryl hydrocarbon receptor . the ahr has been studied for decades mainly because of its critical role in xenobiotic-toxicity and carcinogenesis. in its inactive state, ahr resides in the cytoplasm in a chaperone complex together with the x-associated protein  <dig>  and heat-shock protein  <dig> . after ligand binding, the receptor translocates to the nucleus where it associates with its cofactor arnt  yielding a competent tf. this heterodimer binds to a dna binding motif called the xenobiotic response element , which functions as an enhancer in the regulatory domain of a wide range of genes commonly referred to as the ahr gene battery  <cit> . some of these genes, such as the cytochrome p <dig> enzyme cyp1a <dig>  nadh:quinine oxidoreductase , aldehyde dehydrogenase , udp glucuronosyltransferase  and glutathione-s-transferase , are involved in phase i/ii metabolism. as previously mentioned, this activation of metabolizing enzymes through ahr may lead to the formation of toxic metabolites of the activating ligand itself. this is particularly true for benzo--pyrene , a classical ahr agonist. only after the self-induced metabolism of this procarcinogen is the ultimate genotoxic metabolite anti-benzo--pyrene-trans- <dig>  8-dihydroxy- <dig>  10-epoxid  formed. several studies have examined the transcriptional effects of ahr activation in different species and cell types  <cit> . however, deciphering the ahr-specific transcriptional response is not a trivial task, considering that ahr activation might trigger the activation of other tfs or the generation of toxic metabolites which will add side effects to the observed differential gene expression . therefore, the overall transcriptional response directly related to ahr binding is incompletely elucidated, and the number of well-defined ahr specific genes still remains small.

one strategy to assess ahr-dependence is to compare gene expression of cells or tissues that have the wild type ahr with those of ahr-null cells in a matched genetic background, as was shown by tijet et al.  <cit> . in their study they compared the effect of  <dig> , <dig> -tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin  in ahr +/+ and ahr -/- mice after long term exposure. this experimental setup, as the authors themselves conceded, does not allow the discrimination of genes directly regulated through ahr as a primary response and secondary, downstream effects: both classes would register as being differentially expressed. a time course design with early measurements has the potential to distinguish primary responders, which are likely to change first, from indirect responses that are likely to show up later.

in an elegant experimental setup, hockley et al.  <cit>  sought to separate the primary effects of ahr activation from the side effect caused by the genotoxic metabolite bpde. they compared the effects of bp, bpde and tcdd exposure in two different human cell lines. unfortunately, the first time point they investigated was not until six hours after exposure. considering that it was shown previously that ahr translocation and nascent transcription is already induced  <dig> h after tcdd exposure  <cit> , we believe that identification of primary ahr responders is only possible by including early time points of exposure in gene expression studies.

in this work, we investigate the hypothesis of whether time-resolved transcriptional signatures of genes that are primary ahr targets differ from the profiles observed for genes responding to the toxic metabolite bpde. we demonstrate that machine learning can be used for identifying these characteristic signatures and for subsequently classifying genes as to whether they are primary ahr-dependent targets or indirectly affected  genes. this general strategy of using time course gene expression data to predict transcriptional regulatory roles has been previously explored  <cit> , although primarily in lower organisms such as bacteria and yeast.

we expect that because such learning methods are less encumbered by methodological assumptions , they are more able to find subtle but meaningful patterns in the data. for example, an important assumption of previous attempts to cluster ahr-centric expression data  <cit>  is that co-regulated genes should also be co-expressed. hence, clustering of genes based on expression patterns should identify sets of genes subject to the same regulatory program. however, in time courses such co-expression may only be present during certain phases. in the case of ahr we expect co-expression during early time points, whereas expression may diverge later when the influence of ahr diminishes. the analysis presented here anticipates and effectively deals with this scenario.

here we employ machine learning techniques coupled to a straightforward yet robust experimental design in order to more clearly define genes that are under the direct transcriptional control of ahr. this is accomplished by training a random forest  <cit>   classifier to learn the difference between genes responding to bp exposure and side effects caused by the bp metabolite bpde. the trained classifier is then applied to all genes found to be significantly differentially expressed as a result of bp exposure, and their roles as primary responders or side effects are predicted. in addition, the patterns learned by the classifier are used as a basis for performing weighted clustering. these clusters facilitate a better understanding of the functional relatedness of the perturbed genes. finally, we support predictions with our own experimental follow-up, as well as with data from independent studies.

RESULTS
extensive transcriptional response
the transcriptional response due to ahr activation by  <dig> nm and  <dig> μm bp was investigated in murine hepatoma cells . exposure effects were examined in time-course data for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> h after treatment, together with corresponding vehicle  controls.

a total of  <dig>  genes were perturbed significantly  by exposure to bp and had at least a 2-fold change  at some time point over the course of the experiment. compared to previous studies of ahr-mediated temporal gene expression, this represents a very substantial transcriptional response . these genes were highly enriched for a host of biological processes , including mrna transport, control of the cell cycle, apoptosis, and development.

prediction of primary vs. side effects
the overall analytical framework used here is summarized in figure  <dig>  using a matrix of time-resolved gene expression values as predictors , we trained a random forest classifier in a two-class scenario . training labels were assigned based on the significant perturbation of a gene in conditions that suggest being either a primary ahr responder or responsive to the presence of bpde . this yielded  <dig> genes as primary responders and  <dig> genes as side effects , before filtering for outliers. the final classifier had an estimated misclassification rate of 7%. performance of the classifier on out-of-bag  data is depicted as a receiver operating characteristic  curve in additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig>  panel a.

we then used this trained classifier to predict on all of the  <dig>  differentially expressed genes. the predictions have varying degrees of confidence, indicated by the proportion of votes cast for the predicted class. to establish a threshold above which we could be confident that the classifier was predictive, we permuted the original training labels randomly, trained a random forest with these labels, and predicted on all  <dig>  genes. in general we found that in this "null" scenario, the random forest did not predict with a proportion of votes greater than  <dig> . therefore, we consider a class prediction with a proportion of votes greater than  <dig>  to be a reliable prediction . after filtering,  <dig> genes were predicted as primary responders to ahr ,  <dig>  genes were predicted as side effects, and  <dig> genes could not be reliably classified .

list of predicted primary targets of ahr transcriptional regulation. confidence scores of both membership in cluster  <dig>  and as a primary ahr target  are given. known transcriptional regulators  are bolded. additionally, assignment to either the training or test set is indicated for each gene.

characterization of transcriptional response programs
to characterize the expression patterns that underlie the classifier's decision rules, we used the rf proximity measure as an input to pam  clustering - this combination is a form of weighted clustering. this yielded three coherent clusters, depicted in figure  <dig>  clusters  <dig> and  <dig> are comprised of genes predicted to be side effects of ahr activation by bp, while cluster  <dig> contains genes predicted to be primary responders to ahr. clusters  <dig> and  <dig> are characterized by undulating expression profiles in the low  bp exposure, with the mean behavior of each cluster strongly anticorrelated to the other. the high  bp exposure shows less cohesive expression patterns, but with the same general trend of anitcorrelation between clusters  <dig> and  <dig>  in both cases, time points in the  <dig> nm bp series are more important for the identity of the clusters than time points in the  <dig> μm bp series. cluster  <dig> is characterized by punctuated expression induction at  <dig> hours in the  <dig> nm bp time series, and a slightly extended phase of induction in the  <dig> μm bp time series. other time points are unimportant for the cluster's identity; indeed, the expression of these genes is fairly divergent outside of the common phase of induction. although cluster 3's "identity phase" is generally between 3- <dig> hours after exposure, where all genes in the cluster show elevated expression, several genes  in the cluster are highly expressed well before this window.

using the kolmogorov-smirnov  test, we evaluated the clusters for enrichment of genes perturbed by an ahr mutation . by using data from previous studies  <cit> , we performed a 2-way anova and took p values from the genotype*ligand interaction; these p values were used as indicators of genes under the direct influence of ahr. genes belonging to the training set were excluded when calculating the enrichment. cluster  <dig> was the only cluster to show enrichment for genes perturbed by an ahr mutation. this result further supports the assertion that cluster  <dig> contains true ahr primary responders, and that the classifier is predictive in practice. we similarly checked the three clusters for overrepresentation of known xre motifs, using ucsc  <dig> kb upstream promoter sequences and motifs from transfac . we found only borderline  enrichment of an xre motif among genes in cluster  <dig> and no enrichment in the other clusters. the lack of significant enrichment among the predicted primary ahr responders suggests that our knowledge of the sequence-level requirements for functional binding of ahr is currently far from complete.

experimental confirmation of ahr dependency
two independent experimental approaches were chosen to confirm ahr-dependency for a subset of representative genes: direct comparison of the transcriptional response of ahr-expressing hepa1c1c <dig> and mutant tao bprc <dig> cells deficient in endogenous ahr, as well as confirmation of binding of ahr in the corresponding promoter regions by chromatin immunoprecipitation .

bp is likely to induce side effects caused by bp metabolites independent of direct ahr activation, therefore we included tcdd - a non-metabolized ahr ligand - in our confirmation experiments. differential expression of tiparp, tnfaip <dig>  cdkn1a, cdkn1b, cyp2s <dig>  nfe2l <dig>  mpp <dig>  and klf <dig> after treatment with bp or tcdd at different concentrations was investigated by quantitative real-time pcr . after bp and tcdd exposure, the expression of all genes was induced as soon as  <dig> h after the start of treatment in hepa1c1c <dig> cells, while there was no significant induction compared to vehicle control samples detectable in tao bprc <dig> cells up to four hours after exposure . to complement these experiments, the effect of bpde treatment on the predicted primary ahr targets was investigated. after  <dig> h of exposure to  <dig> μm bpde, a time point for which pronounced induction with bp was observed, no significant upregulation of these genes by bpde exposure was found .

enrichment of ahr binding in the promoter region of all chosen genes could be confirmed by chip, with fold changes  ranging from  <dig> - <dig>  .

to investigate the impact of ahr itself on the diverged pattern of the low and high bp concentration in the later time course  we studied ahr nuclear translocation over time. gfp-ahr expressing cells  were exposed to either  <dig> nm or  <dig> μm of bp for up to  <dig> h. nuclear translocation was determined as the ratio of nuclear to cytoplasmic fluorescence. a prolonged nuclear translocation of the receptor was detectable for the high concentration, whereas after  <dig> h of exposure to  <dig> nm bp the distribution of single cell ratios approximated the control distribution . this finding suggests a continuous transcriptional activation by ahr with the higher concentration of bp corresponding to a prolonged induction of ahr target genes as, seen in cluster  <dig> for  <dig> μm bp.

confirmation of bpde dependency
to confirm that the differential expression observed for genes of either cluster  <dig> or  <dig> is indeed dependent on bpde, we used the previously mentioned in vitro set-up . the relevant bpde concentration was determined by comparing the effect of  <dig> μm bp on hepa1c1c <dig> cell proliferation to that of different bpde concentrations in the same cell line. while bpde concentrations up to  <dig> μm had only a marginal effect on proliferation,  <dig> μm bpde induced an effect very similar to that seen with  <dig> μm bp . therefore, subsequent qpcr experiments for representative genes were performed with  <dig> μm bp or bpde respectively. the chosen genes showed transcriptional responses in ahr-deficient cells only when exposed to bpde itself. in hepa1c1c <dig> cells bp treatment induced effects similar to bpde, however with a pronounced time lag .

discussion
exposing cells to xenobiotic compounds like drugs or environmental pollutants often induces a complex transcriptional response, made up of both specific and unspecific regulatory mechanisms. distinguishing the transcriptional profiles associated with the primary target effect from those acting in parallel is essential for understanding possible side effects of such chemicals.

as an example of such a case, we investigated ahr, one of the most prominent ligand-activated tfs involved in xenobiotic-induced signaling. the cellular response to ahr activation can be seen as a mixture of a primary response and side effects. the side effects are due in part to stress caused by the formation of active metabolites of the ahr ligand, while the primary response is related to ahr binding to gene regulatory sequences. a subsequent transcriptional cascade downstream of ahr might be activated by other tfs, which are themselves regulatory targets of ahr .

we have employed a time-course design involving early and late time points to capture both primary and downstream effects. these effects are separated on the time axis, but it is not obvious a priori where to draw the line, i.e. up to which time point expression changes reflect primary responses. the use of machine learning allowed us to identify the relevant time points in a data-driven way. in addition to weighting time points with respect to their relevance for distinguishing ahr target genes, this analysis also identifies specific expression patterns that are characteristic of primary ahr targets.

ahr target genes
previously well-described members of the ahr gene battery like cyp1a <dig>  nqo <dig> cyp2s <dig>  aldh3a <dig>  aldh4a <dig> and cyp1b <dig>  <cit>  were predicted as primary responders to ahr. in addition to this qualitative confirmation of the effectiveness of our computational approach, we could demonstrate ahr dependency experimentally by chromatin immunoprecipitation  and qpcr. further, we found the set of predicted targets to be enriched for genes that showed significant ahr genotype*ligand interaction  effects based on previously published data  <cit>  .

bp is likely to induce side effects caused by bp metabolites independent of direct ahr activation, therefore we included tcdd - a non-metabolized ahr ligand - in our confirmation experiments. all of the genes chosen for the qpcr verification confirmed the predicted ahr-dependency .

we performed a go enrichment analysis for a functional evaluation of the predicted target genes. the regulated genes in cluster  <dig> were enriched for  <dig> different biological functions including terms related to cell cycle control and proliferation. this influence on the cell cycle is also manifested on the protein level, as we were able to show in a previous study  <cit> . experimental confirmation of two of these genes, the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors cdkn1a and cdkn1b, showed an exclusive induction in wild type cells, together with an enrichment for ahr binding at the corresponding promoters. another gene known to be involved in cell cycle regulation, but less well-defined, is the palmitoylated membrane protein  <dig> . mpp <dig> was also strongly induced by tcdd and bp in ahr-expressing cells, while no differential expression was elicited in the mutant tao bprc <dig> cells. a more indirect effect on cell cycle regulation originates from the tnf alpha activated signaling cascade. five genes  involved in this pathway were predicted to be primary responders to ahr.

tnfaip <dig> and casp <dig> were investigated in our independent experimental confirmation. for both genes induction of expression was only detectable in hepa1c1c <dig> cells, while the ahr-deficient counterparts showed no significant differential regulation. actual binding of ahr to the promoter sites could be confirmed by chip. primary regulation by ahr of the important regulators of the cell cycle cdkn1a, cdkn1b as well as mpp <dig> together with targeting of the tnf alpha signaling pathway emphasizes the impact of ahr on endogenous cellular functions outside of xenobiotic metabolism. further, these findings suggest that the observed reduction in proliferation after exposure to bp is not only a response to dna damage, but is also, at least in part, a direct consequence of ahr activation.

the early time points proved vital in distinguishing ahr targets from genes induced as side effects , emphasizing the importance of planning experiments such that the immediate effects are captured. although perturbation at early time points determined the ahr primary response for both bp concentrations, the consistency of expression between the concentrations diverged later in the time course . we investigated if indeed ahr itself might be important for this difference. comparing the translocation behavior of ahr we could show a persistent nuclear localization of ahr for high bp concentrations for up to 24h of exposure, while for low concentrations of bp cells showed fewer and less pronounced translocation events. obviously many mechanisms might be responsible for the concentration-dependent differences in the transcriptional pattern, like the balance between mrna production and decay. nevertheless, persistent ahr translocation suggests persistent mrna production, thereby shifting this balance.

an ahr transcriptional cascade
twelve of the genes in cluster  <dig>  are known transcriptional regulators. these regulators could constitute a transcriptional cascade that begins with the activation of ahr.

in a recent study, dere et al.  <cit>  integrated chip-chip and transcriptional data of murine liver tissue after tcdd exposure. interestingly, over 70% of the genes we predicted by our approach as primary ahr responders were also identified in their study to be located in regions of ahr enriched binding. more importantly, eleven out of the twelve transcriptional regulators identified by our method were also found in such ahr enriched binding regions. this not only underlines the quality of our random forest classifier, but suggests a more general transcriptional network initiated by ahr, independent of the activating ligand.

ahr has been connected to hormone-induced signaling as was reinforced by our go enrichment analysis that identified "regulation of hormone levels" as one of the biological functions. crosstalk with the estrogen receptor has been studied extensively  <cit>  and glucocorticoid receptor /ahr crosstalk has also been suggested  <cit> . our classifier predicted the glucocorticoid receptor  itself as an ahr target together with sgk <dig>  a gr-regulated kinase. in addition, the tf klf <dig>  known to be induced by gr and involved in adipogenesis, was predicted to be a direct ahr target. besides klf <dig>  further ahr targets were predicted with an involvement in lipid synthesis and lipid transport, i.e. the transcriptional regulators ppard and lpin play a role in mammary lipid synthesis, and npc <dig>  osbpl <dig>  and pitpnc <dig> are involved in lipid transport. the role of gr in lipid homeostasis and metabolism is well-established  <cit> . from our analysis we can deduce a possible ahr-activated network of genes directly influencing lipid status and its regulation by the glucocorticoid receptor.

the interaction of ahr with another tf nfe2l <dig>  might also have an influence on lipid status, specifically on adipogenesis  <cit> . a bidirectional regulation of these two pathways has been described previously  <cit> . both tfs have been shown to bind in the other's promoter region, thereby directly influencing transcription  <cit> . therefore, the prediction of nfe2l <dig> being an ahr target is very well corroborated by previous studies and was indeed verified by our experimental follow-up. in addition, a recently described interaction of nfe2l <dig> and ahr confirms one other predicted ahr target gene: abcc <dig>  xu et al. showed that this multidrug resistant protein is directly activated by ahr and nfe2l <dig> in liver  <cit> .

in our analysis we were only able to reliably classify  <dig>  of the  <dig>  regulated genes as either primary ahr targets or as genes responding to bpde stress. we found that the unclassified genes were enriched  for genes perturbed by an ahr mutation. a possible explanation for this enrichment is that there are genes that are downstream targets of ahr  among this set. since the classifier was not trained on such examples of downstream ahr targets, we expect that it would not reliably classify these genes.

side effects
genes in clusters  <dig> and  <dig> are predicted to be perturbed not as a result of ahr regulation, but by the presence of the metabolite bpde. this genotoxic metabolite of bp is known to cause dna damage by dna-adduct formation  <cit> . dna repair processes are initiated, followed by re-initiation of dna replication . further, many map kinases were differentially regulated, and all of them are members of clusters  <dig> or  <dig>  the idea that map kinases are ahr-independent is supported by tan et al.  <cit> , who could show that ahr ligands could activate mapks independent of ahr.

to further support the predictions of our classifier, we selected some representative genes from clusters  <dig> and  <dig>  and measured their expression in response to exposure to bp or bpde in wild type  or mutant  cells . these experiments demonstrate that bpde causes differential expression with and without ahr, while bp only perturbs expression in the presence of ahr, i.e. when metabolism of bp to bpde is made more efficient by a functional ahr pathway. these results demonstrate, as predicted, that these genes are affected by the presence of bpde and are not a primary response regulated by ahr.

utility of weighted clustering
one unique and desirable aspect of the type of learning approach applied here is a side effect of the learning process - the proximity measure. the rf proximity is a type of similarity measure between subjects , based on how often two genes take the same path down the decision trees of the forest. it is in effect a weighted similarity measure because only time points that are useful in the learning process are used in the calculation of the proximity. this is in contrast to the widely used euclidean distance or pearson correlation, in which all features make an equal contribution.

a weighted similarity measure is advantageous in clustering gene expression time series, especially in complex transcriptional responses of higher eukaryotes, as presented in this work. additional systems are present in higher eukaryotes that influence the synthesis, stabilization, and degradation of mrna. these additional systems make it less likely that functionally related genes share precisely the same characteristic expression profile over time. for instance, functionally related genes, induced by a common tf, may share similar expression patterns shortly after induction, but may then diverge as other factors come into play, such as micrornas. a supervised, weighted metric such as rf proximity de-emphasizes the diverging time points while emphasizing the common phase of induction, resulting in the grouping of the functionally related genes. conversely, such expression profiles are unlikely to fall into the same cluster when using e.g. the euclidean distance, and could be a contributing factor to the mixed success of past attempts  <cit>  to cluster ahr-induced gene expression time courses in a way that is biologically interpretable.

one technique that is frequently used to address problems such as those described here is biclustering  <cit> . briefly, biclustering is a strategy that seeks to cluster in two dimensions simultaneously, e.g. genes and time points. the goal is to find genes that show similar expression in some  conditions. there are many algorithms and heuristics that implement biclustering. strengths and weaknesses of the approach vary by implementation, but in general most biclustering methods are unsupervised and are non-deterministic. without alleviating assumptions it can become a computationally intractable problem. it can be difficult to judge the quality of the resulting clusters, and clusters are often redundant. in the work presented here, clustering with the rf proximity presented fewer potential pitfalls compared to biclustering, since we had a means of performing supervised learning and the rf proximity was obtained "for free" since it was part of the learning process. in addition, the clusters were non-redundant and judging their quality was fairly straightforward by using another random forest to predict the assigned cluster labels of the genes . in addition to the work presented here, clustering with an unsupervised rf proximity has been described in shi and horvath  <cit> , and an example using multivariate response random forests to examine transcriptional programs in yeast can be found in xiao and segal  <cit> . we have found that pam clustering with the rf proximity measure works well in scenarios where weighted clustering is desirable, and is an alternative to biclustering that is worth considering. however, one obvious limitation for any supervised method - including our use of rf here - is the need for a training set. in some situations a training set may be difficult or impossible to assemble - this is an important consideration when selecting a clustering method.

CONCLUSIONS
we explored the time-resolved transcriptional response induced by exposure to the environmental pollutant bp and mediated by the transcription factor ahr. as with many microarray experiments involving cellular stress, we observed an immense degree of differential expression, which often complicates biological interpretation. however, by using machine learning approaches, we successfully teased apart the specific, receptor-driven transcriptional response from the more general toxic response. genes predicted to be part of a primary receptor-driven response were validated by extensive experimental work, further supporting the predictive power of our classifier. in addition to the specific results that further characterize the ahr regulatory battery, our work here offers a useful strategy for distinguishing receptor-dependent responses and side effects based on expression time courses.

