BACKGROUND
campylobacter jejuni is a major cause of human bacterial gastroenteritis in industrialized countries  <cit> . infection commonly results in self-limiting gastroenteritis but sequelae may occur, for instance in the form of the guillain-barré syndrome causing peripheral neuropathy  <cit> . the genus campylobacter is widespread in the environment and constitutes part of the normal flora of birds, cattle and swine. although there are gaps in our knowledge of the sources of infection, the handling and consumption of chicken meat are considered important routes of transmission  <cit> .

cases of campylobacteriosis are mainly sporadic but outbreaks do occur, predominantly through contaminated milk and untreated water  <cit> . due to the sporadic nature of campylobacter infections, it has proven hard to discern the epidemiological characteristics of the disease. robust and reproducible typing methods are needed to this end, and a multitude of genotypic methods are now complementing serotyping and other traditional phenotypic methods . among these, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis  possess high discriminatory power and is widely used for studies of strain relatedness  <cit> . however, pfge requires strict adherence to standardized protocols, and produces data in the form of band patterns of restriction endonuclease digested fragments which are not readily compared between laboratories. errors or ambiguities in the assignment of bands may also occur  <cit> .

a multilocus sequence typing  scheme assesses genetic differences by nucleotide sequence determination of approximately  <dig> bases in each of seven loci  <cit> . the strain discriminatory performance is highly dependent on the screened loci, which are selected to represent slowly evolving genes under stabilizing selection pressure, supposedly unaffected by antigen variation or genomic rearrangements. each allele is assigned a number based on sequences in the mlst database  <cit> . thus, each isolate is described by a seven-digit sequence type , which is further grouped according to lineage into clonal complexes, defined as groups of isolates with identical alleles at ≥ <dig> loci. the mlst scheme has been used in studies of the population structure of clinical and veterinary isolates of c. jejuni  <cit> . the discriminatory power was comparable to that of multilocus enzyme electrophoresis  <cit> , and amplified fragment length polymorphism  <cit> , but did not reach that of pfge in a study of epidemiologically related isolates  <cit> .

comparative genomic hybridizations  using genome-wide dna microarrays have proven useful in studies of intraspecies diversity for a number of bacterial species  <cit> . determination of the full genome sequence of c. jejuni strain nctc  <dig>  <cit>  allowed construction of microarrays for studies of the genetic relationship between campylobacter. using strain nctc  <dig> as reference, several studies have demonstrated a high degree of intraspecies variability concentrated to defined genomic regions, particularly affecting loci coding for lipooligosaccharides, flagellar modification, and dna restriction-modification systems  <cit> . cgh may also elucidate sources of infection, transmission routes and virulence of bacteria  <cit> .

few studies have exploited the power of cgh to evaluate the accuracy and resolution of present genotyping technologies. in the current study we used a whole-genome microarray to study c. jejuni isolates typed with pfge. we studied closely related pairs of chicken and human isolates, which clustered together in the pfge analysis, with the aim to dissect the true genetic relationship within and between the pairs. the cgh data in this study were generated using an oligonucleotide array, which was evaluated for its ability to discriminate between present and absent or divergent genes. the results were further compared with mlst results to evaluate the genotyping resolution of the different methods.

RESULTS
multilocus sequence typing
the twelve isolates representing five distinct pfge genotypes were analyzed using mlst  <cit> . three different sts belonging to three clonal complexes were found among the isolates . human and chicken isolates of the same pfge genotype also had the same st. all isolates within each st shared the alleles in all seven loci investigated .

microarray-based genotyping
on average  <dig>  non-redundant probes  remained after the data preprocessing step and generated a valid log <dig> ratio . several of the excluded probes had low signal intensities in both channels and represented probes that failed during array production. to estimate the noise level associated with the experiment and to define m-value thresholds for sequence divergence, we analyzed the m-value distribution of two self-self hybridizations of reference strain dna prepared at two separate occasions . as expected for a data set with low technical noise, these hybridizations had narrow m-value distributions . only a few probes had absolute m-values of > <dig>   for the first hybridization, and  <dig>  for the second hybridization). one single probe  in the second hybridization had an absolute m-value of > <dig> .

next, a comparison between the sequenced strains nctc  <dig> and rm <dig> allowed for estimation of the effect of sequence divergence on the m-values. we used sequence similarity searches to match each probe with the genome sequence of the rm <dig> strain and to calculate the number of matching nucleotides . there were in total  <dig> probes  with less than  <dig> matching bases, putatively measuring highly divergent genes or genomic regions absent in rm <dig>  approximately 51%  of the probes had a perfect match in rm <dig>  while 21%  had a one-base mismatch. a reduction in the number of matching bases displayed a strong association with reduced hybridization signals, and hence a trend towards lower m-values in the comparison between rm <dig> and nctc  <dig> . interestingly, already a one-base divergence resulted in a significant change in the m-values at the global level .

we further used the rm <dig> vs. nctc  <dig> hybridization data to define an m-value threshold for detection of divergent genes. the effect of m-value threshold on sensitivity and specificity for detection of probes with at least one, two, three or four mismatches to the reference strain was plotted . we used this information, in combination with the self-self hybridization data, to define a conservative m-value threshold of less than - <dig>  for divergent or absent genes. at this stringency level, none of the probes with a perfect match in the rm <dig> genome were erroneously identified as divergent in comparison with nctc  <dig>  on the other hand, using this m-value cutoff only 32% of the probes with ≥ <dig> mismatch could be detected as divergent . the fraction of correctly identified divergent probes increased to 93% when the analysis was restricted to probes with at least four mismatches . collectively, the analyses indicate that the oligonucleotide platform does not permit reliable genotyping at the single-base level, but can with high confidence be used to identify absent or divergent genes . at this level the probability of false-positives is low and the sensitivity to detect ≥ 4-bp mismatches is high , providing a reasonable balance between false positives and false negatives.

the isolates included in the study showed large differences in the number of probes  that were sequence divergent compared to the reference strain. in total 29%  and 17%  of the probes were variable in more than two and three of the studied isolates, respectively. these numbers are in line with previous cgh studies  <cit> . the variable probes represented genes distributed over the entire chromosome, and showed some local clustering . probes exhibiting m-values of > <dig>  were classified as representing genes with higher copy numbers in the test isolate compared to the reference strain nctc  <dig>  genes with higher copy numbers were detected in five of the test isolates . in isolates c <dig> and c <dig> two consecutive genes with higher copy numbers could be detected . the m-values for all probes are available through the arrayexpress data repository .

clustering and correlation of the different typing methods
we next carried out a hierarchical clustering analysis using the microarray data to identify similarities among the isolates. the origin of the isolates  had no effect on the clustering. instead, the isolates clustered into groups similar to those obtained by pfge and mlst. three major clusters were identified . the first included all isolates with pfge types a, b and c, belonging to the mlst st- <dig> clonal complex. within this cluster, the two isolates of pfge type b clustered together, while another cluster was formed by the two type c and three type a isolates. the remaining type a isolate clustered outside this tight cluster. the microarray data indicated that this cluster of isolates is similar to the reference strain nctc  <dig> . this relatedness is further supported by the mlst data; strain nctc  <dig> belongs to the same clonal complex as the type a, b and c isolates , although it is of a different sequence type . the second cluster included pfge type d isolates  and strain rm <dig>  and the third pfge type h isolates .

identification of variable regions
previous cgh studies of c. jejuni have identified  <dig> genomic regions enriched for genes with diverging sequences  <cit> . we analyzed the presence of variable genes in the five groups of isolates  defined by pfge and microarray clustering. a region was confirmed variable if the calculated average m-value of the group was <- <dig>  for at least one of the probes in the region. using this approach, we noted that all of the previously identified variable regions differed in at least one of the five isolate groups, and further that four variable regions  showed divergence in all five groups . also region  <dig> was highly variable, with four isolate groups showing variability in the region. we further mined our data for additional regions that showed variability in multiple isolates. we found three additional regions, spanning genes cj0137–cj <dig> , cj0356c-cj <dig>  and cj1047c-cj <dig> .

identification of cog groups enriched for variable regions
we further used the clusters of orthologous groups of proteins  database  <cit>  to analyze the functional group assignments of the variable genes . in all isolates genes from multiple cog categories were found variable, indicating that sequence divergence is not restricted to genes encoding specific functions . furthermore, using fisher exact test we identified a significant overrepresentation of divergent genes in the cog category m  and v  in several of the isolates . a strong enrichment of the same categories was observed when the analysis was restricted to genes with high sequence divergence . however, when the analysis was carried out using genes with moderate sequence divergence , no significant enrichment of cog categories could be observed. these results suggest that the moderate sequence divergence reflects normal interstrain variability unlikely to affect protein function in any substantial way. furthermore, the probes with moderate sequence divergence seem to be distributed over the entire length of the chromosome, while the probes with high sequence divergence seem to be more tightly clustered .

discussion
in this study we evaluated three different methods for analysis of the genomic content of closely-related c. jejuni isolates from chicken and humans. the methods tested were cgh using oligonucleotide microarrays, and genotyping by pfge and by mlst. we first analyzed six pairs of human and chicken isolates which were clustered based on pfge of kpni digests. cluster analysis based on cgh data yielded an identical grouping, with the exception of one isolate. thus pfge, which may appear a relatively crude method, produced a phylogenetic tree which coincided well with the one produced by genomic probing through cgh. the data further suggests that there are no genetic markers distinguishing the human from the chicken isolates included in this study. the isolates were subtyped using a previously described mlst scheme  <cit> . mlst defined three genotypes among the twelve isolates, compared to five defined by pfge. all eight isolates with pfge genotypes a , b  and c  were found to belong to sequence type  <dig>  the st- <dig> complex has previously been shown to be abundant among isolates from a wide variety of sources  <cit> . the two pfge genotype d isolates were assigned to st- <dig>  a sequence type differing from st- <dig> in three of the seven loci. thus, our results suggest that a combined approach using mlst in combination with a second method is necessary to reach a sufficient discriminatory power, at least for resolving epidemiological relationships on a shorter time scale. this conclusion is supported by previous studies  <cit> .

using the microarray data, we have shown that several previously identified regions  <cit>  are also divergent in isolates investigated in this study. these include regions that are known to be important modulators of the surface-exposed antigenic proteins . in the present study we identified additional regions that are divergent between the isolates, which suggests that additional genome-wide studies are required to fully characterize the variability of the c. jejuni genome. a functional analysis of the variable genes showed that modulation of the surface exposed structures is important for creating variability in the c. jejuni isolates, possibly providing means for avoidance of the host's immune system.

as far as we are aware, this is the first study where a genome-wide oligonucleotide array is used for cgh-based genotyping of c. jejuni. previous studies have used microarrays based on polymerase chain reaction-amplified probes for analysis of different c. jejuni isolates  <cit> . the main advantage associated with the use of oligonucleotide arrays is the avoidance of extensive cross-hybridization with other regions of the genome and an improved specificity and resolution, allowing detection of smaller differences between the isolates. also, the design of the probes can be carried out to ensure approximately equal optimal hybridization conditions, avoiding sequence-specific bias in the hybridization signals. however, there are limitations with the oligonucleotide-based cgh platform. the array probes are targeted towards coding regions of the c. jejuni genome, which does not allow for detection of divergence in intergenic regions. although more specific, the oligonucleotide probes do not allow for detection of single-base changes and lack the possibility to detect short deletions and changes in gene synteny. also, sequence divergence affecting a non-targeted region of a gene will remain undetected using the oligonucleotide probe approach, suggesting that the true differences between the isolates may be even stronger than reported here. as with all microarrays, the analysis is limited to genes represented on the microarray, in this case genes present in strain nctc  <dig>  the design could be improved by adding probes representing genes from other sequenced c. jejuni genomes.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have investigated the variability of closely related c. jejuni isolates. the comparative genomics hybridization data did not affect the pfge-based clustering, with the exeption of one isolate which was removed from the fork containing the remaining isolates of the same pfge type. nor did we identify any markers predictive of source . we have further shown that mlst-based genotyping needs to be complemented with other methods to achieve similar resolution as is obtained with the other genotyping approaches. we have also demonstrated that extensive variability between isolates is not restricted to the previously identified regions. finally, certain functional groups  show significant enrichment among the variable genes. collectively, these results demonstrate the importance of unbiased, genome-wide approaches in analysis of differences between isolates of c. jejuni. this will facilitate our future understanding of parameters governing the pathogenic potential of various isolates and allow the design of relevant tools for assessing the genetic diversity and epidemiology of c. jejuni.

