BACKGROUND
the colonisation of land was a major event in the history of plants. subsequent widespread ecological radiation and diversification was directed by complex interactions involving the interplay between morpho-anatomical and physiological adaptations of plants and the physical and chemical changes in their environment. many adaptations facilitated terrestrial colonisation and survival, including anchorage and water uptake, mechanical support, water transport, protection against desiccation and uv-irradiance, as well as reproduction in absence of water  <cit> . specialised tissues and cell types, especially in the vegetative body, emerged and contributed to the structural complexity of plants. as the architecture and properties of cell walls largely determine tissue/organ structure and function and consequently overall morphology, they must have played a fundamental role in the evolution and differentiation of complex body plans.

by the end of the 19th century, the combined efforts of many plant anatomists led to an increased knowledge of the anatomical complexity of land plants, resulting in the distinction of tissues and cell types that are still recognised today  <cit> . these tissues are composed of cells with walls that are classed as either primary cell walls that prevent cell bursting and regulate cell expansion, or non-extendable secondary cell walls, restricted to certain cell types, which have mechanical properties resisting external forces that would lead to cell collapse. both types of walls are structurally complex composites. in most primary cell walls a load bearing network of cellulose microfibrils is cross-linked and interspersed with complex sets of matrix glycans including those classed as hemicelluloses  and the multi-domain pectic supramolecular polysaccharides  <cit> . secondary cell walls are often reinforced with lignin and contain low amounts of pectins. many cell wall components may display considerable heterogeneity, either in their molecular structure or in their spatio-temporal distribution in plant organs, tissues, cell-types and individual walls  <cit> . as wall components may be present in variable amounts in different cell walls at specific developmental stages, there is not always a clear distinction in molecular composition between primary and secondary cell walls  <cit> . moreover, walls may be modified in response to environmental stress or pathogen attack  <cit>  and even after cell death .

cell walls also display remarkable diversity at the taxonomical level as the presence and/or abundance of specific wall components may vary between the major plant lineages . analysis of the early diverging fern  equisetum  <cit>  has indicated structurally distinct cell walls that do not fit within either the type i or type ii classification that had been developed for angiosperm cell walls  <cit> . recently, a third mannan-rich  cell wall type , typical of ferns was reported  <cit> . although broadly useful in reflecting major taxonomic distinctions in global compositional differences, classifications of cell wall types neglects variation in wall components between cell types within organs and most notably may not relate to all land plant species. in addition, little is known of how the range of polysaccharides found in primary and secondary cell walls relates to the evolution of specific cell wall functions and cell types.

to develop a deeper understanding of cell wall diversity within the context of tissues, cell types and individual walls in a group of land plants that has not been previously extensively studied, we carried out a glycan microarray analysis complemented with selected in situ immunolabelling of  <dig> fern species and  <dig> lycophytes species . through extensive sampling within leptosporangiate ferns, and aspleniaceae in particular, we aimed to identify tissue or cell type-specific distribution patterns of matrix glycan epitopes, but also explore variation in matrix glycan cell wall composition at family and species levels.figure  <dig> 
schematic tree showing the relationships among the major groups of land plants. 1: eusporangiate ferns s.l.; 2: homosporous lycophytes; 3: heterosporous lycophytes. representatives of the plant groups indicated in bold were sampled for this study . genera represented in the immunofluorescence figures are indicated . adapted from  <cit> .



RESULTS
interpretation of the glycan microarray analysis was approached from the perspective of cell wall polysaccharide classes and the results are presented as heatmaps . an exploratory glycan microarray analysis of organs and tissues of the leptosporangiate fern asplenium elliotti revealed considerable variation in the relative abundance of glycan epitopes among samples with most epitopes being detected in the petiole tissues . as our aim was to explore tissue-specific distribution of glycan epitopes across ferns we performed a broad-scale glycan microarray analysis by sampling only petiole bases . the resulting heatmaps are shown in relation to both fern division and molecular probe class .figure  <dig> 
glycan microarray heatmap of cdta and naoh extracts of total organ or isolated tissue of the leptosporangiate fern
asplenium elliottii
. the probes are listed at the top of the heatmap. references for probe specificity are listed in table  <dig>  abbreviations: mab: monoclonal antibody; hg: pectic homogalacturonan; agp: arabinogalactan protein; xg: xyloglucan; me: methyl-esterified.
glycan microarray heatmap of cdta extracts of fern or lycophyte petioles/stems. references for probe specificity are listed in table  <dig> 
glycan microarray heatmap of naoh extracts of fern or lycophyte petioles/stems. references for probe specificity are listed in table  <dig> 



variation in the dataset may reflect differences in developmental stage and health between plants, but also differences in extractability of specific components  and tissue- and cell-type specific differences in cell wall composition. in several cases no binding of specific monoclonal antibodies  above background was detected neither in the glycan microarray analysis, nor in the immunofluorescence analyses, indicating that the epitopes were not extracted, absent, or of  low-abundance. therefore, if epitopes were not positively identified  one cannot conclude that they are absent. moreover, as we did not sample all organs and structures  for each of the species studied, we can by no means state that certain epitopes are absent in the plant.

to understand the variation in epitope abundance we performed in situ immunolabelling experiments using the same antibodies as used for probing the glycan microarrays. as mabs are epitope-specific and not polymer-specific, and, some epitopes might be masked by other wall components  <cit> , we cannot draw any firm conclusions on general fern cell wall composition. however, immunofluorescence  is a powerful tool to explore spatial patterns in glycan-epitope distribution, which is the main aim of this study.

broad themes that became apparent in the glycan epitope analysis included the observation that the majority of the epitopes characterized in angiosperms were generally present across the assessed fern species. while we found no evidence for the presence of some epitopes including the lm <dig> homogalacturonan epitope that occurs at corners of intercellular spaces in angiosperms, the lm <dig> xylogalacturonan epitope that is detected in detaching cells and the lm <dig> feruloylated galactan epitope of amaranthaceae cell walls, all other epitopes of cell wall matrix components were detected in variable  amounts, and these are discussed below. as we can only show a selection of images, we chose to represent variation by selecting those images that provide most clarity with respect to general or very specific labelling patterns. in most cases we show magnifications of vascular bundles  or mechanical tissues .

differential occurrence of pectic homogalacturonan  epitopes in ferns
homogalacturonan  is the major pectic polysaccharide in angiosperms and a range of mabs  are available that recognize subtly different methyl-esterification patterns of this polymer  <cit> . hg is an abundant component of the primary cell walls of most angiosperms, except in the grasses where the total pectic content is low  <cit> . studies have provided evidence for the presence of hgs in gymnosperms, ferns, lycophytes and charophycean green algae  <cit> .

in the glycan microarray analysis pectic hg was widely detected  in the cdta-extracts of the majority of fern samples . the in situ distribution of two of the hg-directed mabs was shown by if . a distinctive feature of if was that the lm <dig> epitope  was generally more abundant than the lm <dig> epitope . lm <dig> bound to primary cell walls, whereas lm <dig> had a more restricted binding pattern to the middle lamellae and intercellular space linings ; conversely to what is generally observed in angiosperm parenchyma  <cit> . the prevalence of the lm <dig> epitope over the lm <dig> epitope was also apparent in collenchymatous cell walls . we obtained no evidence for the presence of the lm <dig> hg epitope  in any of the fern and lycophyte samples studied, although it has been reported in angiosperms  <cit>  and green algae  <cit> . in the case of the lycophyte huperzia, the eusporangiate whisk fern psilotum, and some leptosporangiate ferns such as adiantum, asplenium trichomanes and davallia, only low levels of pectic hg epitopes were detected in the cdta-extracts. if confirmed these results for huperzia , and further suggests that pectic hg might not be a major constituent of their cell walls or that these species have distinct cell wall architectures that hinder the extraction and/or detection of pectic homogalacturonans. in adiantum, asplenium trichomanes and pellea, on the other hand, the cortical tissues are sclerified, and, as secondary cell walls generally contain no or only small amounts of pectins  <cit> , a low hg content was to be expected.figure  <dig> 
indirect immunofluorescence detection of homogalacturonan epitopes with low  and high  levels of esterification in fern petioles and lycophyte stems. calcofluor white fluorescence  shows the full extent of cell walls.  lm <dig> is detected in primary cell walls of the vascular bundle of asplenium rutifolium, while lm <dig> is restricted to the middle lamellae and intercellular space corners.  the prevalence of the lm <dig> epitope over the lm <dig> epitope is apparent in parenchymatous and collenchymatous tissue of asplenium rutifolium.  lm <dig> is detected in primary cell walls of asplenium daucifolium, while lm <dig> is restricted to the middle lamellae and intercellular space corners.  lm <dig> and lm <dig> weakly bind to primary cell walls in the lycophyte huperzia squarrosum. abbreviations: par, parenchyma; coll, collenchymatous tissue. no primary antibody controls are provided . scale bars:  <dig> μm.



 <dig> -arabinan and  <dig> -galactan epitopes associated with specific tissues and/or cell types
analysis of the pectic component rhamnogalacturan-i  was performed by means of the arabinan and galactan-directed mabs lm <dig> and lm <dig>  respectively. although  <dig> -arabinans and  <dig> -galactans are present in the complex heterogeneous pectic polymer rg-i  <cit> ,  <dig> -arabinan may also be a constituent of arabinogalactan proteins  <cit> . rg-i is highly variable both in structure and occurrence within cell walls  <cit>  and many have suggested that rg-i side chains exhibit developmentally-linked structural variation  <cit> . both epitopes have been immunodetected in mature tissues of green algae  <cit> , ferns  <cit>  and angiosperms  <cit> .

in the glycan microarray analysis the arabinan lm6-epitope was detected in the cdta- and naoh-extracts of most species, with relative high amounts in equisetum  and marattioid ferns, and absent in homosporous lycophytes  . in the cdta extracts of isolated vascular bundles of a. elliottii  the lm <dig> epitope was highly abundant relative to what was found for other tissues. supportive if showed consistent distribution patterns of the lm6-epitope among the leptosporangiate ferns , being specifically and strongly immunodetected in the phloem and xylem parenchyma, and the pericycle , the parenchymatous cell types of the vascular bundle. lm <dig> also labelled epidermal cell walls, including the guard cell walls . arabinans have been reported to play key roles in determining guard cell wall flexibility in angiosperms  <cit> , and their detection in guard cell walls of equisetum  <cit>  and other ferns such as asplenium suggests that arabinans might have played an important role in the functional evolution of stomata. pectate lyase pretreatment of sections prior to if unmasked lm6-epitopes in the cortical parenchyma cell walls of many species including asplenium . high relative amounts of the lm <dig> epitope in some fern samples  are caused by a high vascular tissue to total tissue ratio. in contrast to the leptosporangiate ferns, where lm <dig> was largely restricted to vascular and epidermal tissue, it was immunodetected in the majority of tissues in equisetum , explaining the relative high amounts of the lm <dig> epitope in both extractions in the glycan array analysis. while we did not detect the lm <dig> epitope in huperzia, we observed a similar distribution pattern in selaginella as observed in leptosporangiate ferns; a detailed study focussing on cell wall composition of lycophytes is needed to confirm the absence of this epitope in homosporous lycophytes.figure  <dig> 
indirect immunofluorescence detection of the arabinan  epitope in transverse sections of fern petioles and lycophyte stems. calcofluor white fluorescence  shows the full extent of cell walls.  detection of the lm6-epitope in parenchymatous cell types of vascular bundles of todea sp.
 and blechnum brasiliense
.  similar distribution pattern of the lm6-epitope is found in the vascular bundle  of asplenium theciferum. higher magnification  showing binding of lm <dig> to the cell walls of phloem parenchyma , xylem parenchyma  and pericycle .  lm <dig> binding to epidermal  cell walls, including the guard cell walls  of stomata.  detection of lm <dig> epitope in cortical parenchyma after pectate lyase  treatment .  lm6-epitope is not detected in the lycophyte huperzia squarrosum, even after pectate lyase treatment . abbreviations: p, pericycle; phl, phloem; xp, xylem parenchyma; pp, phloem parenchyma; par, parenchyma; coll, collenchymatous tissue; e, epidermis. no primary antibody controls are provided . scale bars:  <dig> μm.



the galactan lm <dig> epitope was detected in the naoh extract of most leptosporangiate ferns and lycophytes . remarkably, lm <dig> was found in high amounts in the cdta cell wall extractions for all equisetum-species and danaea, suggesting that they might have distinct cell wall architectures compared to all other ferns and lycophytes studied where naoh was required to extract the lm <dig> epitope . these results correlate with phylogenetic studies presenting evidence that the marattioid ferns are nearest  relatives of horsetails  <cit> . similarly to lm <dig>  a high abundance of the lm <dig> epitope was found in a sample containing isolated vascular bundles of asplenium elliottii . this was supported by if as we immunodetected galactan in the walls of phloem sieve cells in all leptosporangiate ferns as shown for blechnum and asplenium . additionally, lm <dig> bound to the inner cell wall layers of collenchymatous tissues  as shown for a. theciferum in figure 6h–k. in equisetum and angiopteris, galactan ― in accordance with the lm <dig> arabinan epitope ― was detected in most tissues as shown for equisetum in figure 7l–q. in the lycophyte huperzia, strong binding of lm <dig> to cortical parenchyma and weak binding to phloem cells was observed . in selaginella, the lm <dig> epitope was detected in the phloem tissue . pectate lyase treatment generally resulted in stronger binding of lm <dig>  but unmasking was not observed in tissues where no lm <dig> epitope was detected in untreated sections. it has been suggested that the occurrence of rg-i and its structural variants can be related to mechanical properties of cells or developing organs  <cit> . although the structure-function relationships of galactan-rich pectins are still poorly understood, the literature  <cit>  suggests that these polymers might play an important structural and/or regulatory role in mechanically stressed cell walls. it is of interest to note that we immunodetected lm5-epitopes in the walls of sieve cells and collenchymatous cells, cell types which undergo extensive elongation during differentiation. the identification of the lm <dig> epitope in distinct cell and tissue locations from those observed for the lm <dig> epitope indicates that they are binding to specific polysaccharides and how these relate to the rhamnogalacturonan-i structures of angiosperms remains to be determined.figure  <dig> 
indirect immunofluorescence detection of the galactan  epitope in transverse sections of fern petioles and lycophyte stems. calcofluor white fluorescence  shows the full extent of cell walls.  abundance of the lm <dig> epitope in cell walls of phloem sieve cells in the vascular bundle of blechnum brasiliense.  similar distribution pattern of lm <dig> in asplenium compressum. a high magnification  of a vascular bundle shows that lm5-binding is restricted to cell walls of phloem sieve cells .  binding of lm <dig> to the innermost cell wall layers of collenchymatous tissue in asplenium rutifolium.  lm <dig> binding to most tissues in equisetum arvense, including the cell walls of the vascular bundle and surrounding parenchyma  as well as to the inner cell wall layer of the collenchymatous strengthening tissue .  lm <dig> binding to phloem in the lycophyte selaginella grandis. abbreviations: phl, phloem; sc, sieve cell; coll, collenchymatous tissue. no primary antibody controls are provided . scale bars:  <dig> μm.



xyloglucan epitopes associated with phloem tissues and, after unmasking, primary cell walls
xyloglucans have a backbone of -β-d-glucan units, some of which are substituted with short side chains  <cit> . the structure of xyloglucan can be highly complex, and often shows variation in different taxonomic orders in different plant groups  <cit> . lm <dig>  binding to the xxxg-motif of xyloglucan , and ccrc-m <dig>  binding to fucosylated xyloglucan were employed in this study. xyloglucans are the most abundant hemicelluloses in primary walls of seed plants, except for grasses and other commelinid monocotyledons except for palms, where arabinoxylans are the major hemicelluloses  <cit> . they have also been detected in primary cell walls of bryophytes  <cit> , lycophytes, ferns and gymnosperms  <cit>  and immunolabelling experiments indicated their presence in some charophycean green algae  <cit> .

glycan microarray analysis indicated the presence of the lm <dig> xyloglucan epitope in the naoh-extracts of most of the fern and lycophyte species studied . in our analysis of isolated tissues a relatively high amount of lm <dig> was detected in isolated vascular bundles in both the cdta- and naoh-extracts . if confirmed this as we observed binding of lm <dig> to phloem cell walls . after pectate lyase treatment the latter binding signal was stronger and, in addition, binding to cortical parenchyma cell walls was also observed . this shows that, as in angiosperms, lm <dig> mab binding often requires enzymatic removal of hg  <cit> . the lm <dig> epitope was restricted to phloem cell walls  and guard cell walls in equisetum  <cit>  and was detected in the phloem and cortex of the lycophytes huperzia and selaginella . in psilotum, lm <dig> bound to the inner zones of the cortex, as well as to the phloem. the immunodetection of lm <dig> in the phloem of all early tracheophytes suggests that xyloglucan ― or its structural elaboration ― may have played an important role in the evolution of phloem, and that its incorporation within the phloem walls has been conserved during the evolution of land plants, as xyloglucan has also been immunolocalised in angiosperm phloem  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
indirect immunofluorescence detection of xyloglucan  epitopes in transverse sections of fern petioles and lycophyte stems. calcofluor white fluorescence  shows the full extent of cell walls.  binding of lm <dig> to phloem cell walls of blechnum brasiliense.  pectate lyase treatment  unmasks lm15-epitopes in phloem cell walls of asplenium rutifolium
 and in primary cell walls of cortical parenchyma of asplenium elliottii
.  lm <dig> binds to phloem tissue of equisetum ramosissimum.  similar distribution patterns are found in the lycophytes huperzia squarrosum
 and selaginella grandis
.  while the ccrc-m <dig> epitope is not detected in asplenium rutifolium
, even after pectate lyase pre-treatment , it is localized in the phloem of blechnum brasiliense
. no primary antibody controls are provided . abbreviations: phl: phloem. scale bars:  <dig> μm.



the ccrc-m <dig> fucosylated xyloglucan epitope was detected in the naoh-extracts of most leptosporangiate and eusporangiate ferns studied, but, with the exception of a very weak signal in two species, not found in the aspleniaceae . within the lycophytes, the ccrc-m <dig> epitope was only detected in the heterosporous selaginella. if confirmed these observations as ccrc-m <dig> was not detected in aspleniaceae  and widely immunodetected in other leptosporangiate ferns such as blechnum , treated or untreated with pectate lyase. in non-asplenioid leptosporangiate ferns, ccrc-m <dig> bound to phloem cell walls , which further suggests that xyloglucan might have been important for the evolution of phloem tissues. the absence of this epitope in most asplenioid ferns indicates that its abundance or detectability is variable at family level. although high relative amounts  of the ccrc-m <dig> epitope were detected in our glycan array analysis, if only revealed weak binding, even after pectate lyase pretreatment, suggesting that ccrc-m <dig> epitopes might be masked by other polymers than hg or are soluble and lost during antibody-incubation procedures. as the epitope was found in two out of  <dig> species belonging to aspleniaceae, it is probably only present in very low amounts or in a configuration that hinders epitope access or alters extractability.

xylan epitopes are associated with secondary cell walls but also display some distinct distribution patterns
the mabs lm <dig> and lm <dig> both recognise unsubstituted -β-xylan, but lm <dig> can also bind to substituted arabinoxylans  <cit> . xylans are the major cellulose-linking polysaccharides in secondary cell walls of higher plants  <cit>  and are the major non-cellulosic polysaccharides in primary cell walls of commelinid monocots  <cit> . in ferns, xylans have been reported to occur in secondary cell walls  <cit> . evidence for the presence of xylans in charophycean green algae, chlorophytes, and red algae has also been published . in angiosperms, lm <dig> and lm <dig> bind strongly to secondary cell walls, and pectate lyase pretreatment unmasked xylan epitopes in parenchyma, including distinct regions of collenchyma cell wall thickenings  <cit> .

glycan microarray analysis only detected the lm <dig> epitope in the naoh-extract of a small number of leptosporangiate ferns and heterosporous lycophytes and the lm <dig> epitope in diplazium . we did not detect these epitopes in isolated vascular bundles , suggesting that the total amount of xylan epitopes might be relatively low compared to that of other epitopes, or that the epitope was not extracted in sufficient amount to be detected. interestingly, none of these epitopes have been found in a sample of isolated sclerenchyma , suggesting that, in some ferns, xylans might not be the major hemicellulosic polysaccharides in sclerified tissues, unless they occur as a structural variant which cannot be recognised by either lm <dig> or lm <dig>  with few exceptions, lm <dig> gave much the same if results, binding to tracheid cell walls . however, in several cases autofluorescence did not allow clear observation of antibody binding as shown for a. polyodon in figure 9a–c. if did not provide clear evidence of lm <dig> binding to cell walls of any fern or lycophyte studied; weaker binding compared to that of lm <dig>  could easily have been obscured by autofluorescence. in only a few cases lm <dig> weakly bound to phloem parenchyma cells  and to cortical and epidermal primary cell walls, but not to collenchymatous cell walls, as shown for a. rutifolium . interestingly in other petioles of the same a. rutifolium plant we did not observe lm <dig> binding to the cortical parenchyma and epidermis . in huperzia squarrosum, lm <dig> bound to xylem tracheids and scattered cells of the cortex parenchyma , whereas in the heterosporous lycophyte selaginella it strongly bound to all cortical parenchyma cell walls . the unusual binding pattern in huperzia suggests that sclerification of cortical parenchyma might not occur simultaneously in all parenchyma cells. we specifically immunodetected the lm <dig> epitope in equisetum guard cell walls . it is of interest that the same epitope was also found in guard cells of psilotum  <cit> , suggesting that they might fulfil a structural role in stomata of early tracheophytes.figure  <dig> 
indirect immunofluorescence detection of the xylan  epitope in transverse sections of fern petioles and lycophyte stems. calcofluor white fluorescence  shows the full extent of cell walls.  autofluorescence of tracheids  obscures observation of lm <dig> binding in asplenium polyodon. note also the autofluorescence of the suberin lamellae of the endodermis .  lm <dig> binding to tracheid cell walls and phloem cell walls of asplenium loxoscaphoides.  abundance of the lm <dig> epitope in epidermal cell walls and cortical parenchyma of asplenium rutifolium. note that the epitope is not detected in the collenchymatous tissue .  binding of lm <dig> to cell walls of scattered cortical parenchyma cells in the lycophyte huperzia squarrosum.  in the lycophyte selaginella grandis, the lm <dig> epitope is detected in all cortical parenchyma cell walls. abbreviations: t, tracheids; e, epidermis; phl, phloem; coll, collenchymatous tissue. no primary antibody controls are provided . scale bars:  <dig> μm.



mannan-epitopes are associated with sclerified secondary cell walls and are unmasked in primary cell walls after pectate lyase treatment
mannans are mannose-rich complex heteroglycans that can occur as storage polymers, particularly in the leguminosae  <cit> , or fulfil structural functions  <cit> . in this study we used the lm <dig> antibody which is known to bind to heteromannans including glucomannan and galactomannan  <cit> . mannans appear to be very abundant in the primary cell walls of the earliest land plants such as bryophytes, lycophytes, and early-diverging ferns, and less abundant in those of leptosporangiate ferns, gymnosperms and angiosperms  <cit> . a mannan-rich primary cell wall type was proposed for ferns, based on analysis of fern laminae  <cit> . mannans have also been detected in algal species  <cit> , including some of which completely lack cellulose in their cell walls  <cit> . in angiosperms, mannans  are usually found at low levels in secondary cell walls  <cit> , whereas they are the major hemicelluloses in secondary cell walls of gymnosperms  <cit> . glucomannans, in particular, give extremely tough physical characteristics to some cell walls  <cit> .

glycan microarray analysis detected mannans in both naoh- and cdta-extracts of ferns and lycophytes . high amounts of the mannan-epitope were found in species with relative high amounts of sclerified tissues. in a. elliottii the highest amounts of mannan-epitopes were detected in the isolated hypodermal sclerenchyma , petiole base tissue and vascular bundles  . if showed that throughout all ferns and lycophytes studied, the lm21-epitope is strongly associated with  secondary cell walls . lm <dig> strongly bound to the inner cell wall layer of sclerified epidermal and hypodermal cell walls, scattered sclerified cortex parenchyma cells as well as to xylem tracheids and sclereids surrounding the vascular bundles . as the lm <dig> epitope was restricted to the inner cell wall layers of secondary cell walls, it is possible that these epitopes might be masked as a result of the incorporation of  phenolic compounds. in some cases we observed weak binding of lm <dig> to cortical parenchyma and the vascular bundle. after pectate lyase pretreatment lm <dig> bound to primary cell walls in most fern species . lm <dig> was also immunodetected in the strengthening tissue of equisetum  and in tracheids of huperzia . these results show that heteromannans are present in fern primary cell walls and that they are also implicated in the sclerification process. the walls of these mechanical tissues are typically impregnated with yellow-brown phenolic pigments. the absence of the lm11-epitope in sclerenchyma suggests that, as in gymnosperms, heteromannans might be the major hemicelluloses in secondary cell walls. the presence and abundance of hemicelluloses in fern cell walls may be different from what is generally found in angiosperm cell walls. while primary cell walls of  flowering plants are generally xyloglucan-rich  <cit> , we detected mannan and xyloglucan epitopes in fern primary cell walls. our results also suggest that mannans, as in gymnosperm secondary walls  <cit> , might be the dominant hemicellulose in most fern secondary walls. these findings are in agreement with earlier reports stating that fern cell walls, either primary or secondary, are mannan-rich  <cit> . however, results obtained through if by themselves do not establish the major hemicelluloses and therefore, detailed investigations of fractioned cell wall material from different fern tissues are needed to determine the relative abundance and structural variation of hemicelluloses. this might increase insights into the functional redundancy or interchangeability of sets of hemicellulosic polymers pertaining to cell wall properties.figure  <dig> 
indirect immunofluorescence detection of mannan  epitopes in transverse sections of fern petioles and lycophyte stems. calcofluor white fluorescence  and bright-field  showing the full extent of cell walls.  localisation of the lm <dig> epitope in and around the vascular bundle of asplenium elliottii. the epitope is detected in the cell walls of tracheids  and sclereids  that surround the vascular bundle. a high magnification shows detection of the lm <dig> epitope in the inner cell wall layer of sclereids . note red autofluorescence of sclereid cell walls .  lm <dig> binding to the innermost cell wall layer of sclerenchyma hypodermal cells  and the sclereids of an asplenium elliottii petiole. note red autofluorescence of sclereid cell walls .  immunodetection of lm <dig> in sclerified epidermal cell walls and subepidermal tissue of hymenasplenium obscurum. note red autofluorescence of sclerified epidermis and subepidermal tissue .  unmasking of the lm <dig> epitope in primary cell walls of the cortical parenchyma of todea sp. after pectate lyase treatment . note that cell walls of the vascular bundle and surrounding sclereids  are labeled prior to pectate lyase treatment.  detection of the lm <dig> epitope in the collenchymatous strengthening tissue of equisetum ramossisimum.  strong binding of lm <dig> to tracheids and weak binding to cortical parenchyma in the lycophyte huperzia squarrosum. abbreviations: scl: sclerenchyma; phl: phloem; ep: epidermis. abbreviations: t, tracheids; scl, sclereids; scler, sclerified tissue; e, epidermis; par, parenchyma, coll, collenchymatous tissue. no primary antibody controls are provided . scale bars:  <dig> μm.



mixed-linkage glucan is detected in cell walls of fully elongated cells
-β-d-glucans, also known as mixed-linkage glucans , are found in species belonging to the angiosperm poales order  <cit>  but have also been detected in distantly related equisetum-species  <cit> . recently, the bs-400- <dig> mlg epitope was detected in the lycophyte selaginella moellendorfii  <cit>  and it was shown that its detection was abolished after lichenase treatment, indicating that mlgs are more common in vascular plants than previously assumed. based on thin-layer chromatography of lichenase digests, xue and fry  <cit>  explored the occurrence of mlg in a selection of lycophytes and ferns s.l. . they did not find evidence for the presence of mlg in the ten leptosporangiate ferns species they have studied. our glycan microarray analysis, however, revealed variable amounts of the mlg-epitope in the naoh extracts of ferns and lycophytes, from nearly undetectable to high relative values of over  <dig> . two of the ten leptosporangiate ferns investigated by xue and fry  <cit> , todea barbara and trichomanes speciosum, were also included in the present study and in which no or very low relative amounts of the mlg epitope were detected. in equisetum, a higher abundance of mlg was found in species belonging to the subgenus equisetum compared to representatives of the subgenus hippochaete  <cit> . our results show the same trend as considerably lower relative levels of the mlg epitope were detected in e. hyemale and e. ramosissimum, which both belong to the hippochaete subgenus. if showed that the mlg antibody binds to different tissues in the leptosporangiate fern asplenium elliotii . while the thickened walls of the collenchymatous mechanical tissue were strongly labelled, the epitope was not detected in the abaxial sclerenchyma tissue . this, however does not imply that mlg is absent in the latter tissue, as the epitope could be masked by phenolic impregnation of the sclerenchyma walls. the mlg-epitope was also detected in the epidermis . parenchymatous tissues were weakly labelled except for cell walls of the cell layers surrounding mechanical tissues, where increased binding signals were detected . labelling in the vascular bundle was restricted to the pericycle . in blechnum brasiliense both cortex parenchyma and pericycle were labelled, while cell walls of the sclerenchyma sheath and subepidermal sclerenchyma were not . in equisetum, we immunodetected the mlg epitope in the thickened cell walls of the strengthening tissue and the epidermis , as well as in cell walls of a continuous ring of parenchymatous tissue located between the central cavity and the vascular bundles . in all cases binding of the anti-mlg antibody was abolished after lichenase treatment . it is of interest that species including todea barbara, osmunda vauchellii, trichomanes speciosum, adiantum capillus-veneris and asplenium hemionites, for which we did not detect mlg-epitopes in the glycan array, contain high proportions of sclerenchyma and have very stiff petioles. species with collenchymatous mechanical tissues, on the other hand, including equisetum, asplenium nidus and asplenium tenerum, were found to contain high relative amounts of the mlg-epitope. moreover, the localisation of the epitope within or close to areas where sclerification may occur suggests that mlgs may  indirectly or directly mediate cell wall mechanical properties, especially in plant organs with immature sclerenchyma tissues and/or  play a role in the sclerification process. this is in agreement with the results of the glycan array analysis of different organ and tissue samples of asplenium elliottii . in the petiole, the highest relative amount of mlg epitopes was found in the middle section of the petiole, which is characterised by abaxial sclerified and adaxial collenchymatous mechanical tissues . in addition, it was found that, in equisetum, mlgs were more abundant in mature non-growing stem base regions than in younger tissues  <cit> . accumulation of mlg in mature, not elongating cell walls is, however, not restricted to ferns s.l. as the mlg-epitope has also been detected in grass fibers and xylem vessels  <cit> , which contain thick, lignified, secondary cell walls that provide mechanical support. further analytical investigations are required to confirm the presence and determine the composition of mlg in ferns. spatio-temporal distribution patterns in relation to growth and development are likely to provide a deeper insight into the functional role of mlg in fern cell walls.figure  <dig> 
indirect immunofluorescence detection of the mixed-linkage glucan epitope  in transverse sections of fern petioles and lycophyte stems. calcofluor white fluorescence  and bright-field  showing the full extent of cell walls.  localisation of the mlg epitope in asplenium elliottii. the epitope is detected in collenchymatous  and sclerenchymatous  mechanical tissues as well as in epidermal cell walls. parenchyma shows differential labelling intensities with stronger labelling of parenchyma walls surrounding mechanical tissues. increased labelling is observed in parenchyma tissues bordering the hypodermal sclerenchyma  and the zone with sclereids surrounding the vascular bundle . weak labelling is observed in the phloem tissue.  the anti-mlg antibody binds to parenchymatous cell walls in blechnum brasiliense. cell walls of the sclerenchyma sheath  and subepidermal sclerenchyma  are not labelled.  detection of the mlg epitope in the collenchymatous strengthening tissue  of equisetum arvense. higher magnification  shows that the epitope is restricted to secondary cell walls.  labelling of a continuous ring of parenchyma tissue located between the central cavity and vascular bundles. abbreviations: coll, collenchymatous tissue; scler, sclerenchyma; e, epidermis; scl: sclereïds; t, tracheids; ss, sclerenchyma sheath; vb: vascular bundle. no primary antibody controls are provided . scale bars: a–c,  <dig> mm; d–w,  <dig> μm.



CONCLUSIONS
the molecular probes used in this analysis have been developed to study angiosperm taxa but are clearly applicable to an analysis of fern cell walls indicating that at least some of the cell wall structures present in angiosperm cell wall polysaccharides are conserved. as cell walls are highly dynamic with their chemical composition depending on developmental and environmental cues, it is not surprising that the glycan array data set displayed variation in glycan epitope-distribution among ferns but also within aspleniaceae. however, if of selected species enabled identification of glycan epitopes that were recurrently detected in cell walls of specific tissues and tissue types, indicating that changes in cell wall architecture, including structural elaboration of specific polymers, are linked to the emergence and/or differentiation of specialised tissues and cell types in land plants. in all species studied we detected xyloglucan lm <dig> and xylan lm <dig> epitopes in phloem and xylem tracheid walls, respectively. the rg-i-related lm5-  and lm6-epitopes  were found in cell walls of specific cell-types in vascular bundles in all leptosporangiate ferns. the lm <dig> heteromannan epitope was generally detected in cell walls of mechanical tissues that are impregnated with yellowish-brown pigments, but was also found in primary cell walls, typically after pectate lyase pretreatments. to the best of our knowledge we provided the first evidence of mlg occurrence in leptosporangiate ferns, in which we detected the highest abundance of the bs-400- <dig> mlg epitope in petioles with immature but fully elongated sclerenchyma tissues.

our results also provided further evidence indicating the distinctive nature of equisetum cell walls and indicated that only low amounts of pectic hg epitopes were detected in cdta extracts of lycophytes. we showed that while the fucosylated xyloglucan epitope ccrc-m <dig>  except for low amounts in two species, was not detected in the fern family aspleniaceae, high relative amounts were found in other leptosporangiate fern species. in the same way, the ccrc-m <dig> epitope was detected in the heterosporous selaginella species but not in the homosporous lycophyte huperzia. these few examples further emphasize the complexity cell wall diversity as cell wall polysaccharides not only vary in their fine-structural details but also may display intricate spatio-temporal and phylogenetic distribution patterns.

implications for screening cell wall diversity
the variation in cell wall composition at lower taxonomic levels raises the question which criteria should be used to select species that are representative of specific plant lineages.

an approach that combines high-throughput screening with detailed analysis of selected species, as adopted here and discussed elsewhere  <cit> , partly solves this problem, allowing investigation of large numbers of samples. however, while covering as much diversity as possible is important, one also needs to take into account other sources of variation. the position of a cell wall in the plant, organ or tissue at any given developmental stage, as well as the environment in which the plant occurs all have an impact on cell wall architecture. the extent of and susceptibility to variation may be substantial as, in contrast to most animals, plants have a sedentary lifestyle. hence, they display plastic phenotypes, resulting in often dramatic differences between conspecifics or even among organs produced by the same plant as we highlighted in this study. if is one of the best methods to unravel such complexity allowing fine mapping of cell wall composition at different levels of organisation, from organs to cell wall microdomains at any given developmental stage. several of our results emphasize the merits of including antibody-based techniques in cell wall comparative studies. we found that differences in epitope abundance are frequently related to the relative proportions of specific tissues with distinct cell wall composition. in addition, some components may have spatially restricted distributions and may be present in amounts that are below the detection limit of some analytical techniques. we also demonstrated variation in cell wall composition within heterogeneous tissues as well as in individual cell walls, information that is often lost during fractionation of plant cell walls for polysaccharide isolation. however, to fully understand cell wall diversity and evolution a multi-modal/-scale approach is necessary, and while in situ labelling experiments clearly have some advantages, they should ideally be complemented with biochemical analysis of fractionated cell walls to provide conclusive information on polymer structure and presence.

