BACKGROUND
quantitative pcr , also known as real-time pcr, has become a powerful tool for the amplification, identification and quantification of nucleic acids. its ability to quantitatively and specifically detect genes has been invaluable for both research and diagnostic applications  <cit> . key to the detection is a fluorescence reporter molecule that monitors the progress of the dna amplification. depending on the mode of signal generation, the reporter molecule may either be a fluorogenically labeled oligonucleotide, commonly referred to as a probe, or a simple fluorogenic dna-binding dye. the most widely used fluorogenic probes are taqman probes, which hybridize to an amplicon during the chain extension phase and become subsequently cleaved by taq polymerase through its 5'-3' exonuclease activity, resulting in a fluorescence signal increase  <cit> . because probe-based qpcr can simultaneously monitor the progress of the dna amplification and verify the identity of the amplified target, it provides the high sensitivity and specificity required for demanding applications such as medical diagnosis and prognosis without an extra post-pcr product verification step. however, taqman probes are usually expensive and time-consuming to synthesize  <cit> . as an alternative to taqman probes, simple dna-binding dyes have been used for qpcr by detecting the total amount of accumulated dna during the reaction  <cit> . a pcr dye is universally applicable to any target sequence and is generally far less expensive than an individually synthesized taqman probe. although qpcr using a dna dye generally does not provide as high a level of specificity as qpcr using a taqman-like probe does, its reliability can be verified semi-qualitatively by analyzing the melt curve of the amplicon following the pcr without opening the pcr tubes  <cit> . for these reasons, qpcr using a simple dna dye is a popular choice among academic laboratories for routine pcr experiments.

since higuchi first demonstrated the use of ethidium bromide in qpcr  <cit> , several other dna-binding dyes have been tested for the application, including p <dig>  <cit> , sybr green i   <cit> , syto <dig>  <cit> , and more recently, bebo and boxto  <cit> . among the dyes screened, sg is by far the best performing one and consequently has become the most widely used qpcr dye. sg is highly fluorescent when bound to dna with very little background fluorescence. the dye has excitation and emission spectra matching well with the optical settings in most of the instruments, and is largely compatible with the chemistry of pcr. despite its popularity, sg still has several disadvantages. one of the problems is that only a relatively low sg concentration  can be used in the reaction because of the dye's high tendency to inhibit pcr and promote mispriming  <cit> . low sg concentration may not only compromise pcr signal strength but also may make dna melt curve data unreliable due to the so-called "dye redistribution" phenomenon  <cit> . the latter problem has been cited to be the main reason why sg is unsuitable for high-resolution melt curve analysis , which is now gaining popularity because of the high specificity it offers and its potential to be used in diagnostic applications. in addition, sg is relatively unstable, especially under the alkaline condition of tris buffer during storage  <cit> . finally, although sg is only weakly mutagenic by itself  <cit> , it has been reported to be a strong mutation enhancer by possibly impairing the natural dna repair mechanism in cells  <cit> .

evagreen  is a new dna-binding dye we developed. since its commercialization, it has been reported to be used for dna quantification  <cit> , double-stranded dna tracing and quantification in capillary electrophoresis  <cit> , dna conformation detection  <cit> , quantitative pcr  <cit> , melting analysis on a lab-on-chip  <cit> , and real time isothermal dna amplifications  <cit> . in this study, we take a systematic approach to evaluate the new dye in spectral properties, stability, dna-binding affinities, qpcr and post-pcr dna melt curve analysis. by changing dye concentration, chain extension time or the length of amplicons respectively while keeping other pcr components constant, we studied how each of the factors affected ct or specificity in qpcr. we also studied eg's dna-binding behavior in side by side comparison with sg towards double stranded dna vs. short stranded dna, long  vs short . finally, we attempt to use all the physicochemical properties of eg to explain why eg showed significant advantage in qpcr and post-pcr dna melt curve analysis.

RESULTS
absorption and fluorescence spectra
the absorption spectrum of eg without dna presence showed a major peak at  <dig> nm and a shoulder peak at around  <dig> nm . upon addition of increasing amounts of dsdna , the peak at  <dig> nm dropped while a new peak at  <dig> nm emerged. at saturating dna concentrations, the  <dig> nm peak decreased to a shoulder peak while the peak at  <dig> nm became the major peak. without dna present, the dye was weakly fluorescent with an excitation peak at  <dig> nm and emission peak at  <dig> nm . in the presence of dsdna, the excitation and emission wavelengths of the dye red shifted to  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm, respectively. by comparing the dye's fluorescence intensities at zero and saturating  λdna concentrations, the fluorescence enhancement of the dye upon dna binding was estimated to be approximately  <dig> times . in the presence of the same concentration of m <dig> dna, which is considered to be mostly single-stranded with some local double-stranded regions, the fluorescence enhancement was only about  <dig> times.

dna titration
to gain further insight into the fluorescence responses of the dye toward dsdna and ssdna over a wider range of dna concentrations, the dye was titrated with λdna and m <dig> dna, respectively, in 1× amplitaq buffer. the fluorescence intensity readings for each titration were plotted against the dna concentrations as shown in figure  <dig>  the linear titration range for λdna was from  <dig> to about  <dig> ng/μl with a slope of  <dig>  while the linear titration range for m <dig> dna was from  <dig> to at least  <dig> ng/μl with a slope of  <dig> . the ratio of the two slopes is thus  <dig> , indicating that within the linear titration range the dye is more than  <dig> times more fluorescent in the presence of dsdna than in the presence of ssdna of the same weight concentration.

in order to assess whether eg binds to dsdna with any base preference and whether its dna binding is affected by salts, the dye was titrated with the double-stranded at-rich λdna and the double-stranded gc-rich tbr dna, respectively, in tris buffers with or without an inorganic salt. furthermore, in order to mimic the condition used during qpcr, the titrations and fluorescence recordings were made at 50°c. as shown in figure 4a, the fluorescence of the dye in the presence of λdna  is twice as intense as that in the presence of tbr dna  in  <dig> mm tris ph  <dig> . a similar trend was observed when the titrations were carried out in  <dig> mm tris ph  <dig>  containing  <dig> mm kcl  except that the titration curves were shifted toward the right relative to their counter parts. the large fluorescence difference observed between titration using λdna and that using tbr dna was apparently not due to difference in the dye's binding affinities toward the two types of dna. this can be better appreciated by replotting the titration curves with normalized fluorescence intensities. as shown in figure 4b, the normalized titration curves of eg with λdna and tbr dna in  <dig> mm tris ph  <dig>  are nearly completely superimposable, suggesting that eg binds to the two types of dna with equal affinity. likewise, nearly identical normalized titration curves were obtained for eg titrations with λdna and tbr dna in  <dig> mm tris ph  <dig>  containing  <dig> mm kcl except that, again, they are shifted to the right relative to the titration curves obtained in  <dig> mm tris buffer ph  <dig>  . the decrease in the dye's dna binding affinity due to salt effect, as suggested by the shifting of the dna binding curves to the right, was also observed when the  <dig> mm kcl in the buffer was replaced with  <dig> mm mgcl <dig> .

for comparison, sg was also titrated with λdna and tbr dna, respectively, in  <dig> mm tris ph  <dig> , and the resulting normalized titration curves were co-plotted with those of eg . unlike eg, sg displayed differential binding affinities towards the two types of dna; the significant left-shifting of the sg titration curve with λdna suggests that sg has a higher affinity toward λdna than toward tbr dna. furthermore, as shown in figure 4b, sg has an overall higher dna binding affinity than eg does. however, similar to eg, sg also produced nearly 50% less fluorescence when titrated with the gc-rich tbr dna, compared to titration with the at-rich λdna .

to learn how eg and sg each may bind to primers, primer-dimers and primer-template hybrids in typical pcr reactions, each dye was titrated with a 10-base paired stem-loop fragment , a 22-base paired stem-loop fragment , and a 24-base single-stranded fragment . to ensure the conformation stability of the double-stranded fragments and detection sensitivity, the comparative binding study of the dyes with the three dna fragments was carried out at room temperature instead of a higher temperature as used in pcr. as shown by the normalized dna binding curves in figure  <dig>  both eg and sg exhibited lower binding affinity toward shorter dsdna fragment  than longer dsdna fragment , and even lower affinity toward the ssdna fragment except that eg generally showed lower affinity than sg for each given type of dna fragment. as the dna concentration corresponding to the midlevel fluorescence of a binding curve may be used to estimate the relative dissociation constant of a dna-dye complex  <cit> , it is evident that the degree of binding affinity decrease for eg as a result of dna fragment size reduction or change from dsdna to ssdna fragment was far more pronounced than that for sg.

effect of dye concentration on qpcr performance
sybr green i is known to show pcr inhibition when used at above a certain threshold concentration  <cit> . the exact threshold concentration may vary, depending on such factors as the type or make of dna polymerase, primer sequences, amplicon, buffer components and cycling parameters. it is desirable to have a relatively high threshold dye concentration so that pcr signals can be made more robust and dna melt curve data more reliable . to explore the concentration limit for eg, we conducted qpcr experiments using four separate dye concentrations,  <dig>  μm ,  <dig> μm ,  <dig>  μm  and  <dig>  μm , respectively. also, to test the effect of amplicon size, each dye concentration was applied to the amplifications of three separate amplicons, mcg , tbp , and gcl , all cloned into a plasmid . for comparison, similar experiments were carried out using four sg concentrations,  <dig>  μm ,  <dig>  μm ,  <dig>  μm  and  <dig>  μm , respectively, under the same condition . the concentrations of sg were determined using a sg extinction coefficient of  <dig>  at  <dig> nm, which we estimated using a combination of the dye's optical density specification supplied by the manufacturer and published information on the dye's structure  <cit> . this number is significantly lower than the reported extinction coefficient of  <dig>  .

to eliminate any differences due to primer annealing, the universal m <dig> forward and reverse primers were used for all pcr experiments. also, the denaturing and annealing steps in each thermo cycle were each set for  <dig> seconds to ensure that the two processes were as close to completion as possible in all experiments.

using the standard pcr protocol , eg at  <dig> ×  and 1× both gave relatively early ct for all three amplicons. slight ct delays occurred at  <dig>  × eg while raising the dye concentration to 2× caused significant ct delays . for sg, the only non-inhibitory concentration was  <dig> ×  for all three amplicons . higher sg concentrations resulted in either significant ct delay or non-specific amplifications as revealed by melt curve analysis and gel electrophoresis . thus, based on these results, the threshold concentrations  under our conditions are approximately  <dig>  μm for eg and  <dig>  μm for sg, respectively. as shown in figure  <dig>  qpcr using eg on average gave 4– <dig> times more fluorescence than that using sg when both dyes were applied at their threshold concentrations. it is also worth noting that the effect of target sequence on ct differed slightly between reactions using the two dyes. for example, for the amplifications of mcg and gcl, eg gave earlier ct values than sg. on the other hand, for the amplification of tbp, sg gave earlier ct values than eg. in general, however, the ct difference between two dyes for a given amplicon was within ±  <dig> cycle.

effect of chain extension time and amplicon size on qpcr performance
given the finding that eg had relatively low pcr inhibition, we reasoned that it might be possible to reduce the chain extension time from the standard  <dig> seconds to a shorter time without adversely affecting pcr performance. thus, we compared eg and sg in qpcr experiments using the extension time at 72°c of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> seconds, respectively. in order to see the interplay of dye concentration and chain extension time, each dye was also tested at two different concentrations, i.e.,  <dig>  μm  and  <dig>  μm  for eg and  <dig>  μm  and  <dig>  μm  for sg, respectively. again, mcg, tbp and gcl were chosen to represent amplicons of different sizes in the comparative studies.

as shown in figure  <dig>  panel a <dig>  reduction of chain extension time did not significantly affect the ct values for mcg amplifications for either dye at  <dig> × concentration although amplifications with eg consistently gave about twice the final fluorescence signal as those with sg did. doubling the concentration of eg from  <dig> × to 1× had no major effect on the amplification in terms of both ct values and specificity . in contrast, when the concentration of sg was doubled to 1×, the ct became increasingly delayed as the chain extension time was systematically shortened. when the extension time was shortened to  <dig> seconds or lower, there were marked ct delays as well as formation of nonspecifically amplified products  as confirmed by post-run dna melt curve analysis .

similar results were obtained in the comparison of eg and sg in the amplifications of the longer  <dig> base pair tbp and  <dig> base pair gcl, respectively, except that the ct delay for the amplifications using sg became even more pronounced as the chain extension time was shortened. amplification reactions using eg showed significant ct delay, only under the most challenging condition–the combination of a very long amplicon , a relatively high dye concentration  and a very short extension time  . on the other hand, the ct values for amplification reactions using sg became quite sensitive to reduced extension time, especially at the higher 1×  dye concentration . moreover, when the extension time was shortened to  <dig> seconds or below, amplifications of both tbp and gcl using sg produced nonspecific products . in fact, when the extension time was reduced to  <dig> seconds, only nonspecifically amplified products were detected as revealed by post-pcr dna melt curve analysis and gel electrophoresis . finally, reactions using sg generally showed poorer reproducibility than those using eg in response to decreasing extension time and elevated dye concentration .

the above results suggest that eg may be suitable for fast cycling qpcr. thus, to further explore this possibility, we carried out qpcr on a gapdh fragment using the optimal  <dig>  μm eg concentration. the reactions were performed using two-temperature cycling protocols of  <dig> seconds at 95°c and various amounts of reduced annealing/extension time  at 60°c. for comparison, a commercially available kit, power sybr master mix, was run side-by-side, also using the same two-temperature cycling protocols. the commercial master mix contained approximately ~ <dig>  μm sg as determined from the dye's optical density at  <dig> nm . instead of making our own sg master mix from the same buffer and enzyme system used for eg, we chose power sybr master mix to avoid the possibility that the our buffer and enzyme system might show bias against sg and because power sybr master mix was of optimized formulation for sg as suggested by the manufacturer. each amplification reaction was repeated eight times in order to assess the reproducibility of the reaction. figure  <dig> displays the ct values of amplification reactions run with various reduced annealing/extension times for power sybr master mix and the eg master mix. when the annealing/extension time was set for  <dig> seconds, amplifications with either master mix gave comparable ct values and similar reproducibility. however, as the annealing/extension time was shortened, the ct for power sybr master mix became increasingly delayed and its reproducibility, as shown by the error bars in the figure, also suffered progressively. for example, the ct for power sybr was delayed by as many as 5– <dig> cycles when the annealing/extension time was reduced to  <dig> s. on the other hand, for the same extent of annealing/extension time reduction, the ct for the eg master mix increased by only about  <dig> cycle while still maintaining excellent reproducibility.

pcr dynamic range
a key application of qpcr is to determine the starting concentration of a target gene. this is typically accomplished by comparing the ct for the target gene amplification of the sample against a standard qpcr titration curve, where the ct is linearly related to the logarithm of the starting dna copy number. among other factors, the linear dynamic range of the pcr titration is expected to be affected by the qpcr dye. thus, to compare eg and sg for their performance in this aspect of qpcr, 10-fold serial dilutions of a gapdh target as a cdna preparation were amplified using either an eg master mix or power sybr master mix. following each pcr experiment, dna melt curve analysis was carried out to verify amplification specificity. as shown in figure  <dig>  target amplifications in the presence of either dye produced comparably good linear dynamic range, efficiency and specificity. however, amplifications using the eg mix resulted in significantly earlier ct values and higher signals than those using power sybr mix. in addition, the fluorescence signals continued to rise for more than  <dig> cycles for amplifications using the eg mix. on the other hand, for amplifications using power sybr mix, the signal increase lasted for only about  <dig> cycles before reaching a plateau.

dna melt curve analysis
we observed that dna melt peaks associated with eg at its optimal concentration  were significantly stronger and also narrower than those associated with sg at its optimal concentration. in addition, the melt temperatures for dna associated with eg were generally from  <dig>  to about 1°c lower than those for dna associated with sg in the same buffer. figure  <dig> compares the melt curves of two gapdh amplicons, each resulting from the amplification of  <dig> pg starting human cdna using either a eg mix or power sybr mix as described above for the human cdna titration experiments. as shown in the figure, the peak width at half height for eg  is only about half of that for sg  while the peak height for the former is nearly ten times that for the latter. in order to rule out the possibility that the apparently wider peak associated with sg was due to multiple peaks superimposed with each other, we examined the products from both pcr reactions on agarose gels. the results indicated that the pcr products from both reactions were the same single product.

effect of dna polymerase source on the comparative performance of eg and sg in qpcr
the qpcr data shown in figure  <dig> and  <dig> were all generated with amplitaq from abi. as dna polymerases from different commercial sources may be prepared differently and supplied in different storage buffers, we would like to find out if the make of enzyme played any role in the observed qpcr performance difference between eg and sg. the experiments were repeated with taq from neb, promega, fermenta and home made taq respectively. we found that although ct values and pcr signal strength differed slightly from enzyme to enzyme and from run to run, the performance difference between the two dyes still held .

stability of evagreen
qpcr exposes reaction components to high temperature and, in some pcr instruments, to high powered laser irradiation. moreover, the ph of tris-based master mixes is often alkaline at room temperature and especially at 4°c during storage. thus, it is essential for a qpcr dye to be thermally, hydrolytically and photolytically stable. to test the thermal and hydrolytical stability of eg under an accelerated condition, a solution of the dye along with a reference dye rox was incubated in ph  <dig>  tris at 99°c for three hours. during the course of incubation, the solution was periodically sampled for absorption spectral measurement at room temperature. for comparison purpose, a solution of sg and rox reference dye in the same buffer was incubated and monitored under the same condition. as shown in figure  <dig>  the absorption spectrum of eg shifted only slightly, a result largely within the experimental error. in contrast, the spectrum of sg had nearly disappeared at the end of the 3-hour incubation. similar data were obtained when the dyes were incubated in ph  <dig>  tris buffer at the same temperature except that sg decomposed even faster . to test the ability of eg to withstand multiple freeze-and-thaw cycles, a  <dig>  μm eg solution in h2o  was subject to  <dig> freeze-and-thaw cycles by taking the sample in and out of a -20°c freezer over the course of one week. uv/vis measurements of the eg sample before and after the freeze-thaw test detected no significant change . eg also appeared to be reasonably photostable as no signal variation was observed during routine qpcr experiments due to photobleaching of the dye.

discussion
qpcr using sg has proven to be a valuable alternative to that using the more costly taqman probes, particularly for many routine research applications. however, problems with sg's tendency to inhibit pcr and promote nonspecific amplification have prevented wider applications of the technique  <cit> . furthermore, the low dye concentration required to minimize sg's interference to pcr can cause dye redistribution problem during dna melt curve analysis, making the dye unsuitable for repeat melting, multiplex pcr  <cit>  and high-resolution genotyping  <cit> . we have demonstrated that eg is a promising new dna-binding dye with several features that make the dye suitable for both qpcr and challenging post-pcr melt curve analyses.

for qpcr employing a dna-binding dye, an inherently conflicting issue is how much dye should be used in order to achieve the best result possible. on the one hand, a relatively high dye concentration should result in a high fluorescence signal in response to the increasing amount of dna generated during the reaction. although the ct value of the reaction is not determined by the fluorescence signal strength, an overall higher signal level for the amplification adds robustness to the qpcr by increasing the confidence level of the fluorescence readings. moreover, a relatively high end-point fluorescence signal should directly result in a relatively high dna melt peak during post-pcr melt curve analysis . on the other hand, because the dye is a dna-binding molecule, it will inevitably affect the dna amplification process if present at too high a concentration. consequently, there exists an optimal dye concentration that gives the best possible fluorescence signal and at the same time ensures minimal or no interference from the dye. we have determined that, under the condition we used, the best concentrations for eg and sg are  <dig>  μm and  <dig>  μm, respectively. the significantly higher concentration permitted for eg suggests that eg has much lower pcr inhibition than sg does. with the respective optimal dye concentrations, qpcr using eg consistently yields  <dig> to  <dig> times more fluorescence than that using sg does, leading to overall more robust results .

the relatively low pcr interference but high pcr signal of eg may have stemmed largely from its favorable dna binding properties. the pcr inhibition by a dye, as characterized by a delay in ct, is most likely due to the dye's interference with the chain extension step, where the dye may bind to the single-stranded template, thereby serving as "road bumps" to the extending primer-template complex. therefore, an ideal qpcr dye should preferentially bind to dsdna and have as little interaction as possible with ssdna. as shown in figure  <dig>  eg has much lower affinity towards ssdna than sg does. this dna binding difference between the two dyes may be at least partially responsible for their difference in the pcr inhibition. the relatively high pcr inhibition we observed for sg is also consistent with data reported for other similar dyes that have high affinity for single stranded oligonucleotides. it is known that multi-cationically charged nucleic acid dyes such as toto- <dig>  ethidium homodimer- <dig>  picogreen and to-pro are generally not good dyes for qpcr . these highly positively charged dyes typically exhibit poor binding selectivity between dsdna and ssdna because a large portion of their dna binding affinity is attributable to electrostatic interaction, for which ssdna is also effective. another possible contributing factor to pcr inhibition is the high binding affinity of the dye to dsdna, particularly to short dsdna fragments. during the chain extension phase, portion of the single stranded template may form regional stem-loop structure, which may be transient and unstable in nature but could be stabilized in the presence of a high affinity dsdna-binding dye. it would not be surprising that the stabilization of such secondary structures could lead to a significant slow down of the polymerization reaction, particularly for long amplicons, where stem-loop secondary structures are more likely to form. as demonstrated in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  the binding affinities of both eg and sg become progressively lower as the size of dsdna becomes smaller. however, the extent by which the binding affinity is weakened is much more significant for eg than for sg. the weaker affinity of eg toward short dsdna fragments should be of advantage because the dye is less likely to stabilize any regional stem-loop structures in the template and thus less likely to inhibit pcr via this mode of pcr interference.

the weak binding of eg toward short dsdna fragments may also help explain the dye's relatively low tendency to promote nonspecific amplifications. nonspecifically amplified products are a result of mis-priming, where unintended chain extension reactions are initiated either by the set of primers partially hybridizing to each other or by the primers partially hybridizing to unintended regions of the templates. these pcr side-products can sometimes become the dominant or even the exclusive products under certain challenging conditions such as high dye concentrations, long amplicons, low target concentrations and the use of a non-hot-start enzyme, for example. the highly dye-dependent and dye concentration-dependent nature of nonspecific product formation strongly suggest that certain dna-binding dyes such as sg may have the ability to enhance or promote the formation of nonspecific primer hybridizations, which would otherwise not occur due to imperfect sequence match. indeed, intercalating dyes are known to be able to increase the stability of dna or rna duplexes by enhancing the stacking interaction and reducing the charge density of the phosphate backbone  <cit> . because the duplexes formed from mis-priming are very short fragments, the binding affinity of a qpcr dye to short dsdna fragments should correlate well with the dye's tendency to promote nonspecific amplifications. figures  <dig> and  <dig> show that, compared with sg, eg is much less likely to cause nonspecific amplification, consistent with eg's lower binding affinity to short dsdna fragments. one should realize that a more accurate assessment on eg's lower tendency to cause nonspecific amplification will likely require more rigorous testing methods such as cloning and sequencing of a large number of different clones.

fast qpcr is attractive for the amount of time one could save. however, qpcr using sg has been reported to produce poor reproducibility  <cit> , which has been confirmed by our result . we have demonstrated that, as a result of eg's lower tendency to inhibit pcr and promote nonspecific amplification, qpcr using the dye could be reliably carried out with up to  <dig>  μm dye concentration and as little as  <dig> s of chain extension time . however, because we used relatively simple plasmid dna as the input template, one should exercise caution when applying the same conditions to the amplifications of more challenging templates such as genomic dna. one of the factors that make genomic dna challenging templates is their resilience to melting in the initial cycles. also, the large remaining portion of the dna other than the target region may assume regional conformations that can act as inhibitors for the polymerase, effectively reducing the concentration of the enzyme. in addition, portions of the non-target region of the genomic dna may form partial or imperfect hybrids with the primers and/or the target and thus may initiate nonspecific amplifications and interfere with the desired target amplification. furthermore, because of the large size, genomic dna may significantly increase the viscosity of the reaction solution, thus lowering the diffusion rate of the reacting molecules. in view of these factors and the dye effect, several steps may be taken to ensure the success of amplifying a genomic target:  adjust the buffer composition or add an organic solvent such as dmso  <cit>  to facilitate the dna melting;  extend the melting time;  avoid excessive reduction of the extension time;  lower the dye concentration; and  increase the amount of enzyme.

pcr buffer composition may play a role in the performance of an eg master mix. it should be emphasized that all qpcr tests described in this paper employed regular taq and were run in a buffer containing  <dig> mm tris ph  <dig> ,  <dig> mm kcl and  <dig>  mm mgcl <dig>  as recommended by the enzyme manufacturer. for qpcr using chemically-modified hot-start enzyme amplitaq gold, a cognate buffer containing  <dig> mm tris ph  <dig> ,  <dig> mm kcl and  <dig>  mm mgcl <dig> is usually recommended by the enzyme suppliers. although these buffers have been widely used for qpcr using sg, our preliminary results indicate that they may not be optimal for qpcr using eg in combination with chemically-modified hot-start taq. eg may perform even better with a lower kcl concentration and concurrently a higher tris concentration, particularly for high-gc amplicons . the difference in buffer preference between eg and sg may be a reflection of the different dna-binding profiles of the two dyes, and suggests that for different enzymes it may be necessary to adjust the buffer composition in order to best take the advantage of eg.

our data showed that eg gave much stronger and narrower dna melt peaks than sg did in post-pcr dna melt curve analysis , a techniques increasingly used as a better alternative to gel electrophoresis for pcr product confirmation  <cit> . two factors may have contributed to the substantial difference in the melt peak intensities associated with the two dyes. the primary factor was likely to be the difference in dye concentrations used in the qpcr experiments. because a relatively high eg concentration  was used in the qpcr, the fluorescence resulting from dsdna-dye complex formation at the end of the amplification reaction was accordingly high. the high starting fluorescence level led to a large fluorescence fall following dsdna melting. as the intensity of a dna melt peak measures the rate of fluorescence loss as a function of temperature, a large fluorescence fall corresponds to an intense peak. the second factor was likely to be the difference in the discriminative fluorescence response on bindings to ssdna and dsdna between the two dyes. because eg had greater preferential fluorescence response to dsdna over ssdna than sg did , the conversion of a dsdna-dye complex into a ssdna-dye complex was expected to result in a greater fluorescence change for eg than for sg. moreover, eg's significantly lower binding affinity to ssdna should further decrease the fluorescence following the dsdna-eg complex melting. thus, these factors in combination should make post qpcr dna melt curve analysis using eg much more sensitive than that using sg.

the relatively narrow dna melt peaks associated with eg may be a result of high dye concentration, which minimizes or prevents dye redistribution problem from occurring. when the amount of a dna-binding dye is limiting relative to the amount of the amplicon, only a small fraction of the binding sites available on the amplicon may be occupied by the dye molecules. during amplicon melting, the dye molecules in the at-rich regions are expected to dissociate first due to the relatively lower melt temperatures of the regions. the dissociated dye molecules could then become available for binding to the still un-melted gc-rich regions. this dye redistribution may have the effect of delaying the rate of fluorescence loss during amplicon melting, leading to a relatively broad dna melting transition and thus broad melt peak. the relatively high pcr inhibition of sg requires that the dye be used at a relatively low concentration , which causes dye redistribution problem during dna melt curve analysis. as a result, melt peaks of dsdna-sg complexes are often relatively broad. dye redistribution is also believed to be responsible for sg's failure in the application of closed-tube high-resolution melt curve analysis , which is becoming a promising technique for identifying variants of heterozygous and homozygous sequences  <cit> . sg could be used for hrm application, only if the dye is reintroduced at a relatively high concentration at the end of a pcr experiment  <cit> . this practice, however, is undesirable because it is not compatible with qpcr and prone to cross contamination. unlike sg, eg is compatible with both qpcr and closed-tube hrm  <cit> , as a result of the dye's relatively high concentration permitted in qpcr. therefore the higher permissible concentration of eg in qpcr makes it more advantageous in detecting multiple products by melt curve analysis following the multiplex pcr experiments. it was shown that sg failed to detect multiple pcr products by showing only a single melt peak even though gel electrophoresis revealed the presence of multiple products  <cit> . the problem was again attributed to insufficient dye presence, which led to sg migration from the low-melting amplicons to the highest-melting amplicon during the dna melting process.

in a hrm study of methylation differences in an amplicon containing  <dig> cpg dinucleotides at the snprn locus, evagreen was compared with lcgreen plus and syto <dig> in statistically significant number of samples. evagreen gave most robust result and lowest failure rate  <cit> .

we have shown that eg also possesses other physical properties that should make the dye readily adaptable to current instrument settings and protocols for both qpcr and melt curve analysis. the absorption or excitation peak at  <dig> nm of the dna-bound eg well encompasses the wavelengths of some of the common excitation sources such as the  <dig> nm argon laser or the blue led light equipped in commercial qpcr instruments. the emission wavelength  of the dna-bound dye also matches well with the fam detection channel. in the absence of dna, eg exhibits a weak background fluorescence, which is slightly more pronounced than sg. this turned out to be a benefit for the bio-rad icycler iq pcr instrument because the background fluorescence of eg is sufficient for well-factor correction, which is normally accomplished by adding fam to the pcr mix. the nucleotide-independent dna binding property of eg also could be an advantage, particularly for multiplex pcr, where multiple templates may be amplified in a manner more reflective of the individual template concentrations. we observed that eg appears to be stable both under typical pcr condition and during storage in an alkaline buffer at lower temperatures, thus facilitating its routine handlings.

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that the unique dna-binding properties of eg could be responsible for the observed relatively low pcr inhibition and relatively low tendency to cause nonspecific amplification by the dye. an ideal qpcr dye is supposed to possess optimal affinity for dsdna to ensure detection sensitivity without adversely affecting the dsdna melting step or promoting regional stem-loop structure during the chain extension phase, and at the same time it should have low or no affinity for ssdna and short dna fragments. we therefore propose that a dna dye that substantially relies on electrostatic interaction for its dna binding may not be ideal for qpcr application because such a dye may bind to ssdna with significant affinity and is thus more likely to interfere with the chain extension step. the relatively low pcr inhibition of eg can be exploited for several benefits. first, the dye may be used at a relatively high concentration , which should provide a robust pcr signal as well as a strong and sharp dna melt peak. second, the use of a relatively high dye concentration in qpcr eliminates dye redistribution problem, making the dye suitable for hrm application in a closed-tube format. third, eg may be suitable for qpcr using a fast cycling protocol. finally, we have also shown that eg is both spectrally compatible with existing instruments and very stable. these combined features of eg should make it a promising dye for both qpcr and other related applications.

