BACKGROUND
polyandry, when a female mates with more than one male in a single reproductive period, is a common mating strategy among animals  <cit> . however, explanations of mating frequency based on classical sexual selection theory  suggest that males, but generally not females, should maximize their reproductive success through numerous matings  <cit> . furthermore, multiple matings can have significant fitness costs for females such as disease contraction  <cit> , increased predation risk  <cit> , and physical injury  <cit> . nevertheless, many field and experimental studies now show that females commonly mate multiply to acquire sperm from several males  <cit> .

the solution to the apparent paradox of polyandry is that females acquire direct and indirect fitness benefits through multiple matings. direct fitness benefits, such as increased parental care  <cit> , protection from predators  <cit> , and acquisition of nutrient-rich spermatophores or seminal fluid  <cit> , have been described in a number of species, most notably in insects  <cit> . in many other taxa, however, there are no obvious direct benefits of polyandry, suggesting that females may receive indirect  fitness benefits from multiple matings  <cit> . in these species, females may mate multiply to increase the likelihood of fertilization by a high quality mate through sperm competition or sperm selection  <cit>   or to ensure fertilization with a compatible mate . in some cases, sperm with genotypes that differ from a particular female’s eggs are more successful at fertilization or may enhance offspring viability  <cit> . in other cases, greater genetic similarity  is positively associated with fertilization success  <cit> .

while polyandry has been examined extensively in behaviorally complex and mobile terrestrial animals , less considered are the conditions that affect the evolution and frequency of polyandry in sessile marine animals, most of which have resource-free mating systems  <cit> , in which the benefits of polyandry are primarily indirect and mating is limited by gametic dispersal distances  <cit> . polyandry may be beneficial  in sessile species if it increases the likelihood of fertilization by either high quality or genetically compatible sperm when pre-copulatory mate choice is limited  <cit> . on the other hand, polyandry may be an unavoidable consequence of reproduction in these species, its frequency a reflection of the density of conspecifics and the inability to reject or avoid multiple fertilizations. among sessile species, barnacles are most unusual in that they copulate, such that mating is likely limited to only a handful of adjacent individuals in most species . observations of social polyandry  are common in barnacles , but genetic analyses of barnacle mating systems are limited and in some cases have yielded contrasting results with respect to the frequency of polyandry. for example, one study found that the prevalence of multiple paternity was related to density but was generally low, suggesting that siring success was mediated by the distance between mates  <cit> , whereas an unpublished study from another non-stalked species reported polyandry in nearly 80% of broods . a third study examined paternity in broods from physically isolated individuals of the gooseneck barnacle pollicipes polymerus, finding that some individuals had received sperm through the water column, and thus can potentially reproduce with mates outside the range of an extensible penis  <cit> . finally, high relatedness and kin aggregation has been observed in semibalanus balanoides <cit>  which suggests that genetic identity or compatibility may also be important in determining barnacle settlement and possibly reproductive success. clearly, the drivers of polyandry in barnacles and other sessile marine animals are complex and more information is needed on the relative roles of ecological and genetic factors influencing the evolution of polyandry in these species.

in this study we used microsatellite markers to examine multiple paternity in a natural population of pollicipes elegans, an hermaphroditic intertidal gooseneck barnacle that is found in high-density aggregations on rocky shores of the tropical and subtropical eastern pacific. based on the intriguing findings from previous studies of paternity in barnacles  <cit>  and evidence of high relatedness within barnacle aggregations  <cit>  we examined the relationship between conspecific density and multiple paternity, the effect of genetic relatedness on proportional siring success, and the extent of relatedness within p. elegans aggregations. though it is difficult to explicitly show the genetic benefits of polyandry , a relationship between relatedness and siring success indicates that genetic identity is important in determining reproductive success in multiply-sired broods, potentially driving the evolution of polyandry in p. elegans.

RESULTS
paternity
paternity analysis of  <dig> individual larvae from  <dig> broods and their respective mothers revealed two or more fathers in  <dig> of the  <dig> broods analyzed, with the minimum number of fathers ranging from one to five . in six out of the  <dig> broods analyzed, there were multiple solutions for the reconstructed paternal genotypes , which were ranked by likelihood, based on mendelian segregation. there was no effect of sample size on the number of fathers estimated . in the three cases of single paternity, offspring inherited at least one allele that was not present in the mother’s genotype, demonstrating that self-fertilization was unlikely.

our power to detect multiple paternity  was very high given the markers and sample sizes available in this study. simulations showed that the power to detect two or three fathers was relatively high  even at low sample sizes of  <dig> offspring, and increased to  <dig>  and  <dig>   when the number of offspring was increased to the mean sample sizes from this experiment . however, power to detect four or five fathers was much lower; at mean sample sizes power was  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. skew in reproductive contribution  also reduced power substantially in simulations of four and five fathers, but power was not substantially affected for detecting two or three fathers . at the average sample size from this study and the skew scenario evaluated, power to detect four and five fathers with skew was  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively.

among aggregations for which we were able to genotype all of the adults, we found few exogenous alleles in larval broods that could have originated through spermcasting. for the two lowest densities , densities at which we were able to genotype every individual, we found no external alleles in any larval broods. for one aggregation at a higher density , for which we were able to genotype all but one adult, we found three exogenous alleles in larval broods, suggesting that at least one of these alleles originated from outside the aggregation.

effect of density on paternity
examining paternity in broods sampled from a range of conspecific densities , we found a positive and significant linear relationship between adult barnacle density and the number of contributing fathers . this linear relationship appeared to level off with higher density and regression of paternity on log-transformed density produced a better overall fit .

reproductive skew and effect of relatedness
reproductive contribution of fathers in multiply sired broods was variable, differing significantly from the expectation of equality  in four of the  <dig> broods analyzed . in the broods showing significant departures from equal paternal contributions, the patterns of skew were different. for example, in brood c <dig>  most of the offspring  were sired by one individual, while the other four fathers sired somewhat equal , but far smaller numbers of offspring. in brood c <dig>  two of the fathers sired an approximately equal proportion of the offspring , with the 3rd father siring far less .

the permutation-based test of correlation revealed a positive and highly significant association between parental relatedness and the proportion of a given brood sired by putative fathers . this relationship was robust to a number of different relatedness estimators including that of queller and goodnight  <cit>  . overall, pairwise relatedness between parents was relatively low , though a few parental pairs appeared to show very high relatedness .

genetic analysis of adult barnacles within aggregations
the eight markers used to examine fine scale population structure and relatedness in the three barnacle aggregations varied in their number of alleles , and showed an overall pattern of high heterozygosity . in aggregation two only, two markers showed significant deviations from hardy weinberg equilibrium . principal coordinates analysis showed little evidence of allelic differences across the three groups . similarly, overall fst was low , with only one significant pairwise fst comparison . relatedness calculations within each group were generally low,  with only aggregation one showing a positive average pairwise relatedness . relatedness in the first aggregation was significantly greater than expected by chance  whereas the relatedness estimates for the other two aggregations were not .

discussion
multiple paternity in p. elegans
despite modest sample sizes of offspring and relatively low power to detect four and five fathers, we found a high frequency of polyandry  in p. elegans, with up to five fathers per brood. both the frequency of polyandry and number fathers in multiply-sired brood p. elegans are greater than what was found in tetraclita rubescens, an acorn barnacle, which had multiple paternity in 29% of broods and only 4/ <dig> broods with more than two fathers  <cit> , but are similar to unpublished data for another acorn barnacle, semibalanus balanoides . these contrasting results suggests that the frequency and extent of polyandry varies substantially among barnacle species, as it appears to vary among other copulating crustaceans such as crabs and lobsters . similar variation in the frequency of multiple paternity has been observed across species of birds, in which levels of extra-pair paternity vary from 0% to over 90%  <cit> .

a significant relationship between barnacle density and the number of fathers contributing to broods suggests that the number of potential sperm donors in an aggregation is a significant factor influencing polyandry in p. elegans. a similar effect of conspecific density on the frequency of polyandry has been shown in other copulating marine  <cit>  and terrestrial  <cit>  species, but not in a spermcasting, brooding colonial ascidian  <cit> . unlike spermcasting invertebrates, most barnacles transfer sperm with an extensible penis that can be several times an individual’s body length, and the ability to successfully fertilize mates is likely determined largely by the length of the penis and the distance to potential mates  <cit> , but see  <cit> . total extensible penis length is not known for p. elegans, but the recent report of relatively short penis length in a related gooseneck barnacle species  <cit> , suggests that mating may also be limited to close neighbors in p. elegans.

most broods possessed microsatellite alleles that matched those found in adults sampled from their mother’s aggregation, indicating that fertilization occurs primarily by physically proximal males. this result suggests that if spermcasting occurs in p. elegans, it is only effective over short distances, or within aggregations. while we cannot rule out short-distance spermcasting within aggregations , we found no exogenous paternal alleles in any of the low density aggregations and thus no evidence of long-distance spermcasting. likewise, most individuals in low-density aggregations lacked lamellae entirely, suggesting that long-distance spermcasting is neither common nor effective in p. elegans.

we also observed an apparent upper limit to multiple paternity in p. elegans, as indicated by the observation that the linear relationship between the number of fathers siring a brood leveled off at higher densities. several factors could explain this. first, a lack of power to detect four or more fathers may have produced underestimates of paternity at higher densities resulting in the apparent asymptotic relationship observed between paternity and density. though power was limited in this study, an upper limit to polyandry may be set by the number of neighbors within reach because penis length is short in pollicipes, and because spermcasting  may only be effective over short distances. lastly, females might actively discard sperm or reject copulations after a certain number of insemination attempts, given that copulations can be costly to survival , potentially limiting the number of contributing males at higher densities. in their meta-analysis of multiple paternity in brooding invertebrate species vs. “pregnant” vertebrates  <cit> , avise et al. noted the far lower levels of multiple paternity than what is theoretically possible given that brood sizes of marine invertebrate species can be as high as  <dig>  embryos. an upper limit to the number of fathers contributing to a brood likely represents a balance between the fitness benefits of polyandry and the limitations on multiple mating imposed by logistical or physical factors.

polyandry and sexual selection in p. elegans
evidence of significant skew in paternal contribution and the finding of a significant correlation between genetic similarity and reproductive success suggest that some form of post-copulatory sexual selection may occur in p. elegans . paternity bias towards mates with greater genetic similarity could indicate that the specific genetic combination of gametes from the two parents influenced reproductive success, a result that is consistent with a compatible genes model of the benefits polyandry . the finding of a positive relationship between genetic similarity and reproductive success contrasts sharply with much of the current literature on the indirect genetic benefits of polyandry, which typically emphasizes a negative relationship between genetic similarity and reproductive success . mating with genetically dissimilar individuals is thought to be beneficial because increased genetic diversity reduces the risk of inbreeding depression, and ensures a range of genotypes for offspring to contend with environmental uncertainty  <cit> . other studies have, however, demonstrated fitness benefits of mating between individuals with a high or intermediate level of genetic similarity  <cit> . our results show the potential for a similar fitness advantage for fathers that are genetically similar to their mates, supporting the role of compatible genes as a potential benefit of polyandry in this species.

studies of relatedness in other barnacles may provide clues about why genetically similar mates produce more offspring in multiply-sired broods of p. elegans. in the acorn barnacle semibalanus balanoides, barnacle aggregations from a number of rocky outcrops showed higher average relatedness than expected by chance   <cit> , which is likely driven by oceanography  and sets the stage for fine-scale spatial variability in relatedness that may be important during reproduction. though we found that overall genetic similarity was much lower within adult aggregations of p. elegans , our paternity results suggest that during reproduction, there may be a preference for sperm from more genetically similar individuals, even if that similarity is low. because we could not individually genotype recently-fertilized embryos, it is not clear whether the observed pattern of paternity bias reflects greater fertilization success of compatible gametes or differential post-fertilization viability of compatible embryos. both scenarios are plausible. experimental work on the sperm-bindin locus and receptor in various sea urchin species has shown that males with more common or matching bindin genotypes perform better in sperm competition, resulting in greater reproductive success . alternatively, a number of studies show that differential embryo survival influences paternity bias, and its inference  <cit> . future studies of paternity in barnacles should examine paternity bias and differential reproductive success at different time points—post fertilization  and during the larval stages—to better understand the role of compatibility during fertilization and during the larval stages.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we found that multiple paternity is common in the eastern pacific gooseneck barnacle p. elegans  and that the number of mates contributing to a brood is associated with the density of conspecifics. we also found that higher relatedness between mates conferred an advantage in male reproductive success within multiply-sired broods, suggesting the potential for cryptic female choice of compatible sperm and that polyandry may confer genetic benefits to brooding individuals, though future studies will be needed to test this explicitly. while density clearly affects the availability of potential mates and thus opportunities for multiple paternity, post-copulatory processes  may be important in ensuring reproductive success in this sessile, polyandrous species.

