BACKGROUND
recently, barthélémy et al. studied the ribosomal protein  set of spadella cephaloptera in order to investigate the phylogenetic and genomic features of chaetognaths  <cit> . chaetognaths are small marine predators of significant importance in the planktonic ecosystem  <cit> . however, they are mainly known for their singular morphological and developmental characters that have been extensively debated by zoologists since the discovery of the phylum  <cit> . furthermore, the molecular phylogeny of these organisms has also proved problematic, which makes their placement one of the most difficult issues in animal systematics  <cit> . noticeably, two phylogenomic studies recently argued for the inclusion of chaetognaths in protostomes but proposed different branchings for this phylum: as the sister group of all other protostomes or as the sister group of just the lophotrochozoans  <cit> . the data analyzed by barthélémy et al.  <cit>  came from a collection of  <dig>  ests that were sequenced by our team in order to perform phylogenomic inference, as described previously  <cit> . from this data, barthélémy et al. retrieved the ests encoding the  <dig> ribosomal proteins, which are major components of the ribosome translation machinery  <cit> . these genes are broadly conserved during evolution and they have rarely been duplicated among eukaryotes  <cit> . their analysis of this dataset of ribosomal protein transcripts lead barthélémy et al. to emphasized three main findings  <cit> .

• first, they identified nucleotide variants of certain rp genes in the surveyed ests. they stated that these variants correspond to duplicated, paralogous copies on the basis of pcr amplification of the alternative forms in single individuals. accordingly, the authors proposed an allopolyploid origin for the chaetognath phylum. moreover, they suggested that the two paralogous gene sets were differentially regulated depending on tissues and life-stages of s. cephaloptera.

• then, they described conserved 28-nucleotide stretches at the extremity of 5'utrs of unrelated rp transcripts. these motifs are overall similar but could be distinguished by some diagnostic residues, from which these forms were called tac and ttt. they assumed that these motifs belong to the genomic copies of all these genes. they claimed to have identified binding sites for transcription factors in these motifs and thus proposed that these motifs are involved in the regulation of transcription.

• finally, they performed phylogenetic inference from a concatenated rp dataset of ~ <dig> amino acid positions and  <dig> taxa, but were unable to accurately position chaetognaths among metazoans. the authors said that this lack of resolution could be due both to long-branch-attraction and to nucleotide compositional bias affecting the divergent chaetognath sequences.

here, we prove that mistakes were introduced in this previous study, making these three conclusions incorrect. we first challenge the hypothesis that the conserved motifs they observed in 5'utrs are present within the genomic copies of numerous unrelated rp genes. in contrast, we actually show that these motifs were added post-transcriptionally by a trans-splicing mechanism. then, we investigate the possible causes for the lack of resolution of the phylogeny previously obtained. we point out that instead of the two biases mentioned by barthélémy et al.  <cit> , the problems encountered are incident to the limited set of taxa sampled.

RESULTS
experimental questioning of the gene duplication hypothesis
the exploration of transcript diversity within the est collection revealed the presence of distinct variants of numerous ribosomal proteins, which are primarily distinguished by strong nucleotide divergences in both coding sequence and non-coding portions of the transcripts. at the extremity of the 5'utrs of all these unrelated transcripts, barthélémy et al. also detected two 28-nucleotides long motifs, which are overall similar but with the exception of some diagnostic residues that prompt them to call these motifs the tac and ttt forms  <cit> .

barthélémy et al. tested whether these ribosomal protein variants correspond to genes duplicated within the genome of s. cephaloptera by attempting to amplify these alternative variants from the genomic dna of single individuals. for this purpose, they designed reverse primers in the coding sequence of the targeted genes and forward primers within the conserved 5'utrs motifs that could be split in tac and ttt forms, based upon divergent nucleotides . this experimental design relies on the hypothesis that these motifs are present in the genomic copies of the rp genes, in the same position as it lies in their transcripts. in their study, amplifications were performed for three different individuals and four genes  that each included at least two variants . it was claimed that some products were recovered, but no documentation was provided, neither sequences nor photos of the gel-electrophoresis results  <cit> . nevertheless, the authors concluded that duplicated paralogous genes of ribosomal proteins are present in the genome of s. cephaloptera.

we argue here that the 5'utr motifs in which barthélémy et al. have selected their forward primers, are not located in the genomic regions of the targeted genes, but are only added after transcription during a trans-splicing maturation of the pre-mrnas. indeed, we noticed that these conserved motifs are present at the 5' end of ~30% of the transcripts in the library and that those transcripts code for many kinds of proteins, not just rps . we also found that, with a length of 36-nucleotides, these conserved motifs are slightly longer than the 28-nucleotides previously described, as illustrated by the example of rp s <dig> . we consider that the occurrence of such conserved motifs in hundreds of distinct genes is inconceivable and we propose instead that this pattern reveals the occurrence of trans-splicing. the observation of similar stretches of conserved nucleotides at the 5' ends of transcripts from unrelated genes has been considered as firm evidence for trans-splicing in an abundant literature dealing with organisms from all over the tree of eukaryotes, such as euglenozoans, hydrozoans, nematodes, urochordates and rotifers  <cit> . the trans-splicing mechanism acts through spliceosomal addition at the 5' end of transcripts of a splice-leader  sequence that is encoded by a distinct locus, the splice-leader gene. this splice-leader sequence is then found at the 5' end of a large subset of transcripts, but is found to be absent from the genes themselves that are related to these transcripts. adding the splice-leader is said to ensure a better stability of trans-spliced transcripts, but trans-splicing is also associated with operonic transcription in some metazoans .

the occurrence of trans-splicing in s. cephaloptera was verified by our experimental attempts to reproduce and complete the work of barthélémy et al.  <cit> . we first targeted the variant  <dig> of the ribosomal protein s <dig>  gene with the same set of oligonucleotide primers used in their study , but we were not able to amplify any product using the conditions given in the above publication . conversely, using an alternate forward primer located in the coding sequence of the variant  <dig> of rp s <dig> gene, we recovered the genomic sequence of variant  <dig> of the rp s <dig> with the same dna sample, which excluded any pcr problem in our attempt to reproduce the results of barthélémy et al. . further sequencing of this product allowed us to characterize the structure of rp s <dig> with the arrangement of its introns and exons . second, the absence of tac and ttt motifs in the genomic sequence of the rp s <dig> gene was definitely proven by cloning and sequencing its upstream region using an original pcr genome walking strategy, that is, no such motifs were found here . these two observations are consistent with the post-transcriptional addition of the tac and ttt motifs by a trans-splicing mechanism. finally, definitive evidence of trans-splicing was provided through the localization and characterization of the genes that encode splice-leaders corresponding to tac and ttt motifs. we specifically surveyed the 5s cluster region using forward and reverse 5s primers, because this is the region that usually contains splice-leader genes in other species that perform trans-splicing  <cit> . in this way, we identified two sl genes organized in tandem within a unit of the 5s gene cluster . these tandem genes correspond to the two sl motifs  and both include an outron, a cotranscribed sequence that is excised during trans-splicing process  <cit> .

in summary, three lines of evidence strongly support the occurrence of trans-splicing in s. cephaloptera: first, the conservation of nucleotide stretches, the splice-leaders, at the 5'-end of unrelated transcripts; second, the lack of these splice-leader motifs in the genomic copies of considered genes; and third, the discovery of sl-genes within 5s clusters, where they usually lie in other species exhibiting trans-splicing.

we have demonstrated that tac and ttt motifs could not be reliably used to demonstrate the presence of paralogs but the question remains of whether the variants of ribosomal proteins, such as the variants 1– <dig> of rp s <dig>  correspond to paralogous genes or not . conceivably, such paralogs could have arisen either through previous whole-genome duplications or allopolyploidization events in the lineage leading to s. cephaloptera. alternatively, they may simply not be paralogs but instead may result from cryptic-speciation. according to this latter view, the multiple arrow worms collected for library construction would belong to several different cryptic species within the sampled population. the nucleotide divergence observed between the variants of rp genes would then correspond to the genetic differentiation between these cryptic species. it has recently been discovered that cases of cryptic speciation are more common than originally expected  <cit>  and cryptic speciation could actually be widespread among marine organisms, as illustrated by the example of the well-known ciona intestinalis tunicate  <cit> .

ribosomal proteins fully resolve chaetognath and animal phylogeny
using a dataset of about  <dig> amino acids and  <dig> taxa, barthélémy et al. did not recover a clear positioning of the chaetognath taxon in the phylogenetic tree, despite the use of improved inference methods, in particular the site-heterogenous cat model that generally lessens the problem of long-branch attraction  <cit> . accordingly, they attributed this lack of resolution to some putative problems, namely, a persistent long-branch-attraction  artefact, a bias of amino-acid or nucleotide composition, a divergence between the variants of rp genes and finally the sampling of a too limited set of taxa. however, no attempt was made to test which of these many problems were the main culprits.

hence, we carried out several analyses that revealed that the main culprit was the scarce taxon sampling. first, we illustrated the power of a ribosomal protein dataset for resolving the phylogeny of bilaterians by employing the site-heterogenous cat model on a dataset containing  <dig>  aminoacid positions and  <dig> taxa . we recovered the major clades of the so-called 'new animal phylogeny' with reliable support values  <cit>   and we positioned the chaetognaths as the sister group of all other protostomes with significant posterior probabilities  and bootstrap support . however, the cat-based analysis failed to recover the monophyly of the deuterostomes and instead united the hemichordates, echinoderms and xenoturbellids with the protostomes, but with low support  . this topology has been obtained by an independent study that used similar conditions  <cit> , but it is clearly contradicted by morphological analyses and molecular analyses using site-homogenous model such as wag, that is those analyses upheld deuterostome monophyly  <cit> .

systematic errors related to model violation, as well as problems due to limited taxon sampling, are well-known pitfalls in phylogenetic reconstructions, and numerous approaches allow the detection and resolution of these problems . first, using a relative-rate test we excluded that chaetognaths evolved at a significantly higher rate than other taxa , which is, for instance, the case for platyhelminthes which did evolve faster . hence, this testing supports our phylogenetic findings by excluding the possibility that our placement of chætognaths is an lba artefact. adding to this support, the cat model we used in tree reconstruction itself minimizes lba  <cit> .

also, barthélémy et al. suggested that a compositional bias impacts the phylogenetic placement of chætognaths. in dataset with such biases, taxa with high content in certain nucleotides or amino-acids  can group together artefactually as they have independently evolved these biases through homoplasy. compositional biases mainly affect the nucleotide datasets, but nucleotide composition could influence amino-acid content, so amino-acid datasets can have this bias too  <cit> . therefore, we performed a principal component analysis and a test of amino acid composition to evaluate potential deviation in amino acid composition . we found that the amino acid composition of some taxa is strongly divergent  but that this is not the case for chaetognaths, whose content is utterly typical . finally, we estimated the impact on the overall topology of the divergence between the variants of each ribosomal protein, which corresponds either to paralogous copies or to haplotypes from distinct cryptic species. for this purpose, we constructed alternate chaetognath taxa including either the most- or the least-divergent sequence variant of s. cephaloptera rp when these two forms are present . trees inferred from alignments including any of these taxa resulted in identical topologies and similar support values , which excludes the possibility that our previous statements were biased by the inclusion of one of the distinct gene variants  <cit> .

in summary, we excluded three of the potential pitfalls that could misplace chaetognaths in the rp-based phylogenetic tree: a remnant long-branch attraction effect, a compositional bias of amino-acids, and an intra-taxon molecular divergence. unaddressed, these problems could have raised doubts about our present finding as well as those of previous studies  <cit> . our analyses clearly argue for the chaetognaths as the sister group of all other protostomes, as is supported by both site-heterogenous  and classical site-homogenous  models  <cit> . interestingly, this phylogenetic position was independently recovered in two recent studies, mainly based on ribosomal proteins that include enlarged taxonomic sampling with acoel flatworms  <cit>  or bryozoans and syndermates  <cit> .

here, the position of chaetognaths was primarily resolved by improving the taxon sampling, from  <dig> to  <dig> major taxa. the problem of inadequate taxon sampling has been at the the root of major controversies in the phylogenomic field  <cit> . studies based on a limited taxon sampling have proposed the revival of the coelomata hypothesis  <cit>  or even proposed the impossibility of resolving animal phylogeny as a whole  <cit> , but careful examination of these results later revealed that the authors had been misled by incomplete taxon sampling  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we show here that the study by barthélémy et al.  <cit>  relies on a set of evidence whose accuracy is dubious. particularly, the major claim, for extensive gene duplication, was made on the basis of experiments and analyses that did not include sufficient validation procedures. for example, no sequences or gel photographs were provided to support the results of pcr amplifications of genes. hence, we suggest that careful precautions be taken when dealing with understudied model organisms for which only limited data and few preliminary studies are available. the originality and the novelty of chaetognath genomics deserve data and analyses of the highest grade. further investigation of the questions briefly evoked in the present paper will be the subject of a new publication designed to enlighten the genomic features of the astonishing organisms that are chætognaths  <cit> .

