BACKGROUND
neuronal development, as well as neuronal response to injury, depend on both intrinsic programs of gene expression and on extrinsic cues from the surrounding environment. understanding the balance between these two, and potentially influencing it, are the focus of current strategies to improve neuronal regeneration after injury  <cit> . that the intrinsic state of a neuron can be manipulated to improve regeneration has been well-demonstrated in dorsal root ganglia  neurons, where neurite outgrowth in response to spinal nerve injury is significantly improved by a preceding peripheral nerve lesion  <cit> . this ability of intrinsic changes to influence neurite outgrowth has been further demonstrated by transgenic expression of genes such as cytoskeleton-associated protein  <dig> , growth associated protein  <dig> , small proline-rich repeat protein 1a , and activating transcription factor  <dig>   <cit> .

in addition to intrinsic effects, the extrinsic environment also vastly influences outgrowth ability  <cit> . for example, neurite regrowth is affected by injury-induced inhibitory factors such as semaphorins, nogo, and myelin-associated glycoprotein, as well as reactive microglia and fibrous scar tissue  <cit> . grafts of peripheral nervous system  tissue at sites of central nervous system  lesion can improve neurite growth across an otherwise inhibitory scar, and much research has been focused on distinguishing the growth-permissive and growth-inhibitory aspects of these two  <cit> .

measuring changes in neuronal gene expression in models of regeneration has allowed for a combinatorial readout of both intrinsic and extrinsic factors, since many extrinsic cues elicit intracellular signals that affect transcription  <cit> . however the complexity of in vivo models means that responses that causally affect a neuron's regeneration are observed simultaneously with dispensable secondary or tertiary effects of the environment and signaling from other affected cells. in vitro models provide an opportunity to address this, by allowing for tighter experimental control of the extrinsic environment while still allowing measurement of intrinsic transcriptional activity.

in the present study, we have used two in vitro model systems, those of superior cervical ganglia  and drg, to study intrinsic transcriptional activity during neurite outgrowth. explanting these tissues provides the dual conditions of axotomy, which mirrors in vivo regeneration models, and a controlled extracellular environment, where we can observe gene expression changes during neurite outgrowth in the absence of signaling from multiple guidance factors and injury-induced signals in vivo. we compared these effects to published data on genes associated with regeneration in vivo, and found many areas of commonality. we also attempted to perturb these gene expression patterns with exposure to semaphorin 3a , a potent extrinsic inhibitory cue that affects both local growth cone morphology and also axoplasmic transport – a means of potentially conveying signals back to the nucleus  <cit> . these data demonstrate the applicability of comparing across in vitro and in vivo models of neurite outgrowth, and their potential for revealing genes involved in intrinsic patterns of regeneration.

RESULTS
intrinsic patterns of gene expression during neurite outgrowth in vitro
we wished to determine the transcriptional profiles of neurons undergoing neurite outgrowth in vitro. we were particularly interested in finding genes whose expression is generally associated with the process of neurite outgrowth, rather than with cell type-specific effects. thus, in order to avoid focusing on transcripts unique to one tissue type versus another, we used a comparative strategy to look for effects that were common to two tissue types and therefore more likely to be involved in the general process of neurite outgrowth. while these explants contain multiple cell types, we felt this was preferable to the more disruptive conditions required to dissociate neurons or obtain a pure neuron population. to this end, we monitored gene expression in cultured explants from scg and drg using dna microarrays.

we initiated our studies by culturing embryonic day  <dig>  mouse scg in vitro and harvesting tissue for rna isolation at time points from  <dig> to  <dig> hours. time points were selected to detect both fast, short-term responses , as well as sustained, long-term changes . samples were hybridized to affymetrix mg-u74v <dig> a and b microarrays, with rna from acutely dissected explants serving as a baseline reference. in scg,  <dig>  probesets were observed to change  <dig>  fold or greater over time. to test if these changes were significantly different from the null hypothesis , we used a polynomial regression of the maximum of quadratic order. this analysis revealed that  <dig>  probesets were significantly changed  during neurite outgrowth by scg.

we followed these experiments with a parallel analysis of a more heterogeneous tissue type, the drg, which is more frequently used than scg for in vivo studies of neurite regeneration. cervical and upper thoracic drg from e <dig> embryos were cultured with ngf  and harvested at time points from  <dig> to  <dig> hours. using affymetrix moe 430a microarrays,  <dig>  probesets were observed to change  <dig>  fold or more during neurite outgrowth in cultured drg, with  <dig>  changes of p ≤  <dig>  by quadratic statistical analysis.

the transcripts commonly affected during neurite outgrowth by both these model neuron populations may represent those most relevant to neurite outgrowth or regeneration in general. thus, we combined the scg and drg microarray data by identifying  <dig>  matching probesets from the two types of affymetrix microarrays used for these experiments .  <dig> matched probesets were changed significantly at least  <dig>  fold . to visualize these gene expression profiles, a clustering algorithm called hierarchical ordered partitioning and collapsing hybrid  was used   <cit> . hopach is similar to traditional hierarchical clustering, but also provides statistically set cluster divisions at each sub-level  <cit> . the data are visualized as a dual time-course, with the drg samples over time followed by the scg samples over time . the first-level hopach clusters  group genes with common regulation patterns in both drg and scg , as well as those with more divergent patterns.

we wished to determine the biological functions of these gene clusters. the mappfinder function of genmapp was used to test for significant localization of particular biological functions  terms) to each of the main hopach clusters  <cit> . go terms over-represented in each cluster, as compared to their presence in the whole dataset, are shown in figure 1b . significant down-regulation, by both scg and drg, was found for genes involved in cell division and nuclear metabolism . common upregulation  was observed for genes associated with extracellular matrix, basement membrane, and cell adhesion, suggesting remodeling of the local environment to allow axon outgrowth. increases in both scg and drg of genes involved in proteolysis and lysosome function echo previous observations of increases in these gene families after neuronal injury  <cit> . finally, neurite outgrowth relies on the increased production of both membrane and cytoplasmic components  <cit> , as can be observed in the large numbers of genes in the commonly upregulated group , where genes involved in lipid metabolism and cytoplasmic components are localized.

in addition to looking at drg and scg changes together, the data for each time course of neurite outgrowth were clustered and annotated separately . one of the unique categories identified in drg but not scg is the late induction of apoptosis-related genes. this is not surprising, since apoptosis is normally underway in drg neurons of this age, while scg neurons undergo apoptosis in vivo at a later age  <cit> . in addition, while most scg neurons are ngf-responsive at this time, drg are more heterogeneous and include both ngf- and neurotrophin 3-responsive neurons, of which the latter may undergo cell death in these cultures  <cit> . mappfinder annotation of these clusters thus confirms previously observed differences in their developmental programs, and demonstrates that functions known to be involved in neurite outgrowth are represented in these data.

we also wanted to uncover novel biological associations in these data. as one approach to this, we examined the next smaller level of hopach clusters. most significant biological functions localized in these smaller clusters were also represented in the larger main clusters, as shown by the vertical colored bars and matching colored boxes in the go term list in figure  <dig>  however one example of novel biological associations found at the sub-cluster level is demonstrated by a group of genes at the bottom of figure 1a. this sub-cluster contains twelve genes, of which six are associated by genmapp with nucleic acid binding : atf <dig>  early growth response  <dig> , eukaryotic translation initiation factor  <dig> , gm <dig> , musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene family protein f , and c-myc intron  <dig> binding protein  . the expression of these genes peaks earlier than most other genes in cluster  <dig>  suggesting a potential for temporal regulation. atf <dig> upregulation has been previously noted after injury, and its regeneration-promoting ability has been recently demonstrated in vivo by seijffers et al   <cit> . egr <dig> is a multi-functional transcription regulator in both neuronal and non-neuronal cells. in the nervous system, it is associated with plasticity and synaptic activity, although a transient activation after neuronal injury has been noted  <cit> . maff has recently been described as part of a negative downstream regulatory loop after activation of egr <dig>  <cit> . although mibp <dig> has been previously found to be neuronally expressed  <cit> , neither mibp <dig>  eif2s <dig>  gm <dig>  nor maff have been previously linked to regeneration. however their close association with atf <dig> and similar temporal expression suggests them as good candidates for a role in neurite outgrowth and regeneration.

relating gene expression patterns of growth in vitro to regeneration in vivo
to understand how the transcriptional patterns of neurite outgrowth in cultured drg and scg relate to regeneration of adult ganglia, these data were compared to several published studies of adult drg and scg regeneration in vivo. for this meta-analysis, three recently published studies with large datasets were selected, and the time point from each study that most closely matched the other available data was used. from costigan et al., the data included  <dig> unique genes significantly regulated at least  <dig>  fold in lumbar drg at three days after sciatic nerve axotomy  <cit> . in xiao et al.,  <dig> genes were significantly regulated at least  <dig> fold in lumbar drg at two days after sciatic nerve axotomy  <cit> . finally, the data from boeshore et al. provided  <dig> genes significantly regulated at least  <dig> fold in scg at two days after axotomy of the internal and external carotid nerves  <cit> . a total of  <dig> genes are found in common among at least two of these three studies of neurite regeneration in vivo , of which  <dig> are found among the probesets in our data. of the  <dig> genes found in the drg-scg in vitro dataset,  <dig> genes were also significantly changed during in vitro outgrowth of one or both explant types.

our data provide an opportunity to look at the behavior of this group of previously identified regeneration-associated genes in two common in vitro models of neurite outgrowth. at the time of dissection both drg and scg have extended significant nerve projections   <cit> . therefore these embryonic in vitro culture models encompass both ongoing developmental gene expression as well as effects of axotomy. we localized the  <dig> genes commonly affected during in vivo regeneration models and in vitro outgrowth models on the cluster diagrams described above . the localization of these changed genes on the cluster diagrams provides insights into which of these in vivo regeneration-associated genes may be part of an intrinsic outgrowth program. for instance, down-regulation of the transcription factor isl <dig> and up-regulation of the catabolic enzyme lysozyme have both been previously noted during drg and scg in vivo regeneration, and these genes behave similarly during embryonic neurite outgrowth  <cit> . this suggests that their functions may be truly intrinsic to this process. however genes such as neuropeptide y , growth arrest and dna damage inducible protein  <dig> , arginase  <dig> , and protein tyrosine phosphatase 4a <dig>  all of which are upregulated during in vivo regeneration, are down-regulated over time during outgrowth by embryonic scg and drg  <cit> . this suggests that upregulation of these genes may not be an absolute requirement for neurite outgrowth or regeneration. thus the present data not only suggests additional outgrowth-associated genes, but may also suggest which in vivo changes are intrinsic to neurite extension, and which may be the result of the extrinsic environment or synaptic interactions.

in addition to these  <dig> genes changed both in vivo and in vitro, there were also  <dig> regeneration-associated genes present but not changed significantly in vitro . these  <dig> genes are generally of low intensity, with a median intensity value of  <dig>  in drg and  <dig>  in scg, as compared to a median intensity of  <dig>  in drg or  <dig>  in scg for the  <dig> regeneration- and in vitro outgrowth-associated genes. these  <dig> genes include those functioning mainly in mature neurons  or in non-neuronal cells  or the glial high affinity glutamate transporter slc1a3). the lack of significant change for these transcripts in vitro is difficult to interpret, since low intensity may reflect alternatively active repression or a low expression level in the growing cells.

the two groups of genes from the meta-analysis encompass two possible patterns of gene expression in explants undergoing outgrowth in vitro – first, the up- or down-regulation of transcripts from a starting level, and second, the failure to up or down-regulate a given set of transcripts. a third possibility is that genes highly expressed in developing neurons in vivo would be required and/or maintained at a high level of expression during outgrowth in vitro. these genes would not appear to be upregulated over time, and would thus not be captured by our previous analyses. since microarray hybridization intensity usually scales with increasing expression levels, we calculated a median intensity value for each gene in the drg-scg dataset as a relative measure of expression. the intensity values were plotted against each other, revealing a linear relationship  . thus many genes are expressed at similar levels in both tissues. for instance, within the top 2% highest intensity genes, more than half  are highly expressed in both drg and scg.

upon examination of the genes identified in this highest intensity, most highly expressed group of transcripts, we found many genes previously linked to regeneration . these include several of the best-known regeneration associated genes, including scg <dig> , gap <dig>  cap <dig> , and marcks  <cit> . two other large categories of genes include proteins involved with ribosomal functions or cytoskeletal dynamics, both of which are relevant to the process of neurite outgrowth. to quantify these observations, we used mappfinder to assess the over-representation of go terms among the most highly expressed genes . figure 3a illustrates several of these functional groups and notes which transcripts have been previously linked to regeneration  <cit> . together, the meta-analysis and intensity-analysis confirm that gene expression patterns of neurite outgrowth in vitro incorporate many growth-competence genes associated with neurite regeneration in vivo, as well as pointing to potentially novel members of these groups for further study.

validation of transcriptional patterns associated with neurite outgrowth
the affymetrix microarray experiments described thus far identify expression changes in scg and drg cultures undergoing active neurite outgrowth. to validate these changes, both an alternative microarray platform and quantitative real-time rt-pcr  were used. first, we used spotted dna microarrays of the riken  <dig> k release set to measure changes in both drg and scg samples . these analyses revealed similar patterns of gene expression change as found by affymetrix arrays . we compared the data for transcripts found on both platforms, and of the  <dig>  probesets observed to change significantly in drg during neurite outgrowth,  <dig> had representative cdna probes represented in the riken data. this subset of genes displayed an average spearman correlation of  <dig>  :  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ) between the two platforms. for the  <dig>  probesets changed significantly in scg,  <dig> are represented in the riken data, with an average spearman correlation of  <dig>  . the positive correlations of these data are visually depicted on a gene-by-gene basis in additional file  <dig> – additional figures 2a and 3a.

we also selected several genes for individual validation using qpcr with dual-labeled fluorescent hydrolysis probes. these genes were selected to include a wide range of fold changes detected by microarray , as well as to include transcripts potentially affected by the extrinsic cue sema3a . the expression changes of all eight drg genes selected for significant changes by microarray analysis were validated by qpcr . similarly,  <dig> out of  <dig> genes observed by microarray analysis to change significantly over time in scg were validated by qpcr . figure  <dig> illustrates the time course of gene expression change in drg  and in scg  for those genes with significant change over time by both microarray and qpcr. thus, we believe that many if not most of the changes identified by microarray analysis indeed reflect real changes in mrna abundance in the two explant culture systems.

p-value indicates significance of qpcr data for a quadratic model of change over time.

* selection of these genes included probesets not part of the matched drg-scg dataset, as an additional screen for genes missed by these filters.

** significance for this gene is for a linear model of change over time; this gene does not fit a quadratic model.

§ changes observed by microarray were statistically significant .

p-value indicates significance of qpcr data for a quadratic model of change over time. italicized p-values for two genes indicate lack of statistical significance.

* selection of these genes included probesets not part of the matched drg-scg dataset, as an additional screen for genes missed by these filters.

** significance for this gene is for a linear model of change over time; this gene does not fit a quadratic model.

§ changes observed by microarray were statistically significant .

limited effects of semaphorin 3a on transcription
axon growth cones can exhibit dramatic changes in their morphologies, direction, and rate of growth in response to extrinsic protein cues encountered in the environment  <cit> . semaphorin 3a  is one such diffusible axon guidance cue with potent repellent activity for both scg and drg neurons  <cit> . in addition, sema3a has been demonstrated to affect local protein translation and axoplasmic transport, suggesting to us the possibility that sema3a may interact with signaling cascades, including those that regulate gene transcription in the nucleus  <cit> . as an approach to determining whether exposure to an extrinsic cue such as sema3a can elicit changes in gene expression, we cultured explants in the presence or absence of a heterologous source of sema3a for varying amounts of time, and carried out microarray analyses as described above.

in spite of a robust effect by sema3a on the morphology of neurite outgrowth in both culture systems , we found relatively few genes showing robust differences in gene expression in explants cultured in the presence or absence of sema3a. as a quantitative measure, a gene was operationally defined as sema3a-affected if it showed a  <dig>  fold or greater difference between control and sema3a-treated samples at any one time point, as well as a p-value ≤  <dig>  by quadratic analysis. using these criteria, we observed  <dig> probesets affected by sema3a in drg, and  <dig> probesets affected by sema3a in scg . the magnitude of changes observed was subtle–for drg probesets the median fold difference between control and sema3a treated samples was  <dig>  fold , and for scg probesets it was  <dig>  fold . with just one exception, however, none of the genes selected for validation by qpcr were shown to be regulated by sema3a in either drg or scg .

taking these data at face value, it is difficult to confirm or rule out the possibility that sema3a induces any meaningful changes at the transcriptional level. we therefore reasoned that if sema3a causes a significant and biologically-relevant effect on transcription, the most likely genes affected might encode proteins either directly in the semaphorin signaling pathway or otherwise known to be involved in cell signaling or cytoskeletal dynamics. to test this idea, a candidate list was compiled of genes previously described to be downstream of sema3a or related guidance cues  <cit> . genmapp was used to analyze this pathway for effects found during neurite outgrowth or exposure to sema3a, and this revealed many more genes affected by neurite outgrowth than by sema3a . this approach failed to reveal any significant enrichment of sema3a-affected genes in this group relative to their representation in the whole dataset. the only two genes with potential sema3a effects on this mapp  showed less than a 2-fold maximum difference between control and sema3a-treated samples. we also analyzed a list of  <dig> guidance-related signaling molecules, including gene families and receptors for ephrins, netrins, transforming growth factor betas, neurotrophins, small gtp associated proteins, cadherins and other extracellular matrix molecules, protein kinases, and many other pathways  <cit> . similar to figure  <dig>  genmapp analysis of this pathway revealed no significant enrichment of genes affected by sema3a exposure .

quantitative pcr analysis was used to further investigate several potential sema3a-affected transcripts found by microarray analysis. measurement of a 2-fold change is near the detection limit of qpcr, so it is not surprising that for most genes analyzed, qpcr either did not reveal a substantial effect of sema3a or else the effect was not statistically significant . the only gene for which a statistically significant sema3a effect was observed by qpcr–of a maximum  <dig>  fold change–was tubulin beta  <dig>  in drg . since tubb <dig> is a cytoskeletal component, its upregulation could indicate an effect of extrinsic cue signaling on the neuronal cytoskeleton. the lack of validation for the majority of sema3a-affected genes indicates that changes observed by microarray are either within the level of noise, or that very subtle effects are masked by technical and biological variability in these assays. however qpcr confirmed that there are no large-scale effects of sema3a at the transcriptional level. taken together, our results suggest that effects of the extrinsic cue sema3a on neurite outgrowth in scg and drg are not manifested at the transcriptional level, but rather are focused on biochemical changes at the level of receptors and other signaling molecules localized to axonal or cytoplasmic compartments of the cell.

p-value indicates significance of qpcr data for a quadratic model of change over time. italicized p-values indicate lack of statistical significance.

* selection of these genes included probesets not part of the matched drg-scg dataset, as an additional screen for genes missed by these filters.

§ mock-sema3a differences observed by microarray were statistically significant .

† by microarray analysis, the mock-sema3a differences observed for tubb <dig> were not statistically significant.

italicized p-values indicates lack of statistical significance of qpcr data for a quadratic model of change over time.

* selection of these genes included probesets not part of the matched drg-scg dataset, as an additional screen for genes missed by these filters.

§ mock-sema3a differences observed by microarray were statistically significant .

discussion
comparing across in vitro models
we assessed the gene expression patterns of neurite outgrowth for two different neuronal populations over a wide range of time points. this comparative approach is advantageous because it reveals commonalities across divergent cell types of the peripheral nervous system. as expected for tissues serving different biological functions and isolated from different chronological ages, there are differences in gene expression between these two explant types. however of the genes that are actively engaged by neurite outgrowth in both scg and drg, there are more similarities in direction of change than divergences . these commonalities in gene expression are likely to be related to the similar activity undergone by these explants over time. the observation that so many genes are changing similarly in both neuronal tissue types suggests that these effects may be relevant to other neurons as well. the cluster of transcriptional regulators highlighted in this analysis demonstrates one such group of genes for future investigation.

sema3a does not elicit significant transcriptional changes
previous data on the growth-cone collapsing effects of sema3a, as well as its ability to affect axoplasmic transport, suggested to us that sema3a could act at multiple levels, with local effects on growth cone morphology as well as downstream effects on the nucleus  <cit> . other developmental guidance cues such as bone morphogenetic proteins, sonic hedgehog, and wingless-related proteins have both transcriptional and local effects  <cit> . to address whether the gene expression patterns of neurite outgrowth or regeneration were affected by extrinsic factors such as sema3a, we conducted parallel experiments with and without sema3a in the culture environment. for this extrinsic cue, minimal changes in the number and magnitude of gene expression were observed, despite careful scrutiny of both individual genes and a systematic search for pathway-level effects. we were unable to experimentally validate any of the sema3a-related changes observed by microarray. although we cannot rule out the possibility that we missed other effects due to experimental limitations , our results nonetheless suggest that the inhibitory effects of sema3a at sites of injury and regeneration in vivo are mediated locally and not via transcriptional changes in the responding cells.

parallels and insights for in vivo regeneration
to discern potentially important candidates within the genes commonly affected during outgrowth by scg and drg, we compared our data to several previously published studies of neurite regeneration in vivo. this analysis revealed commonalities between neurite outgrowth in vitro and regeneration in vivo, and it also revealed differences between those two. the genes affected in both cases are logically the ones that are most likely to be involved in both processes. among the differences, it is expected that some transcripts expressed and affected in adult models of regeneration are particular to mature neurons with functional synaptic connections, and that others are due to interactions with the inflammatory and inhibitory extracellular environment after injury. our data facilitates the interpretation of in vivo data because it provides an opportunity to focus on genes involved in growth competence, in the absence of reactions to loss of synaptic input and to the extracellular environment of injury.

the differences observed between gene expression patterns of in vivo regeneration and in vitro outgrowth fall into two main categories. first, there are genes that are present on the array platforms used, but that have a low intensity signal that does not appear to change over time. examples of this group included galanin, gfap, and receptors for benzodiazepine, serotonin, or glutamate. interpretation of this group is difficult, because a failure to observe a strong signal may indicate either poor signal detection by the array probes, or may indicate meaningful transcript absence or repression in these cultures.

a second category of differences between in vivo regeneration and in vitro outgrowth yields more insights. in this group of regeneration-associated genes, the transcripts are observed to change during in vitro outgrowth, but the directionality of change is different. for instance, genes that are commonly upregulated in regeneration models but that are down-regulated during in vitro outgrowth include arginase  <dig>  npy, and gadd45a  <cit> . the observation that these transcripts change over time in our cultures indicates that their expression is being regulated in these models, and it also suggests that their upregulation  is not required for neurite regrowth by drg or scg neurons in vitro. since our models use an extrinsically controlled in vitro environment, these observations suggest that the changes observed in these transcripts after injury in vivo may have more to do with responses to inhibitory aspects of the in vivo environment or to interactions with other cell types in the regenerating areas, rather than with neurite outgrowth.

finally, the process of extending neurites, which is common to both regeneration in vivo and outgrowth in vitro, suggests that there may be commonalities in the gene expression programs involved. this was confirmed in part by our meta-analysis comparison of several regeneration models in vivo to the genes changed during outgrowth in vitro. similar up- or down-regulation was observed for genes including lysozyme, secretogranin  <dig>  and the transcription factors 1sl <dig> and atf <dig>  additional commonalities were revealed by a comparison of the genes most highly expressed in both explant models . as described earlier, embryonic neurons are already growth competent in their gene expression patterns, and thus may already express certain regeneration-associated genes at the time of dissection. a number of the genes most highly expressed in both explant types, such as gap <dig>  cap23/basp <dig>  and scg <dig>  as well as others listed above, are well documented for their roles in regeneration  <cit> . this group of genes that are highly expressed and maintained in these embryonic explants may thus be a window into potential regeneration-associated genes. these candidates may be ideal for further investigation as regeneration-promoting genes, for instance by testing their ability to stimulate neurite outgrowth of adult neurons as was demonstrated for gap <dig> and cap23/basp <dig>  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
by investigating intrinsic transcriptional activity in drg and scg as two distinct in vitro models of neurite outgrowth, we have demonstrated commonalities in gene expression relevant to this process. in addition, through a meta-analysis comparison of these results to several large-scale studies of gene expression during regeneration in vivo, we have discerned that many transcripts affected in vivo are also highly expressed or changed during outgrowth in vitro. together these results demonstrate the usefulness of our in vitro models in identifying programs of gene expression intrinsic to regenerating neurons. we also found that despite its potent effects as an inhibitory extrinsic cue and potential for retrograde signaling, sema3a does not appear to significantly affect the intrinsic transcriptional activities involved in neurite outgrowth. thus, the robust effects of semaphorin signaling on axon growth cone guidance are most likely restricted to local mechanisms not involving changes in gene expression in the nucleus. our analyses present several groups of genes relevant for future testing of potential roles in neurite outgrowth or regeneration.

