BACKGROUND
the amplification of variable region  of immunoglobulin  by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  has become an invaluable technique for studying antigen-antibody interactions and cloning monoclonal antibodies  for medical purposes  <cit> . all approaches require amplification or cloning of the heavy-chain variable regions  and light-chain variable regions  cdnas, which are responsible for the antigen-antibody interactions and present an important diversity in their amino acid composition. the specific amplification of antibody fv genes is a major challenge in cloning fv genes, whether expressed in hybridoma cell lines or in a population of splenic b cells. this is due to the fact that the mouse ig genes are highly diverse in their amino acid composition and nucleotide sequence.

when isolating vh and vl genes from hybridoma cell lines, the most widespread solution is either to use the specific consensus primers suggested to be "universal" or use the commercially available primer sets to isolate the variable  domains. because 3' primer design often covers the isotype specific constant region sequences, 5' primer design is generally focused. previous studies indicated that using the primer sets might give more chance of success than the "universal" primers  <cit> . however, the failure of the primer sets or the "universal" primers to amplify certain v gene segments has recently been documented by several authors. some research has noted that only four out of ten v genes of ig cdnas were amplified  <cit> .

in our study, we initially employed the "universal" primers based on zhou et al.  <cit>  designed for amplifying mouse v genes from three hybridoma cell lines. the vl regions were amplified successfully. however, the vh region was not amplified from one hybridoma cell line csa. commercially available mouse primer sets from pharmacia corporation designed for mouse scfv library construction were used to amplify the cell line. but the result was still unsuccessful. this prompted us to design our own primer. but most existing algorithms and programs of primer selection have a lot of shortcomings for a large gene family. moreover, they could not balance the specificity and the number of primers. we wanted to design as small as possible a set of primers to amplify the target gene. so we developed an efficient algorithm, which could identify the most highly conserved region of ig vh fragments, then a specific degenerated 5'primer was designed, which rescued the failed vh region followed by 3'race and 5'race pcr.

RESULTS
conventional pcr with the "universal" primers and commercially available primer sets
the specific amplification product of predicted size from the hybridoma cell line csa was not observed using the "universal" primers or the commercial primer sets.

race with the primer designed by our algorithm
 in contrast, a good amplification at the expected size was obtained when the novel algorithm was adopted and the 3'race and 5'race followed with the primer. the vh fragment of the csa cells was about  <dig> bp .

 the result of the homology search using the blast algorithm provided by ncbi showed that the vh chain of csa cell clone was 73% identical and involved in vh <dig> family .

discussion
primer design strategy
cloning v genes from a number of mouse hybridoma cell lines have been critical for the generation of scfv and the research on the interaction of antibody and antigen. because  <dig> bp length of an antibody variable gene has about  <dig> variety, amplifying a fv is more difficult than an unknown gene in other gene families.

in our study, we initially employed the "universal" primers  <cit>  and commercially available mouse primer sets designing for mouse v genes to amplify fv genes from three hyridoma cell clones. the vl regions of the immunoglobulins cdna were all amplified successfully. however, the vh region was not amplified from the hybridoma clone csa. so we had to design our own primers of hybridoma clones.

there are programs which can be used to design primers  <cit> . however, they have some shortcomings. firstly, some programs are appropriate for designing primers with small sets of sequences. for example, codehop is a program for designing degenerate primers  <cit> . codehop works well for small sets of proteins but is inappropriate for constructing primers with very high degeneracy on large sets of sequences. secondly, some algorithms focus on the coverage of the primers and don't care about the unknown genes. thirdly, the alignment always focuses on the two ends of the sequences, whereas the most conserved candidates may be in the middle of the related sequences. some research has noted that there are 20% hybridoma cells clones which can not be amplified successfully with the present programs  <cit> .

designing degenerate primers manually is appreciated by some people. the fvs of  <dig> hybridoma cell lines were amplified successfully by wang et al.  <cit> . however, besides being more work than using the programs, this method can not allow a tradeoff between specificity and coverage of the primers  <cit> . but the successful ratio of fv amplification can be decreased because of too high specificity or too large coverage of degenerate primers.

to amplify the vh genes of ig cdnas from the hybridoma cells, the aims we must achieve are:  to align the full length sequences;  to design primers of relatively low degeneracy to realize the inherent benefits of a degenerate primer to cover every family sequence; and  minimize the number of the specific primers. so we focused on the selection of conserved regions of the sequence and the degeneracy of the primers.

algorithm
we have developed a new algorithm for searching for optimal primers to achieve the aims. we prove that the problem of minimizing the number of primers required to amplify a set of dna sequences is np-complete. there are two distinct steps. in the first step, all sequences of the variable region from the database were aligned and the conserved region was determined. in the second step, highly degenerate primers in the middle of region of mouse ig v genes were designed, which is suitable for their pcr amplification. the input of the method is a list of cdna or dna sequences and a set of integers that specify the length of the primer.

in general, the conventional protocol for designing the v genes primer is in the leader peptide and in the constant region, or in framework  <dig>  and framework  <dig>  of the cdna based on the available sequence data on mouse v segments. for 3' primer design, known constant region sequences are normally chosen as the target sequences. previous alignment programs often focus on fr <dig> of the cdna of the v gene. afraid of interfering with the antibody function, we abandon selecting the leader peptide as the target for 5'primer design according to the most widespread solutions and selected fr <dig>  because of the high variety in the end of the fv is the cure point of defeated amplification, we used two methods of alignment during the alignment in order to find the more conserve region. the first one was all mouse ig gene sequences listed were aligned within each subgroup defined by kabat  <cit> . based on this alignment,  <dig> highly degenerate primers at the 5'end of the v fr <dig> region were designed for vh regions. there were two reasons that we abandoned this approach of alignment. firstly, our intention was to use as few primers as possible to amplify the target sequence. secondly, it will not necessarily prevent cross-family amplification if all the primers are used at the same time and nucleotides mismatch may be unnecessarily incorporated into the gene and may interfere with antibody function because of the degenerate nucleotides in primers. the second method was all mouse ig gene sequences in all subgroups were aligned as one group. so the optimal region, which is in the middle of the vh gene with the most highly conserved sequence, was selected. only one primer with a few degenerate nucleotides was designed by our program in the end of fr <dig> region with most highly conserved sequence based on the dna level or the protein level.

pcr technique
traditionally, the alignment of the sequences and designing of primers were based on the end of the target sequences with the currently available programs. due to the limitations of traditional pcr, the regions in the middle of the sequences were ignored. however, improvement in the technology of pcr has lead to improvement in primer design methods. the number of primer sets designed by our program at the 5' end of the vh region is  <dig> and less than the number of primers designed by other authors. but we found the most conserved region in the middle of the vh fr <dig> and a primer with two degenerate nucleotides were designed at this region. the region from part of fr <dig> to fr <dig> can be amplified with a oligo primer with 3'race, because the complete fr <dig> region can influence the fv three dimensional structure and the antibody function  <cit> . the other part of fr <dig> region was amplified with 5'race. so we rescued the complete vh fragment from the immunoglobulin cdnas using our design program followed by 3'race and 5'race.

CONCLUSIONS
the program is very effective in sequence alignment. during amplification of an unknown gene, identifying a conserved region is the first and most important step. the lower the variety of sequences is, the lower the difficulty of amplifications is. in our experiment, we found the most conserved region with a heuristic method. the primers designed in this region have higher amplification ability. then our work became easy and successful.

the program allows a tradeoff between degeneracy and coverage. it is quite effective in designing highly degenerate and highly specific primers for cloning an unknown gene in a large gene family. a primer with a few degenerate nucleotides was designed in the most conserved region in the middle of v region. the target gene was amplified by 3'race and 5'race. however this was a special case. the program was also quite effective in designing the primers for constructing the antibody library, besides cloning an unknown gene in a large gene family. it was important to note that the design method is a rational combination of computer-aided design and biological experiments.

3'race and 5'race pcr was a good method for cloning an unknown gene in a large gene family. since the v region has a high diversity, traditional pcr with degenerate primer sets would produce some mismatch to the template, which would influence the function of the antibody. 3'race and 5'race can amplify the sequence accurately without any mismatch and assure function on the gene level.

