BACKGROUND
local ecological adaptations, sexual selection and genetic drift in isolated populations may lead to the emergence of reproductive isolation – a fundamental requirement for speciation  <cit> . however, speciation constitutes the extreme of the process of divergence, which does not necessarily lead to the birth of new species. the development of reproductive isolation is usually a gradual process, and diverging populations may spend millions of years exchanging genes before reproductive isolation, and thus speciation, is completed  <cit> . speciation may be more likely if processes underlying reproductive isolation act in concert. for example, sexual selection may lead to divergent female preferences for male sexual ornaments, which may lead to pre-zygotic reproductive isolation and speciation [reviewed in  <cit> . however, evolution of such divergent preferences is more likely if gene flow between populations is limited  <cit> . geographic isolation, either by distance or some kind of barrier to dispersal, is considered the most important factor facilitating isolation of gene pools and, in consequence, speciation  <cit> .

due to a relatively high degree of isolation, streams and rivers favour formation of highly structured populations of aquatic organisms [e.g.  <cit> , which should facilitate speciation by limiting gene flow. indeed, freshwater fish undergo speciation relatively more easily compared to marine fish  <cit> . however, some degree of gene flow between populations in different rivers is possible if they inhabit the same river drainage or, to a lesser extent, if migration between rivers in different drainages occasionally occurs, e.g. during floods, or via the sea if river mouths are close enough and species can survive increased salinity. riverine environments therefore provide a good system for understanding the various factors that promote and constrain speciation.

a possible case of incipient speciation between fish populations occupying different drainages has been proposed for guppies  inhabiting streams of north-eastern venezuela  <cit> . the common guppy  is an important model organism for the study of sexual selection and natural selection in the wild  <cit> . recently the guppy has also been used as a model for studying speciation by divergent sexual selection  <cit> . p. reticulata was first collected from guaire river in caracas and described by peters . another form of the guppy, which differs in male colouration and body shape from the common guppy, was first collected by franklyn bond in  <dig>  and later by john endler in  <dig>  in the coastal town of cumaná, in north-eastern venezuela, and has been known as ‘endler’s livebearer’. alexander and breden  <cit>  carried out the first detailed morphological analysis of the guppy from the cumaná region. they found that several populations located within the city of cumaná differed significantly in sexually selected traits and body shape from other guppies across the natural range. they called this form the cumaná guppy and provided evidence for its partial pre-zygotic isolation from the common guppy. when allowed to interact simultaneously with males from a cumaná population and from a common guppy population from the san juan drainage, cumaná females gave birth to 80% of offspring sired by cumaná males, whereas among common guppy females the proportion of offspring sired by cumaná males was only  <dig> %. in a separate series of crosses the authors found no evidence for genetic incompatibility between the two populations . this suggests that the difference in paternity reflects female preferences for conspecifics, as was also shown in earlier work  <cit> . alexander and breden  <cit>  thus concluded that cumaná guppies and common guppies may be undergoing speciation, with reproductive isolation arising as a consequence of divergent sexual preferences. however, it is not clear to what extent this partial reproductive isolation can limit gene flow between natural populations of cumaná guppies and common guppies occurring in north-eastern venezuela.

poeser et al.  <cit>  argued that because of the differences in colouration, body and gonopodium shape and sexual behaviour, the cumaná guppies, along with other populations inhabiting streams and rivers north-west of cordillera de la costa and draining to the gulf of cariaco and caribbean sea , probably constitute a separate species, which they named poecilia wingei. they proposed that the uplifting of cordillera de la costa, about  <dig>  years ago, separated two groups of guppy populations, allowing p. wingei to diverge in allopatry from the common guppy populations inhabiting rivers of the san juan drainage. according to this scenario, divergence in morphology and female preferences evolved under gene flow limited by the geographic barrier. however, poeser et al. <cit>  provided no quantitative morphological, behavioural or genetic assessment of the differences between guppy populations in these two drainages.

molecular evidence for genetic isolation between these groups of populations has so far been very limited and does not give a clear idea about gene flow between the two drainages. a study of mitochondrial dna  control region sequences carried out by alexander et al. <cit>  found that mtdna haplotypes of cumaná region form two distinct lineages, one of which includes haplotypes from the san juan drainage. even if this pattern suggests that there has been some introgression of mtdna between cariaco and san juan populations, these populations may still be differentiated at nuclear genes, as mtdna tends to be more sensitive to introgression than nuclear dna, due to various phenomena, such as lower effective population sizes and different mobility of sexes  <cit> . a recent study  <cit>  of genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms included the cumaná population and one population from the san juan drainage . the study showed high divergence between these two populations, but it remains to be seen to what extent the two populations reflect divergence between the two regions in general.

the main goal of this study was to expand the analyses of alexander et al.  <cit> , and to quantify genetic differentiation among populations in the north-western cariaco drainage and south-eastern san juan drainage, east of the cordillera de la costa. two types of molecular markers were used: mtdna and microsatellites. we also analysed phenotypic differentiation among populations in these drainages, using male body shape and sexually selected colour patterns which alexander and breden  <cit>  found to differentiate the cumaná guppy from the common guppy. if the cordillera de la costa is a major geographic factor facilitating incipient speciation in the guppy, one would expect significant morphological and genetic differentiation between the two drainages. in particular, we expected that significant genetic differentiation between the drainages coincides with significant phenotypic differentiation. furthermore, we used discriminant analysis of principal components  to investigate whether separating guppies in the region into two distinct species is justified by morphological differentiation.

RESULTS
microsatellites
microsatellite loci were genotyped in  <dig> individuals. all  <dig> loci were polymorphic, with the number of alleles ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> . the genotyping error was estimated at  <dig> %. seventy-three of  <dig> pairwise tests for linkage disequilibrium  were significant after applying the sequential bonferroni correction. however, there was no repeatable pattern of linkage disequilibria across populations; linkage disequilibrium for a given pair of loci was almost always detected in a single population only. this indicates that linkage disequilibria resulted from population structure/admixture rather than from physical linkage between loci. significant departures of the genotype frequencies from hardy-weinberg expectations were detected, after correcting for multiple comparisons, in  <dig> out of  <dig> tests . this was most probably due to the presence of null alleles, which were detected in all populations in at least some loci. their estimated frequencies ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> , but differed greatly for the individual loci between populations . therefore, we did not exclude them from further analyses.

comparisons between pairs of populations revealed a degree of genetic differentiation  ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>  , with global fst =  <dig> . most of the pairwise tests produced values between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . multidimensional scaling of genetic distances showed that cariaco and san juan drainage populations cluster separately with the only exception of the population cas, which clustered together with san juan populations . a similar pattern emerged from a neighbour joining tree constructed from the matrix of pairwise fst , but separation between cariaco populations  and san juan did not receive significant bootstrap support . a weak pattern of isolation by distance was detected when all populations were considered together .

the most likely number of genetic clusters identified in structure analysis was  <dig>  generally, populations from cariaco and san juan drainages fall into separate clusters , with the exception of sf, a cariaco population which clustered together with two san juan populations, pa and rsj. we also present the result of structure clustering for k =  <dig>  which was performed to check whether populations on each side of the geographic barrier  form separate clusters when two genetic clusters are assumed. in this analysis, populations from the cariaco drainage and san juan drainage grouped separately, except for two anomalies; the sf population, which contains an admixture of alleles from san juan drainage, and the cas and guar populations, which group with san juan drainage populations. in the dapc fifteen principal components of pca and three discriminant functions were retained. as in structure, k =  <dig> appeared optimal. as expected, dapc yielded similar results to structure for both k =  <dig>   and k =  <dig> . the mean probabilities of assignment of the individuals to the cluster representing their own drainage were:  <dig>   and  <dig>  , for cariaco and san juan drainages, respectively. the mean probability of assigning san juan drainage guppies to the cluster representing cariaco drainage was  <dig>  . analysis of variance showed a highly significant difference in assignment probabilities of individuals differing in their drainage of origin into cluster  <dig> representing the cariaco drainage .

amova analyses with groups defined on the basis of mtdna , indicate that  <dig> % of the total microsatellite variation was explained by the group level . groups that were geographically defined  explained  <dig> % of variation when all populations were included , and  <dig> % when only the populations sampled in  <dig> were included .

mitochondrial dna
among  <dig> sequenced individuals,  <dig> haplotypes were identified . most mtdna haplotypes clustered into two major well-supported lineages , one of which occurs exclusively among cariaco drainage guppies . inside the second lineage a well-supported sub-lineage is distinguishable, occurring exclusively among cariaco drainage guppies . the remaining haplotypes clustering with the sub-lineage b  occurred predominantly among the san juan drainage guppies, except for a few haplotypes representing cas , guar  and sf  populations . the rflp analysis confirmed that the haplotypes common in lineage c were predominant in cc, ccar, cum, per and sf populations . the net divergence between the two main mtdna lineages  was  <dig> .

pairwise fst between populations for mtdna ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  and  <dig> tests were significant . drainage explained  <dig> % of mtdna differentiation , a considerably higher proportion of the variance than in the case of microsatellites. this percentage increased to  <dig> %, when the six populations sampled in  <dig> were excluded .

colour and shape variation
populations differed significantly in all three colouration characteristics . the mean number of black crescents differed significantly between cariaco and san juan guppies . the presence of double swords and relative tail orange area did not differ significantly between the two drainages . the relative thickness of the caudal peduncle did not differ between drainages  but was significantly differentiated among populations .

in dapc for phenotypic traits five principal components of pca and three discriminant functions were retained. we found no support for the presence of two phenotypically distinct clusters which could be equated with two species. indeed, the values of bic did not reach a plateau, providing no clear indication that the optimal number of clusters was less than  <dig> . therefore, we only performed the analysis for two clusters  to test the main hypothesis about differentiation between drainages . the mean probabilities of assignment to the cluster representing own drainage were:  <dig>   and  <dig>  , for cariaco and san juan drainages, respectively. the mean probability of assigning san juan drainage guppies to the cluster representing cariaco drainage was  <dig>  . there was no difference in assignment probabilities of individuals differing in their drainage of origin into cluster  <dig> representing the cariaco drainage .

discussion
cumaná guppy inhabiting a stream within the cariaco drainage has been shown to be distinct in terms of male sexual colouration, and partially reproductively isolated form a common guppy population inhabiting a stream in the san juan drainage  <cit> . the two drainages in north-eastern venezuela are adjacent to each other, but are separated by a mountain range, cordillera de la costa, which may have formed a barrier to gene flow. it has been hypothesised that this barrier may have facilitated the phenotypic differentiation between guppy populations inhabiting separated drainages  <cit> . to test this hypothesis, we studied guppy populations inhabiting these two drainages using both molecular  and morphometric approaches.

in accordance with the hypothesis that the cordillera de la costa constitutes a barrier to gene flow, the grouping of populations by drainage explained a significant proportion of genetic variation in both mtdna and microsatellites. structure results generally supported the distinction between the cariaco and san juan drainage guppies. in the analysis with two genetic clusters imposed, the populations clustered mostly by drainage , the exception being the populations cas, guar and sf, located near the western and eastern borders of the cariaco drainage. dapc yielded similar results, with guar and cas showing the greatest admixture of genes from the san juan cluster, and all other populations clustering in accordance with drainage membership . multidimensional scaling of the matrix of pairwise fst showed a similar pattern of separation between drainages, except one cariaco drainage population  which is separated from san juan drainage cluster along the first dimension .

microsatellite differentiation between the cariaco and san juan drainages  was larger than that reported by suk and neff  <cit>  for differentiation between guppies in the caroni and oropuche drainages in trinidad , a level of differentiation proposed by schories et al. <cit>  to represent separate poecilia species. for comparison, in the smooth  and carpathian  newts which constitute well defined species,  <dig> % microsatellite variation was attributed to interspecific differentiation  <cit> , a value comparable to the one reported here. however, different races of the genus heliconius, which are considered examples of incipient speciation, were found to differ by over 30% at microsatellite loci  <cit> . these examples imply considerable variation in the degree of differentiation at microsatellite loci among incipient/young species. however, microsatellites generally have not supported clustering together of populations according to the region , providing no evidence of species status to populations from the cariaco region.

in the mtdna phylogeny, two main lineages were distinguished; one composed exclusively of haplotypes from the cariaco drainage, the other comprising mostly haplotypes found in guppies from the san juan drainage, but containing also a well-supported cariaco sub-lineage b. both the cariaco drainage lineage c and sub-lineage b received a high bootstrap support, indicating its distinctiveness and substantial divergence from the san juan lineage , as reported by alexander et al. <cit>  for the mtdna control region. assuming mutation rate typical for many vertebrates , the net divergence between the two main lineages of haplotypes  would be consistent with the  <dig>  years of separation between the two drainages starting with the uplifting of cordillera de la costa, although this is only a rough estimate and should be treated with caution.

while mtdna and microsatellite divergence estimates reported above support the hypothesis of considerable isolation and differentiation between guppies inhabiting streams on the opposite sides of the cordillera de la costa, structure results do not corroborate such a clear distinction. the evanno et al. <cit>  method indicated eight, not two, as the most probable number of genetic clusters. while this result should be treated with caution, as structure is not well suited for the analysis of data exhibiting hierarchical population structure, dapc yielded the same optimal number of clusters. furthermore, a greater number of clusters than two is consistent with the results of amova, which showed that most genetic variation is distributed between populations within drainages. the fact that the highest degree of admixture was observed in populations near the borders of the drainages  strongly indicates that this pattern is due to gene flow rather than homoplasy. gene flow is further corroborated by mtdna introgression, which shows similar geographic pattern.

neighbouring populations and populations sampled from within the same stream mostly fall into the same cluster . also populations cc, ccar and wc, which are located in the cumaná flood plain, were assigned to a common cluster. this pattern is reflected in significant, although weak, isolation by distance.

interestingly, the population cum, , clusters with a more distant population per, which was sampled during the same season as cum, 10 years after the first three populations were sampled. this genetic similarity between geographically more distant populations, but temporally closer sampling events indicates that temporal changes in genetic composition of populations may be rapid and have a considerable effect on population structure of guppies in north-eastern venezuela. recent simulations  <cit>  showed that large temporal allele frequency fluctuations can arise as a consequence of relatively small sizes of guppy populations  <cit> . despite this, drainage explained a similar percentage of variation in microsatellites when samples from  <dig> were excluded, and for mtdna the structure was even more pronounced in this limited dataset. therefore, the overall picture of significant differentiation between drainages was not biased due to a temporal gap in sampling events from the cariaco drainage.

surprisingly, sf located at the western border of the region did not fall into any group composed of cariaco drainage populations in the structure analysis, and instead shared the cluster with the geographically distant san juan drainage populations. a possible explanation could be that introgression from a western common guppy population occurred; indeed, individuals with the haplotype from haplogroup a, typical of san juan drainage guppies, were found in populations located west of sf .

our results suggest a recent increase in introgression of san juan genes into cariaco drainage guppies . two pairs of populations in our data, sampled from very close locations, ycual/sf and guar/cas , corroborate the idea of rapid invasion happening in few years. in the structure analysis with two main genetic clusters, ycual showed more genetic similarity to guppies in the cariaco drainage, while sf sampled 10 years later in close proximity showed a high proportion of the san juan genes. in the second case, population guar, sampled in  <dig>  clustered to a great extent with san juan populations but also showed considerable admixture with cariaco genes, whereas cas, sampled in  <dig> from the same stream, grouped with the san juan drainage populations. a similar situation has been reported for trinidadian guppies, where substantial admixture was found between populations in adjacent streams, but belonging to different drainages . furthermore, in populations at the borders of the cariaco and san juan drainages, cas and guar, only mitochondrial haplotypes typical for san juan drainage were present, and one was also found in sf . this clear geographical pattern strongly suggests introgression, rather than incomplete lineage sorting, as an underlying mechanism. a recent snp-based study also indicated introgression from poza azufre  to cumaná .

our data also provide evidence that some introgression may have occurred in a more distant past. in a phylogram of mitochondrial haplotypes within the san juan lineage , a cariaco sub-lineage was clearly distinguished, supported by a high bootstrap value. the presence of this lineage may be explained by a past introgression of a san juan haplotype into cariaco populations, which then evolved, in isolation from san juan guppies, within these populations.

the reasons for the san juan drainage guppy’s invasion into the cariaco drainage are not clear. the pattern of introgression, most pronounced near the borders of the cariaco drainage, suggests the role of natural processes and not of human-induced introductions. we are not aware of any abrupt environmental changes in this area, but occasional floods occurring in the region may favour occasional migration events  <cit> . amova results based on microsatellite loci indicate the proportion of variation explained by drainage was nearly twice as high as that estimated in the analysis in which the highest level of hierarchy was defined by mtdna haplotypes. this suggests that when the geographic barrier is crossed, reproductive barriers do not prevent introgression of mtdna.

the analysis of body shape and colour patterns that distinguish the cumaná guppy from other guppy populations  <cit>  showed that only the population cc represented all the characteristics which phenotypically define the cumaná male morphotype . some other populations from cariaco drainage exhibited individual cumaná characteristics, but not their complete combination . individuals from the wc and cum populations, located near the cc population, had an increased number of black crescents, while the wc population revealed an increase in the mean orange tail area and, together with cas, a relatively high occurrence of the double sword, compared to other guppy populations measured. the only trait which significantly differed between the cariaco and san juan drainages was the presence of black crescents. thus overall, there is little evidence that most guppies inhabiting cariaco region can be equated with cumaná morphotype, as suggested by poeser  <cit> . indeed, most individuals from cc population were assigned to cluster  <dig> in the dapc based on phenotypic traits, whereas vast majority of individuals from other populations from both san juan and cariaco drainages, were assigned to cluster  <dig> . consequently, there was no significant difference between drainages in probability of assignment to a drainage. this result clearly shows that morphological differences are not aligned with a geographic barrier between two drainages. rather, the cc population represents the typical cumaná morphotype, with other traits, except for black crescents, occurring only in some populations in the region.

that we found no evidence for original designation of p. wingei according to drainage  <cit>  does not exclude the possibility that cumaná population could be genetically and morphologically distinct enough to be considered a different species. however, our results do not provide evidence for genetic differentiation, as cc population, representing cumaná morphotype, clustered together in the structure with ccar which represents the common guppy morph . furthermore, phenotypic analyses showed that populations in the san juan drainage also contained individuals with some ‘cumaná traits’, for example, double swords were observed in the poza azufre and rio san juan populations, and high mean orange area in rio juan sanchez population. this pattern is visible on the graphical representation of dapc, where individuals belonging to the cluster  <dig>  dominated by the ‘cumaná-type’ phenotypic characteristics, occur sporadically throughout all populations . likewise, cc population contained individuals assigned to 'common guppy' cluster  <dig> . overall, our data do not support existence of two species which can be easily separated based on male morphology. the lack of support for the existence of two clusters in dapc analysis of morphological traits further strengthens this conclusion.

there are two possible explanations for the patterns we observed. first, the cumaná city area constituted the source of cumaná morphotype, and migrants from this area spread widely throughout the cariaco drainage. the second is that the whole cariaco drainage was the original range of the cumaná type guppy, but the populations located closer to the border with the san juan guppies have been invaded by immigrants from the san juan drainage.

as most genetic variance was distributed among populations rather than between drainages, it seems that limited gene flow between different streams, to a greater degree than between drainages, may have facilitated the evolution of divergent female preferences of females form cumaná  <cit> . apart from limited gene flow, genetic divergence between populations may be due to drift, as effective sizes of many guppy populations are < <dig>  <cit> . a recent theoretical model showed that under such conditions, speciation by sexual selection is particularly likely  <cit> .

once divergent mating preferences evolve, they may constitute a powerful mechanism maintaining divergence in sexual traits. genetic clustering of populations from the cumaná flood plain , representing both cumaná  and common guppy morphs  suggests that female choice has imposed differential rates of introgression among genes that do or do not encode for traits related to biological divergence. divergent female preferences have also been shown to facilitate reproductive isolation among guppy populations differing in the strength of selection from predators  <cit> . thus, although sexual selection can under some scenarios also constrain speciation  <cit> , our results are consistent with a traditional view that sexual selection may facilitate the emergence of reproductive isolation  <cit> . however, we have also found that phenotypic traits typical for cumaná morphotype are present in other populations and vice versa, which indicates that the barrier to the flow of genes associated with traits subject to mating preferences is incomplete. more intensive sampling effort in cumaná region will be necessary to determine if morphological homogenisation with respect to male sexual traits has been occurring in consequence.

CONCLUSIONS
our results show significant genetic differentiation between guppy populations in neighbouring drainages, but the geographic barrier of cordillera de la costa played a minor role in structuring guppy populations relative to the influence of limited gene flow between streams within drainages. our results indicate that immigration of san juan drainage guppies into the cariaco drainage has been occurring both in the past and recently, and the resulting introgression may be causing erosion of genetic differentiation of the guppies it the cariaco region. phenotypic differentiation between regions did not correspond to genetic differentiation, thus providing no evidence for the role of geographic barrier in incipient speciation. instead, our analyses supported phenotypic distinctiveness of males from central cumaná population. significant phenotypic differentiation between genetically homogenous  populations from cumaná region suggests that divergent mate preferences documented in earlier work  <cit>  can maintain variation in secondary sexual traits even in the face of considerable gene flow. however, most phenotypic traits characterising cumaná morphotype were not unique to this population, resulting in assignment of many individuals from other populations to cumaná phenotypic cluster and vice versa, indicating that pre-zygotic barrier to the flow of genes associated with divergent male colouration is incomplete. overall, our data do not provide justification for distinguishing the separate species p. wingei.

