BACKGROUND
protein crystal lattices contain two kinds of interfaces: biological ones  and crystal packing ones , indistinguishable by crystallographic means. traditionally they have been assigned by visual inspection alone, but their identification has increasingly become a challenge due to the sheer complexity of the macromolecular objects that modern structural biology tackles nowadays. a series of breakthroughs in protein production and structure determination techniques, especially in protein crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance and electron microscopy, have enabled researchers to solve the structure of macromolecular complexes and oligomeric proteins of very large size, sometimes composed of many copies of different kinds of subunits. prominent examples in this respect are for instance fatty acid synthase  <cit>  and the recently solved immunoproteasome  <cit> . another important trend is the increasing automation of the structure determination pipeline through structural genomics efforts, often producing protein structures before thorough biochemical characterization. reliable computational tools are thus needed to decide which interfaces are the biologically relevant ones and consequently what is the biological assembly in the crystal. the need for such tools is not limited to crystallography: integrated approaches merging electron microscopy, proteomics and crystallography are being employed to tackle very complex entities such as the nuclear pore complex  <cit> : there, researchers determine the structures of individual components in order to fit them into a lower resolution global electron density map derived from electron microscopy data. it is vital, in order to obtain a correct fit, to know if the assemblies of the components obtained by crystallography are biologically relevant.

in the last fifteen years several computational methods have been developed to distinguish biological interfaces from crystal contacts. the first of them relied on interface area analysis  <cit>  and was followed by approaches based on sequence conservation  <cit> , combination of geometrical and other properties such as conservation via machine learning  <cit>  and thermodynamic estimation of interface stability  <cit> . this last method, implemented in the pisa server, proved to be the most successful and is the current de facto standard in the field. an interesting approach, protcid  <cit> , infers information about the biological significance of interfaces from their presence in multiple crystal forms of the same protein .

in this article we present an integrated approach to the problem that relies on evolutionary analysis of the interfaces and on a novel geometric criterion. in a previous, proof-of-concept work  <cit>  we employed ka/ks ratios as the evolutionary metrics for the selection pressure acting on protein-protein interfaces in crystals. ka/ks ratios are a well-established tool in the field of molecular evolution: they measure the ratio of the number of non-synonymous substitutions per non-synonymous site to the number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site in a multiple alignment of coding sequences  <cit> . we compared the ka/ks ratio averages of interface rim and core sets to detect if the selection pressure acting on core residues was significantly stronger than that of rim residues. this approach had three main limitations: first, its recall was limited since in many cases not enough homologs could be found to run a significant ka/ks ratio estimation. second, ka/ks value estimation was slow, bringing the duration of most runs up to several hours. third, no easy-to-use public implementation was available.

our new approach, named eppic , overcomes all the above limitations, introduces two novel criteria for detecting biological contacts and, most importantly, achieves a very high level of accuracy. additionally we implemented it in a robust freely available software package and offer it to the community in an easy-to-use graphical web interface.

RESULTS
eppic is an approach for distinguishing biological interfaces from lattice contacts in crystal structures using evolutionary information from protein sequences. some early attempts  <cit>  in this direction, using sequence entropies as metrics for selection pressure, did not achieve levels of accuracy high enough to make them competitive with methods like pisa, which estimates the thermodynamic stability of an interface to predict whether it should exist in solution  or only in the crystalline state . to date, pisa is the de facto standard to address the biological interface versus crystal contact issue and to predict the biologically relevant assembly of protein structures. since pisa makes no use of sequence information, complementary methods that employ the wealth of sequence data available are particularly needed, especially as the size of biological sequence databases has increased exponentially in the last years and will only keep increasing further in the near future.

our recent approach  <cit>  aimed at demonstrating the feasibility of an evolution-based method measuring interface selection pressure at the coding-sequence level. having achieved that goal, we set out to develop a completely new, more powerful and general approach to the problem, overcoming the limitations described in the introduction. first of all, we introduced a new geometric analysis criterion, based on the number of core residues in an interface, which represents by itself a powerful predictor of interface character. this allows us to formulate an interface assignment even when not enough homologs to the query are available for evolutionary analysis. second, we have re-evaluated the use of sequence entropies instead of ka/ks ratios as a metrics for selection pressure. we found out that, with stringent criteria for homolog selection, better redundancy reduction of sequences and thanks to the increasing amount of sequences currently available, we could reach a better performance than that achieved with ka/ks ratios. the usage of entropies brings the advantage of making calculations much faster but also of simplifying the computational workflow. third, we have introduced a new way to exploit the difference in selection pressure between interface and surface residues. comparing the average sequence entropies of interface and non-interface residues is an approach pioneered by elcock & mccammon  <cit> . that early attempt, however, was limited by the small size of sequence databases at the time and most importantly by biasing factors acting on surface residues, e.g. allosteric binding sites, unknown interfaces to other partners, external active sites and the like. we modified that approach substantially, first of all by comparing only interface core residues with surface residues, and by introducing a random pooling of surface residues that enables us to compute more statistically robust scores of selection pressure acting on the interface core residues with respect to the surface “baseline”. a similar surface sampling approach was also used successfully by valdar and thornton  <cit>  in order to analyze conservation in a small set of homodimer interfaces.

the above three criteria, combined with further statistical considerations on interface area, allow us to achieve a performance of 89% accuracy on a minimally modified version of the ponstingl  <dig> dataset  <cit>  as compared with 84% accuracy achieved by pisa on the same interfaces.

compilation and annotation of new reference datasets
an important issue we tackled in this study was that of reference datasets of crystal contacts and biological interfaces. we identified this as one of the most important issues in the computational prediction of interface character and believe this particular problem has not received enough attention in previous studies. experimental methods for oligomeric state determination are themselves prone to artifacts and it is rather common in the literature to find debated assignments, based on contradictory experimental data. it is thus essential that the data to be used for method developing and benchmarking have 100% clear experimental backing. the crystallographic accuracy of the structures is also vital: we realized that some of the most frequently used datasets in the literature contained some structures not following the most stringent crystallographic quality criteria, since they were solved many years ago and predated the use of quality measures such as the free r-factor  <cit> .

another important issue that has been mostly neglected is the distribution of areas of the interfaces used to train or benchmark classifier algorithms. as demonstrated already by janin  <cit> , an exponential decay relationship exists in the distribution of areas of crystal interfaces: the bulk of the crystal interfaces known to date have areas below  <dig> Å <dig> with very few representatives above that value. it is also well known that biological interfaces on the contrary tend to exhibit large areas  <cit> , with a majority of cases from  <dig> Å <dig> and above. an overlap region exists where both kind of interfaces are frequent in the area values of approximately  <dig> Å <dig> to  <dig> Å <dig>  thus an interface-classifying method should always take this into account and use this area distribution as a baseline for predictions. as ponstingl  <cit>  already noted, a simple classifier based on area alone achieved high accuracy in interface assignment. in introducing our own reference datasets we prioritized having a distribution of areas that is out of the trivially classifiable region. this issue was first recognized and partly addressed in the work of bahadur et al.  <cit> , where they included a crystal interface in their dataset only if its total buried area was above  <dig> Å <dig> 

we thus created our own reference datasets, adopting a three-fold strategy: 1) only use entries for which the oligomeric structure is clearly experimentally verified 2) include only crystal entries that fulfill a series of quality check criteria , 3) focus on the range of interface areas where it is really difficult to distinguish crystal from biological contacts. we compiled two duarte-capitani datasets: one of large crystal contacts , the other of small biological interfaces . dcxtal contains  <dig> entries validated as monomers, with  <dig> crystal interfaces of at least  <dig> Å <dig>  for comparison, in the bahadur set the lower limit for crystal interface area was set at  <dig> Å <dig>  surely the growth in the number and average quality of available crystal structures has made the compilation of a sizeable dataset of large crystal contacts easier than in the past. dcbio consists of  <dig> oligomers, with  <dig> validated biological interfaces. both datasets are listed in detail in additional file 1: tables s <dig> and s <dig>  respectively. in figure  <dig> we plotted the area distribution of the entries in our datasets and two others for comparison: the ponstingl  <dig> dataset of monomers and dimers  <cit>  and the bahadur homodimer and monomer datasets  <cit> . the boxplots show clearly very different area distributions, being our datasets a mixture of biological and crystal interfaces belonging exclusively to the overlapping area region. we also compared the dc sets with the piqsi database  <cit> : while only  <dig> dc entries  were present in piqsi, their assignments were 100% in agreement with the piqsi ones.

geometry criterion: core size
the idea of dividing the residues of the interface, i.e. those that bury some surface area, into different classes appeared early in the protein interface literature. loconte et al. <cit>  proposed a first classification based on atoms rather than residues, dividing them into  <dig> classes which they called a, b and c. the fully buried atoms formed class b, while classes a and c were subdivisions of the partially buried ones. later chakrabarti and janin  <cit>  introduced the concept of core residues as those residues having at least one fully buried atom. this definition was later used by guharoy & chakrabarti in their pioneering work on the relative average entropies of core and rim residues in interfaces  <cit> . schärer et al. <cit>  substantially modified the definition of core residue, basing it on the percentage of the accessible surface area  that becomes buried upon interface formation. the cut-off for defining a residue as core was set by schärer et al. at 95% burial . levy  <cit>  used a more complex scheme with  <dig> categories: core, rim and support. the scheme uses, as well as bsa and asa, the relative surface accessibilities , i.e. the asa of a residue x relative to its asa in a reference extended tripeptide gly-x-gly. in levy's definition a residue is “core” if: 1) its rasa in the monomer is larger than 25% and 2) its rasa in the complex is smaller than 25% . the schärer definition proved effective when employed to divide interfaces into a rim and a core set, the average ka/ks ratios of which were then compared to classify the interfaces into “crystal” or “bio”. as part of the present work we analyzed the predictive power of the three residue-based core definitions  when using the number of core residues as a simple geometric criterion to categorize interfaces as biological or crystal contacts. figure  <dig> displays the number of core residues  found in our datasets of biological interfaces and crystal contacts by using the chakrabarti, levy and schärer core definitions, respectively. the core size of each interface is plotted versus its area. notably, while the two former core definitions lead to a quite strong correlation of core size with interface area , the latter is much less correlated . moreover in many cases it seems to clearly separate crystal from biological interfaces. for our two datasets it is able to tell bio interfaces apart from crystal interfaces with 80% sensitivity and 73% specificity, which makes it per se a powerful discriminator of interface character. in their  <dig> work bahadur et al.  <cit>  presented two geometric parameters that were also very good at discriminating interfaces, namely the fraction of buried atoms and the non-polar interface area. it must again be underlined that the data used in that study was very different: their crystal interface areas were above  <dig> Å <dig> whilst here our dcxtal interfaces are above  <dig> Å <dig> 

chakrabarti
levy
schärer
interface residues are those for which bsa> <dig>  core residues are then a subset of those. the values of core residue sizes for a typical biological interface example chosen from one of the entries in dcbio are shown . bsa is defined as bsa=asa-asa, relative asa as rasa=asa/asa. u and c stand for uncomplexed and complexed respectively.

as another way of displaying the predicting power of schärer's core definition we produced roc curves  depicting the ability of various geometrical parameters to predict the character of a) our dc bio/crystal interfaces and b) ponstingl’s bio/crystal ones. schärer's definition outperforms the others and also the interface area as predictors. this difference only becomes apparent when using the datasets that focus on the difficult to predict region . if we use a more conventional dataset with a typical area distribution  the difference does not appear. this is striking as previous studies  <cit>  of several geometrical interface parameters, including some based in voronoi tessellation, found that area ranked first in prediction power compared to the other parameters.

schärer's definition uses a percent burial cut-off to assign residues to core, so the question arises as to what an optimal value for this cut-off in terms of interface classification is. strikingly, the 95% cut-off appears much more powerful than lower ones. we plot in figure  <dig> the roc curves of the core size at different cut-offs  as predictors of interface character for our dc datasets. it is apparent that when one includes more and more partially buried residues the predictive power decays rapidly.

the core residues thus defined seem to be an essential interface determinant. interestingly the definition is in agreement with that of hot spot residues introduced by bogan et al. <cit>  and offers a possible explanation as to why the number of core residues is so powerful in distinguishing biological interfaces. in that study, the authors compiled a set of site-directed mutagenesis studies on interface residues and found that only a few well-buried residues contributed the most to the binding energy of the interface. moreover, all residues that contributed significantly to the binding energy were fully  buried, whilst partially buried residues were never found to significantly contribute to the energy. thus, full burial was a necessary but not sufficient condition for a residue to be a hot spot.

it must also be noted that crystallographic accuracy is essential for the effectiveness of the geometry criterion, the full power of which can only be seen when using sets of good quality crystal protein structures. a striking example is the structure of bovine interferon gamma, solved first at  <dig> Å resolution  and later again at  <dig> Å resolution  in the same crystal form. the area of the dimer interface changes from  <dig> to  <dig> Å <dig> from the first to the second, but more importantly the number of core residues leaps from  <dig> in the first case to  <dig> in the second.

estimation of selection pressure: sequence entropies
as mentioned above, in this work we decided to move from the ka/ks ratio selection pressure metrics to sequence entropies at the amino-acid level. we realized that we could see very good differential selection pressure signal at the interfaces by carefully choosing the homolog sequences to measure the entropies. most importantly we decided to be very conservative in the amount of homologs to use, cutting the homolog list at a sequence identity value as high as 60% . there are mainly two reasons for this choice.

first, by staying in the very high identity region we avoid the risk of introducing errors in the alignments and we can rely on the assumption that the structures of homologs used in the alignment are very well conserved. from knowledge gathered over the years of casp structure prediction experiments, it is known that alignment accuracy is very good only down to ~50% sequence identity, medium to good in the 30-50% identity region and low below 30% identity   <cit> . these assessments done over the different casp experiments are based on the gold-standard of a structural alignment to the best template  <cit> .

as a second point the quaternary structure of proteins and thus interfaces seem to be less conserved than that of the tertiary structure. poupon and janin  <cit>  estimate that 40% is a reasonable limit to the reliability of a good quaternary structure homology, thus it seems dangerous to consider sequence homologs below that 40% level.

strikingly, almost all methods for interface classification or prediction until now have used much lower sequence identities for measuring conservation. for instance a few studies  <cit>  used the well-known hssp database to get their alignments. hssp uses 25% as the identity cut-off for sequences with length above  <dig> residues   <cit> . valdar et al. <cit>  select their homologs by performing a maximum of  <dig> psi-blast iterations with an inclusion e-value cut-off of 10- <dig> which results in identities as low as 5%. caffrey et al. <cit>  even compared two types of alignments: a “diverse” one, aimed at capturing paralogs, and a “close” one to contain only orthologs. the former had a very generous homolog inclusion cut-off  while the latter took close orthologs from selected species in the same taxonomic kingdom. this second type of alignment, although more stringent, is not comparable to those computed here, as it typically contained very few sequences .

in order to see how the choice of identity cut-off affects our interface predictions we studied the accuracies of predictions with variable identity cut-offs. the results are presented in figure  <dig>  as we lower the sequence identity cut-off for inclusion of homologs in our alignments the accuracy of the evolutionary predictions clearly degrades. the behavior was similar across different sets of biological interfaces datasets . we achieved optimal results with a combination of 60% soft identity cut-off and 50% hard identity cut-off .

choosing a more stringent cut-off is only possible thanks to the size that sequence databases have reached in the last few years. as the growth will only continue in the foreseeable future we believe that our conservative approach will continue giving the best signal to noise ratio in measuring differential selection pressure of interfaces.

core versus surface scores
one of the earliest attempts to use evolution to predict biological interfaces  <cit>  compared average sequence entropies of interface residues versus those of the other surface residues. as discussed in the introduction, this approach was hampered by bias caused by patches of low-entropy surface residues corresponding for instance to binding sites or external active sites. in the search for an additional evolutionary prediction criterion, we took inspiration from that early attempt and introduced an approach comparing the average sequence entropies of interface core residues and of surface residues. in order to reduce bias in the calculations, we employ random pooling of surface residues. given an interface with n core residues, we sample random pools of n surface residues so that we then can compare the entropy of the core residues versus that of the distribution of surface samples. we then give the final score as the distance of the average core entropy to the mean of the surface samples in units of their standard deviation, in a z-score-like approach.

core-surface scores provide a measure of the selection pressure acting on the key residues of an interface compared to a surface “baseline” estimated from the randomly pooled surface residues. in order to further reduce bias, only those surface residues that are involved in none of the interfaces found in the crystal are used for pooling.

valdar and thornton  <cit>  did also employ a surface sampling approach in analyzing a limited set of homodimer interfaces, though in their case the statistical significance of the interface versus surface conservation was assessed via p-values. later, caffrey et al. <cit>  followed that approach and used a z-test for significance estimation, but concluded that the measured evolutionary signal was not sufficient to predict interface patches from conservation information alone.

combining information from the different criteria
as described above we employ three different indicators of the interface character: a geometric one and two evolutionary, core versus rim entropy ratio and core versus surface entropy score. to offer a final prediction of interface character we set out to combine the different indicators into a single call. we decided for a simple majority voting system, where we place more confidence on the evolutionary calls . in the case that not enough suitable homologs are available for a certain protein structure, making it impossible to employ the evolution-based criteria, the final call is based on geometry only. in addition we employed the results from the compilation of the dcxtal contact dataset  to establish hard limits for biological or crystal contact character: areas above  <dig> Å <dig> are always considered biological, while areas below  <dig> Å <dig> are always considered crystal, irrespective of the other indicators. the low hard area limit criterium refers to non-induced  <cit>  protein-protein interfaces, and does not apply to protein-peptide ones.

engineering artifacts in the pdb: a word of caution
a further novelty we introduced in our interface classifier method is that of checking for engineering artifacts in the structure being analyzed. this important aspect is, to our knowledge, mostly neglected by computational methods attempting to classify crystal interfaces. in order to produce, characterize and crystallize proteins, structural biologists often need to introduce modifications into their wild-type sequences. these range from point mutations to insertion of affinity tags or to total chimeric constructs. we deal with this issue by first of all finding a reference uniprot sequence for the given pdb sequence. multiple uniprot assignments to a single pdb entry usually indicate a chimeric construct  then we attempt to predict the interface with all three criteria. in these cases we further check whether the core and rim residues to be scored locate in a region that aligns properly to the reference. warnings are produced for mismatches; if the number of mismatches exceeds a threshold, again no evolutionary prediction is carried out and the final call is geometry-based.

parameter optimization and performance
several parameters are used in classifying an interface as biological or crystal. especially important are the cut-offs used for each of the scores: core size , core versus rim entropy ratio and core versus surface entropy score. in order to optimize those we used our manually annotated dcxtal and dcbio datasets, which contain entries with experimentally verified quaternary structure assignment and with areas in the difficult range 1000– <dig> Å <dig>  the optimization process with these datasets led to the following cut-off values:  <dig> core residues for geometry,  <dig>  for entropy core/rim ratio and − <dig>  for core versus surface scores.

finally, in order to benchmark our method with a separate independent set we used the well-known ponstingl  <dig>  <cit>  sets of monomers and dimers which we minimally modified . this dataset has the advantage of having been employed several times as benchmark in the literature  <cit> . in the case of pisa  <cit>  it was also used as optimization set.

in table  <dig> we present the results of the optimization and benchmarking steps and for reference we include the pisa performance on the same sets . the three different methods are first assessed separately and then as a single combined predictor. additionally to the two datasets dc and ponstingl we also include the statistics for the bahadur set  for completeness. overall, the performance of our final combined predictor compares favorably to that of the pisa server in the  <dig> sets. the geometric predictor alone is able to classify the interfaces with high accuracy and is helped by the evolutionary ones to further improve the performance in the final call. it must be noted that the evolutionary predictors are in themselves very powerful at classifying interfaces, with sensitivity/specificity figures ranging from 64% to 87%. these figures are not directly comparable to those of the geometric predictor or the combined predictor as they are based on the subset of entries that could be predicted at all . in the analysis of wrong evolutionary predictions we often found cases with problematic alignments, e.g. with inhomogenous sequence identity distribution of homologs. viral or archaeal proteins seem particularly prone to this kind of problem. we are convinced that better filtering and selection criteria will help in further improving the performance of the evolutionary predictors.


eppic 

pisa
classification statistics for our own compiled datasets , composed of dcxtal  and dcbio , for the ponstingl  <dig> dataset of monomers  and dimers  and for the bahadur datasets . we first present the statistics for each of our indicators separately and the statistics for the combined predictor. pisa statistics compiled by us are shown in a separate table. statistics are given in terms of sensitivity or rate of correct biological interface predictions and specificity or rate of correct crystal interface predictions. the statistics for the evolutionary methods are based on the total number of interfaces that could be predicted . the numbers for each case are indicated in parentheses together with the corresponding sensitivity or specificity. as well as accuracy values we present the matthews correlation coefficient  which gives a better assessment of the predictions in cases where the positive and negative sets are unbalanced . all eppic evolutionary predictions are based on uniprot release 2012_ <dig> 

performance with sequence data growth
in order to more precisely assess the performance of our method we studied the behavior of the evolutionary predictions with the change in sequence data over the last years. the uniprot database has seen an exponential growth aided mainly by an improvement in sequencing technologies that even outperforms moore's law  <cit> . we studied the performance dependence of our interface evolutionary predictions with the growth of sequence databases by using archived uniprot versions from the first release appeared in december  <dig> to the current one almost  <dig> years later. the first and more important effect that we observed is a dramatic increase in prediction coverage as the uniprot database grows. for the ponstingl datasets, coverage rose from 27% in  <dig> to 65% in  <dig>  we are able to predict a particular entry whenever we can find at least  <dig> non-redundant sequence homologs within 50% identity of the query. additionally we tried to assess whether the accuracy of the scores increases as alignments get enriched with more sequence data. we thus studied the evolution of the core-surface scores in biological interfaces from a few datasets , plotted in figure 6a. the score distributions across all interfaces exhibit a downwards trend both in terms of median scores and of their spread. contrastingly figure 6b present the scores across time for crystal interfaces , where a slight upwards trend can be observed and not much variation in the spread.

web server
in order to make the eppic approach easily accessible to the structural biology and bioinformatics community, we built a web server , with a front-end design centered on clarity and usability. to that end we created a rich interactive web application, based on the ext-gwt  framework. as a minimum input, the user has simply to provide the pdb code of the entry to be analyzed or to upload a coordinate file in pdb or mmcif format. the user can also access an “advanced” input panel that allows for changing the parameters for homolog selection and alignment. a collapsible panel on the left provides an overview of the currently running and of the completed jobs. the results page  consists of a top panel, showing the key information about the job and of a dynamic table listing all interfaces present in the crystal lattice. each row of the table corresponds to an interface, represented as a clickable cartoon-style thumbnail, and shows additional information about the interface. the last columns give the prediction calls  for all three approaches  and the final combined call. as an optional extra column, warnings are shown if the residues involved in the interface do not properly align to the reference uniprot entry or other kinds of issues are found in the interface geometry. by clicking on an interface thumbnail, the user can access a 3d view of the interface itself, either through jmol  <cit>  , a local molecular viewer  or a pymol  <cit>  pse session file.

a practical example
an example of using eppic in the context of an important structure biology problem is provided by the work of zhang et al. <cit>  on the mechanism of activation of epidermal growth factor receptor , which is based on dimerization. the authors determined the crystal structure of the egfr kinase domain , where either a symmetric or asymmetric dimer, of very similar size , can be chosen as the biologically relevant entity mediating activation. a symmetric dimer, already determined by stamos et al.  <cit>  in a different crystal form, was computationally analyzed by landau et al.  <cit> , who proposed it, among six possible dimer choices, as the key contact controlling inactivation of the receptor. zhang et al. settled the issue with a series of mutagenesis experiments that identified the asymmetric dimer as the relevant one. eppic analysis of entry  clearly indicates the zhang asymmetric dimer as biologically relevant and the symmetric one as a crystal contact. it does so based on clear signals by the entropy core-rim and core-surface criteria, which lead to a correct call for this difficult case in which both interfaces exhibit similar geometrical features . strictly speaking, the asymmetric dimer is unviable since such heterologous interfaces can extend to infinite fibers  <cit> . zhang et al. do acknowledge this issue and attribute the apparent contradiction to the fact that the crystallized construct is only an intracellular fragment of the full length membrane protein. the symmetric and asymmetric dimers of  are shown in figure  <dig>  and b), respectively) as they would appear to the user in the respective pymol pse session files provided by the eppic web front-end.

CONCLUSIONS
we present here a new, highly effective and easy-to-use method addressing an important issue in structural biology and bioinformatics: that of distinguishing crystal contacts from biologically relevant interfaces. the importance and spread of this problem is now widely recognized: as an effective method to solve it, eppic will significantly help in the interpretation of crystal structures, in guiding biochemical experiments on protein-protein interfaces and hybrid approaches in which single components solved by crystallography are to be assembled into large supramolecular entities. two important conclusions can be drawn from this study: first, that fully buried residues are a key determinant of biological protein-protein interfaces; second, that a stringent sequence selection for the multiple sequence alignments used to measure the evolutionary signal provides a more robust and less noisy way to detect the footprint of evolution in interfaces. this is especially important as the incessant growth of sequence databases fueled by new high-throughput technologies will only increase the usefulness of evolution-based methods. eppic bears significant potential for further developments, the most straightforward one being automatic inference of quaternary structure assemblies from the interface predictions, thus providing a complete pipeline from crystal structures to putative biological assemblies. the method is applicable to many problems in both structural biology and structural bioinformatics, to name just a few: validation of structures of oligomeric proteins and of protein complexes, detection of crystal contacts in which one of two partners mimics a biological partner, prediction of protein-protein binding sites in the absence of the structure of a complex and the validation of models of complexes and oligomers.

