BACKGROUND
diabetes is a major risk factor for the development of cardiovascular disease and could promote cardiovascular diseases via multiple mechanisms  <cit> . hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and dyslipidemia could increase inflammation and proliferation in the atherosclerotic lesions in coronary and cerebral arteries  <cit> . evidence suggests that high glucose, via various mechanisms, such as increased production of advanced glycation end products, augmented activation of protein kinase c and enhanced generation of reactive oxygen species , plays a critical role in the development and progression of diabetic cardiovascular complications  <cit> . in addition, elevated glucose concentration is also known to activate a variety of cells to stimulate extracellular matrix  synthesis  <cit> , which is thought to be mediated by inducing transforming growth factor-β  <cit>  and its downstream mediator connective tissue growth factor   <cit> . however, the mechanism why atherosclerosis is accelerated in diabetes is still largely unclear.

recently, ctgf has emerged as a key factor in vascular remodeling and in the development and progression of atherosclerosis  <cit> . the ctgf gene contains a tgfβ response element in its promoter region and it is thought to be a downstream mediator of the profibrotic effect of tgf-β  <cit> . but ctgf expression is also regulated by camp  <cit> , high glucose  <cit> , endothelin- <dig> <cit>  and angiotensin ii  <cit> . high glucose has been known to stimulate ctgf expression in different cell types, including renal mesangial cells and fibroblasts  <cit> . however, there are few data about the direct effects of high glucose on ecm protein synthesis and ctgf induction in vascular smooth muscle cells . and the connection between high glucose and ctgf expression in vsmc remains unclear. in the view of the increased expression of ctgf in the atherosclerosis, we hypothesized that ctgf might be upregulated by high glucose in vsmcs, and the upregulation of ctgf might contribute to changes of ecm components. in order to test our hypothesis, we examined the influence of high glucose on the ctgf expression in human vsmcs. in previous study, primary human umbilical vein smooth muscle cells  have been characterized as a model for investigation of vsmc functions  <cit> . therefore, huvsmcs were used as a model to study the effects of high glucose on the expression of ctgf and other ecm genes by rna interference and neutralization antibody in this paper. our data demonstrate that high-glucose-stimulated vsmc growth and migration, as well as the high-glucose-induced ecm components deposition in vsmcs were attenuated by ctgf inhibition, which suggested that therapies targeting ctgf might be useful in preventing intimal hyperplasia in the atherosclerotic lesions in diabetic macrovascular complications.

RESULTS
effect of high glucose on ctgf expression in huvsmcs
to determine whether high glucose modulates the expression of ctgf mrna, huvsmcs were treated with  <dig> mmol/l d-glucose, and total rna was isolated at various times from  <dig> to  <dig> hours. real-time quantitative rt-pcr revealed that high glucose rapidly induced the expression of ctgf above basal levels  <dig> hours after treatment. the induction of ctgf expression was peaked at  <dig> hours after treatment, and then declined to near baseline by  <dig> hours . to exclude the possibility that high-glucose-induced ctgf expression was caused by increased osmolarity, we tested the effect of  <dig> mmol/l mannitol on ctgf mrna expression. compared with cells in the normal glucose medium, there was no significant stimulatory effect on ctgf expression in huvsmc cells incubated for  <dig> hours in normal glucose media containing  <dig> mmol/l mannitol, confirming the specificity of the high glucose response in stimulating the ctgf expression in huvsmcs .

under serum-starvation condition, growth-arrested huvsmcs expressed low level of ctgf protein, as shown by western blot as a band of ≈ <dig> kda. total cellular ctgf protein levels began to increase after treated with high glucose for  <dig> hours, and peaked at  <dig> hours post-treatment. the elevated ctgf level lasted up to  <dig> hours after treatment . the expression of ctgf protein was also analyzed by immunocytochemistry, which showed that growth-arrested huvsmcs presented a slight ctgf staining, and treatment with high glucose for  <dig> hours significantly increased cytoplasmic ctgf staining . these data suggest that high glucose induces both ctgf mrna and protein production in huvsmcs.

tgf-β has been identified as a potent inducer of ctgf expression and it is also a very important regulator of ecm in different cell types  <cit> . our results showed that tgf-β treatment  also induced ctgf expression in the huvsmcs. induction of ctgf by high glucose may occur indirectly, mediated by the action of tgf-β. to test this hypothesis, we examined the effect of a neutralization antibody of tgf-β  on high glucose-induced ctgf expression. we observed that the blockade of tgf-β by a neutralization antibody against active tgf-β partly decreased high glucose-induced ctgf gene and protein production . this partial inhibition suggests that endogenous tgf-β synthesis is, at least partly, involved in high glucose-induced ctgf production.

role of ctgf in high glucose-induced ecm accumulation in huvsmcs
previous studies have showed that high glucose increased ecm accumulation in cultured smooth muscle cells  <cit> . we therefore investigated whether ctgf was involved in high glucose-induced ecm components deposition, including collagen type i and fn in huvsmcs. consistent with other reports  <cit> , we observed that ecm components  accumulated significantly under high glucose condition using both real-time pcr and immunocytochemistry analysis .

to block ctgf actions, we used a ctgf-specific small inhibitory rna construct  to knockdown ctgf expression. ctgf-sirna significantly inhibited basal and high glucose-induced ctgf gene expression in huvsmc as evaluated by quantitative pcr. similarly, ctgf-sirna knockdown of ctgf protein was confirmed by western blot and immunocytochemistry . the knockdown of ctgf significantly reduced mrna and protein levels of collagen type i and fn . as a negative control, the scrambled sirna had no effect on any of ctgf, collagen type i or fn expression in huvsmcs . thus, the data demonstrate that ctgf is a downstream mediator of high glucose-induced ecm components accumulation in huvsmcs.

role of ctgf in the high glucose-induced proliferation of huvsmcs
to examine a role of ctgf in high glucose-induced proliferation, we grew quiescent, ctgf gene-silenced huvsmc cells under high glucose or normal glucose conditions for  <dig> hours. -thymidine incorporation and cell counting were quantitated in these cells.

role of ctgf in high glucose-induced migration in huvsmcs
monolayer scratch wound assays have been used by others to study migration of vsmcs  <cit> . in order to exclusively measure migration, dna synthesis of huvsmcs was further blocked by addition of hydroxyurea. our results showed that  <dig> hours after injury, the ctgf-sirna transfected cells were less than the mock transfection or the scrambled-sirna treated cells to migrate into the wound gap . furthermore, the expression of matrix metalloproteinase- <dig>  mrna and protein were also reduced in the ctgf-sirna transfected cells. mmp- <dig> is an important factor directly involved in controlling cell movement and the turnover of ecm  <cit> . in comparison, the scramble-sirna transfected cells showed unchanged mmp- <dig> mrna expression .

discussion
in the present study, the potential correlation between high glucose and ctgf was investigated in cultured huvsmcs. the major finding of this study is that high glucose up-regulates the expression of ctgf in huvsmcs and knockdown of ctgf gene results in the inhibition of high glucose-induced vsmc proliferation and migration. these observations establish acritical role of ctgf in mediating high-glucose induced ecm accumulation in vsmc and suggest that inhibition of ctgf may be useful for preventing abnormal vsmc growth and migration in diabetic vessels.

ctgf was first identified as a 38-kda cysteine-rich protein, which can be specifically induced by tgf-β. it is recently found that ctgf is expressed abundantly in atherosclerotic blood vessels, but only marginally in normal vascular tissues. ctgf is one of the key factors involved in the development of atherosclerotic lesions  <cit> . to further assess the role of ctgf in diabetic cardiovascular complications, we examined whether ctgf was regulated by high glucose in vsmc. our data show that exposure of huvsmc to high glucose, but not iso-osmotic mannitol, leads to an increase of ctgf expression, and the induction of ctgf by high glucose is partly mediated via tgf-β pathway.

some studies have showed that high glucose may mediate diabetic renal and macrovascular complications by stimulating ecm production  <cit> , and the increased ecm synthesis accounts mainly for intimal plaque formation in the atherosclerotic lesions in diabetic vessels, so the effect of blocking ctgf action on ecm expression was further examined in this study. by ctgf-specific sirna, our results demonstrate that knockdown of ctgf expression prevents ecm production in vsmc, indicating that ctgf plays an important role in mediating ecm accumulation in vsmc in response to high glucose.

in addition to increased ecm deposition in vsmc, it has been recognized that vsmc proliferation within the vessel wall is another critical pathogenic feature in the development of atherosclerosis. glucose metabolism has been implicated to play an important role in this cellular mechanism  <cit> . neointimal formation, the leading cause of restenosis, is also caused by proliferation of vsmcs. patients with diabetes mellitus have higher restenosis rates after coronary angioplasty than non-diabetic patients. enhanced proliferation of vsmc has also been demonstrated in diabetic experimental animal models  <cit> . in addition, cultured vsmc cells grown in media with high glucose concentration  have exhibited increased cell proliferation  <cit>  several intracellular signals elicited by high glucose are responsible for vsmc cell proliferation, including increased expression of tgf-β receptor type ii via pkc-β  <cit> , enhanced intracellular ros production  <cit> , and suppressed apoptosis via upregulation of bcl-xl and bfl-1/a <dig> levels through pi-3k and erk1/ <dig> pathways in vsmcs  <cit> . our results suggest a role of ctgf in the huvsmcs proliferation induced by high glucose.

the migration of vsmcs from the media into the neointima is important in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. this process is regulated by multiple factors, and it involves changes in the interaction between the ecm and intracellular signaling cascades that regulate cell movement  <cit> . high glucose is one of the multiple factors that could increase vsmcs migration  <cit> . ctgf over-expression can significantly increase the activity of mmp- <dig> in vsmc conditioned medium and increase the migration of vsmc  <cit> , which suggests a link between high glucose-induced vsmc migration and ctgf over-expression. mmp- <dig> is able to induce vsmc migration and proliferation in addition to ecm degradation, and it has also been shown to play an important role in atherosclerotic plaque formation and restenosis after vessel injury  <cit> . consistent with previous report  <cit> , our data demonstrate that ctgf-sirna suppresses high glucose-induced huvsmc migration via, at least partly, down-regulation of mmp- <dig> 

recently, rna interference  has reinvigorated the therapeutic prospects for inhibiting gene expression and promised many advantages over binding inhibitors, including high specificity. rnai provides a new, reliable method to investigate gene function and has the potential for gene therapy. in mammalian cells, 21-or 22-nucleotide  rnas with 2-nt 3' overhangs  exhibit a rnai effect  <cit> . it is important to avoid homologous sequences within a target mrna in a given protein family  <cit> . one of the reported ctgf sirna sequences targets the coding region 360– <dig> from the first nucleotide of the start codon of ctgf mrna  <cit> , but it is located within one of the four conserved cysteine rich modular domains-the von willebrand factor  domain  in the ctgf mrna  <cit> . in order to construct a specific ctgf-sirna, we searched for regions of low homology to other genes of the ccn family. with the help of some sirna-design tools in the internet, we designed five specific pairs of dna templates coding sirna against human ctgf-mrna and reconstructed the plasmid psilencer <dig> -h <dig> sirna-ctgf. however, we only observed one pair of the dna templates coding the sequence  has significant effect  to down-regulate the expression of basal and high glucose-induced ctgf expression in huvsmcs. the reason why only one out of five pairs of sirna shows specific gene knockdown is unclear. this problem remains to be one of the many challenges of therapeutic usage of sirna  <cit> . down regulation of ctgf markedly reduces the synthesis of high glucose-induced ecm proteins such as collagen type i and fibronectin. our results indicate that ctgf is involved in ecm accumulation under normal glucose condition, but also it is an important mediator in the ecm deposition induced by high glucose in vsmc. antagonism of ctgf function could possibly attenuate progression of diabetic macrovascular complications.

CONCLUSIONS
ctgf might be involved in high glucose-induced proliferation, migration and ecm production in vsmc, and could contribute to the pathogenesis of diabetic macrovascular complications. our results indicate that rna interference is a useful tool to investigate ctgf gene function and might be useful in developing a potential therapy for diabetic macrovascular diseases.

