BACKGROUND
the european union  has an ever-increasingly highly industrialized and specialized pig production sector  <cit> , and is the second largest pig producer in the world with  <dig>  million tons of pork produced in  <dig>  <cit> . to maintain this high level of production and the current swine health status, it is crucial to prevent the introduction and re-introduction of infectious diseases, particularly oie notifiable diseases such as african swine fever . the introduction of asf into any eu country would result in an immediate export ban of pigs and pig products from the infected area. this could cause huge losses for the affected country, especially given the ban of intra-eu movements as it poses the highest volume of trade, but also to the eu as a whole. the eu is a net exporter of pork, with  <dig>  million tons of pork exported to third countries in  <dig>  furthermore, there is the potential to increase exports due to high demand from russia and china  <cit> , besides important intra-eu trade.

asf is one of the most devastating swine diseases given its high mortality, economic losses as a result of trade restrictions, and the fact that no vaccine is available for its control  <cit> . traditionally, this viral infectious disease has been widespread on the african continent, where it still remains in many countries. in  <dig>  asf spread to some southern european countries , where it persisted for more than  <dig> years  <cit> . on the island of sardinia , asf has been endemic since  <dig>  which is the cause of much concern, although it has not spread to other eu areas  <cit> . in other european countries and some territories of the american continent , asf virus  was also introduced in the 20th century, but was swiftly eradicated by drastic control programs.

since its introduction into georgia in  <dig>  <cit> , asfv has spread to russia, armenia, azerbaijan, and later to the ukraine and belarus, and has affected both domestic pig and wild boar  populations. more recently, in january and february  <dig>  asf was confirmed in dead wild boars in lithuania and poland  <cit> . this situation is perceived to be a major threat for european pig producers and has increased disease awareness among eastern eu member states  <cit> .

since there is no vaccine available for asfv, disease prevention and rapid control require safe disposal of waste from international ports and airports, effective surveillance, disease awareness in high-risk areas, and regularly updated control and contingency plans. the design of tailored prevention and control strategies benefits from knowledge of the identification and allocation of the risks for asfv introduction, which can be generated transparently through risk assessment  <cit> .

various eu countries have already made country-specific risk assessments. finland has analyzed the potential routes of asfv introduction by emphasizing the risk of wild boar infection in the country, as well as the importance of biosecurity measures to prevent domestic pigs coming into contact with asfv  <cit> . germany has analyzed the risk associated with returning animal transport vehicles, which it has classified as moderate for the transport of breeding pigs, but as high for movements of pigs for fattening and slaughter  <cit> . other analyses have been carried out to estimate the risk of asfv introduction into the united kingdom  <cit> , poland  <cit>  and denmark  <cit> . however, none has been published in the peer-reviewed scientific literature. consequently, the results are available only upon request to the authors.

the risk of asfv entry into the eu has been analyzed by the authors of the present study for five different pathways, these being: i) legal imports of live pigs during the high-risk period   <cit> ; ii) legal imports of different types of pig products also during the hrp  <cit> ; iii) illegal imports of pig products  <cit> ; iv) transport fomites   <cit> ; and v) wild boar movements  <cit> . the objective of the present work was to integrate all these pathways into a flexible and transparent modular framework to enable the visualization and comprehension of the risk of asfv introduction into eu by these five different pathways. the results of this framework will identify the eu countries at higher risk for all the analyzed pathways, in which specific control strategies can be adopted to prevent asfv entry into the eu. in addition, the provided structure can be later used as an example to assess the risk of asf entrance into other regions or can be conveniently adapted for the introduction of other diseases.

methods
model structure
a modular risk assessment framework was developed to separately integrate the risk assessments for the five main routes of entry  in order to provide an overview of the risk of asf introduction into the eu. five modules were developed to estimate the risk of asfv entry into  <dig> of the  <dig> eu countriesa via each analyzed pathway: legal imports of live pigs, legal imports of pig products, illegal imports of pig products, transport-associated fomites, and wild boar movements. the risk pathways included in the analysis were based on a literature review that considers asfv transmission mechanisms, known routes of introduction into previously free areas, and the current epidemiological situation.

all five modules, and consequently the modular framework that integrates them, correspond to the entry assessment component as defined in the oie risk analysis framework, where entry addresses the likelihood of a commodity infected by a certain pathogen  being released into a particular territory  <cit> . the exposure and consequence assessments, which have been previously published  <cit> , were not included.

description of pathway modules
different approaches were taken to develop the five risk assessment modules after considering pathway-specific characteristics and data availability. the risk of entry via legal import pathways was estimated by quantitative models, whereas risk was assessed by semi-quantitative models for illegal imports, wild boar and transport-associated fomites.

the legal import  risk assessments provided risk estimates as probability distributions for asfv introduction. in order to facilitate the visualization and interpretation of these results, the mean probabilities of asfv introduction were categorized into six risk scores  based on natural breaks calculated by jenks algorithm  <cit> . all the semi-quantitative models followed a similar approach using proxy indicators . the data values for each proxy indicator were categorized using natural breaks , and were consequently converted into six scores . each module produced an overall risk score for all the eu member states, calculated by a weighted linear combination of the scores of the proxy indicators. the weights of each parameter were obtained by expert opinion elicitation. the use of such methodology produces risk scores from  <dig> to  <dig> that reflect probabilities of 0 = negligible, 1 = very low, 2 = low, 3 = medium, 4 = high and 5 = very high to compare the remaining countries within the same pathway.

the detailed structure, parameters, inputs and outputs for these modules are available in separate publications  <cit> . the present work provides only a brief summary of each module in order to facilitate the comprehension of the adjustments made and, consequently, the proper interpretation of the results obtained.

module  <dig> and 2: legal imports
for both legal import pathways , two quantitative risk assessments  <cit>  were conducted as detailed data were available for not only the frequencies and amounts of imports of pigs and products from extra-eu countries  to eu member states , but also for the numbers of pigs and pork production quantities in the countries of origin  <cit> . for both modules, a similar structure based on a scenario tree was used . for pig products, three different types of pork products, referred to as fresh meat , frozen meat  and processed products  , were considered to account for the different asfv survival periods for these products  <cit> . the models were developed in @ risk version  <dig>  .

module 3: illegal imports of pig products
as data on illegal imports are very scarce and the probabilities associated with most steps of the risk pathway would be difficult to estimate quantitatively, a different approach was adopted. illegal importation of pig products for personal consumption and for commercial purposes was modeled semi-quantitatively using ten social, economic and geographical factors, also called proxy indicators, which were assumed to influence the risk of illegal import . further details on the illegal import model and its results are available in  <cit> .

l.pigs , l.prod , illegal , taf  and wb .

module 4: transport fomites
similarly to the model for illegal imports, a proxy-based semi-quantitative model was used to estimate the risk of introduction through fomites associated with transport vehicles. the three routes that considered transport-associated fomites were: trucks returning from asf-affected areas, waste from different ship types, and waste from international planes  <cit> .

module 5: wild boar movement
the risk of asfv introduction through wild boar  movements was estimated for those eu countries sharing borders with non eu countries from eastern europe, considered to be the origin of the risk. for this purpose, a semi-quantitative model was employed that considered two sources of infection: wild boar infection in the country of origin through contact with asf-infected wildlife  or through contact with asf-infected domestic pigs. afterward, the introduction of asfv into the eu was assumed to occur through the natural movement of infected wild boars or through contacts of infected wild boars with other wild boars. the detailed structure and parameters considered in the model are described in table  <dig> and elsewhere  <cit> .

overall risk of entry
the modular framework was implemented in microsoft excel  and is available as an additional file . all the modules summarized in section “description of pathway modules” were included with a first worksheet that documented the methodology, module structure, assumptions and limitations, and a second worksheet with all the data inputs and calculations employed. a summary table with all the information  of all the parameters used in the framework is presented in table  <dig>  additionally, the final risk scores of each country by all analyzed pathways were summarized in table  <dig> 

. risk scores equal or higher than  <dig> were highlighted using boldface numbers.

sensitivity analysis
for each module, sensitivity analyses were previously conducted to assess the robustness of the model and the influence of the different input parameters and/or the weights assigned to the proxies on the model results  <cit> . for the modular framework, the influence of the method used in each module to categorize the data of the proxies and risk scores was also assessed. in the individual risk assessments, categorization into risk scores was based on the natural breaks calculated with jenks algorithm  <cit> , except for the illegal pathway module. in the illegal pathway module, the parameter values tended to be clustered at lower values with a few extreme high values. thus, jenks algorithm led to quite low values which fell into relatively high risk scores. therefore, a manual definition of the natural categories was preferred.

in the sensitivity analysis, other commonly used categorizing methods, specifically quantiles and geometric intervals, and jenks algorithm for the illegal pathway, were used to calculate the risk scores for all five pathways. the results obtained with these alternative categorization methods were compared with the original method. specifically, the list of countries at higher risk  for each pathway when using the different categorization methods is presented in descending order  in table  <dig>  variations in the prioritization order, and the number of countries at higher risk, are also included in this table.

a sensitivity index was also calculated to assess the magnitude of the influence of the categorization methods on each module results. this sensitivity index  was computed after considering the number of countries for which the risk score changed “cc”, the extent of this change “ec” , and the total chances of change for this pathway “tc”. this tc represents the sum of the potential levels of change for all the countries by this pathway . the sum of the possibilities for all the countries composed the tc for this pathway. the si was computed as follows: si=∑lc*cctc

RESULTS
the model and its results are available as an excel file in a public domain  and as additional file  <dig>  the risk scores of asfv introduction by the five pathways into each eu member state are presented in the results column on each pathway spreadsheet, and are also summarized in table  <dig> and in the “overall results summary” worksheet of additional file  <dig> 

the list of countries at higher risk  per pathway is provided in table  <dig> in descending order, from highest to lowest risk . these are the countries that would benefit from prevention activities for each analyzed pathway. the average number of countries with high-risk scores per pathway was  <dig> , and there were some pathways with only two countries at higher risk , whereas others had five  or four  countries at higher risk.different distributions of risk scores were observed between pathways . whereas most countries presented a risk score of  <dig>  in some analyzed pathways, the majority of countries presented a risk score of  <dig> in others . interestingly for these last two pathways, none of the countries presented the highest risk score of  <dig> fifteen eu member states  had at least one risk pathway with a risk score equal to or higher than  <dig> . thirteen countries  presented one risk score of  <dig> or  <dig>  four countries had a risk score of  <dig> for one pathway: bulgaria for legally imported products during the hrp; finland for wild boar, slovenia and sweden for legally imported pigs during the hrp. however, these countries did not necessarily obtain high risk scores in other pathways; indeed some  obtained risk scores of  <dig> and  <dig> for other pathways.

among the  <dig> countries with lower risk scores , some countries presented similar risk profiles, with the same risk scores for the same pathways.

sensitivity analysis
the results compiled in table  <dig> reflect that for all the pathways and categorization methods, only two pathways presented differences in the order of countries at higher risk. in the taf pathway, lithuania and finland interchanged their positions from the second to the third, and vice versa, when applying quantiles and geometric intervals instead of jenks nb. for the illegal pathway, modifications in the order were observed when comparing manual nb  with the other categorization methods . italy became the first country at risk , and france came fifth  when using other methods. consequently, the positions of the other countries changed, but not their relative order. for the other pathways, the only observed changes related to the inclusion of countries in category  <dig> , or to those included in category  <dig> 

the sis calculated by the pathway and categorization method are presented in table  <dig>  the pathway that underwent the greatest modifications in terms of extent of change , unlike the others, is that associated with legal import of products, which presented an average si over all categorization methods evaluated at  <dig>  this was also the only pathway for which some countries  underwent the maximum ec at three levels. in the remaining pathways, risk scores were less sensitive, with an si of  <dig> ,  <dig> for the wild boar module and  <dig> for illegal transport. the maximum ec observed in the other pathways was  <dig> levels, which affected four countries  and one country in the illegal pathway. in the taf and wild boar pathways, the countries’ risk scores changed one level at the most.

si , ec , cc ; l.pigs , l.prod , illegal , taf  and wb ; na .

discussion
the modular framework herein presented integrates the methodology and outputs from five pathway-specific risk assessments to produce specific risk profiles for asfv routes of entry into the eu. all the modules used the best data available, which need to be consistent and homogenously collected across eu member states. due to the limited availability of detailed data and the huge variability between eu member states in terms of pig production characteristics, trade, environmental and even socio-cultural features, the results generated by this modular risk assessment framework need to be interpreted with caution. some of the eu databases used for model parameterization were not as complete and detailed as national ones  <cit> . it has to be stated that this may have resulted in under- or overestimations of risk scores for some countries, depending on the reliability of the data available per country in these generic databases. data on wild boar density and abundance of backyard pig production were limited at the time of the analysis performance, and could definitely affect the model results and the next assessment steps   <cit> . the incorporation of recent fao data on wild boars and low biosecurity farm  <cit>  or wild boar density models based on ecological parameters  <cit>  may improve the analysis. however, as the unit of analysis of this framework is the national level, these data are not expected to influence the final analysis outcome, especially when we consider that the densities of wild boars or domestic pigs in the individual sensitivity analysis of the wild boar pathway were the risk factor with the lowest influence on the model’s results  <cit> .

the present framework integrates the calculations and results of five risk analyses using diverse methodological approaches for risk estimation. legal import pathways were estimated by using stochastic quantitative models; consequently, an absolute probability of the risk of asfv entry was obtained per country . only for this particular case can we state that the risk of asfv introduction through legal imports of products during the hrp was higher than by legal imports of pigs during the same period. the probability of asfv introduction through legal imports of pigs during the hrp was extremely low , while for the legal imports of products during the hrp it was much higher, with a maximum probability of  <dig>  for bulgaria . these probabilities referred only to the risk of asfv being released into the eu by these routes, without considering the probability of exposure, which could certainly modify the final risk of asf outbreak occurring in the country. however, as the main goal of this work was to develop a method to integrate different types of model  into the same framework, the probabilistic results were transformed into risk scores from  <dig> to  <dig>  and took the same format as the other pathways. nevertheless, both the detailed risk probabilities and any additional information can easily be consulted in the modular framework provided .

for the other pathways, estimated semi-quantitatively, it was not possible to make comparisons between routes, but between countries within the same route. the methodology selected for the semi-quantitative assessments differed substantially from the conventional methods, which combined matrices of numbers and risk terms. risk matrices can provide an impression of higher accuracy and/or confidence if compared with qualitative assessments, which can be particularly wrong when scores are assigned and combined arbitrarily, and with no transparency  <cit> . in contrast, the systematic approach used herein produced risk scores by the weighted linear combination of the selected parameters contributing to the risk. the structure of these calculations, data inputs and weights used in the framework are presented in additional file  <dig>  thus ensuring the transparency of the model methods and results.

nonetheless, as with any risk assessment model, a certain level of subjectivity was involved in selecting the pathways analyzed , module structure, methods applied, the parameters used as risk indicators , and categorization and weighting methods . attempts were made to minimize these limitations by means of the model’s transparency and the systematic application of the chosen approaches, which occurred with data categorization. after testing several categorization methods, natural breaks were used as this is the method that best adapts to the different distributions presented for all the input data. within this method, the optimization method using jenks algorithm was employed for most pathways to minimize intra-class variance and to maximize inter-class variances  <cit> . for the illegal import pathway however, the very skewed distribution of some parameter values led to relatively high-risk scores when jenks adjustment was utilized, and it was thus decided to use manual natural breaks for this module. this observation is confirmed when comparing the list of countries at higher risk by each categorization method within illegal pathway . the use of manual nb provides a maximum risk score of  <dig> for four countries, whereas with jenks nb three countries presented a risk score of  <dig>  the lists of countries at higher risk observed among the two nb categorization methods were very similar, with two countries that modify their order and consequently change the position of the others but not their relative risk. also the magnitude of the changes was not high  when comparing with other pathways. consequently, although the magnitude of changes observed was not big, authors decided to employ manual nb for this pathway for calculating the final results, as it better fits to the distribution of input data used and provides more adjusted results.

the sensitivity analysis assessed the impact of the categorization methods on the model’s outcomes and suggested satisfactory model robustness for all the pathways, except for the legal imports of products, which presented the greatest ec, with an average si of  <dig>  in addition, a maximum extent of change of  <dig> levels took place for eight countries for the legal imports of products pathway when modifying categorization. within this pathway, data categorization was used only for transforming risk probabilities into risk scores, but conferred no additional value to the calculations . consequently for this specific case, evaluating the absolute probabilistic values presented in additional file  <dig> is recommended to better interpret the results instead of risk scores.

for the remaining pathways, the variations found by using other categorization methods were much slighter , with a maximum extent of  <dig> levels of risk  and  <dig> . this confirms the robustness of the model structure, especially for the semi-quantitative pathways where data categorization proved an important element to assess risk.

besides the analysis of the ec observed , the comparison of the main study output, specifically the list of countries at highest risk per pathway, revealed good consistency among the different categorization methods employed. indeed the order of countries at highest risk changed only for the illegal pathway  and for taf . specifically for taf, the values of two countries interchanged from second and third positions at risk, but both remained in the same risk category. for all the other pathways, no changes were observed in the list of the highest risk countries, except for the inclusion of some countries at the end of the list. these results suggest that the main model’s outputs were not influenced when other categorizing methods were used.

all five modules within the framework provided relative risk scores on a scale of risk scores from  <dig> to  <dig>  the equivalent to risk probabilities from negligible to very high. despite the use of different methodologies for each pathway module inhibits a direct comparison of the results among the pathways, as the same methodology was used for all the countries within each module, it was possible to compare the countries’ risk scores for a given pathway. accordingly, these results can be used at the eu level to determine the countries/areas at higher risk per route of introduction. the application of specific control measures  in these high-risk countries/pathways could prove beneficial for the whole eu. based on this assumption, special attention should be paid to sweden and slovenia , followed by finland, france and greece , for the legal import of pigs pathway during the hrp. in relation with legal imports of products during the hrp, the only country at high risk was bulgaria , followed by romania and germany . for illegal imports, no country presented the highest score , but a risk score of  <dig> was estimated for france, germany, italy and the united kingdom. something similar occurred with the transport associated fomites pathway, for which lithuania and poland obtained the highest scores . finally, the risk deriving from the wild boar movement route was estimated with a score of  <dig> for finland, followed by latvia, poland and romania with a risk score of  <dig> 

some countries, like finland, romania, germany, poland and france, obtained risk scores of  <dig> and/or  <dig> for several pathways. these countries would benefit from further national research to elucidate which pathways are at higher risk for their country and which actions can be implemented to prevent these risks. countries with similar risk profiles are also often similar in terms of external trade, geographic location, wild pig movements, and other factors that have been considered in the assessment. germany and the uk obtained high risk scores for illegal imports, legal import and transport, which reflect their vast volume of trade with third countries  <cit> . they operate more flights from asf-affected countries, and they also obtained the largest number of residents from asf-affected countries, and very high values for inbound and outbound tourism . in comparison to other eu countries, these two countries maintain very close relations with non eu countries, which could potentially incur a risk for disease introduction.

transport and wild boar obtained risk scores of  <dig> or  <dig> in lithuania, finland or poland, which reflects their geographical proximity to affected areas and, consequently, the facility of entrance by these routes influenced by distance. these results have been recently validated by the notification of asf cases in dead wild boar in territories of lithuania and poland  <cit> . malta and luxembourg, with almost no pigs and an insignificant number of imports and risk relations, were at extremely low risk  for all the analyzed pathways.

in addition to these logical and biological arguments, the results obtained in the present framework agree with previous country-specific risk assessments. in a previous risk assessment for finland, introduction by wild boar was considered to be the riskiest pathway  <cit> , which agrees with the risk score of  <dig> obtained in the wild boar module of the present framework. similarly, germany obtained a risk score of  <dig> in the present transport fomites module and a moderate-high risk for the risk of the means of transport of pigs in the national assessment made by fli  <cit> . these examples stress that despite the framework’s limitations, the obtained results agree with other assessments. this, consequently, inspires confidence in our model’s results. however, the authors are aware that these agreements do not guarantee the exact prediction of risk.

the analysis of the present results per pathway also provides interesting information on risk management. in some of the pathways analyzed, risk concentrated mainly in very few countries , whereas other pathways proved relevant for many countries . these findings suggest the benefits of a coordinated eu program for preventing and controlling the disease.

the outcomes obtained with this modular framework can be used to inform about the development of targeted risk management measures in the eu by implementing preventive measures in those pathways and countries that obtained higher risk scores. additionally, the modular framework provided in the additional file can be used as a template to estimate the risk of asfv introduction into other geographic areas or timeframes as more data become available.

CONCLUSIONS
a modular framework has been implemented to estimate the risk of asfv entry into the eu through five different introduction routes: the legal imports of pigs and products during the high risk period, the illegal imports of products, the transport associated fomites and the movement of wild boar. the framework, available in a public domain, integrates the five risk assessment modules and offers a transparent, easy-to-interpret tool that can be easily updated as data become available and can also be adapted to other regions of interest. the model’s results identify the eu countries at higher risk per route of asfv introduction, and acts as a useful basis to develop a coordinated eu program and to, ultimately, improve asfv prevention in the eu.

endnote
acroatia was the eu country not included in the analysis given its recent inclusion in the eu .

competing interest
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contribution
this work is the result of the long-term coordinated efforts made between three institutions . lm, bml, mm and jmsv carried out the analysis for the legal imports and transport fomites pathways. sc, bj, fsv, dup and bw made the illegal assessment. at, mm and mjr developed the assessment for the wild boar pathway. the respective teams did the sensitivity analyses in the corresponding pathways  and adapted their pathway analysis in order to integrate a common structure. lm integrated the modules into the common structure and wrote the draft of this manuscript. all the authors participated in the discussions about the selection of the methodologies used, the interpretation of the results, and the preparation of the manuscript by reviewing the results, and by notably modifying and suggesting changes to improve the study. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
modular framework for estimating the risk of asf introduction into european union. the present file includes input data, calculations and results of the five pathways assessed in the study. in addition, explanations about the structure and source of data were also included in separate sheets.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work has been funded by the asfrisk project . the authors wish to acknowledge all the collaborators in the expert opinion elicitation sessions. the authors are also grateful for eduardo fernández-carrión’s support in the mathematical assessment. lina mur holds a scholarship from the fpu program of the spanish ministry of education, culture and sports.
