BACKGROUND
stem cells have the capacity to self-replicate or to produce progeny of one or several specific differentiated cell types. there are two types of stem cells: embryonic and somatic stem cells, which are found in foetal and adult tissue respectively. while they are generally committed to a particular tissue fate, somatic stem cells can alternatively generate cells belonging to different tissue types when they are exposed to specific cues produced by a different tissue. high hopes rest on the future application of stem cells in cellular therapies, including those of the central nervous system disorders. for this reason, the mechanisms that regulate the acquisition of a neural fate by somatic stem cells are under intensive study. in this work, we will extend our investigations of the regulation of the expression of nestin, a neural stem cell marker, by mesenchymal stem cells  and compare it to the corresponding process occurring in radial glial cells , a major form of neural stem cell in mammalian central nervous system  development.

mscs can differentiate into many types of mesenchymal phenotypes, i.e. osteocytes, chondrocytes and adipocytes, and they can also differentiate into non-mesenchymal cell, i.e. neural cells, when grafted in the lesioned central nervous system  <cit>  or when grown in vitro together with neural cells  <cit> . in the latter case, mscs adopt a neural fate in co-culture only after expressing nestin, an intermediate filament protein which is predominantly expressed during early stages of development by stem and progenitor cells of the central nervous system  <cit> . in cultivated mscs, nestin expression requires serum-free conditions and at least  <dig> cell population doublings  to occur, suggesting a kind of maturation and/or selection of rat nestin-positive neurogenic mscs  <cit> .

during development, the cns of vertebrates contains an abundant cell type designated as radial glial cells . these cells while classically known as guiding cues for migrating neurons  <cit> , play a major role as precursor cells for pyramidal neurons and astrocytes  <cit> . since rg express a number of astroglial characteristics and can differentiate into astrocytes after completing their guidance function, they have been previously considered as integral part of the glial lineage. however, it was recently demonstrated that rg may persist as neural stem cells in several discrete regions of the adult brain. rg are expressing nestin both in vivo and in vitro  <cit>  as well as an antigen related to nestin and recognized by the rc <dig> antibody  <cit> . while several growth factors and activities are known to act on the proliferation and differentiation of rg  <cit> , their phenotype is also controlled in vitro by factors contained in serum  <cit> . indeed, the transition between rc2-positive rg and stellate gfap-positive astrocytes and its reversal can be induced, respectively, by withdrawal and addition of serum in the growth medium of cultures of developing cerebellar glial cells. in the case of mscs, it is the withdrawal of serum that allows their expression of nestin suggesting that some serum-derived factors inhibit nestin expression in these cells.

because serum-dependent effects on the stellation of astrocytes have been attributed to thrombin which is a normal serum component  <cit> , we addressed the question of the regulation by thrombin of nestin expression in both mscs and rg. indeed there are indications that thrombin can have a regulatory role in nestin expression in vivo after experimental intracerebral haemorrhage  <cit> . we demonstrate that the presence of thrombin in the culture medium stimulates the growth of both rg and mscs in a dose-dependent manner. in addition to the mitogenic effect, we demonstrate that thrombin represses nestin expression by mscs but increases its expression by rg. we found that the par- <dig> receptor is involved in the regulation of nestin expression by both cell types to thrombin. finally, we demonstrate that the modulation of nestin-expression by mscs in serum-free conditions is dependent on their cell density.

RESULTS
serum and thrombin mitogenic effect on radial glia and mesenchymal stem cells
to measure the effect of serum and thrombin on the proliferation of mscs and rg, cells that had been maintained in serum-free conditions were allowed to incorporate brdu in the presence of serum or thrombin . an increase of the brdu labelling index was observed for both mscs and rg that were treated with serum or thrombin. while rg did not incorporate brdu in the absence of serum, addition of thrombin at  <dig> nm stimulated their brdu incorporation to 28% of that induced by serum. with mscs, about 80% of all cells were incorporating brdu in serum-free medium and addition of either serum or  <dig> pm thrombin to the medium lead to similar increases of labelling indexes up to  <dig> and 90% of all cells.

ns: no significant difference.

*: p <  <dig> .

** p <  <dig> .

rg and rat mscs were cultured for respectively  <dig> and  <dig> days in the absence of serum and then were grown for two further days in the presence of serum or with  <dig> nm  or  <dig> pm  of thrombin. brdu  was added for the last  <dig> hrs before fixation with paraformaldehyde and immunofluorescent staining for both nestin and brdu incorporation. cells were counted on  <dig> microscopic fields  on at least three coverslips in each condition. percentage of brdu-incorporating cells and standard deviation in each condition, obtained with graphpad prism <dig> software, are shown. levels of significance compared to the control  condition are shown.

we used a double immunostaining procedure for nestin and brdu to analyze separately the brdu incorporation by both nestin-positive and nestin-negative mscs . we found that 86% of nestin- positive mscs incorporated brdu and that this percentage did not change significantly after addition of serum or thrombin. contrasting with this, we found that  <dig> % of nestin-negative mscs incorporated brdu in the absence of serum and that this percentage increased significantly in the presence of thrombin and serum  to reach values close to those of nestin-positive cells.

regulation of nestin expression by thrombin in radial glia and in mesenchymal stem cells
mscs and mouse rg production of nestin was assessed by immunostaining, leading to the conclusion that thrombin regulates nestin expression differently in the two cell types . a decrease in the number of nestin-positive mscs was observed when, after  <dig> hours in serum-free culture medium allowing them to express nestin, they were grown further for  <dig> days in the presence of serum or thrombin . this effect of thrombin was dose-dependent with half-inhibition occurring at  <dig> pm thrombin .

trap is a hexapeptide that corresponds to amino acids  <dig> to  <dig> of the thrombin receptor and mimics the effect of thrombin independently of receptor cleavage  <cit> . when mscs were incubated in dem supplemented with different concentrations of trap <dig>  a significant decrease of nestin-positive mscs number occurred at concentration of trap <dig> equal to or above  <dig> μm .

those immunocytofluorescence observations were confirmed by a western blotting approach. in immunoblots, the signal for nestin was observed in each condition but decreased in the presence of serum or thrombin while the signal obtained for actin remained unchanged .

in order to exclude an apoptotic effect of thrombin on mscs that would lead to a specific decrease of the number of nestin-positive cells, we performed a tunel assay on mscs treated with different concentrations of thrombin. no apoptotic cells were found in any condition, while a positive control, in which mscs were treated by dnase, showed a strong tunel labelling .

an indirect effect of thrombin that would regulate nestin expression through an increase in cell density and cell to cell interactions can also be excluded. although thrombin induces a proliferative effect on rmsc, no change in cell density occurred in cultures treated with increasing concentrations of thrombin for  <dig> days . when, fudr  was added to inhibit dna synthesis and cell proliferation, a significant decrease of nestin expression by rmsc cultivated in dem +  <dig> pm thrombin or 10% serum was still observed indicating that thrombin inhibits directly nestin expression by rmsc .

an opposite effect was seen with radial glial cells which stop expressing nestin after  <dig> hours without serum but maintain this expression in the presence of serum, thrombin or trap- <dig> . no such effect was seen on gfap expression which was not investigated further. western-blot analysis allowed to estimate at respectively  <dig> pm and  <dig> μm the concentrations of thrombin and trap- <dig> causing a half-maximal stimulation of nestin expression .

because mscs and rg were obtained from different rodent species and are usually grown in the presence of different sera, the effect of horse serum instead of bovine serum was tested on rat mscs and the same experiment was repeated with mouse mscs. no significant difference was found when nestin-positive rat mscs were treated with dem+10% fbs and mem+10%hs, the medium used for rg cultivation , suggesting that fbs and hs exert the same effect on nestin expression of rat mscs. a similar effect was observed when mouse mscs  were tested , suggesting that the species difference between rat mscs and mouse rg is not responsible for the observed different regulation of nestin expression by serum and thrombin.

thrombin receptor in radial glia and mesenchymal stem cells
the presence of the specific thrombin receptor par- <dig> was demonstrated on both rg cells and mscs by immunocytochemistry using the h- <dig> antibody. in both cell types par- <dig> is expressed by cells grown in the presence or absence of serum . the distribution of par- <dig> is indicative of a plasma membrane localization as it extends frequently to cell processes that the intermediate filaments nestin or gfap did not reach . more intense staining was also visible in the nucleus.

in mscs, we observed by double-immunocytochemistry, the expression of par <dig> on both nestin-negative and nestin-positive mscs suggesting that both cell types might be sensitive to the effect of thrombin .

to confirm the expression of par <dig> by mscs and rg cells, rt-pcr analysis was performed on total rna extracts of both cell types. using primers optimized for rat and mouse transcripts, par <dig> mrna was detected in mouse rg  and in mscs  at a level comparable to that of astrocytes of rat used as positive control. gapdh mrna served as internal control of the rt-pcr.

regulation of nestin expression by density of mesenchymal stem cells
we have noticed that the effect of omitting serum in cultures of mscs in order to increase their expression of nestin is variable in efficacy and that this variation could be a consequence of differing densities of mscs stimulated by serum withdrawal. in order to determine how cell density could regulate the expression of nestin by mscs, cells were plated at various densities in growth medium without serum for  <dig> days to induce nestin expression . we observed that at a density of  <dig>  cells/cm <dig> or above, mscs decrease by more than 8-fold their nestin expression in response to serum withdrawal . those results were confirmed by western blot on cultures established at a density of  <dig>   <dig> or 100· <dig> mscs/cm <dig> which reached about  <dig>   <dig> and 100% confluence before extraction as shown by phase contrast microscopy . using identical amounts of total protein extracted from mscs plated in serum-free conditions, nestin signal decreases with increasing cellular density . quantification of the nestin expression in each condition was determined by calculating the ratio between the intensity of the nestin bands and the corresponding actin signals used as internal control for the protein contents loaded on the gel. this was normalized to the level of nestin expression in mscs seeded at 20· <dig> cells/cm <dig> .

to further characterize the mechanism  responsible for such an effect, we co-cultivated mscs coated on coverslips at a permissive density for  <dig> hours in serum-free medium together with different densities of mscs physically separated in a millicell device . no significant decrease in nestin expression is observed in the mscs grown at a permissive density on coverslips  in the presence of a high density of mscs in a millicell. this clearly suggests that the decrease of nestin expression at high mscs cell density requires a direct cell-to-cell contact. as a positive control of the permeability of the millicell device in such setup, mscs were cultivated at a permissive density in serum-free medium with 30% fbs loaded into a millicell device. a strong decrease of nestin expression was indeed observed under this condition.

discussion
thrombin, a multifunctional serine protease, plays central functions in haemostasis but also promotes a wide range of cellular responses via an interaction with specific seven-transmembrane domains receptors  <cit> . thrombin and perhaps other coagulant proteases, mediates proliferative responses triggered by tissue damage  <cit> . in vitro, thrombin is the most potent activator of blood platelets  <cit> , is chemotactic for monocytes  <cit> , and is a potent mitogenic factor for vascular smooth-muscle cells <cit> , fibroblasts  <cit>  and vascular endothelial cells  <cit> . thrombin signalling is mediated by a family of g protein-coupled protease-activated receptors , for which par <dig> is the prototype  <cit> . thrombin activates par <dig> through binding to and subsequent cleavage of the n-terminal domain of the receptor to expose a new amino-terminus that then acts as a tethered ligand to initiate intracellular signalling by the receptor  <cit> . we found on both radial glial cells and rat mscs a membranous expression of par <dig> suggesting that thrombin may act on these cells physiology. we also found that par <dig> is expressed in the nucleus and cytoplasm. the intracellular staining for par <dig> can be explained by the presence of intracellular store of par <dig> in the cells  <cit> .

there is increasing evidence suggesting that members of the serine protease family, including thrombin, chymotrypsin, urokinase plasminogen activator, and kallikrein, may play a role in normal development and/or pathology of the nervous system. thrombin-like proteases have been shown to exert deleterious effects on different neuronal and non-neuronal cell populations in vitro, including neurite retraction and death  <cit> . moreover, the proteolytic activity of thrombin has been shown to inhibit long-term morphological differentiation in serum-free cultures of several cell types, including spinal cord and brain neurons, neuroblastoma cells, astroglial and neuroepithelial cells  <cit> .

nestin expression in the adult nervous system has been detected in a number of pathological conditions including cerebral ischemia  <cit> ., and traumatic brain injury  <cit> . nakamura et al. <cit>  have demonstrated that intracerebral injections of low doses of thrombin that induces neuroprotection without causing detectable brain injury resulted in a marked increase in nestin expression indicating that this could constitute a protective mechanism induced in astrocytes by levels of stress that do not produce a definable lesion. nestin expression could, therefore, represent an embryonic reversion of the mature cytoskeleton that may aid in the response to and recovery from a wide variety of cerebral injuries, but might also perhaps aid in damage prevention.

in this study, we demonstrate that nestin expression is regulated by thrombin in opposite manner in rg and mscs although the proliferation of both cell types is stimulated by this protease. thrombin effect is thus associated in both cell types with a proliferating, undifferentiated state but in rg cells this involves the induction of nestin expression, a marker of immaturity for neural progenitors. in mscs however, nestin expression corresponds to the first step toward acquisition of a neural fate and thus corresponds to a progression from the mesenchymal "undifferentiated", proliferating phenotype  <cit> . maintenance of mscs proliferation in the presence of thrombin would indeed be associated with an inhibition of nestin expression by mscs as it constitutes one feature of their undifferentiated state. a possible selection of one population type over the other can be discounted as an explanation for the decrease of nestin expression by mscs in the presence of thrombin because this effect still occurs in cells that cannot proliferate when treated with fudr. furthermore, the absence of apoptotic cells in the cultures treated with thrombin as well as the similar proliferation rates for both nestin-negative and nestin-positive mscs which are induced in the presence of serum or thrombin in the growth medium demonstrate that thrombin represses directly the expression of nestin by mscs and does not act by selecting the population of nestin-negative cells.

thus unlike radial glial cells, mscs in vitro respond to thrombin by a decrease of nestin expression. the nestin gene contains two tissue-specific transcriptional elements : a cis-element in the first intron drives nestin expression in somitic muscle precursors, while an enhancer in the second intron directs expression to cns precursor cells  <cit>  and thus to radial glial cells. which of these two regulatory elements controls nestin expression by mscs remains to be determined.

finally, we demonstrate that nestin expression by mscs decreases at a high cell density, as observed by immunocytofluorescence and western blot assay. tropepe et al. <cit>  have found that embryonic stem cells express nestin when they differentiate into neural cells. this expression and the subsequent neural differentiation of embryonic stem cells are inhibited by a high cell density suggesting a similar behaviour for both mscs and embryonic stem cells. it has also been demonstrated that a high cell density could accelerate the differentiation of human bone marrow mscs into chondrocyte in a chondrogenic differentiation medium  <cit> . however, this chondrogenic differentiation is mediated by soluble factors while the decrease of nestin expression observed in our experiments is mediated by a direct cell-to-cell contact. since our experiments were made with mscs obtained after more than  <dig> passages, we cannot exclude that these apparently different regulatory processes for the high cell density effect on mscs mesodermal fate result from the use of mscs of early and late passages.

there are however indications that mscs of late passage secrete a soluble factor that can act on other cell types. indeed wislet-gendebien et al. <cit>  have already demonstrated that nestin-positive mscs secrete bmp <dig>  a member of tgfβ family, which stimulates the astrocytic differentiation of co-cultured neural stem cells, a maturation process that involves a loss of nestin expression by these cells. however, our co-culture experiments did not show any significant decrease in the proportion of nestin-positive mscs when cells at a permissive density were grown with other mscs at higher densities in a setup that allows no direct contact, suggesting rather a requirement for a direct cell-to-cell contact for nestin repression. alternatively, high cellular density by increasing the direct cell-to-cell contact in the culture dish could inhibit specifically the proliferation of nestin-positive mscs which then could explain their decrease in number as the overall cellular density increases.

during the last few years, a number of studies have addressed the phenotypic plasticity of mscs. most of these studies were performed in vivo and demonstrated that environmental factors play important roles in determining the ability of grafted mscs to adopt a neural-like phenotype. nakano et al. showed that murine bone marrow cells adopt a neural fate when they are directly injected into the striatum of previously irradiated mice  <cit> . similarly, mscs also adopt neural fate after systemic injection in lethally irradiated mice  <cit> . interestingly, the systemic injection of mscs in non-irradiated but brain-lesioned mice had positive effects on injury repair, but very few mscs-derived cells expressed neural marker in such conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
this work shows that the presence of thrombin in the culture medium stimulates the growth of both rg and mscs and that nestin expression by mscs and rg can be regulated in opposite manner by thrombin in vitro. thrombin effect is thus associated in both cell types with a proliferating, undifferentiated state but in rg this involves the induction of nestin expression, a marker of immaturity for neural progenitors. in mscs however, nestin expression, as it corresponds to a progression from the mesenchymal "undifferentiated", proliferating phenotype toward acquisition of a neural fate, is inhibited by the mitogenic signal. as we know that thrombin is expressed in the central nervous system  <cit>  and is present in higher concentration during brain injury and implicated in the response to brain lesions  <cit> , it will be interesting to study the effect of thrombin on the regulation of the neural phenotypic plasticity of mscs in vivo in the context of their proposed use as grafting material for cell therapeutic approaches of the central nervous system lesions.

