BACKGROUND
the question of how the brain stores memories has generated intense interest. it is widely thought that information is retained in the strengths of synaptic connections between neurons  <cit> . the "synaptic hypothesis" is supported by numerous studies demonstrating that synaptic strengths do in fact change after learning, and that manipulations that block these changes also interfere with learning  <cit> . a host of models has explored how such modifiable synapses, when embedded in a network of neurons, could store information  <cit> . in these models, different items are represented by distinct patterns of active neurons in the network. recent theoretical work has explored how the distribution of connection weights affects the capacity of a network to store such patterns  <cit> . these studies have consistently demonstrated that a skewed distribution, where most weights are relatively weak and only a few are strong, maximizes the number of patterns that can be retained. electrophysiological studies support this view, and have shown that the distribution of synaptic strengths onto neurons in many parts of the brain is indeed skewed  <cit> .

the network activity patterns predicted by the synaptic hypothesis have also found experimental support. several studies have shown that cortical slice networks, as well as randomly connected networks of cortical neurons, can retain multiple, distinct activity patterns that spontaneously re-occur more often than expected by chance  <cit> . these significantly repeating activity patterns are diverse, temporally precise, and stable for several hours, suggesting that they may be used by the brain to retain information  <cit> . studies from intact animals are consistent with this, and show that precisely repeating sequences of neural activity occur when birds sing a well-learned song  <cit> , or when rats recapitulate a path taken through an often-traveled maze  <cit> .

to advance these two lines of work, a link must be made between the distribution of connection strengths and the patterns retained in living neural networks. in our previous work, we reported that isolated cortical networks produced an average of  <dig> ±  <dig>  distinct groups of significantly repeating patterns  <cit> . we later published a model that generated repeating patterns that were remarkably similar to those from experiments  <cit> . in addition, this model reproduced the size distribution of cascades, called "neuronal avalanches" observed in these networks  <cit> . by tuning the weight distribution in this model and comparing its output to the data from cortical slice networks, we sought to answer two questions: what distribution of connection strengths will best fit the statistics of the observed repeating patterns? what distribution of connection strengths will maximize the number of repeating activity patterns? our hypothesis was that a skewed distribution would both fit the data and be optimal.

we report here that the distribution of connection strengths that best fits the data is also the distribution that maximizes the number of repeating patterns. this distribution has many weak connections and only a few strong ones. portions of this work were previously presented as a talk  <cit>  and in abstract form  <cit> .

RESULTS
overview
the results comprise four sections. first, we describe general features of activity from the 60-channel multielectrode array recordings in acute cortical slices. second, we show that a computational model qualitatively reproduces the avalanche size distribution and the significantly repeating avalanches generated by these slice networks. as very similar findings have been reported previously, these results are presented only briefly for the sake of clarity and completeness. third, we show that the distribution of connection weights in the model has a large effect on the distribution of repeating activity patterns. fourth, we show how the distribution of connection weights in the model also affects the overall number of distinct repeating activity patterns.

activity produced by acute cortical slices
we recorded spontaneous extracellular activity from acute slices of rat somatosensory cortex  with 60-channel multielectrode arrays for two hours per preparation. each slice network had  <dig> or more active electrodes. local field potential  activity from these slices was similar to that reported previously for organotypic cultures  <cit>  and consisted of quiescent periods punctuated by network bursts. local field potentials that crossed threshold appeared as negative voltage peaks approximately  <dig> ms wide, indicative of a population spike . such sharp negative lfps are thought to be produced by a group of neurons in the vicinity of the electrode firing nearly synchronous action potentials  <cit> . data were binned at  <dig> ms, as this was the average time between successive activation of two electrodes within a network burst when the interelectrode spacing was  <dig> μm, as reported previously  <cit> .

when activity from all electrodes in an array was plotted in raster form, we commonly observed multiple lfps in the same time bin. we also observed cascades of consecutively active time bins . after cascades were recorded over several hours, it was possible to plot their size distribution , which could be approximated by a power law. because this distribution was not expected by chance  <cit> , but was similar to that produced by computational models of sand pile avalanches  <cit> , we previously named these events "neuronal avalanches"  <cit> .

another feature of neuronal avalanches reported earlier is that many of them display spatio-temporal structure. when all avalanches of a given length are compared, many of them are more similar to each other than would be expected by chance  <cit> . we found that spontaneous activity from acute cortical slices shared this property. these repeating avalanches could be ordered into groups  that were stable over two hours. this long-term stability, as well as the similarity that these avalanches have to spatio-temporal sequences of activity found in vivo, suggest that neuronal avalanches could be used to retain information in cortical circuits.

activity produced by the model
we used a simple model based on a branching process  <cit>  to capture the central features of the slice data . briefly, each node in the network represented activity at one of the  <dig> electrodes. when a node became active, it had some probability, p, of activating another node in the next time step. in this model, each node had  <dig> connections to other nodes, and the set of p values coming from each node determined the weight distribution. figure  <dig> shows that the avalanche size distribution produced by the model is qualitatively similar to that typically produced by an acute cortical slice  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows that the repeating avalanches produced by the model are qualitatively similar to those commonly found in the data  <cit> . these results demonstrate that the model is a reasonable platform from which to explore the effects of the weight distribution on significantly repeating avalanches.

effect of the exponent b on the distribution of groups
using this model, we next explored how the distribution of connection weights affected the distribution of groups of significantly repeating avalanches. connection weights in the model were given by a weighting function  shown in figure  <dig>  note that the steepness of the curve was determined by the exponent b. we sought to determine which value of b produced a distribution of groups of repeating avalanches that best matched the data. to do this, the model was run ten times for each value of b, each time for a period that simulated one hour of real time , and all groups of statistically significant avalanches were extracted. we examined only groups containing avalanches of length  <dig> through  <dig>  avalanches of length  <dig> had no temporal extent, and were excluded because their occurrences did not clearly depend on the connection strengths between units. statistically significant groups with avalanches longer than  <dig> frames were not observed in the data or in the simulations.

the exponent of the weighting function had a profound effect on the distribution of groups of significant avalanches. low values of b  produced distributions of groups of avalanches that also declined with l . high values of b  produced distributions with the opposite trend , contrary to what was seen in the data. figure  <dig> shows the distributions produced by all values of b.

the sum of squares error between the data and all model distributions is plotted in figure 9a. low values of b  produced relatively good fits to the data that had errors less than the intrinsic error of the data itself. values of b greater than  <dig>  produced fits with errors that exceeded  <dig> , the variability of the data itself. from this we conclude that only weighting functions with b in the range of  <dig> - <dig>  could reasonably fit the data.

effect of the exponent b on the number of groups
we also counted the total number of groups of statistically significant avalanches produced by the model for all values of b. figure 9b shows the maximum number of groups of significantly repeating avalanches varied widely and peaked at b =  <dig>  and b =  <dig> . figure  <dig> shows all the weighting functions that were considered good fits for the data. interestingly, two of these functions were also found to produce the largest number of groups of significantly repeating avalanches. thus, two of the weighting functions that were best-fitting were also optimal.

discussion
relation to other work
our results are consistent with several experimental studies that have examined the distribution of connection strengths in living neural networks. song and colleagues  <cit>  used patch clamp recording in cortical slices to measure the amplitudes of post synaptic currents produced in layer v pyramidal neurons by neighboring neurons. they found that the distribution of amplitudes was approximately lognormal, with only a few strong connections. brunel and colleagues, working in the cerebellum, reported similar findings  <cit> . they found that the distribution of synaptic strengths from granule cells onto purkinje neurons also had very few strong synapses. although these two studies examined synaptic connection strengths, their results are similar to those of pajevic and plenz  <cit> , who reconstructed activity flow in cortical slice networks from field potential data. pajevic and plenz  <cit>  found that connection strengths from a single electrode were distributed approximately exponentially, again with only a few strong connections.

our results are also in agreement with modeling studies. gardner  <cit>  analytically derived the distribution of connection strengths that would maximize storage capacity in the perceptron, a type of feed-forward neural network model that can be used for pattern classification  <cit> . this distribution again had very few strong connections. brunel and colleagues noted the correspondence between the optimal weight distribution for the perceptron and their findings in the cerebellum  <cit> . in the recurrent hopfield neural network model  <cit> , storage capacity is actually reduced if each unit has too many strong connections. this is because an excess of strong connections produces false associations between patterns that are actually distinct. when such an over connected network is annealed from a given starting configuration, it will often converge to a spurious hybrid state that is a mixture of two or more previously learned states. this problem of saturation in neural network models has been noted by several groups  <cit> , whose results suggest that optimal storage is best achieved when strong connections are sparsely distributed. all of these findings are consistent with the results of the present study.

none of these previous reports, however, examined how the distribution of weights was related to spatio-temporal activity patterns. this is an important topic for exploration because in vivo studies have increasingly suggested that memories in behaving animals are linked to spatio-temporal activity patterns, and not to static configurations of active neurons  <cit> . our work builds on previous studies by explicitly linking the capacity of a network model to store such spatio-temporal patterns to the weight distribution between units in the network. we also go beyond previous work by exploring how connection weights affect the distribution of groups of significantly repeating spatio-temporal patterns. we accomplish this by recording significantly repeating spatio-temporal activity patterns of all lengths over several hours, something that is presently difficult to do in vivo and has not yet been reported. in this respect, an in vitro network preparation is useful as it provides a stable platform from which to examine all patterns of activity produced by a network over a long time without interruption from outside perturbations.

validity and limitations
this work does have several limitations, though. first, the spatio-temporal activity patterns reported here were all recorded from isolated cortical networks. the activity in these networks was therefore not produced by sensory stimulation, and modulatory systems that are normally present in vivo were absent. in addition, the pattern of synaptic connections present in vivo is not necessarily reproduced in vitro. for neuronal cultures, connections are not formed in response to sensory experience. for acute slices, some axons and dendrites are likely to be cut. second, the signals analyzed here were all lfps, which are difficult to attribute to individual neurons or synapses. caution should therefore be exercised when using the results of the present study to predict phenomena in vivo.

despite these limitations, in vitro preparations are still widely used as models of local cortical networks because many of the features characteristic of neocortex are preserved: neuronal morphology  <cit> , cytoarchitecture  <cit> , gross intracortical connectivity  <cit> , and intrinsic electrophysiological properties  <cit> . in addition, the reproducible activity patterns seen in cultures and in slices are similar to each other  <cit> , and are remarkably similar to activity patterns seen in vivo  <cit> .

with regard to lfps, several recent reports indicate that bursts of action potentials, like the kind that could produce lfps, as well as lfps themselves, often contain more information about the state of a network than do single action potentials  <cit> . an analysis of lfps in cortical slices and cultures is therefore expected to provide insights into information retention at the local network level. it is also interesting to note that the lfp bursts that we call neuronal avalanches can be induced in acute slices by the application of nmda and dopamine agonists  <cit> . these agents also have been found to induce up states in vivo  <cit> , suggesting that avalanches may be related to up states. although this link was not explored in this paper, this potential connection further motivates the investigation of these lfp bursts.

one might also ask why we did not attempt to reconstruct weight distributions from the data. although such a reconstruction is possible and recently has been done for cortical slice networks  <cit> , it is important to note that reconstruction alone would not have allowed us to ask how changes in the weight distribution affect the storage capacity of the network. for our purposes, it was important to have a tunable network model where we could explore storage capacity as a function of a single variable. we adopted this approach because it is presently unfeasible to experimentally tune the weight distribution on all nodes in living neural networks. as it turns out, the number of connections we use in our model, as well as the shape of the weight distribution, are consistent with the results of reconstruction  <cit> . we also did not attempt to explicitly model the small-world degree distribution found by pajevic and plenz  <cit> . this would have involved introducing heterogeneity into our model, and would have complicated the interpretation of our results. instead, we chose to treat all nodes as equivalent and gave them random connectivity. the degree distribution of a random network with a mean degree of  <dig> would be similar in shape to that found by reconstruction  <cit> , suggesting that our results are unlikely to be affected much by this difference. nevertheless, this is an interesting topic that could be explored more fully in future studies.

the model that we propose here is phenomenological and is not yet clearly linked to biophysical mechanisms. some of our previous modeling work  <cit>  has suggested ways in which biophysical mechanisms like firing rate homeostasis and conservation of synaptic strengths might play a role in tuning the network to the point where it would produce avalanches. these predictions are testable, indicating that the model eventually may be linked to mechanisms at scales smaller than the network.

implications
multielectrode recordings from behaving animals indicate that reproducible spatio-temporal patterns of neural activity are used to represent specific items in memory  <cit> . these findings suggest that the significantly repeating avalanche patterns that we find in both our in vitro data and in our models may be used as a platform from which to explore information retention in local cortical networks. if neuronal avalanches can be used for this purpose, then our findings may place constraints on how learning could occur in local cortical networks. it is presently unclear how a network could maintain an optimal distribution of weights in the face of learning, if learning involves strengthening or weakening of existing connections. learning could disrupt optimal distributions, pushing the network away from the point of maximum storage capacity. it is possible that a rescaling process could allow individual connections to change strength while approximately preserving the overall distribution near an optimal point. there is some support for rescaling of synaptic strengths in response to changes in overall activity levels  <cit> , as well as support for conservation of synaptic strengths in the face of plasticity  <cit> . modeling studies would be needed to determine whether such mechanisms could preserve an optimal distribution in the presence of synaptic plasticity  <cit> .

it is also interesting to note that network studies in other areas of biology have found weight distributions that have relatively few strong connections  <cit> , hinting that this distribution is perhaps of more general significance. kauffman and colleagues have shown that two connections per node in random boolean networks leads to systems that are poised at the edge of chaos, where adaptability is maximized without introducing instability  <cit> . this intriguing conjecture has yet to be explored in neural networks.

finally, we would like to note that hebb's theories on memory did not just emphasize a particular synaptic learning rule, but a process whereby groups of cells, or "assemblies" could activate each other in sequences  <cit> . the order in which these assemblies are activated is expected to have important consequences for memory. both theoretical  <cit>  and experimental  <cit>  work has begun to probe this idea . because modeling studies suggest that the distribution of connection strengths influences the dynamics of activation  <cit> , it is likely that the distribution of strengths will also place constraints on the order in which assemblies can be activated.

CONCLUSIONS
the main finding of this study is that the set of connection strengths that best fits the distribution of groups of significant avalanches also produces the largest number of groups of significant avalanches. this suggests that the set of connection strengths actually used in cortical slice networks is the one that maximizes information storage capacity. this set of connection strengths is skewed, with only a few strong connections and many weak ones. fixed distributions impose constraints on learning, however. we conclude that the network must have mechanisms for preserving the overall weight distribution while allowing individual connection strengths to change with learning.

