BACKGROUND
gene regulation is of major importance for physiology of all organisms, and has been intensively studied in fungi. it ensures that the required genes are switched on and act under the circumstances they are needed, and allows fungi to respond to changing conditions. thirty-seven classes of regulator proteins have been identified in fungi
 <cit> , such as c2h <dig> 
 <cit> , zn2cys <dig> 
 <cit> , fungal specific transcription factor domain , bzip 
 <cit> , histone-like transcription factors 
 <cit> , hlh 
 <cit> , hsf 
 <cit> , myb dna-binding 
 <cit> , tea 
 <cit>  and gata 
 <cit> . they coordinate many cellular processes that control growth, survival or reproduction on particular substrates, under certain conditions, or in particular environmental niches. therefore the presence or absence of specific regulators is intimately linked to fungal biodiversity.

analysis of the first available eukaryotic genome indicated a likely diversity of regulators
 <cit> . for example, a number of zn2cys <dig> regulators known in other fungi were absent in saccharomyces cerevisiae <cit> . differences in regulatory protein repertoire were found particularly for this class of regulators, which was reduced in number in kluyveromyces lactis compared with s. cerevisiae <cit> , and considerably expanded in aspergillus nidulans <cit>  and magnaporthe oryzae <cit> . furthermore, a range of functions for fungal zn2cys <dig> regulators lacking yeast orthologs have been described
 <cit> . with an exponentially growing number of fungal genome sequences covering all branches of the fungal tree of life it is now possible to explore the regulatory diversity of fungi and trace the evolutionary origin of particular regulators. for several specific regulators their presence in sets of fungal genomes has been reported. the pentose catabolic pathway in aspergillus is regulated by two transcriptional activators, xlnr and arar
 <cit> . while xlnr is present in nearly all tested filamentous ascomycetes, arar appears to be restricted to the order of the eurotiales that consists of aspergillus, penicillium and related genera. an even higher diversity was observed for regulators of galactose catabolism. a subset of the ascomycetes contains the regulator galx that appears to be mainly involved in the oxidoreductive pathway in aspergillus niger and a. nidulans <cit> . in addition, a. nidulans contains a second regulator, galr, that controls genes of the leloir pathway and for which orthologs were not detected in any of the other studied species
 <cit> . the a. nidulans long chain fatty acid utilisation regulators fara and farb, which themselves are related in sequence, each have orthologs widely conserved in filamentous fungi and share a single common homolog in certain hemiascomycetes
 <cit> . in contrast, the short chain fatty acid utilisation regulator scfa was very poorly conserved, with possible orthologs in a. nidulans, aspergillus fumigatus and neurospora crassa <cit> . the a. niger extracellular protease regulator prtt was identified only in certain aspergilli
 <cit> .

previous genome-wide studies of transcription factors have focussed on a single transcription factor family
 <cit> , a single species
 <cit> , or the relative representation of transcriptional regulator classes in the fungal kingdom
 <cit> . the rapid growth in availability of fungal genomes, particularly those of basidiomycetes, over the last few years has now yielded wider representation of genome sequence data across the various lineages of the fungal kingdom and provides the opportunity for a more detailed analysis of prevalence of transcription regulators across fungal genomes. in this paper we compared the distribution of regulator gene classes between currently available fungal genomes. we analysed the presence or absence of  <dig> characterised regulators in  <dig> fungal genomes to provide a comprehensive evaluation of fungal diversity with respect to regulatory systems. the regulators we have focussed on are all well characterised in at least one fungal species and represent a range of different physiological functions, including  <dig> regulators involved in development and/or morphology,  <dig> regulators involved in carbon metabolism, and  <dig> regulators involved in nitrogen and amino acid metabolism. many of these regulators perform central functions in the organisms where they have been initially studied and therefore provide a good test set for the analysis of their prevalence and evolution in the fungal kingdom.

RESULTS
distribution of regulator classes throughout the fungal kingdom
to determine whether there are major differences in the relative number of regulators from different classes in the different fungal phyla, a pfam analysis of the  <dig> known fungal transcription regulator-related pfam domains
 <cit>  was performed on  <dig> ascomycete and  <dig> basidiomycete genomes . a total of  <dig>  putative transcription factors were identified . interesting differences in the relative number of regulators from different pfam classes could be observed between the two phyla . when comparing ascomycota and basidiomycota the main differences are a much larger expansion of the zn2cys <dig> domain family  and the fungal specific transcription factor domain proteins  in the ascomycota, while in the basidiomycota the c2h <dig> family  and the cchc zinc-finger family  form a significantly higher percentage of the total number of regulators . this indicates that after these phyla split different regulatory strategies have developed based on different regulator classes. within the ascomycota, pezizomycetes contained the highest average amount  of putative regulators compared to saccharomycetes  and taphrinomycetes . moreover, the zn2cys <dig> domain family and fungal specific transcription factor domain proteins in pezizomycotina were found in higher proportions than in the saccharomycotina and taphrinomycotina indicating the major expansion of these regulator classes occurred after divergence of the pezizomycotina from the other lineages. unlike in the basidiomycota, the lower abundance of these two families in the saccharomycotina and taphrinomycotina is not accompanied with a higher abundance of the c2h <dig> and cchc families.
 <dig>  the average number of transcription factors for each phylum is indicated underneath each pie chart. the number of genomes analyzed in each phylum or subphylum is indicated in parentheses.

to compare the pfam distribution of transcription factors between different fungal species, we used hierarchical clustering. the  <dig>  regulators identified in the pfam analysis were clustered, using orthomcl followed by manual curation, into  <dig>  non-redundant orthologous groups . these ortholog groups were then used to analyze the distribution of putative regulators among the pfam families in fungi. a clear trend of regulator family distribution could be detected when species were clustered based on the transcription factor abundance pattern of the families . interestingly, within ascomycota only pezizomycotina species were clustered as one distinct group, the other major subdivisions, saccharomycotina and taphrinomycotina, were clustered within the basidiomycota as two separate groups next to agaricomycotina. this indicates that after these phyla diverged, different regulator classes have been exploited in different lineages.

prevalence of specific regulators in fungal genomes
a pilot study using bidirectional blastp analysis to identify putative orthologs of a subset of chosen regulators was performed followed by manual curation to determine the parameters for automated analysis of the prevalence of regulators in fungal genomes . this automated analysis was used to test for the presence or absence of orthologs of  <dig> regulators  in the  <dig> genomes used for the pfam distribution analysis above . a cut-off designated for identification of distant homologs
 <cit>  was applied throughout the survey in order to decrease the false negative rate caused by the highly divergent sequences of regulators. the results were then manually curated based on sequence alignments and phylogeny to remove false positives. an example is presented for arar, where galr was identified as a false positive .
 <dig> 

although the lowest number of orthologs was identified in the basidiomycota, orthologs for five regulators involved in development and/or morphology , the carbon catabolite repressor crea, and the general expression activators hapb, hapc and hape, are commonly found in basidiomycetes. most of these regulators have general functions for fungal physiology, which explains their common distribution among fungi. conversely, orthologs for six of the seven regulators from schizophyllum commune  were only detected in basidiomycetes, while the other  also had orthologs in filamentous ascomycetes. interestingly, no basidiomycete orthologs were detected for any of the transcriptional activators involved in plant biomass utilization . all these regulators are members of the zn2cys <dig> class , which is particularly expanded in ascomycetes compared to basidiomycetes . indications for similar regulation systems related to plant biomass degradation have been found in transcriptomics studies of basidiomycetes
 <cit> . however, the absence of orthologs for the ascomycete regulators suggests that these regulators have developed after the split from the ascomycetes, and the underlying molecular mechanisms may differ.

the overall low number of regulators for which an ortholog could be found in the basidiomycetes fits with the general pfam distribution  in which clear differences were found in the expansion of the different pfam families between ascomycetes and basidiomycetes. this suggests a smaller regulatory repertoire in the ancestral fungus, which has undergone significant evolution since the basidiomycetes and ascomycetes separated.

the ascomycete yeast genomes also lack a significant number of the regulators, in particular those involved in plant biomass degradation and those involved in development. as most yeasts are not able to degrade plant biomass, nor go through developmental changes, this fits well with their physiology. interestingly, there is a division into two groups with respect to the presence of crea orthologs. saccharomyces lacks this regulator, but instead has mig <dig>  which is the functional homolog of crea, despite low sequence similarity. mig <dig> orthologs were not found in any of the other tested fungi .

the most diverse profiles can be seen for the filamentous ascomycetes. regulators that are particularly poorly conserved in this group include two involved in development and/or morphology , seven involved in carbon metabolism , one involved in nitrogen metabolism , the iron homeostasis regulator srea, the unfolded protein response regulator haca and the aflatoxin biosynthesis regulator aflr, but many other differences can be observed. while the presence of some of these regulators appears to be evolutionarily related  others are more dispersed through the ascomycete tree of life, suggesting that the regulator was present in their common ancestor but has been lost in specific species of different lineages.

present in nearly all of the filamentous ascomycetes  are eleven regulators involved in development and/or morphology , four involved in carbon metabolism , seven involved in nitrogen metabolism , the his-asp phosphorylation signalling regulator srra, the ccaat-binding complex components hapb, hapc and hape, the sulphur metabolic regulator metr, and the penicillin biosynthesis regulator penr <dig>  providing a core set of transcriptional regulators that control most aspects of physiology.

for some transcription factors, multiple homologs were identified in the same species. in those cases where manual curation did not allow elimination of the additional copies, they were retained in the output data set . we do not assume that the different copies will have the same function, although they are likely involved in similar processes. functional analysis of these proteins will be needed to reveal their biological role.

discussion
genomic studies of fungal transcription regulators have generally focused on a single transcription factor class in a particular species , or on the transcription factor complement within one species . however, analyses of transcription factor families have been conducted across a range of fungal genomes . one study identified  <dig> pfam families of transcription factors represented in  <dig> fungal genomes, and revealed the zn2cys <dig> zinc binuclear cluster and the fungal-specific transcription factor domain as the two largest fungal transcription factor classes
 <cit> . another study focussed on identification of transcription factors in  <dig> fungal genomes using the fungal transcription factor database  phylogenomics pipeline, and determined the proportion of transcription factors amongst total predicted proteins
 <cit> . analysis of transcription factor family distribution revealed species-specific differences
 <cit> . the aim of our study was to perform an inventory of the presence of regulators in the fungal kingdom, employing the expanded set of genome sequences that have become available in the last five years. our analysis of the distribution of regulator classes indicated differential expansion of certain regulator types in ascomycetes and basidiomycetes, consistent with the development of many regulatory systems from a more limited ancestral set of regulators after the divergence of the two major fungal phyla. in ascomycetes, the zn2cys <dig> and fungal-specific domain regulators overwhelmingly predominated. this is consistent with previous identification of these two regulator classes as the most abundant fungal-specific regulators in a smaller set of mostly ascomycete fungal genomes
 <cit> . the c2h <dig> zinc finger class comprised a smaller but major regulator class in the ascomycetes. further analysis revealed a greater relative abundance of the zn2cys <dig> and fungal-specific domain regulators in the pezizomycotina than in the saccharomycotina and taphrinomycotina. in basidiomycetes, the c2h <dig> and cchc classes showed a relative expansion and, with the zn2cys <dig> and fungal-specific domain regulators, comprise four similarly abundant major regulator classes. the differential expansion of regulator families in the fungal phyla and sub-phyla suggests that evolution of many regulators occurred after the divergence of these groups. the regulator distribution observed in our analysis showed some differences compared with the previously reported distributions in ftfd
 <cit> , most likely due to our expanded dataset. however, the abundance of zn2cys <dig> and c2h <dig> domain regulators reported in ftfd are compatible with our results.

as regulators play a major role in fungal physiology, their presence or absence may provide options and impose limitations on the natural habitat of fungal species. analysis of the presence of individual transcription factors demonstrated that regulators with a central role in fungal physiology are most commonly found throughout the fungal tree of life, while regulators with more specific roles are less commonly present. this makes sense, as the loss of central regulators is likely to cause a significant competitive disadvantage for a species, unless transcriptional network functions are maintained by transcriptional rewiring. in contrast, the more specific regulators and the regulons they control will only be essential or advantageous in particular habitats.

as the characterised query regulators for our transcription factor presence/absence analysis were mainly from ascomycete fungi, it is not surprising that a relatively low number of orthologs was found in the genomes from basidiomycetes. regulation of gene expression is poorly studied in these fungi compared with ascomycetes, but our data suggests that many of the regulatory systems have developed after the split of these two phyla. interestingly, differences in the presence and absence of regulators were also found in closely related species. while it cannot be fully excluded that this can be due to gaps in the genome sequence or errors in gene annotation of specific genomes, this does suggest that changes in the regulatory systems have also occurred more recently. examples of this are the galx/galr system for regulation of galactose catabolism
 <cit>  and the protease regulator prtt
 <cit> , which was shown to differ significantly between the aspergilli, and the specific presence of the cellulose regulator aceii
 <cit> .

while the absence of a particular regulator may accompany loss of an entire regulon and therefore an altered metabolic or developmental capability, its absence could indicate transcriptional rewiring of the regulatory mechanism. conversely, presence of a regulator ortholog also does not necessarily indicate conserved function. recent studies have shown that transcription regulatory mechanisms can display considerable plasticity across species. for some regulons the regulator components are conserved but exhibit functional reassignment and rewired circuitry, resulting in rearrangements of transcriptional networks
 <cit> . other regulons share a conserved overall strategy but include additional regulator components to integrate additional regulatory signals, or show transfer of regulation from one regulator to another, or rewiring via evolution of combinatorial interactions between transcription factors
 <cit> . the array of transcriptional rewiring possibilities indicates that while the absence of a particular transcription factor ortholog suggests regulatory differences or the loss of regulons, the presence of orthologs may, but does not necessarily indicate conserved function. therefore functional analysis is required to determine the role of each transcription factor in each species.

CONCLUSIONS
we have conducted an inventory of the thirty-seven pfam transcription factor classes across  <dig> genomes of the two major fungal phyla and shown differential expansion of transcription regulator classes between the ascomycetes and the basidiomycetes, with the largest expansion of zn2cys <dig> and fungal-specific domain regulators in the pezizomycotina. we also analyzed the presence profiles for  <dig> known regulators in these  <dig> genomes and found that regulators with central functions in fungal physiology were more commonly present than those with more specialised roles. the increasing number of fungal genome sequences and functional analyses will provide better insight in the evolution of regulatory systems and in particular the  <dig> fungal genome project
 <cit>  will add to this as it aims to cover the breadth of the fungal kingdom.

