BACKGROUND
of the many reasons for the attrition of candidate drugs during the development process, toxicity or lack of efficacy in vivo are among the most frequent  <cit> . excessive concentration in particular tissues can be the cause of the former, while failure to reach targets can contribute to the latter. the steady-state tissue distributions of drugs are determined by the rates of their uptake and efflux. while the role of carriers as mediators of drug efflux is well appreciated, uptake was, until recently, considered to be almost entirely a process of passive diffusion through the lipid part of the membrane and therefore largely determined by drug lipophilicity, with carrier uptake considered exceptional  <cit> . it is now increasingly recognized that drug uptake is predominantly carrier-mediated  <cit> . the missing information required to understand the tissue distributions of drugs is thus represented by the specificities and location of uptake carriers. although there are any number of specific examples  <cit> , the first task is to establish general methods for determining which of the known carriers are most responsible for the cellular uptake of particular drugs, as a prelude to establishing the tissue distributions of the relevant carriers.

saccharomyces cerevisiae is a well-understood and widely used model organism for chemical genomics studies  <cit> . existing data regarding the interaction of yeast cells with drugs have brought up a number of cases in which changes in the activity of specific carriers increase or decrease the sensitivity of cells to xenobiotics, with the clear implication that such carriers effect the entry of these drugs into cells or their exit from them  <cit> . a particular benefit of s. cerevisiae is the availability of a barcoded series of deletion mutants  <cit> , whose relative rates of growth/survival can be tested in competition experiments . we therefore recognized that if a drug is toxic when present at a high concentration inside the cell, but requires the activity of a carrier to be taken up by the cell, a strain with no or reduced carrier activity should be relatively resistant to the drug and survive better in competition experiments when compared to strains with normal uptake activity. this analysis also predicts that if another non-toxic  substrate for the carrier is known, then this will compete with the toxic drug for uptake into the wild-type  strain , thereby conferring phenotypic protection against toxicity.

in the present work, we have employed two high-throughput platforms that exploit resistance associated with gene deletion to identify drug transporters. we have used these approaches to study the uptake of  <dig> pharmaceutically active  compounds. the first platform consists of parallelized screens where we grow the total pool of homozygous diploid yeast gene deletants in batch fermenters, with and without the drug. the proportions of the different strains in the population are assayed by amplifying their molecular barcodes and hybridizing them to a tag <dig> oligonucleotide microarray. resistant strains will account for an increasing proportion of the total pool in drug-treated compared to untreated conditions, because they are able to outcompete susceptible strains due to the resistance conferred by the gene deletion. the second platform screens strains individually and relies upon robotics to increase throughput by spotting strains deleted for genes encoding transporters onto 768-spot plates, allowing many strains to be screened in parallel.

these high-throughput experiments suggested uptake transporters for  <dig> of  <dig> compounds screened. for half of the compounds with suggested transporters, validation low-throughput experiments were performed confirming most of the suggested transporters. furthermore, protection experiments using known  substrates were performed for three of the drugs, confirming the role of the suggested transporter in drug uptake.

RESULTS
canavanine transport: a proof-of-principle experiment
to calibrate and validate our experimental methods, canavanine, a known antimetabolite substrate  <cit>  of the uptake transporter arginine permease  was used. canavanine is an arginine analogue that is readily incorporated into proteins, producing a toxic effect. a concentration of the drug was used that was sufficient to reduce the growth rate of the wt strain by 90% . figure 1a shows results of the pool experiment using canavanine, with resistance associated with the can1Δ/can1Δ deletant demonstrated by that strain's top-ranked position on the drug-treated axis. by plotting the mean arbitrary fluorescent units from untreated and canavanine-treated pools, we could clearly identify the can1Δ/can1Δ deletion strain as highly enriched in the population following canavanine treatment .

in the robot-assisted experiments, four replicates of a deletant strain for each of the known yeast genes encoding transporter proteins were spotted onto solid medium. growth on a plate containing canavanine identified only the known canavanine-resistant strain can1Δ/can1Δ , in complete agreement with published data and with our results from the competition experiment described above.

we validated the results from both high-throughput experiments by performing growth experiments in a bioscreen c instrument , which generates robust growth curves under more strictly controlled conditions . we calculated the maximum growth rate of the wt and can1Δ/can1Δ strains in the presence of canavanine , and confirmed that, unlike the wild type, can1Δ/can1Δ mutants are insensitive to canavanine. furthermore, a competition experiment between canavanine and the native can1p substrate, arginine, illustrates the fully protective effect of arginine . both of these results suggest that the cellular import of canavanine occurs exclusively via can1p, as reported previously  <cit> .

drugs with a single protein carrier
the two screening procedures identified a number of transporters which clearly represented the sole transporter responsible for the uptake of a particular drug into yeast cells. the first example is similar to that of can1p transporter and canavanine. we screened for transporters responsible for the uptake of the anticancer drugs 5-fluorocytosine and 5-fluorouracil and, as could have been expected, found that the fcy2Δ/fcy2Δ mutant was the most resistant strain . fcy2p is a known cytosine transporter and is so named because of the fluorocytosine-resistant phenotype of its mutant alleles  <cit> .

the analysis of data from pool competition experiments with diphenyleneiodonium chloride , by plotting the mean arbitrary fluorescence of untreated and treated pools, identified the nrt1Δ/nrt1Δ deletant as highly enriched in the population following dpi treatment . robot-assisted experiments using individual transporter deletants spotted onto agar also identified nrt1p as the most likely dpi transporter . we next performed growth assays on wt and nrt1Δ/nrt1Δ strains in the presence of increasing dpi concentrations and verified the resistance conferred by the deletion of the candidate transporter .

dpi is an inhibitor of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase and related enzymes  <cit> , and bears some structural similarity to nicotinamide riboside. furthermore, both nicotinamide riboside and thiamine  <cit>  are known to be transported by nrt1p  <cit> . therefore, we investigated whether the native nrt1p substrates could protect cells against dpi by outcompeting the drug for import via the nrt <dig> transporter. nicotinamide riboside is not commercially available and so the structurally related compounds, nicotinic acid and nicotinamide, were assessed. we found that  <dig> μm of either nicotinic acid or nicotinamide protects against dpi , recovering 80% of the control growth rate . thiamine, which is imported via nrt1p with a lower affinity than nicotinamide riboside, was also able to protect cells against dpi, albeit less efficiently than nicotinic acid .

using robot-assisted experiments, we found that two structurally related antineoplastic drugs, methotrexate and aminopterin, are also potential substrates of the nrt <dig> transporter . neither nicotinic acid nor nicotinamide protected against growth-rate inhibition by methotrexate . however, final optical density , which broadly equates to biomass yield, can also indicate drug resistance. using this as the criterion, protection due to  <dig> μm nicotinamide or nicotinic acid was observed, increasing the final od from  <dig>  without protection to  <dig>  with the protective substrate . at  <dig> μm, thiamine protects weakly against methotrexate .

robot-assisted experiments also indicated an aminopterin resistance phenotype for the ctr1Δ/ctr1Δ  and the fen2Δ/fen2Δ  mutant strains . aminopterin inhibits the activity of dihydrofolate reductase , an enzyme that is required for purine biosynthesis and for which there is a high demand in rapidly growing cells  <cit> . given that these two deletants have reduced growth rates even in the absence of drugs , it may be that the consequent reduced demand for dhfr activity makes them less susceptible to the deleterious effects of dhfr inhibitors such as aminopterin.

experiments with the alkylating agent iodoacetamide  <cit>  suggested a single transporter, the maltose transporter, mal11p  <cit>  ; however, this result was only observed on solid medium and not in liquid cultures. furthermore, this drug/transporter combination seems structurally improbable, and therefore needs to be validated by independent methods to provide a clear picture of whether and how this import operates.

robot-assisted experiments to identify the transporters of bay11- <dig>   <cit>  and benzbromarone   <cit>  suggested the uridine permease, fui1p  <cit> , as the main route for cell entry . however, due to the large number of suppressor mutants of yeast plated on agar containing either of these two drugs, this result could not be validated in liquid cultures. while pool selections performed in the benzbromarone-containing cultures did indicate that the fui1Δ/fui1Δ mutant was among the five most enriched deletants in the population, the enrichment measured was below our standard threshold of significance .

mitoxantrone is an antineoplastic agent that acts by inhibiting type ii topoisomerases  <cit> . in robot-assisted experiments, we found that the most likely route for mitoxantrone to enter yeast cells is via the low-affinity amino-acid permease, agp1p  <cit>  . interestingly, the same route was suggested for protoporphyrin import . protoporphyrin is a tetrapyrrole used as a carrier for divalent cations  <cit>  and it has been previously suggested that it is imported into yeast cells via pug1p  <cit> . however, in our strain background and experimental conditions , pug1Δ/pug1Δ mutants were not phenotypically different from the control strains .

drugs for which multiple transporters were identified
quantitative analysis of the robot-assisted experiments performed on cisplatin plates identified the purine and cytosine permease, fcy2p  <cit> , as the main import route for this anticancer drug . the experiments also identified the phospholipid transporter, lem3p  <cit> , as a putative cisplatin transporter; however, this was not reproduced in liquid cultures. interestingly, the arsenite and antimonite transporter, fps1p, as well as the choline/ethanolamine transporter, hnm1p, also showed resistance to cisplatin, albeit to a level below our threshold of  <dig> sd from the plate average . as with many of the examples in this section, experiments with double  or multiple mutants might reveal a very strong resistance phenotype and establish the relative contribution of each of the carrier proteins to the transport of the drug.

tunicamycin is an antibiotic that inhibits protein n-glycosylation  <cit>  and therefore is used experimentally to induce the unfolded protein response  <cit> . robot-assisted experiments on tunicamycin plates identified five transporter gene deletions conferring resistance to the drug: lem3Δ/lem3Δ, dnf2Δ/dnf2Δ, pca1Δ/pca1Δ, pho89Δ/pho89Δ and qdr2Δ/qdr2Δ . both lem3p and dnf2p are phospholipid transporters  <cit>  and therefore might contribute to tunicamycin import by binding the hydrophobic tail common to all forms of the drug . pho89p and pca1p are phosphate  <cit>  and metal transporters  <cit> , respectively, and therefore are unlikely to be responsible for the direct uptake of the drug. qdr2p, on the other hand, is a known pleiotropic drug transporter that might well assist in tunicamycin import  <cit> . more examples of the indirect effect of transporters on drug uptake or efficacy are given below.

drugs for which transporters have an indirect effect on their efficacy
robot-assisted experiments linked the fcy2p transporter  to the import of the antifungal drug, fluconazole . deletions of three additional transporter genes  also conferred resistance to fluconazole. fluconazole acts by inhibiting the cytochrome p <dig> enzyme 14-α-demethylase  <cit> , one of only three p450s in s. cerevisiae. cytochrome p450s are heme-containing proteins, and fet3p and ftr1p are known iron import routes  <cit> . therefore, it is plausible that the resistance to fluconazole that we observed with fet3Δ/fet3Δ and ftr1Δ/ftr1Δ mutants might be an influence on the drug's target, rather than its import. itr1p is a myoinositol transporter and its role in fluconazole import is not clear  <cit> . interestingly, robot-assisted experiments also identified itr1p as the putative transporter of two more azole antifungal drugs, ketoconazole  and clotrimazole  , which also target the cytochrome p <dig> family. this result establishes a new link between itr1p and azoles. at lower clotrimazole concentrations , fet3Δ/fet3Δ and ftr1Δ/ftr1Δ mutants were also resistant to the drug .

robot-assisted experiments on cantharidin  identified no transporter deletion strain that showed resistance to the drug at a significance level above our standard threshold of  <dig> sd over the plate average . however, if we lowered the stringency of the screen to include hits  <dig>  sd above the plate average , we could identify snq2p, cch1p, mid1p, pho89p or fen2p as possible uptake routes. snq2p is a multidrug transporter and therefore a plausible cantharidin import route  <cit> . cch1p and mid1p work together to mediate calcium import  <cit> . whilst it is reassuring to identify two proteins that are known to work in tandem, it seems unlikely that calcium channels are directly responsible for cantharidin import. pho89p is responsible for phosphate uptake and cantharidin is a phosphatase inhibitor  <cit> . therefore, we might infer that a phosphate imbalance due to the pho89Δ/pho89Δ mutation might be responsible for the observed resistance and that pho89p is not directly responsible for cantharidin uptake. the structure of cantharidin does not resemble known fen2p substrates ; however, validation assays in liquid cultures verified the resistance to cantharidin observed in fen2Δ/fen2Δ strains .

robot-assisted experiments with the antimalarial drug, artesunate  <cit> , did not provide strong hits using the significance threshold of  <dig> sd above the plate average . however, when looking for the strains with growth  <dig> sd above the plate average, we identified cch1Δ/cch1Δ  <cit> , mid1Δ/mid1Δ  <cit>  and fen2Δ/fen2Δ as artesunate-resistant strains . the overlap between the cantharidin and artesunate hits is quite striking; especially considering that cantharidin has also been demonstrated to be an antiparasitic  agent  <cit> . after drug-induced cell stress, yeast cells frequently undergo changes in intracellular calcium concentrations mediated by cch1p-mid1p  <cit> , therefore the role of cch1Δ/cch1Δ and mid1Δ/mid1Δ deletions in resistance to artesunate and cantharidin is unlikely to be due to a direct role in drug import. however, the pantothenate transporter fen2p is a possible artesunate import route as it bears the carboxyl tail observed in other fen2p substrates  and in the substrates of related proteins, vht1p and dal5p   <cit> .

the drug  <dig> -phenanthroline is a heterocyclic organic compound that forms strong complexes with most metal ions  <cit> . interestingly, robot-assisted experiments using this drug suggested the high-affinity copper transporter, ctr1p  <cit> , as the major route of cellular ingress for phenanthroline . it remains to be demonstrated if phenanthroline import is aided by the formation of a complex with copper or if the resistance we observed is an indirect effect of an intracellular copper imbalance . ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate is a metal chelator that induces g <dig> cell cycle arrest  <cit> . therefore, it was not surprising to identify the strain lacking the cadmium transporter, pca1p, as the most resistant strain in a robot-assisted experiment . the  <dig> -phenanthroline resistance observed in a pca1Δ/pca1Δ strain could be due to an indirect effect caused by metal imbalance and not by a direct role of pca1p in drug import.

drugs for which no transporter could be identified
at the concentrations tested , we could not identify candidate transporters for  <dig> -dichloroisocoumarin, n-phenylanthranilic acid, tamoxifen, tetraethylthiuram disulphide , vanillylmandelic acid  or zm <dig> . with our current experimental set-up, it is not possible to determine whether this was due to passive diffusion of the drug via the plasma membrane, presence of multiple transporters equally capable of importing the drugs  or whether the strain deleted for the correct transporter was not present in our collection. even if no transporter is present in s. cerevisiae, the possibility that human cells may contain specific transporters for these drugs cannot be excluded, since bioinformatic analyses predict that the human genome encodes  <dig> transporter proteins, compared with yeast's  <dig>  <cit> .

nt indicates liquid verification or competitor experiments were not tested.

discussion
the importance of carriers in drug uptake has, until recently, been much overlooked in favor of the idea of drug uptake by diffusion through the lipid bilayer, despite persuasive arguments and extensive evidence to the contrary  <cit> . carriers are an important component of cellular biochemistry , with many hundreds known in both yeast  <cit>  and human  <cit>  cells. to assess which drugs use which transporters, we have employed two high-throughput experimental platforms to identify new drug-transporter interactions. through these targeted validation experiments, including protection with known substrates, we have been able to identify and/or confirm the transporters required for uptake of  <dig> of  <dig> drugs tested .

the approach we have described relies on substrates being cytotoxic, and upon the identification of the optimum drug concentration for each screen. furthermore, due to the fact that our method is based on the use of single deletion mutants, we would not always be able to detect redundant transporters. therefore, a collection with double transport mutants would provide invaluable information about possible transporters for those drugs not yielding hits.

for hundreds of transporters to mediate the uptake of tens of thousands of diverse compounds, as must occur if transporters dominate uptake, considerable transporter promiscuity is required. certain solute carriers present in mammalian genomes are known to transport extremely diverse substrates, with pept <dig> being a particularly clear example for which early structure-activity relationships have been defined  <cit> . yet such structural insights are exceptional and, generally, the chemical basis of promiscuous transporter function is not well understood. here, we have identified several examples of yeast transporters with multiple and diverse substrates. fen2p has been shown to mediate the uptake of artesunate, pantothenate and aminopterin, which bear the characteristic carboxyl group of other fen2p substrates and the substrates of related transporters , but are otherwise structurally dissimilar. our experiments also link 5-fluorouracil and cantharidin to fen2p, which do not bear the carboxyl group. this suggests fen2p might transport an even broader range of substrates, although we cannot eliminate the possibility that the gene deletion confers resistance indirectly .

the experimental survey generated many such links between drugs and transporters that are difficult to rationalize, as well as links with tantalizing  structural similarities - such as that between benzbromarone and the uridine substrate of fui1p. this lack of a substrate-level understanding of transporter function particularly highlights the need for methods such as those developed here, which are capable of uncovering links one would not otherwise anticipate. it seems clear, however, that, in combination, a set of transporters are indeed capable of the promiscuity necessary to mediate the uptake of very diverse substrates.

drug development is a multi-objective optimization task, with major components of the objective function being terms describing the pharmacokinetic processes of drug absorption, tissue distribution and excretion, all of which involve uptake across cellular membranes. to understand pharmacokinetics properly and mechanistically, therefore, requires knowledge of the interactions between transporters  and their substrates . allelic variation data based on the knowledge of these carriers will feed into structure-activity relationship modeling to allow the prediction of likely substrates from large drug libraries  <cit> , and into integrative systems biology models  <cit>  using a patient's individual genotype to move towards delivering personalized medicine.

CONCLUSIONS
this work has exploited the gene-deletion collection of the model eukaryote, s. cerevisiae, to employ two chemical genomics platforms with which to identify drug carriers responsible for the uptake of a range of very diverse compounds. the first involves competition between deletion mutants in liquid culture, while the second uses a robot to seed arrays of mutants on agar - in both systems the impact of drugs on the mutants' growth may readily be measured and the genes specifying drug carriers identified by the drug resistance of their cognate deletion mutants. in this way, we have provisionally identified the protein carriers mediating the entry, into yeast, of  <dig> of  <dig> drugs studied. moreover, the impact of the deletion mutants on drug entry firmly establishes that transport via protein carriers, rather than simple diffusion, is likely to be the main route of cellular ingress for many drugs.

