BACKGROUND
studies in the field of evolutionary developmental biology have highlighted an important role for the divergence in patterns of gene regulation in shaping species-specific developmental outcomes. however, they have generally focused on a few loci, with the intent of mapping the precise changes in cis regulatory sites that are responsible for altered phenotypes  <cit> . conversely, large-scale interspecific comparative gene regulation studies in the context of development are lacking, despite a growing body of speculation about the importance of divergence in regulatory networks in determining broad evolutionary patterns  <cit> . such comparative studies are crucial to a more complete synthesis of evolution and development, as theoretical models of evolutionary processes are ultimately derived from the attempt to explain general patterns, rather than from case studies  <cit> . a number of researchers have used interspecific hybrids in order to study patterns of gene expression divergence at the level of the transcriptome, typically with the intent of elucidating the incompatible divergence of regulatory factors responsible for post-zygotic reproductive isolation leading to speciation . such hybrids offer us the chance to reveal incompatible divergence between regulatory elements that are masked by stabilizing selection acting to maintain similar expression levels in the parental species  <cit> . these studies have found a wide quantitative divergence of gene expression levels between hybrids and  members of their parental species, manifested as an improper expression of genes within hybrids relative to both parental species. the majority of these misexpressed genes are underexpressed relative to the parents, which is thought to result from a loss-of-function phenotype in hybrids caused by the incompatible divergence of gene regulatory elements, either in cis or trans. a potential caveat to expression studies employing interspecific hybrids is that they have generally examined only a single developmental stage, typically the adult. hybrids are often characterized by the breakdown of various developmental systems, such as atrophied or absent germlines or heterosis of particular tissues/organs  <cit> . such observations have led to the suggestion that widespread misexpression of genes in adults may not reflect the equally widespread incompatible divergence of regulatory elements during this stage. rather, they may result from incompatibilities occurring among a smaller number of genes upstream in ontogenic hierarchies that have complex cascading effects that manifest themselves as an increasing proportion of misexpressed genes as ontogeny progresses  <cit> . this increase in the proportion of misexpressed genes may result from two non-mutually exclusive mechanisms:  improper regulation of genes occurring early in development may lead to improper development of particular tissues creating allometric differences in mrna abundance relative to the parental species.  improper regulation of early genes may lead to improper regulation of their downstream targets, which propagates throughout the developmental regulatory network. irrespective its ultimate cause, we shall refer to this hypothesis as the 'cascade model' of hybrid misexpression.

the notion that changes occurring early in development are likely to lead to deleterious cascading effects in later stages is the most popular explanation for the observation that species are generally more similar to one another morphologically in earlier developmental stages compared to later developmental stages . generally termed 'developmental constraint'  <cit> , this hypothesis invokes the notion that purifying selection will be stronger when acting on early-expressed, developmentally integrated genes  <cit> . evidence for the developmental constraint hypothesis has come from the observation that genes expressed early in development tend to be more conserved at the sequence level than those expressed later  <cit> . more recently, it has been suggested that, while constraint may explain conservation of sequence and structure in early development, a greater opportunity for selection in later stages, engendered by such features as greater organismal mobility, complexity of behavior and sexual reproduction, may also contribute to the greater level of divergence seen among species' adults  <cit>  - a theory originally proposed by darwin  <cit> . it should also be noted that, while von baer's third law holds generally, it has been established that interspecific divergence does not increase monotonically over the entire course of development; rather, the earliest stages of ontogeny in vertebrates, for example, can vary substantially between species  <cit> . this has led to the proposal of a 'developmental hourglass' model of ontogenic divergence, wherein certain stages of development are more highly conserved as a result of a greater integration of complex regulatory interactions compared to those occurring either earlier or later - typically those stages during which organogenesis begins  <cit>  .

in order to test the predictions of the cascade model of hybrid misexpression, as well as to address whether von baer's law holds at the level of gene expression, we conducted drosophila melanogaster cdna microarray-based expression profiling of males of d. melanogaster, d. sechellia and d. simulans, at four synchronized developmental time points . d. simulans and d. sechellia shared a most recent common ancestor  ~ <dig>  -  <dig>  million years ago  and form a clade that shared an mrca with d. melanogaster approximately  <dig>  mya  <cit> . in addition, we also performed the same analysis on the male interspecific f <dig> hybrids of the d. simulans  × d. sechellia  cross . we sought to test two specific hypotheses:

 <dig>  does interspecific divergence in gene expression level increase over development  or is expression more conserved during a particular developmental stage, indicating greater regulatory integration during a particular part of the life cycle?

 <dig>  is such divergence also manifested in interspecific hybrids via an increasing proportion of misexpressed genes over subsequent stages of development, directly revealing regulatory divergence?

we find evidence that gene expression levels, when compared between pure species, follow a pattern of greater conservation in the earlier stages, as has been previously observed at the level of gene sequence and morphology. however, our results in hybrids do not support the developmental cascade model of misexpression: rather, we find ontogenic stage-specific breakdown of expression with the fewest misexpressed genes observed during the late pupal time point. our data provide important insights for research exploring both the evolution of gene regulation in the context of development and the genetics of speciation, as it appears that phenotypic patterns of divergence observed in interspecific comparisons may mask more complex divergence occurring at the molecular level  <cit> .

RESULTS
within-species expression patterns over ontogeny
we first sought to compare how patterns of gene expression varied within species over the course of our four sampled developmental time points. restricting our comparison to the  <dig>  genes that were detectibly expressed at all four time points in the three species and the hybrids, we found that  <dig> % ,  <dig> % ,  <dig> %  and  <dig> %  of genes varied significantly in the expression level over the course of the sampled developmental interval in d. melanogaster, d. sechellia, d. simulans and the hybrids, respectively . the proportion of genes that varied significantly during development in d. sechellia was significantly greater than that of the other two species and the hybrids . however, no other pairwise comparisons were statistically significant . the relationships among genes varying among the three pure species or the parental species and the hybrids are shown in venn diagram form in additional file  <dig>  numerous lines of evidence suggest that d. sechellia arose from a relatively recent island colonization event, perhaps having gone through a severe bottleneck, and have since maintained low effective population sizes  <cit> , leading to a reduced level of intraspecific polymorphism relative to the other two pure species. a reduced level of intraspecific polymorphism in expression level could lead to reduced estimates of between-replicate variability on the microarrays, thus improving our statistical power to detect significant differences. an inspection of the distributions of between replicate variances in our array data revealed that, indeed, d. sechellia showed significantly reduced between replicate variance compared to the other two species and the hybrids during the three earliest sampled times in our ontogenic interval . therefore, we generated a set of random array values for these time points, retaining the means of d. sechellia while scaling their variance to that estimated from d. simulans . we found that the number of genes that vary significantly in expression level over development in d. sechellia remained significantly higher than in both d. simulans and the hybrids but it was no longer significantly greater than d. melanogaster .

between species divergence in the context of ontogeny
focusing only on the pure species, we compared the number of genes that were differentially expressed at each of the four sampled time points in pairwise comparisons among those genes detectibly expressed at all stages in all three species . we find that in those pairwise comparisons between species in which the number of differentially expressed genes varied significantly over our sampled developmental interval  fewer genes were differentially expressed at the earlier stages . in no case were there significantly fewer genes differentially expressed at a later developmental time in comparison to an earlier one . as d. simulans and d. sechellia form a clade excluding d. melanogaster  <cit> , we expected that they would show fewer differentially expressed genes than the other two possible pairwise comparisons. this was the case in all situations in which the difference between comparisons was statistically significant for the larval, late pupal and adult time points . however, there are significantly more genes differentially expressed between d. sechellia and d. simulans than in the comparison between d. melanogaster and d. simulans during the early pupal point . we also found significant asymmetry in the number of genes differentially expressed in comparisons between d. melanogaster and d. simulans or d. sechellia during the larval and early pupal time points, where fewer genes are differentially expressed in the former as compared to the latter , suggesting that d. simulans and d. sechellia have experienced different evolutionary pressures in earlier developmental stages.

hybrid expression patterns over development
in order to further probe the divergence among regulatory factors between species, we compared patterns of gene expression among the three pure species as well as the male d. sechellia and d. simulans sterile f <dig> interspecific hybrids during the four sampled developmental time points. we performed hierarchical clustering analysis using a conservative set of  <dig>  genes detectibly expressed on all replicate array spots during all four developmental time points in the three pure species and the hybrids . bootstrapping the dendrogram indicates that all clusters except one are supported at the 95% level . patterns of expression within individual stages, rather than species, clustered together, indicating that stage-specific expression levels are significantly conserved between species. furthermore, the larval and early pupal time points formed a cluster, as did the late pupal and adult points, which supports previous observations that suggest that substantial expression turnover occurs during the active organogenesis taking place during the pupal stage  <cit> . with the exception of the early pupal point, the clustering pattern matched phylogenetic expectations - d. sechellia and d. simulans cluster to the exclusion of the more distantly related d. melanogaster . the relationship of the hybrids relative to their parental species varied over the sampled developmental interval: in the case of the larval and adult stages, d. simulans and d. sechellia clustered together to the exclusion of the hybrids, indicating substantial non-additivity of expression levels in the hybrids . in the case of the two pupal time points, however, the hybrids clustered with d. sechellia, suggesting that this parent's allelic contribution acts in a manner dominant to that of d. simulans.

we also compared the number of genes that were differentially expressed in pairwise comparisons between the hybrids and their parental species at each stage among those genes detectibly expressed in all three . contrary to the expectations of the hypothesis that misexpression of genes in the adult stage of hybrids results from a cascade caused by the initial misexpression of a smaller number of genes at an earlier developmental stage  <cit> , the larval stage showed the highest proportion of significantly misexpressed genes -  <dig> - while the fewest  were observed during the late pupal time point . thus, the ontogenic pattern of the proportion of misexpressed genes, from fewest to most, was: late pupal < early pupal < adult < larval . in total,  <dig> genes were misexpressed during at least one sampled developmental time point, of which  <dig>  were misexpressed only at a single time point. this indicates that misexpression during the larval stage, for instance, is not a good predictor of continued misexpression in subsequent stages as could be predicted by the cascade model, assuming that not only does the proportion of genes misexpressed over time increase but also that genes misexpressed during a particular developmental stage continue to be misexpressed during subsequent stages. only two genes  are misexpressed during all the four time points. both of these genes are expressed in the testes of d. melanogaster  <cit> . however, their function are unknown, and blast searches of the predicted coding sequences from d. melanogaster of both genes against the genomes of the three pure species failed to find significant similarity to any genes of known function. thus, it appears that there is substantial stage-specific autonomy of regulatory breakdown. interestingly, however, there appears to be an over-representation of male-biased genes , or genes with elevated expression in pure species males compared to females, as well as an under-representation of female-biased genes fbgs) among misexpressed genes that are underexpressed in the parents relative to the hybrids during the larval, early pupal and adult time points . this suggests that, despite such autonomy, there exist predictable commonalities among misexpressed genes  <cit> .

e pupal, early pupal; l pupal, late pupal.

patterns are as follows: not differentially expressed, not significantly differentially expressed in any pairwise comparison among parental species or hybrids; intermediate expression, expressed at an intermediate level between parental expression levels; drosphila simulans dominance, significantly differentially expressed between parental species and for which hybrids are only significantly different in expression level from d. sechellia; d. sechellia dominance, opposite of previous pattern; underexpressed, genes that are significantly underexpressed in the hybrids relative to both parents; overexpressed, genes that are significantly overexpressed in the hybrids relative to both parents; other, genes whose expression patterns did not fit into any of the above classes.

in order to further dissect the relationship between expression in the hybrid and each of its parents, we compared hybrid expression profiles at each time point to each of the parents individually. we observed no significant differences among time points in the number of genes differentially expressed between d. simulans and the hybrid . however, when comparing the d. sechellia and the hybrid, both the early and late time points of pupal stage showed significantly fewer differentially expressed genes than either the larval or adult stages, supporting the results of the clustering analysis, which indicates that the hybrids and d. sechellia have similar expression profiles during both sampled pupal time points . the number of genes differing significantly in expression level between the hybrids and either of their parental species' males was significantly different between the two parents : the larval and adult stages showed a greater number of differentially expressed genes in comparison with the hybrids and d. sechellia, whereas the early- and late pupal time points showed the opposite pattern. in order to compare the patterns of expression in hybrids relative to their parents in the context of the entire developmental interval, we used fuzzy c-means soft clustering on the same  <dig>  genes described above  <cit> , which allowed us to define six clusters which represented major patterns of expression variability over the sampled ontogenic interval . while the majority of clustering patterns are conserved between the parental species, there were several patterns that appeared to be altered in the hybrids . of particular interest is cluster  <dig>  which shows an apparent bias towards under-expression during the adult stage in the hybrids and over-representation of mbgs as well as under-representation of fbgs in both parents and the hybrid. in the hybrids, both clusters  <dig> and  <dig> also showed a significant paucity of genes known to have lethal mutant phenotypes, which suggests that a bias exists towards greater interspecific conservation of gene regulation among essential genes   <cit> .

another way to assess the similarity between hybrids and their parental species is to determine how the hybrids resemble either parent in terms of the degree to which genes change in expression level between each of our three sampled sequential developmental transitions . thus, we restricted our analysis to those genes that varied significantly in expression level in both parental species and the hybrids at each developmental transition. we then performed linear regressions followed by ancova in order to determine if the hybrids were more similar to one parental species than the other . hybrids were significantly more correlated with one of the two parents during the ep to lp and lp to a transitions . in the case of the ep to lp transition, the degree to which genes change in expression level in the hybrid is more significantly correlated with d. sechellia  than d. simulans . however, during the lp to a transition, the hybrid switches to being more significantly correlated to the d. simulans parent  as compared to the d. sechellia parent .

discussion
consideration of microarray methodology
previous studies have shown that using single-species microarrays in order to measure the expression levels of the mrna of multiple species can produce biased estimates due to sequence divergence between the probe and hybridized mrna if appropriate statistical thresholds are not employed  <cit> . with this caveat in mind, we sought to minimize the effect of binding bias on our analysis by:  employing a minimum  <dig> -fold change, expression threshold for expression differences to be considered significant; and  analysing only genes with expression information on all available replicate spots. gilad et al.  <cit>  noted that a  <dig> -fold threshold difference in the expression level provided near 100% specificity  to accurately measuring significant expression differences between human and orangutan mrna samples hybridized on human microarrays, which differ in nucleotide sequence by approximately 3% . while this has led to a reduction in the size of our dataset which is available for analysis, as well as a reduced sensitivity to significant changes in expression level, the increased specificity is necessary in order to minimize the possibility of spurious inferences. we further validated the results of our expression analysis by testing for a potential correlation between pairwise expression and sequence divergence among the three pure species and found no significant correlation  suggesting that our methods were appropriately conservative .

however, it should be noted that the use of such conservative methods does impose a cost on the general applicability of the overall analysis, as our final dataset involves the analysis of ~20% of the genes spotted on the d. melanogaster 12kv <dig> cdna microarray. in order to ascertain the possibility that our final dataset was not representative of the genomic fraction probed by the array, we tested whether those genes analysed showed enrichment, or a paucity, of certain gene ontology  terms as compared to the overall array using the fatigo web tool  <cit> . the distribution of go terms among the genes analysed was not significantly different from that represented on the entire array . we also tested for the possibility that genes used in the analysis were more conserved than the array-wide average, as would be expected if the reason that a significant portion of the genes were being rejected was due to binding artifacts generated by probe-sequence divergence. however, we found a statistically significant bias in favour of greater divergence among genes used in the analysis, when compared to those that were not used for all three species . while this may suggest that the genes employed in the analysis are, on average, more rapidly diverging than the genes that were excluded from analysis, it does not suggest that our analysis is biased towards genes that show greater sequence conservation because of artifacts resulting from probe/rna divergence.

despite this, a certain degree of bias may be expected in our dataset given the limitation of our analysis to genes that were detectibly expressed in all stages among the species being compared. applying such a restriction avoided the possibility that a gene would be considered not expressed at a particular developmental time-point simply because of technical errors associated with probe/rna binding on the microarrays. however, it also carries the negative consequence of ignoring genes that are legitimately expressed at very low levels during certain periods of ontogeny. it is unlikely that much useful information was lost during such stages as microarrays are known to have low power to detect significant differences in comparisons between samples with very low absolute expression levels  <cit> . conversely, if genes that were excluded from our analysis due to their very low expression levels during particular stages showed significant between-species/hybrid differences in expression levels during other stages, such differences would be missed in our analysis. it is not clear if the value of inclusion of such genes would offset the potential biases introduced by including false-negatives . such considerations will be resolved as newer, more sensitive, techniques are employed to answer such questions . in addition, these techniques will also give us the capability of inferring meaningful evolutionary change in expression level among changes below the  <dig> -fold expression threshold employed in this study. nevertheless, a note of caution is warranted in studies that seek to compare loci with minute expression differences: substantial inter-strain variation has been observed in drosophila  <cit>  and, thus, it will be important to determine whether such differences are strain-specific or species-wide.

within-species variation in expression levels over ontogeny
our estimates of the percentage of genes that vary significantly in expression level over the course of ontogeny  are similar to those reported in a previous analysis of gene expression over the entire course of ontogeny in d. melanogaster   <cit> . the reduction in the proportion of genes varying significantly in expression level between stages in our study is most likely a result of our having sampled only the latter portion of development. the significant increase in the proportion of developmentally modulated genes in d. sechellia is striking. however, we noted a systematic bias towards low between-replicate variance in d. sechellia compared to the other samples. correcting for this bias in d. sechellia caused much of the elevated signal of developmental modulation to disappear. despite this, the general pattern of an elevated number of developmentally modulated genes in d. sechellia remained significant in comparison with d. simulans which, again, suggests that d. sechellia may have undergone lineage specific divergence in terms of its developmental expression profiles. it is also interesting to note that the observed reduction in between replicate variance in d. sechellia is consistent with previous population genetics studies of nucleotide diversity in this species, which have found a significantly reduced level of within species polymorphism relative to d. simulans or d. melanogaster  <cit>  .

regulatory divergence in the context of ontogeny
when comparisons between stages were statistically significant, as was the case in the comparisons between d. melanogaster and d. simulans as well as d. simulans and d. sechellia, we found that expression level is more conserved between the pure species during earlier as compared to later stages . thus, von baer's  <cit>  classic observation that earlier stages of ontogeny are more conserved than later stages may apply at both the level of nucleotide sequence  <cit>  and transcript abundance . expression levels are not significantly more conserved during earlier developmental stages in our comparison between d. melanogaster and d. sechellia, which may be the result of two possibilities . first, our analysis may not have provided the sensitivity required to detect differences in the divergence patterns of expression over development in this comparison. our observation of a reduced level of inter-replicate variability in d. sechellia may have led to our observation of a relatively uniform signal of significant divergence in expression level over ontogeny relative to d. melanogaster. alternatively, it is possible that d. sechellia has been subject to substantial divergence in expression levels in early developmental stages, more of which are shared with its closer relative d. simulans, as compared to d. melanogaster. it is possible that, while we are able to detect significant difference among stages in comparisons with d. simulans, similar comparisons with d. melanogaster show a more uniform distribution of divergence over development.

von baer's pattern is not represented in comparisons among the hybrids and either of their parental species . in the case of the comparison with d. simulans there is no significant difference in the proportion of genes differentially expressed among the four sampled developmental time-points, whereas, in the case of the comparison with d. sechellia, the intermediate time points show less divergence. such an observation may indicate that the hybrids neither represent an intermediate phenotype between their parental species, nor are they more closely allied with one over the entire course of development. rather, the hybrids may express phenotypic traits more consonant with one parent as compared to the other, which varies over the course of ontogeny . this lack of a von baerian trajectory in expression level is also apparent among misexpressed genes in the hybrids, where the larval stage shows the highest proportion of misexpressed genes and the two sampled pupal time points the least . while this seems to contradict the evidence for a greater conservation of expression levels during earlier stages observed in comparisons of parental species, it is possible that comparisons of expression level among pure species and pure species and their hybrids are measuring two different aspects of regulatory divergence. whereas interspecific comparisons reveal only the ultimate outcome or regulatory divergence , comparisons between hybrids and their parents allow us to observe the result of divergence at all levels of gene regulation, from cis-regulatory elements to the feedback/forward regulation occurring in the overall hybrid regulatory network. during the larval stage, we may be observing what true and haag  <cit>  have termed 'developmental systems drift': stabilizing selection appears to be the primary evolutionary force acting upon expression levels for the majority of genes  <cit> , and while the underlying regulatory machinery may have diverged between d. sechellia and d. simulans, this divergence may be compensatory such that it does not manifest itself in terms of expression level differences between the parental species  <cit>  . rather it reveals itself only as improper regulation in the case of the hybrids . the larval stage is characterized by a high rate of growth, which is associated with a rapid increase in transcription of total mrna and translation of proteins  <cit> , which may generate selective pressure in order to maintain uniformly high expression levels despite substantial divergence among underlying regulatory machinery. such non-adaptive divergence of complex regulatory systems is facilitated in species with reduced effective population sizes, due to the increased probability of fixation of neutral or slightly deleterious mutations  <cit> , which, as noted above, is known to be the case in d. sechellia. on the other hand, the complex organogenesis occurring during metamorphosis may involve greater integration among the regulatory circuits  than other stages, leading to its underlying machinery being more refractive to divergence causing misexpression in hybrids. nevertheless, assuming that an organism's ultimate phenotype determined by gene expression levels , the conserved expression levels among parental species during earlier developmental stages is probably a compelling validation of von baer's third law.

both our clustering analysis , as well as our analysis of the number of genes differentially expressed in pairwise comparisons, support phylogenetic expectations of between-species divergence in the case of the larval, late pupal, and adult stages . however, this is not the case during the early pupal stage, where d. melanogaster and d. simulans cluster together and show the fewest significantly differentially expressed genes . this may suggest that, as part of its adaptation to its host plant , d. sechellia may have been exposed to unique selective pressures that have altered particular aspects of its larval or early pupal development. this hypothesis is supported by previous studies that have examined developmental phenotypes in the d. melanogaster group  <cit>  and have found evidence of altered developmental phenotypes in d. sechellia relative to other species, where the opportunity for selection may have been responsible for altering aspects of its ontogeny. an alternative explanation for our observation of d. sechellia's status as an outlier is that 'typical' gene expression levels in this species would most probably be observed when it is living on its native host, m. citrifolia  <cit> . by raising our species/hybrids on standard cormeal/molasses/agar medium, we may have induced stress in d. sechellia, leading to a pronounced difference in expression patterns relative to the other species. we tested to see if genes that were uniquely differentially expressed at each stage in d. sechellia were over-represented in terms of certain go categories relative to our entire dataset, although no differences were statistically significant . the possibility does remain, however, that some proportion of d. sechellia's unique expression patterns results from stress , but the present analysis of the hybrids in particular would have been complicated were d. sechellia raised on medium containing m. citrifolia while d. simulans was not.

the developmental basis of hybrid misregulation
a number of studies involving genome-scale transcriptional profiling have revealed that a substantial proportion of the transcriptome  is misexpressed in interspecific hybrids relative to their parental species  <cit> . work in the field of speciation has been quite equivocal about the relative number of genes involved in producing the sterile phenotype observed in hybrids. however, recent evidence has supported the notion that sterility in hybrids between closely related species such as those used in the present study is primarily the result of a small number of genes of relatively large effect   <cit> . thus, it appears unlikely that the misexpression observed in our study stems from the incompatible divergence of cis-regulatory factors at such a large number of loci. more plausible is the hypothesis that the large scale-patterns of misexpression observed in interspecific hybrids result from divergence of a smaller number of loci having widespread effects in trans - perhaps corresponding to some of the loci of large effect revealed through introgression studies  <cit> . however, our study does not support the suggestion that these trans acting factors are derived from the cascading effects of a smaller number of genes that are significantly misexpressed at earlier stages of development  <cit> . in contrast, it would appear that there is considerable stage-specific autonomy of regulatory breakdown, with no obvious pattern of an increasing proportion of genes misexpressed during subsequent stages. mbgs are over-represented among under-expressed, misexpressed genes during three of the sampled developmental stages, indicating that common regulatory factors or selection pressures  may nevertheless underlie misexpression at multiple stages.

the highest proportion of genes is significantly misexpressed during the larval stage . two non-mutually exclusive hypotheses may account for an elevated degree of misexpression during this early stage. first, as mentioned above, the larval stage is characterized by a rapid increase in transcription of total mrna and translation of proteins  <cit> . slight heterochronic changes in hybrid development  may manifest themselves as widespread under-expression or even over-expression of larval genes. some evidence for this hypothesis is provided by previous observations which suggested that spermatogenesis may be delayed in third instar larval hybrids between d. simulans and d. mauritiana, which could lead to qualitative differences in expression pattern of genes involved in this process  <cit> . secondly, previous studies have suggested that d. sechellia has been subject to divergence in embryonic and larval ontogeny  <cit> . as stabilizing selection appears to be the primary evolutionary force acting upon expression levels for the majority of genes  <cit> , this divergence may not manifest itself in terms of expression level differences in the parental species . rather, the underlying regulatory machinery may have diverged revealing itself as an elevated proportion of incompatibilities in hybrids .

if we restrict our analysis to genes expressed in the hybrids that are significantly differentially expressed between males of d. simulans and d. sechellia, they are significantly more likely to be expressed at the d. simulans level in the hybrids during the larval and adult stages, whereas they are more likely to be expressed at d. sechellia levels during the two pupal stages . one may assume that expression levels would generally show an overall dominance in hybrid males in the direction of the parent from which it inherits its x chromosome , assuming, of course, that a significant number of regulatory loci are harboured on the x. our results suggest that this is not the case during all stages and, while the ability of regulatory factors to interact is more conserved during the pupal time points, significant divergence has occurred between the two parental species that manifests itself dominantly with regards to d. sechellia. this hypothesis is supported by our observation that the degree to which genes vary in expression level between developmental transitions in hybrids is significantly more similar to the d. sechellia parent during the ep to lp transition .

a classic study, testing the vulnerability of various stages of drosophila ontogeny to induced mortality when exposed to x-rays, found that susceptibility is highest during pupation, which suggests that this stage is particularly sensitive to deleterious perturbation  <cit> . such an observation is particularly intriguing in the context of raff's  <cit>  'developmental hourglass' hypothesis, which argues that stages involved in organogenesis may be more resistant to evolutionary divergence than preceding or subsequent stages. the original hypothesis focused on embryogenesis. however, our observation of a significantly reduced number of misexpressed genes during the two sampled pupal time points suggests that the mechanisms underlying gene regulation during this stage may be more conserved . holometabolous insects such as drosophila, undergo two rounds of extensive organogenesis , and may have two periods of increased regulatory conservation. interestingly, however, the decreased proportion of genes significantly misexpressed in the hybrids during the pupal stage does not coincide with a decreased proportion of genes significantly differentially expressed between the two parental species .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our comparative analysis of transcriptional patterns over the course of ontogeny among species and hybrids of the d. melanogaster group has revealed the following major results:  in comparisons between the pure species, gene expression levels are more conserved during earlier stages of development as compared to later stages.  however, this is not the case in comparisons between parental species and their interspecific hybrids where the mechanisms underlying gene expression appear to be more conserved during the pupal stage suggesting that the underlying regulatory systems are diverging despite the maintenance of expression levels among pure species.  there is considerable stage-specific autonomy of regulatory breakdown in hybrids and no obvious pattern of increasing proportion of genes misexpressed over the course of ontogeny, which does not support a cascade model explaining hybrid misexpression. finally,  the number of genes differentially expressed between stages support phylogenetic expectations  for all stages except the early pupal stage. our findings have implications for the fields of both evo-devo and speciation. first, they support the extension of von baer's  <cit>  'third law', or the more modern developmental hourglass hypothesis, to the level of the transcriptome, lending support to previous observations which suggested that similar forces may act to limit both gene expression levels and coding sequence divergence  <cit> . secondly, while it has already been remarked that the widespread misexpression of genes observed in interspecific hybrids is unlikely to be the result of equally widespread divergence of cis regulatory elements  <cit> , our results suggest that regulatory factors  experience stage-specific, autonomous incompatibilities, leading to similarly stage-specific patterns of misexpression. several of the so-called 'speciation' genes  that have been identified are predicted to have transcription factor activity and regulate expression of downstream genes in trans  <cit> . the findings presented here suggest that a more complete understanding of stage-specific gene regulatory networks, which would enable us to identify those nodes that may ultimately control the suite of genes identified as misexpressed in hybrids, may be a fruitful approach to identifying new loci underlying both developmental evolution, reproductive isolation, and ultimately speciation.

