BACKGROUND
high-throughput screening  is a growing field which began in the mid 90’s along with the wide scale adoption of 96-well microtiter plates . its impact has been especially huge in pharmaceutical research, where libraries of numerous chemicals are screened for potential new drug candidates   <cit> . modern hts systems are often incorporated into liquid handling systems , which allow automation, and massive increase in throughput of steps traditionally performed by trained lab technicians  <cit> . for many fields of pharmaceutical and biotechnology research the strong advances in recent decades would not have been possible without massively parallel processing of samples allowed by hts. the throughput, and thus the amount of wells in the mtps has been steadily increasing, while the volumes of the assays have been steadily dropping. modern ultra hts  works with up to  <dig> wells per plate, assay volumes at the picoliter level, and throughputs that can easily exceed  <dig>  assays per day  <cit> .

hts is not well established for photothropic microorganisms however, though some systems for screening of microalgae based on facs devices have been demonstrated  <cit> . these systems select cells with the desired characteristics out of a starting pool, and then validate the results of selected strains/organisms after upscaling. while this approach is straightforward and efficient, it is not as flexible as “traditional” hts systems based on a liquid handling platform. it can only be used if a selection with a facs is possible, which greatly limits the amount of parameters that can be screened. for many desirable traits  facs based methods are often not applicable. furthermore, it is limited to the screening of single cells under the artificial conditions of the facs but those single cells often behave different in real cultures. this makes it mandatory to screen cultures under conditions that better mimic later production processes. besides, some screening targets might also require the strains to be continuously monitored during their growth, and various parameters measured in parallel . therefore high throughput cultivation systems coupled with flexible analytic systems for screening are needed.

high-throughput cultivation is obviously only possible in conjunction with a miniaturization of the cultivation vessels. usually this is achieved with the use of microtiter plate based technologies  <cit> . these technologies have been well established for heterotrophic cells and many commercial systems for integration into a liquid handling robot are available. they are widely adopted by industry and cultivation parameters and methods  are well established  <cit> . huber et al. demonstrated the capabilities of such a system by monitoring microbial growth and protein levels of cultures expressing a fluorescence protein after inductions of variable strengths using a commercial system  and a liquid handling robot  <cit> . similar systems have not been reported for photothrophic organisms however.

we have developed a prototype for such a system for the automated cultivation of unicellular cyanobacteria by integrating a cultivation chamber with a particular design and construction into a liquid handling robot. the chamber can be fully handled by the robots manipulator arm. cultures are kept in suspension within deepwell mtps  with controlled shaking, co <dig> atmosphere, and light conditions. each well can be treated as an individual photobioreactor, allowing for the parallel cultivation of currently up to  <dig> strains. the first prototype was included into a tecan genesis rsp  <dig> pipetting robot, and has been used to successfully screen for temperature tolerant clones out of a pool of enhanced strains  <cit> . here we present an improved and expanded version of this previously developed prototype system. the screening platform is now integrated into a modern tecan freedom evo  <dig> pipetting robot, with many analytic methods and systems available, and can be modified or extended in a flexible and modular manner.

for this study we used synechocystis sp. pcc  <dig> as the target organism, as it is a widely used model organism for phototrophic organisms and cyanobacteria in particular. being from the morphological section chroococcales it is unicellular and is officially classified as a fresh water strain, though it is highly tolerant to salt and marine media  <cit> . the synechocystis sp. pcc  <dig> genome was sequenced in  <dig>  <cit> , as the first genome from a photosynthetic organism.

RESULTS
this work describes a novel system for automated cultivation and screening of phototrophic microorganisms based on a pipetting robot with an in-house build and designed cultivation chamber.

the first section shows and discusses the various measured parameters and other methods which have been developed for the system, while the second section shows an example for an automated cultivation within the screening system.

established methods
inoculation and cultivation conditions
cultures can be inoculated into the screening system either by direct transfer from another liquid cultivation, such as a larger photobioreactor, or by picking single colonies from bg <dig> agar plates . an inoculation of monoclonal strains with a facs system should also be straight forward, as some models allow direct sorting into microtiter plates.

picking single clones from agar plates  allows having different monoclonal strains in each well of the dwp used for cultivation, which typically will have a lag phase of about 1 week.

once inoculated into the wells, cultures have to be kept in suspension. initial experiments  demonstrated that synechocystis cultures tend to aggregate quite strongly in the dwps with simple orbital shaking, whereas a pattern of n-s & w-e shaking partially remedied this. however, as programmable linear shaking is harder and far more expensive to scale up, glass beads were tested to allow cultivation with orbital shaking. a growth test showed that the beads effectively keep the cultures in suspension, even with orbital shaking, whereas the number of beads  and their size  seems to have little effect . all cultivations presented within this work were performed with orbital shaking at 750 rpm, with two glass beads of  <dig>  mm within each well.

the dwps placed within the cultivation chamber have all important parameters  controlled and monitored. the temperature regulation and control is achieved by a heating mat below the dwp . in a setup with separate temperature sensors in each well and a set point of 28°c, the maximum deviation in any given well from the set point was ≤ <dig> °c while the maximum difference between any two wells was ≤ <dig> °c, demonstrating a very even and precise temperature control.

the cultivation system is also able to heat the cultures using complex predetermined temperature profiles. this allows the simulation of the cultivation conditions for other systems . though for very exact temperature regulation using profiles a temperature probe inserted into a reference well is recommended. complex temperature profiles have previously been successfully used in the prototype system for comparison of the thermal tolerance of various strains out of a pool of mutants  <cit> .

overall the cultivation can be performed in a semi-sterile fashion. the chamber and robot surfaces can be chemically sterilized, and the whole robot is covered by a hood. only few contaminants are observed  even during prolonged cultivation. if fully axenic cultures are required, specially constructed safety cells  could be installed.

cell density determination and absorption spectrum
the optical density at 750 nm  of the cell cultures is an easily measured parameter which correlates with the amount of cells in suspension for unicellular organisms such as synechocystis. figure  <dig> shows the od <dig> plotted over the cell count for a serial dilution of a synechocystis culture. the obtained function for the linear regression was used for the calculation of cell counts . the resulting error coefficient  demonstrates a good correlation of the parameters.figure  <dig> 
od
750
as measured in 80 μl in 384-well-microtiter plates plotted over the number of cells per ml with manual counting.




the lower detection limit is around  <dig> cells per ml. for lower cell-densities the od is not differentiable from a blank media measurement.

the measurement of full absorption spectra for cultures allows a quick and simple determination of pigment content and provides an impression of overall culture health, as phycobilly proteins are degraded during various stress conditions  <cit> . for some strains it might also be of interest to monitor this parameter to identify a shift in pigmentation, either due to environmental factors or because of genetic alterations. this could be of particular interest for screening optimal strains  – e.g. for carotenoid production or similar.

figure  <dig> shows the average absorption for synechocystis cultures growing in different wells of a dwp after one week of cultivation in the automated system. the average relative standard deviation  over all cultures and wavelengths was  <dig> %.figure  <dig> 
average absorption spectrum in the range of 400-800 nm for 86
synechocystis
wt cultures normalized to od
750 
=  <dig>  after one week cultivation in the screening system. y-error bars indicate the standard deviation at each wavelength.  <dig> wells of  <dig> remained uninoculated and served as negative controls for cross-contamination.



this deviation however is caused mostly by differences in the cell density of the various cultures; after normalization  the average rsd drops down to just  <dig> %. this demonstrates a very similar pigmentation and fitness of all cultures in the screening system, irregardless of the position in the plate.

chlorophyll a content determination
the extraction and measurement of chlorophyll a, which is a frequently used parameter for various purposes in cyanobacteria and microalgae biotechnology, can also be performed in a fully automated manner within the screening platform. the chlorophyll content can be used to approximate the cell-density and growth for some filamentous algae where an od measurement is not possible, as long as they do not aggregate strongly during cultivation in the automated system and representative samples can be extracted by pipetting. however it has to be considered, that the total chlorophyll concentration is not only dependent on the number of cells but on their individual level of pigmentation, which is in turn affected by other factors such as culture vitality as well as nutrient and light conditions  <cit> . when used in addition to od determination, the pigmentation of cells can be estimated.

figure  <dig> shows the average chlorophyll a content for a serial dilution of synechocystis culture. the average rsd between the technical replicates was at  <dig> %. a linear regression of the dilution series however shows a very good correlation to the volume of culture used for extraction .figure  <dig> 
chlorophyll content for various dilutions of
synechocystis
culture. y-error bars indicate the standard deviation between the  <dig> technical replicates  measured for each concentration.



to determine the standard deviation of biological replicates, chlorophyll a content was measured for  <dig> cultures after 11 days of cultivation in the screening system. the obtained rsd was  <dig> %, showing an increased variation over technical replicates.

overall chlorophyll content determination is not as precise as other parameters that can be measured and takes more processing steps and more time. furthermore, for full automation a robotic centrifuge is required, which constitutes a significant additional investment. the possibility to measure this parameter when needed, however, shows the flexibility of the platform. if a lower variation is needed, more elaborated extraction or measurement protocols are probably recommended.

vitality determination
another alternative to measure culture health is a cell based viability measurement adapted for use in the plate reader. the original method determines the viability of individual cells by measuring their chlorophyll and an unspecific green fluorescence in a microscope  <cit> . this method was adapted to obtain an average viability value for all cells within a given well, instead of a cell by cell viability determination.

to identify the optimal wavelengths for use of this method in the plate reader, fluorescence emission scans were performed with various excitations on mixtures with differing percentages of viable and non-viable cells. the best results were obtained with an excitation of 390 nm .figure  <dig> 
emission spectra from 420-800 nm for various mixtures of fully viable and non-viable
synechocystis
cultures after excitation at 390 nm. mixtures range from 0% viable cells  to 100%  in 25% increments. the blank  control is shown in light blue.



the emission peak at 460 nm clearly increases, while the chlorophyll emission at 650 nm drops, with the amount of non-viable cells. figure  <dig> shows the logarithm basis  <dig> of the quotient of em <dig> / em <dig> plotted over the percentages of viable cells.figure  <dig> 
logarithm basis  <dig> of the em
650
/em
460
quotient values plotted over the percentage of viable cells and a linear regression of the data points.




the regression error of r =  <dig>  for the trend line demonstrates a good correlation for these parameters. this allows assigning cultures numerical “vitality value” from measuring just the emission at these two wavelengths that is independent of overall fluorescence intensity. using the slope of the regression an equation can be calculated which will give a value between  <dig> and 100%, whereas 100% indicates a completely fit culture: vitality%=em460em650+ <dig> . <dig> 

scans of cultures after a prolonged exposure to stress also resulted in a drop of this vitality value, because of the differing emissions of the stressed population, even if no cells were non-viable yet . therefore it is not possible to differentiate between these scenarios  with this method. however it allows for an easy and quickly measured parameter which should give a value of overall culture health and therefore of the potential productivity of the culture. if exact per cell determination is needed measuring samples under the microscope is required.

maldi-tof-ms measurements
a maldi-tof-ms measurement can be used to detect secondary metabolites of interest when screening a range of strains. also protein mass-fingerprinting for the identification of strains is possible or even culture health or similar parameters can be determined as long as markers and reference spectra are available. hereby only a very small amount of cells  and a very simple sample preparation is needed for the maldi-tof-ms measurement.

direct loading of the maldi-target from the robot screening platform allows integration into a complex high throughput ms screening pipeline applicable for screening of either a variety of different strains or of different cultivation conditions.

the best results for intact protein profiling were obtained after incubating the sample for at least 30 minutes in a matrix of sinapinic acid. figure  <dig> shows an example spectrum obtained from a culture growing in the microcultivation system for 9 days .figure  <dig> 
maldi tof intact protein profiles of a
synechocystis
wt culture cultivated in the microcultivation system. left side: full range up to 16000 m/z; right: zoom in to region of interest in the range from  <dig> - 7000 m/z. measurements were obtained on a shimazu axima .



for this proof of concept we could show that direct loading of maldi targets is useful to produce a complex spectrum of protein signals for further analysis. depending on the strain used and the applications the protocol might have to be adapted or changed, however.

culture preservation
two methods have been established for the automated backup of cultures in the hts system.

for short or mid-term backup, cultures can be transferred into  <dig> well plates prepared with bg <dig> agar. depending on humidity, temperature, and light conditions they can be stored for up to several weeks . cultures can then be resuspended by the liquid handling robot and used to directly reinoculate dwps or transferred to a new agar plate for continued preservation.

all re-inoculated wells demonstrated exponential growth after 2 days . this method allows a quick retrieval of cultures of interest, either for upscaling or for repetition of experiments.

for long term storage the liquid handling robot is able to prepare cryopreservation samples of cultures. storage has been tested for up to 6 months , but can presumably be extended almost indefinitely, the retrieval process however is more labor intensive .

automated cultivation
our cultivation chamber, with the established parameters, allows an automated cultivation of phototrophic microorganisms.

in all experiments we had control wells, which were not inoculated but instead contained only medium. they did not show any increase in od, which demonstrates that cross contamination between wells does not take place, therefore each well can be treated as an individual photobioreactor.

a fed batch cultivation with periodic dilutions was performed. the average growth rate calculated for each well in the periods between dilutions were comparable to those obtained in cultivation in larger photobioreactors . however at high cell densities they are not constant and drop off.

one possible explanation for this behavior is due to energy or nutrient limitation, such as light or co <dig> . this could be limited if the cultivation parameters are adapted to their optimal values for each given od during the course of the experiment. the optimal settings for some parameters such as mixing and co <dig> concentration however can be challenging to predict, are typically empirically determined, and vary depending on various additional factors .

an alternative cultivation method which avoids many of these problems is a semi-continuous cultivation. here the od is kept almost constant, by automatically diluting the culture back to a set value at least once a day. growth rates can again be calculated by the od increase in between each dilution but also over longer periods of time under consideration of the average dilution rate. the main advantage of this cultivation type is that limiting conditions arising over the course of a fed batch cultivation  can be excluded and the effect of various conditions can be more precisely and reproducibly examined. it also allows for longer cultivations in order to investigate potential long term effects of for selection-for-growth-approaches. therefore we recommend this form of cultivation if such applications are intended. however, it comes at the cost of more consumables and somewhat increased processing time, which might become a bottleneck for setups with greatly increased throughput .

figure  <dig> shows the results for a cultivation experiment over 13 days with daily culture dilutions and four distinct light intensities, while keeping the other parameters constant. the results show how a daily automated dilution can be used to keep the cultures at reproducible conditions. the edge-effects  clearly visible in figure  <dig>  are discussed further bellow.figure  <dig> 
cultivation over 13 days with daily dilutions back to the starting od of  <dig> . the cell count at the various wells  & middle wells ) are shown over the cultivation time. light intensity was varied during the cultivation time : day 1-3: 15; day 4-7: 32; day 8-10: 51; day 11-13:  <dig> 
average growth rate of cultures ; middle wells ) at the four tested light intensities. error bars at each value represent the difference in the average growth rate of the three days tested.



the average vitality value throughout the whole cultivation was  <dig> % with an average rsd of  <dig> %, demonstrating good cultivation conditions with low variance of culture vitality between wells.

varying the light intensity was chosen as an example, to demonstrate the effect of cultivation conditions on the growth characteristics of the strain being cultivated, and to show how the presented system allows to easily generate high precision, reproducible results. at each light intensity the cultures demonstrated very similar growth rates during the three days of cultivation .

the results show a very high reproducibility across the three days tested at each intensity. as expected the growth rate increases with increasing light. even at a photon flux of 72 μmol m-2 s- <dig>  the growth of cultures does not appear to be fully light saturated, at least not at the higher ods reached before dilution. this indicates that for maximal growth rates or light inhibition experiments either a stronger light source, a lower starting cell density, or more frequent dilutions are needed.

the normalized absorption spectra for the first three stages of cultivation  are very constant. meanwhile at a photon flux of 72 μmol m-2 s- <dig> a noticeable drop in pigmentation of the cultures is visible. this is to be expected as the cells reduce their pigmentation at higher light intensities to avoid light inhibition. the relative standard deviation between the various wells was only  <dig> % for 15 μmol m-2 s- <dig> photons and  <dig> % for the other three intensities, demonstrating very homogeneous pigmentation across the various cultures in the wells of the dwp.figure  <dig> 
average normalized absorption spectra for the various stages of cultivation. the values shown are always at the last day at a given light intensity :  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig> .



when using mtps for cultivation it has to be considered that there appears to be a significant difference between wells at the edge of the plate with access additional light  to those in the middle of the plate which are shaded by the surrounding wells . those in the middle thus have a slightly lower growth rate .

welch’s t-test was used to calculate the statistically significance of these differences. the average t-value for all determined growth rates when comparing these two groups was  <dig>  with two degrees of freedom. this translates to a p-value of  <dig>  indicating a statistically significant difference between cell growth rates for these two groups of wells. it might be of interest to note however, that the variance in od of the various wells  is greater than the variance in the growth rates. this is due to the fact that for the automated dilutions od is calculated as if it were a completely linear correlation, which is only an approximation, due to od being based on light scattering, not absorption. dilutions down from higher od wells will typically have a higher od after dilution than those from lower od wells. therefore ods in wells with a slightly increased growth rate will drift upwards over time.

meanwhile the vitality measurement and the normalized absorption spectra showed no statistical difference between the wells at the edge of the plate and the rest .

in general the difference in growth between edge wells and the rest means, that depending on whether it is relevant for the analysis being performed , the edge wells should be either excluded or treated as a separate group. meanwhile the relative standard deviation between wells not on the edge of the plate is typically only around 5% . if various replicates are made it is important to spread them to different random positions for more robust results. for other analysis  the slight differences in growth rate are probably not relevant.

as mentioned above the most likely cause for the observed difference between wells and the edge and the middle of the plate is a slightly higher light availability. therefore further innovation in the design of the chamber, or the dwps, could reduce  this effect. the difference in growth might also be reduced by cultivating at  light saturation , as slight differences in light intensity are then expected to have a less noticeable effect on culture growth.

CONCLUSIONS
the results presented here demonstrate the possibility of high throughput culturing and screening of a unicellular cyanobacterium in a flexible automated platform. the platform should be applicable for the cultivation of many other phototrophic microorganisms as is, and be adaptable for even more. various methods  have already been established to analyze the cultures within the screening platform. however these represent only a small subset of the possibilities, as the flexible nature of the system allows for the easy integration of many additional methods, especially if an assay in a mtp-format is available .

the prototype in-house cultivation chamber produced reproducible and consistent results with low variability between most wells. as there is no cross contamination between wells, each can be treated as an individual miniaturized photobioreactor. the semi-continuous cultivation presented allows experiments for extended periods of time with constant and reproducible results. while the cultivation in the current system is limited to  <dig> cultures at a time, it should be straightforward and relatively cost efficient to scale further up, allowing the cultivation of thousands of cultures in parallel.

since such a hts system has previously not been available for phototrophic microorganisms it opens the possibility to screen a relatively untapped pool of organisms and metabolites, with applications in many fields .

