BACKGROUND
antisense agents are useful for functional genomics in bacteria as they can down-regulate expression of specific genes by binding mrna and inhibit translation. as antisense agents may be titrated into cultures of wild type cells they are attractive for studies of any gene, even those stringently required for survival. also, down-regulation through externally added antisense agents bypasses the need for genome modifications, thereby allowing gene specific studies of both clustered and overlapping genes. a remaining question, however, is whether antisense agents retain specific inhibitory effects when cotranscribed genes are targeted.

prokaryotic genes are commonly expressed as polycistronic transcripts. for e. coli, several concordant studies predict that the > <dig> genes are expressed as 2500– <dig> transcriptional units  of which 70–75% are expected to be monocistronic  <cit> . therefore, over half of the e. coli genes are expressed from multigene operons. similarly, predictions performed on various other prokaryotic genomes show that between  <dig> and 78% of the genes are expressed within polycistronic transcripts, with an average well above 50%  <cit> . as a practical consequence, reliable single orf genetic knock-out techniques are difficult or unavailable for functional genomics studies on a majority of prokaryotic genes.

we are interested in the use of antisense peptide nucleic acid  for functional genomics as well as antibacterial drug discovery. pna is a nucleic acid mimic with the phosphodiester backbone replaced with pseudo-peptides and can bind to other nucleic acids with high affinity  <cit> . pna targeted specifically to mrna results in inhibition of gene expression, but unlike many other synthetic nucleic acids pna does not induce rnase h mediated cleavage  <cit> . instead, inhibition occurs through steric hindrance of the translation machinery  <cit> , and potent antisense effects can be obtained by targeting the mrna start codon region  <cit> .

here we examined the consequences of pna-mediated inhibition of cotranscribed gene expression in e. coli. the separate mrna start codon regions within both an artificial tu  and the endogenous e. coli lac-operon were targeted by antisense-pnas followed by protein quantifications for each orf. expression from the artificial gfp/dsred construct was completely discoordinated, as only gfp levels were reduced when the gfp start codon region was targeted, and only rfp levels were reduced when the start codon region of dsred was targeted. however, a directional downstream expression inhibition of the native lac-genes was observed. interestingly, mrna-level measurements confirmed this expression pattern, although inhibition was less pronounced than at the protein level. the main conclusion is that steric hindrance of translation initiation affects cotranscribed genes to a variable degree. therefore, simple, specific methods for functional studies on most bacterial genes are lacking.

RESULTS
antisense effects on genes within an artificial operon
to obtain a system producing polycistronic mrna transcripts where expression from cotranscribed orfs is easily quantified we inserted a stop codon between the gfp and dsred parts in the pgrfp double reporter plasmid  <cit> . also, to improve prospects for translational coordination between the genes, the intergenic distance was kept short and a strong sd sequence was included  <cit> . the resulting pgrfpsep construct  was introduced into e. coli as <dig>  after treatment with varying concentrations of anti-gfp, anti-dsred or two unrelated control pnas  protein expression was determined. as seen in figure 2b, treatment with the anti-gfp pnas resulted in a reduction of gfp levels, whereas rfp levels remained largely unaffected . similarly, the anti-dsred pnas only reduced the expression of rfp . moreover, the control experiments with pnas directed to unrelated mrna targets did not inhibit the expression of gfp or dsred . therefore, the results show a specific downregulation of expression even though the coding sequences belong to the same transcriptional unit.

antisense effects on gene expression within the lac-operon
the above result describes the effect of antisense pna targeted to cotranscribed genes within a system where translation is discoordinated. however, as this system is an artificial construct lacking naturally evolved regulatory components and sequences we decided to continue the study with an endogenous operon. we targeted the genes in the chromosomally expressed lac-operon and determined the effect on the expression of its three structural genes; lacz, lacy and laca . treatment with anti-lacz pna resulted in a strong inhibition of the lacz encoded protein . also, expression from the two downstream genes lacy and laca was markedly reduced, however not to the same extent as lacz expression. when bacteria were incubated with anti-lacy pna, lacy and laca gene expression was reduced, whereas expression from the upstream lacz gene was unaffected . unfortunately, we did not obtain any data with anti-laca pna as this displayed strong growth inhibitory effects. nevertheless, the results show that antisense targeted to an upstream gene in the lac-operon has a large impact on the expression from the downstream genes. in contrast, no upstream coordination was observed, suggesting a directional inhibitory effect in the lac-operon.

to ensure that the anti-lacz and anti-lacy pnas did not interfere with bacterial growth and examine whether expression of an unrelated protein was affected by the presence of antisense, we determined growth rate and lux activity in cells carrying the plasmid plux <dig> following treatment with pnas that target the lac-operon. neither growth nor lux expression was altered by the pnas when added in concentrations up to  <dig> nm .

antisense effect on mrna levels
to better understand the expression pattern observed at the protein level, we used quantitative real time pcr  to study the impact of antisense pna inhibition at the mrna level. samples from bacteria treated with varying concentrations of either anti-lacz  or anti-lacy pna  were analysed for their lacz and lacy mrna content . treatment with anti-lacz pna significantly reduced lacz mrna at both  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm  . lacy mrna was less affected and a significant reduction was only obtained with the higher anti-lacz pna concentration . moreover, there was a significantly higher reduction of lacz mrna than lacy mrna after treatment with the lower antisense dose , but not at the higher dose . interestingly, a comparison between protein and mrna levels after anti-lacz pna treatment reveals a coupled reduction . anti-lacy pna significantly reduced the level of lacy mrna at both  <dig> and  <dig> nm concentrations , whereas lacz mrna levels were comparable to untreated cells . again, a coupled reduction of transcript and protein levels is demonstrated as lacy but not lacz protein concentrations were reduced by anti-lacy pna .

the above results demonstrate a dose dependent gene expression inhibition at both the mrna and protein levels, with a proportionally stronger reduction of protein. to further examine this relationship we performed a more detailed analysis of lacz gene expression with anti-lacz pna doses ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> nm concentrations at  <dig> nm intervals. again, a coupled reduction of both protein and mrna levels was observed . supporting our previous observations , increasing doses of anti-lacz pna resulted in a negative exponential decrease in lacz protein activity whereas the decrease in lacz mrna was linear .

discussion
the aim of this study was to examine antisense pna mediated inhibitory effects when genes in polycistronic operons are targeted. we demonstrate that protein expression from cotranscribed genes can be substantially inhibited by antisense and that there is a stringent coupling between protein and transcript levels when ribosomal binding is hindered.

we first demonstrate that antisense pnas directed to the mrna start codon region of either gene in an artificial gfp-dsred dual reporter operon lead to a fully discoordinated reduction in gene expression. this was followed by targeting the separate genes in the chromosomally encoded lac-operon. interestingly, in this case a different response to antisense pna mediated translational inhibition was observed. targeting the 5' lacz resulted in a stronger inhibition of lacz than the downstream lacy and laca proteins, demonstrating a partial discoordination in protein expression, a phenomena previously observed by pestka and co-workers when "anti-mrna" directed to lacz mrna was expressed from a plasmid  <cit> . when lacy was targeted, downstream laca expression was reduced as much as lacy, whereas lacz was unaffected. the general differences in expression response between the gfp-dsred transcript and the lac-operon transcript can likely be assigned to differences in expression regulation: for the naturally occurring lac-transcript, and also for many other endogenously expressed polycistronic transcripts, a variety of regulatory mechanisms have evolved to balance gene expression according to the cell's needs. the gfp-dsred transcript, however, is not a natural component for bacteria and is therefore not likely to be affected by such specific regulatory mechanisms. therefore we conclude that antisense pnas targeted to genes belonging to polycistronic transcripts are very likely to affect cotranscribed genes, thereby rendering gene functional studies on such genes more difficult.

several studies show that efficient ribosomal binding is necessary for bacterial mrna stability  <cit> , and that actively translating ribosomes protect mrna from rnase e mediated decay  <cit> . also, it has been shown that enhanced transcription rates of lacz mrna lead to decreased production of lacz protein and lower transcript stability, probably due to prolonged exposure of unprotected mrna behind the rna polymerase  <cit> . antisense pnas inhibit gene expression by steric hindrance of the translation machinery and the effect is most potent when targeting mrna ribosome binding sites  <cit> . by blocking ribosome loading, antisense pna may have an effect on mrna levels. therefore, we investigated the impact of anti-lacz and anti-lacy pna on mrna. we observed that the pattern of mrna levels following antisense treatment was similar to that of protein levels within the lac-operon, suggesting that inhibition of translation by antisense pna indeed has a destabilising effect on mrna. destabilisation of target mrna is in accordance with that observed by forsyth and co-workers when they used expressed antisense rna to down-regulate gene expression  <cit> . therefore, it appears that the activity of sterically blocking antisense agents, at least in some cases, can be assessed by examining the mrna levels. the reason for this coupling of mrna and protein levels is likely due to an increased exposure/decreased protection of the mrna.

the altered expression pattern of the lac genes as a response to antisense treatment raises at least two new questions:  "why is expression from the downstream lacy and laca less inhibited than lacz with anti-lacz pna?" and  "how can lacz expression remain unaffected when cells are treated with anti-lacy pna?" if one only considers protein expression levels it would be possible to explain the partly discoordinated downstream inhibition as being due to noise in the lacy and laca assays. however, standard curves created with different mixtures of induced and non-induced cells gave linear responses . moreover, mrna quantification experiments revealed a coupled pattern between transcript and protein levels when antisense was added. an alternative explanation could be that reinitiation at nearby start codons after a ribosome has reached the stop of a coding region is somehow affected in a polar manner. however, it has been demonstrated that reinitiation of ribosomes is a comparatively rare event during translation  <cit> , an observation also supported here by our results from the double reporter experiment. it is therefore unlikely that altered reinitiation could explain the rather large expression differences between lacz and lacya. also, the effect on mrna suggests a different explanation. we believe the explanation may lie in direct inhibition of lacz protein synthesis together with rho-dependent premature transcription termination. cessation of translation induces rho-dependent termination, probably due to increased exposure of rho protein binding sites behind the transcribing rna polymerase  <cit> . as it has previously been shown that the lacz coding region contains several rho binding sites  <cit> , antisense inhibition of ribosome binding at the lacz mrna should lead to increased rho binding and therefore increased premature transcription termination. however, as translation inhibition of, in this case, lacz is the primary event; premature transcription termination is expected to be slightly delayed. indeed, such a tendency can be observed at both protein and mrna levels following antisense inhibition . moreover, the analysis using a more detailed anti-lacz pna dose range confirms this pattern : while mrna amounts decreased linearly with increasing concentrations of anti-lacz pna the decrease in lacz protein activity was much more pronounced.

why, then, is lacz not affected by downstream targeting by the anti-lacy pna? even though the lac-operon is thought to be fully transcribed before being processed  <cit> , it has been observed that lacz transcripts are several folds more abundant than zya transcripts  <cit> . this imbalance can be explained by rnase e cleavage within the laczy intergenic region that stabilises the lacz portion of the transcript  <cit> , an event that decouples the coding regions of lacz and lacya  <cit> . according to this model, most of the lacz product is likely to be translated from processed monocistronic transcripts that can not be affected by antisense binding to lacy mrna.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our experiments show that antisense inhibition of genes within polycistronic operons can strongly affect cotranscribed genes. we further show that inhibition is followed by a decreased stability of the transcript that is coupled with translational reduction. this decreased mrna stability can not be explained by rnase h activity because antisense pna do not induce such cleavage. instead, we believe that the presence of antisense unmasks the mrna from translating ribosomes and thereby increases exposure to rnase cleavage and intrinsic decay mechanisms that regulate rna stability. a practical issue associated with the stringent correlation between transcript and protein levels is that mrna quantification may provide an additional measure of specificity for antisense experiments, at least for targets susceptible to rapid degradation when unprotected. also, the antisense based methodology described here can be helpful for investigations of bacterial mrna translation and stability. nevertheless, the dependence of protein expression on mrna structure and stability indicate that simple and specific methods for functional studies on the majority of bacterial genes are still lacking. therefore, we suggest that antisense and other strategies for bacterial gene expression inhibition as a means for gene functional studies  <cit>  and drug screening  <cit>  should be performed with extra caution with respect to cotranscribed genes.

