BACKGROUND
sexual selection theory predicts that females will minimise risk and energy expenditure during courtship, due to their higher investment in offspring compared to males  <cit> . asymmetry in the evolutionary interests of males and females can result in sexual conflicts over whether or not mating takes place  <cit> . males try to maximise the number of mating opportunities while females are highly selective in choosing when and with whom to mate  <cit> . consequently males generally perform the more costly role in pair formation and invest in courtship signals to compete for mating opportunities with the choosier sex. previous research has primarily focused on the role of sexual selection in shaping acoustic and visual advertisement signals with limited effort directed at the role of chemical signalling in courtship behaviour  <cit> .

chemical communication systems, such as those of moths  <cit>  and decapod crustaceans  <cit> , often involve a female signaller and male receiver  <cit> . females appear to initiate courtship through the release of a sex pheromone that triggers the male's mate search and/or courtship behaviours. modern definitions of communication emphasise that a stimulus is a signal only if it:  affects the behaviour of other organisms,  evolved because of those effects, and  is effective because the response has evolved to be affected by it  <cit> . williams  <cit>  questioned the existence of female pheromone signals, such as those produced by moths, based on the fact that they are 'produced in minute traces' and 'not by machinery designed by selection to produce a male response'. his view, particularly with respect to insect chemical communication, has been opposed by arguments emphasising the adaptive value of female signalling  <cit> : by releasing minimal amounts of pheromone, female moths impose scramble competition between males resulting in the selection of males with good searching and chemosensory abilities  <cit> . furthermore, female moths releasing pheromones bear a lower predation risk than mate-searching males since a specific pheromone stimulus may be less conspicuous to their main predators  than the visual/acoustic stimulus of a moving male  <cit> .

this reasoning does not explain female pheromone signalling in aquatic environments. unlike aerial predators, many aquatic predators use chemical stimuli to detect their prey, imposing a high risk to a chemical signaller in water  <cit> . in decapod crustaceans there is no evidence for improved chemosensory abilities of males as a result of scramble competition. yet, evidence from several species of decapod crustaceans suggests that females release urinary signals eliciting specific male responses  <cit> . responses include near-field attraction  <cit>  and courtship behaviour  <cit> . in crustaceans, evidence in support of a communication route from female to male is predominantly based on the analyses of male responses; little is known about female signal production in relation to courtship behaviours .

here, we investigate in the signal crayfish  the function of urine signalling in reproductive interactions by studying the context of release as well as the receiver response. crayfish live at high population densities and have multiple opportunities to mate  <cit> . females invest considerable energy in rearing their offspring  <cit> . female signal crayfish spawn in the autumn and then provide sole parental care for up to  <dig> months. male crayfish, in contrast, despite their initial investment in producing spermatophores are able to inseminate multiple females and are not involved in brood care  <cit> . the great imbalance between the sexes in investment into offspring suggests that, in crayfish, sexual conflict over mating may be particularly strong. hence, it is not surprising that mating in crayfish is generally preceded by fights, with females trying to resist male mating attempts  <cit> . in this scenario, it is expected that females do not invest in courtship signals as they may encourage rather than discourage male mating attempts. however, a recent study demonstrated that both male and female rusty crayfish  release urine during reproductive interactions  <cit> . furthermore, experimental evidence suggests that female odour may elicit male courtship behaviour  <cit> . odour from receptive females was more effective in changing male behaviour than chemical stimuli from males or juvenile females. in these studies the female stimuli were released from inanimate sources and did not elicit male mating attempts comparable to natural courtship behaviours.

our study addresses the obvious discrepancy between the experimental evidence suggesting female chemical courtship signals and the reported resistance of female crayfish to mating, which is in line with sexual conflict theory. we study the function of female urine signals by investigating both the effect on the male receiver as well as the behavioural context of female signalling. male responses are assessed in staged male-female interactions by blocking and artificially introducing the urine of receptive females. by visualising the urinary release in male and female crayfish  we investigate whether urine signalling in reproductive interactions differs from signalling in aggressive interactions. our data show that female urine, while instrumental in initiating male courtship, is released in an aggressive context. the results suggest that in reproductive interactions, driven by conflicting interests between the sexes, the function of urine signals can be different between males and females.

RESULTS
effect of female urine on male mating attempts
in  <dig> blindfolded but otherwise unrestrained control pairs,  <dig> males showed mating attempts by seizing , turning , and mounting  the female. when female nephropores were blocked and water was introduced, none of the males showed any courtship behaviour. all interactions were of an aggressive nature. artificial introduction of female urine in interactions with urine-blocked females stimulated male mating attempts in six encounters. six males seized the females, which is a significant increase in mating attempts compared to urine-blocked pairs stimulated with water . five males turned the female so ventral surfaces were facing, which is a significant increase compared to no cases of turning in urine-blocked pairs . mounting was observed in two experiments.

sex-specific differences in chemical signalling
crayfish displayed sex-specific differences in urine release in agonistic and reproductive interactions ; table  <dig>  figure 1). males engaged in reproductive interactions released urine for a significantly shorter time in comparison to dominant males when fighting, or to females that were fighting or involved in reproductive interactions  test, table 1; figure 2). females, in contrast, released urine for a similar duration irrespective of their dominance status in a fight or whether they were engaged in reproductive interactions .

results from post hoc analysis of two-way analysis of variance  analysing interaction effects of behavioural state  and sex on duration of urine release. least square means and standard error are adjusted values for average urine release time as predicted by the general linear model when all other factors are controlled for. levels not connected by the same letter are significantly different  test).

mating behaviour
reproductive interactions of fluorescein-injected pairs were analysed in detail and followed a characteristic pattern that has been previously observed in p. leniusculus  <cit>  taking on average  <dig> min to complete.

during reproductive interactions agonistic behaviours generally preceded mating and could reach levels of unrestrained aggression . mating commenced when the male seized the female at the rostrum, antennae or chelae and tried to turn her so that her ventral surface was facing him and spermatophores could be deposited. females exhibited aggressive behaviours prior to and at the onset of mating but showed receptive postures before the males could successfully deposit spermatophores .

for full descriptions of behaviours, see  <cit> .

female urine release in reproductive interactions
all females released urine prior to mating, with 94% of females releasing urine during precopulatory aggression. in comparison a third of males did not release any urine prior to mating. urine release by females primarily occurred during aggressive behaviours in relation to other behaviours  =  <dig>  p <  <dig> ; friedman test). females released urine for longer while displaying aggressive behaviours in comparison to receptive or submissive behaviours , or periods where they were not engaged in social interaction .

agonistic behaviour
fights between female crayfish and mixed-sex fights both followed the characteristic pattern that has been previously described for adult male crayfish  <cit> . the winner of a fight displayed highly aggressive behaviours  in comparison to the subordinate animal that displayed submissive behaviours  and did not re-engage in fights once dominance had been established.

there was a significant difference in the proportion of time crayfish spent displaying highly aggressive behaviours  between different fights . male fights were more aggressive than female fights  and mixed-sex fights , whereas similar levels of aggression were shown in female fights and mixed-sex fights. females were always subordinate in mixed-sex fights, probably due to their smaller claw size.

in fight interactions urine release was associated with aggressive behaviours in intrasexual fights but not in intersexual fights, with urine released for longer durations by individuals displaying a high aggression index .

discussion
previous studies have suggested that urinary cues play a key role in coordinating mating behaviour of decapod crustaceans  <cit> . in most cases it is believed that female urine triggers the start of courtship behaviour. this contradicts expectation from sexual selection theory, as females are the limiting sex and should invest little in courtship. here we confirm that in p. leniusculus, a crayfish species with a strong disproportion in reproductive investment between the sexes, the females triggers courtship behaviour by sending urinary chemical signals. males attempt to mate only if they receive urinary signals from the female. the context of female signalling, in contrast, is aggressive. female urine release coincides with aggressive rather than reproductive or submissive behaviours . both males and females release urinary signals in same-sex and mixed-sex fights . males reduce or discontinue urine release as they switch from aggressive to courtship behaviours . our results suggest that the release of urine in social interactions by crayfish has evolved as an aggressive signal in both males and females rather than a courtship signal.

the role of female urinary signals in eliciting male courtship
blocking female urine abolished any male mating attempts. mating behaviours were displayed only when female urine was artificially released or when female nephropores were not blocked. when urine was introduced the likelihood of courtship or mating  was similar to mating or courtship success generally found when staging intersexual encounters for a limited time in a small aquarium . hence, female urine release appears to be essential in stimulating male mating attempts. urine visualisation experiments demonstrate that notwithstanding the aggressive context of female signal release, male courtship behaviour  was always preceded by female urine delivery. after females released urine, males not only started courtship activity but also reduced their own level of aggressive urine signalling. this suggests that female urine is instrumental in diverting male behaviour from aggression to courtship. this conclusion is consistent with previous studies of crayfish , showing that stimulation with exogenous urine  from receptive females is more potent in eliciting behavioural and physiological responses in males than urinary chemical stimuli from males or juvenile females  <cit> .

the female's physical aggression towards males, coupled with a urine stimulus indicating receptivity, sends contradictory messages to the male. how could this ambivalent behaviour evolve? is it adaptive to the female? females could profit in different ways from displaying such conflicting signals. crayfish live at high population densities and during the breeding season females have multiple encounters with adult conspecifics. some of these encounters may be of agonistic nature , others may be sexually motivated. the relative low rate of mating in our experiments indicates that even sexually mature males do not always respond to female urinary signals with courtship behaviours. therefore, the aggressive behaviour covering up the release of sexually attractive chemicals will be adaptive in many types of interactions that involve competition over resources. moreover, females may execute mate selection by sending these conflicting signals as discussed further below.

male urine signalling and female mate choice
females are expected to prefer to mate with dominant rather than with subordinate males. in crayfish fights, dominant males release more urine than the subordinate . hence, it is expected that during courtship male crayfish actively advertise their dominance to the female through chemical signals, in order to maximise their chance of mating. cockroaches, for example, advertise their dominance status to females using the same chemical components in courtship as in aggressive interactions  <cit> . however, the results of our study contradict this in crayfish because males significantly reduced their urine release when interacting with a female during the breeding season . in all, 30% of the crayfish males did not release any urine at all during reproductive interactions suggesting that females do not use urinary chemical cues to assess male quality. a recent study  <cit>  showed that female red swamp crayfish  do not show a preference when allowed to choose between an unfamiliar dominant versus unfamiliar subordinate male of similar size. similarly, female signal crayfish show no preference for a dominant male if given a free choice between males . however, when allowed to watch the males in agonistic interactions prior to the choice, female p. clarkii subsequently showed a preference for the dominant male. we conclude from these studies, that males do not actively advertise their quality  by urinary chemical signals.

however, recent evidence suggests that female p. clarkii use combined visual and chemical information to identify the sex of conspecifics. females were shown to more readily approach larger males and to discriminate between individuals of opposite sex only if they received bimodal  information  <cit> . during the nocturnal activity period of crayfish visual information is strongly restricted. while chemical information alone is not sufficient for the female to identify sex or assess size  <cit>  tactile sensory input during physical interactions may provide crucial information to the female for assessment of male quality. therefore, by engaging in aggressive physical interactions, females can assess male size and strength using mechanoreceptors.

the reduction of male urine release during courtship is surprising but could be regarded as an appeasement towards the female. it may serve the male to de-escalate female aggression and to increase female motivation to mate.

sexual conflict and urine signalling
for most animal species there is unequal investment in gametes and progeny between the sexes, with males investing less than females  <cit> . males consequently have a higher potential reproductive rate and compete over females, while females are more resistant and are interested only in mating with the best available male  <cit> . strong asymmetries between the evolutionary interests of the sexes inevitably results in sexual conflicts  <cit> .

sexual conflict is expected to be particularly strong in crayfish due to the considerable difference between the sexes with regard to their investment into offspring  <cit> . in such mating systems, the male generally does most of the signalling or advertisement while the female chooses among the signallers  <cit> . receptive females are not expected to actively advertise their receptivity with urine signals. instead, the display of precopulatory aggression indicates resistance of the female to male mating attempts and female urine release occurs as an integral component of aggressive behaviour  <cit> .

urine release during fighting behaviour follows the same pattern in males and females, suggesting a function as aggressive signal in both sexes. urine release, therefore, does not appear to be under 'sexually antagonistic coevolution'  <cit> .

males are under high selection pressure to detect sexually receptive females and to break their resistance to mate. equipped with larger claws relative to females of similar body size, males are able to coerce some females to mate  <cit> , giving them the active role in reproduction. at the high population densities typical for crayfish, males regularly encounter females. detection of sexually receptive females at the start of an agonistic interaction is crucial in order to utilise the mating opportunity. once the female is detected, males need to overcome their resistance. by discontinuing their own aggressive urine signalling males may mitigate the female's aggressive behaviour and facilitate mating.

females, in contrast, are expected to be more selective, mate less frequently and only with high quality males. by linking urine release with aggressive behaviours females generate conditions that allow them to conduct mate choice. in encounters with sexually active males, urine metabolites will initiate male mating attempts while the aggressive behaviour will test and challenge the male. by means of the physical interaction females can assess the size and strength of the male. after mating, females exhibit mate choice, either by physically removing unwanted spermatophores  or by adjusting their reproductive effort in relation to male traits. galeotti and coworkers showed, that female crayfish austropotamobius italicus produce larger but fewer eggs for small males with large claws and more numerous but smaller eggs for large-sized, small-clawed males  <cit> . similarly, female p. clarkii invest in larger eggs after having copulated with large males  <cit> . in addition, the resistance of the female may itself be conducive to mate selection. larger and stronger  males may be more successful in overcoming the resistance of the females than small or weak males. hence, by linking urine release with aggressive behaviour females can select high quality mates and enhance their fitness.

the 'dilemma' of urine signalling
as a source of pheromone communication urine can convey multiple messages, with likely uncheatable information about the physiological state and identity of the sender. our study shows that the urine of female crayfish during the breeding season gives away information about her receptivity, which can be exploited by conspecific males. this signalling strategy can be disadvantageous for the female when engaging in interactions with low quality males. perception of sexual metabolites in the urine may increase the persistence of males in interacting with the female, entailing additional time and energy costs for the female, which are not balanced by reproductive benefits. many animals including a range of mammals and fish release urine as a means of communication  <cit> . releasing urine always carries the risk of revealing unwanted information about the state of the signaller and hence is prone to exploitation. crustaceans can adjust the timing of urine release by the opening and closing of the sphincter muscle of the nephropore. however, they may not be able to control the chemical composition as the bladder accumulates urine over extended time periods . receivers are expected to use information provided by the metabolites in the urine as this may give them a competitive or reproductive advantage. hormonal metabolites carrying information about sexual receptivity were suggested to be particularly prone to detection by 'spying' conspecifics  <cit> .

female crayfish, on average, do not gain any non-reproductive benefit by courting or mating. therefore, the urine signalling system may be designed to provide conditions facilitating mate choice. in contrast to crayfish, in many other crustaceans  mating is linked to female moulting  <cit> . moulting is the most vulnerable time period in a crustacean's life. moulted crustaceans are potential prey to conspecifics as well as predators and females attract males and are guarded throughout this vulnerable time. recent studies have shown that a urinary component released by female shore crab is a feeding deterrent to males but not to conspecific females  <cit> . in such cases, females may gain an advantage by attracting males through urinary signals. other examples of urine-borne female sex pheromones including crustaceans, fish and mammals need to be explored to investigate how signal exploitation is mitigated by adjusting the timing of urine release.

CONCLUSIONS
a still unresolved question in animal communication research is why chemical signals that initiate courtship  are normally emitted by females and not by males. in courtship interactions mediated by other communication channels  it is generally the male producing the advertisement signal and the female, as the limiting sex, displaying a choice in responding or not. our study provides evidence, that in crayfish , urine-borne chemical signals of the female initiate male courtship. urine release, in both males and females, is always linked to aggressive behaviour suggesting that urine signalling has evolved as an aggressive signal in both sexes. in reproductive interactions, females show resistance to the males and release urine during the fight preceding mating. males, after receiving female urine pulses, switch from aggression to courtship behaviour and significantly reduce their urine output. these findings suggest that crayfish carefully adjust the timing of urine release in order to reduce the potentially costly consequences of providing multiple sources of information to a receiver with contrary interest. males, by discontinuing their own aggressive urine signalling may mitigate the female's aggressive behaviour and enhance mating success. females, by linking urine release to aggressive behaviours provide conditions that enable them to assess the size and strengths of the male, facilitating postcopulatory mate choice.

