BACKGROUND
animal pigmentation is a tractable and relevant trait for understanding key issues in evolutionary biology such as adaptation, speciation and the maintenance of balanced polymorphisms. while these evolutionary processes themselves have attracted much research attention, apart from a few cases  <cit>  the genetic changes associated with speciation and adaptation remain largely unknown. in addition to its evolutionary and ecological relevance, pigmentation genetics also has medical implications  <cit> , since, due to evolutionary conservation of the main pigmentation pathways, many pigmentation genes in fish and other animal models have contributed to our understanding of human pigmentation disorders  <cit>  and of phenotypic differences and human evolutionary history  <cit> . in the present paper, we investigate gene expression differences that correlate with the ontogenetic development of a color trait thought to underlie speciation-with-gene flow in neotropical cichlids .

cichlid fishes in general are well known for their rapid radiation and speciation  <cit> . morphological diversification, including a diverse range of color traits, are particularly striking among the haplochromine cichlids in lakes victoria and malawi in eastern africa which, with several hundred endemic species each, make up the largest recent adaptive radiation of vertebrates  <cit> . the midas cichlid species complex  from the lakes of nicaragua also constitutes a model system for the study of speciation and radiation by providing one of the very few accepted empirical examples of sympatric speciation  <cit> . two of the main processes thought to be driving divergence in these fish are ecological disruptive selection and color-based assortative mating  <cit> . several populations of midas cichlids are characterized by a conspicuous color polymorphism. in many of the species in this complex there are two color morphs: “normal” and “gold”. the normal morph is always much more common  and these individuals show a grey-black coloration. the gold morph shows a bright orange or gold color  and gave these cichlid fishes their common name, the “midas” cichlids, in reference to the greek god midas who turned everything that he touched into gold  <cit> . some individuals lose melanophores, purportedly via melanophore cell death, and become gold while others remain normal in color throughout their lives  <cit>  . color change does not progress uniformly  and occasionally dark regions can persist even years after color change. the inheritance patterns suggest that this polychromatism is determined by a single locus, with the gold allele dominant to the normal one  <cit> . the timing of the onset of this color change is variable and can begin when an individual is only a few months old, but can also, in a few individuals happen at a much older age - up to several years  <cit> .

based on observations  <cit>  and experiments from their natural habitats as well as the laboratory, these different morphs are known to mate assortatively  <cit>  and significant genetic differentiation between morphs has been found in two crater lakes  <cit> . thus, suggesting that this color trait with a simple, mendelian genetic architecture underlies some of the speciation processes in the midas cichlids. this simple genetic basis can also contribute to understanding the genetic architectures that are more permissive of sympatric speciation in general. linkage or pleiotropy of the mate choice cue and preference loci is expected to exist in this situation  <cit> . although this was traditionally considered rare, a few empirical examples have recently been published  <cit> .

among teleosts pigmentation has been associated with mate recognition, mate choice, shoaling behavior, camouflage and warning coloration and premating isolation during speciation  <cit> . in vertebrates more generally, mouse coat color and the array of color patterns among zebrafish  and its relatives, are some of the most useful and well-explored systems for identifying the molecular mechanisms of color change and color pattern development .

melanophores are chromatophores, or color bearing cells, that are derived from the neural crest and are responsible for production and storage of melanin in specialized vesicles   <cit> . chromatophores are cells specialized in the storage and/or synthesis of light absorbing  pigments or light reflecting structures  <cit> . mammals and birds exhibit only a single pigment cell, the melanocyte  that produces two types of pigment: eumelanin, responsible for black to brown color; and pheomelanin, responsible for red to yellow color  <cit> . in contrast, six kinds of chromatophores are known in poikilothermic vertebrates: melanophores , xanthophores , erythrophores , leucophores , iridophores  and cyanophores   <cit> .

in teleost fish both morphological and physiological processes can play a role in coloration. morphological skin color change in fish is becoming increasingly recognized as a more broadly applicable phenomenon brought about by a large variety of factors  <cit> . this type of color change is defined as occurring via variations in skin pigment concentrations and in the morphology, density and distribution of chromatophores in the three-dimensional organization of the integument – such color changes are relatively slow, occurring over days or weeks  <cit> . changes in the external coloration of teleosts are also influenced by physiological phenomena. primary physiological color changes are caused by the direct effect of environmental factors, such as light, on pigment migration  <cit> , and secondary physiological color changes are those where pigment translocation is mediated by the nervous and endocrine systems. the latter mode of color change involves a number of different factors including adrenocorticotropic hormone  and alpha-melanophore-stimulating hormone . color responses controlled by the nervous system have an almost instantaneous effect, and those color changes mediated by the endocrine system tend to happen within minutes or hours  <cit> .

specifically, the molecular mechanisms behind the loss of melanophores are largely unknown. the coloration patterns that are most closely aligned to that seen in the midas cichlids is perhaps the orange-blotch  phenotype in the cichlid fish of lake malawi, east africa  <cit> . interestingly, the ob phenotype, caused by a cis-regulatory mutation in the pax <dig> gene, might increase camouflage in females but, at the same time, disrupts species-specific male color patterns used for mate recognition. this sexual conflict is thought to have been resolved by linkage to a novel female sex determining locus  <cit> . the synthesis of black melanin  in vertebrates more generally, involves the members of the tyrosinase gene family and melanosomal transporters  <cit> . interestingly, the late onset of melanophore cell death in midas cichlids may also be caused by similar mechanisms to human pigmentation disorders, such as white hairs and vitiligo, whose genetic architectures are also still largely unresolved  <cit> .

the aim of the present study is to identify differences in gene expression associated with the transition from normal to gold coloration in midas cichlid fish. we use next-generation sequencing to uncover genes that underlie morphological color change in this system. in the present study, we consider color-change genes, as genes whose expression patterns correlate with the process of transition from normal to gold. the correlation of their expression with the process of color change suggests that they are molecularly  related to the transition from normal to gold although these are not necessarily expressed in pigment cells and/or directly related to pigment production.

melanophore density decreases during transition : n , t  and g . because of this natural progression, three different patterns of de are expected . de pattern  <dig>  represents genes related to the process of morphological color change. de pattern  <dig>  is expected for genes that are expressed specifically by melanophores. in this case, expression level is expected to correlate with the number of melanophores and decrease from n to g. de pattern  <dig>  is expected for those genes that are under negative regulation of melanophores. accordance of well-known melanogenesis genes with pattern  <dig> provides internal validation for the experiment.

here we analyzed genome wide expression levels in three contrasting phenotypes that represent distinct stages of color transformation in these fish. normal, transitional and gold phenotypes were studied in mature, age matched, sibling fish  using six biological replicates of each phenotype, and two technical replicates of each library. we identify both well-known and uncharacterized genes associated with melanophore maintenance, cell death and clearance as well as potential regulatory target genes. our results illustrate the conservation of genes affecting pigmentation and suggest that some of our degs are potential markers for human pigmentation disorders. interestingly, one of the genes that we found to be upregulated during transition also segregates with the gold phenotype in a genetic cross and is possibly associated with incipient speciation in this system.

RESULTS
the midas cichlid fish system provides a rare example of sympatric speciation, where color-based assortative mating is one of the processes thought to be driving divergence in these fish  <cit> . here, using transcriptome wide next generation sequencing technology  we identified key expression differences between different pigment morphs  in the same midas cichlid species . some of the differentially expressed genes detected have also been implicated in parallel pigmentation traits in other organisms and in human pigmentation disorders  <cit> .

we sampled the scale tissue from  <dig> full-sib midas cichlids originating from heterozygous gold parents  for the rnaseq experiment . sequencing generated  <dig> , <dig> raw reads and this number was reduced to  <dig> , <dig> sequences after the cleaning pipeline was implemented . the latter sequences were used to build the de novo assembly. velvet/oases produced a high number of transcripts that were clustered by cd-hit-est into  <dig>  contigs. the following approaches based on the blastx algorithm and mysql queries  were applied in order to restrict the analyses to annotated sequences and resulted in the final de novo assembly of  <dig>  sequences. contigs shorter than 200 bp were discarded from further analyses since they could contain artefacts derived from cdna synthesis, sequencing and contamination. the contigs ranged in size between 200 bp  and  <dig>  bp . the average nucleotide-wide coverage was estimated to be  <dig> x. an average of  <dig>  m reads from each library  were mapped to the midas de novo assembly and to the  <dig>  tilapia reference sequences. the dispersion and concentration of fold change values are displayed in figure 3a.

patterns of differential gene expression in color change
three separate analyses of differential gene expression were carried out using the edger  <cit> , deseq  <cit>  and bayseq  <cit>  r packages  . a total of  <dig> differentially expressed genes   were identified in at least one analysis method .

letters indicate under which analysis method  de was detected.

the partial, rather than total, overlap between the results obtained with the different analysis packages is likely related to the different methods used to estimate dispersion and to calculate normalization factors  <cit> . a frequent solution to avoid false-positives is to only consider the results that overlap in all analyses. however, this approach is conservative  and is not suitable for studies aiming at identifying a large number of candidates for subsequent analysis. the present study illustrates this quite well in the case of genes such as tyrp <dig>  slc24a <dig> and tyr. these are well-recognized melanophore-markers and, as expected, conformed to expression pattern  <dig>  nevertheless none of these genes were identified by all analysis methods and all three were probably false negatives in the analyses using deseq. the expression of housekeeping genes does vary, but does not show obvious trends or significant differences across groups .

the overlap between the three different comparisons  is shown in figure 3b. the three expression patterns outlined in figure  <dig> can be identified by clustering analysis and are shown in figure  <dig>  pattern  <dig>  is found mainly in well-known pigmentation genes, providing internal validation. genes more clearly up-regulated during transition  were those involved in inflammatory and stress response.

candidate color-change genes
degs that were up-regulated in t  involved immediate-early genes related to cellular response to stress  and recruitment of b cells . the cxc <dig> chemokine is similar in sequence to the gene described  <cit>  in the japanese flounder  where it was found to have a function in immune and inflammatory responses. junb and c-fos are known targets of microphthalmia associated transcription factor  regulation  <cit> . interestingly, the up regulation of the transcription factor junb and c-fos, as seen here, was previously implicated in the transformation of melanocytes to melanomas in humans  <cit> . cornifelin  was also upregulated in t. a similar expression pattern of upregulation of cnfn was detected in psoriatic skin  <cit> . psoriasis is an inflammatory, immune disease in humans characterized by the infiltration of chemokines to the skin tissue  <cit> .

we note that an uncharacterized gene, which includes a lysozyme domain, maps to the gold candidate region as defined by positional cloning . microsatellite and snp markers located in the vicinity of this gene segregate with the gold phenotype in a f <dig> mapping panel confirming linkage. this result raises the exciting possibiity that this uncharacterized gene is the causal gene underlying the gold phenotype. this hypothesis is currently under investigation and will be addressed in future work.

the other color genes analyzed  did not conform to any expected pattern or show clear trends . although some of these genes clearly showed more variation and higher expression values in the t and g groups  as reported previously  <cit> .

conservation of color genes
expression pattern  <dig>  corresponds predominantly to genes related to melanosomal pathways . these were, for example, the tyrosinase gene family members , pre-melanosomal protein a , melanoregulin , sodium calcium transporter 24a <dig> , and in addition one uncharacterized and one reverse-transcribable element. we find that expression pattern  <dig> is shown in genes expressed by melanophores and related to melanosome components and differentiation  <cit> . this pattern is expected given the decreasing melanophore densities of normal to transitional to gold fish, and provides internal validation for the present experiment. the expression of these genes was also found to be higher in dark bars relative to light bars in a recent rnaseq study in stickleback  <cit> .

we show that parallel phenotypes can evolve in different lineages by using genes of the same pathways. the zebrafish golden gene  for instance, was found to be differentially expressed across the midas cichlid color morphs. given the differences between the zebrafish and midas golden phenotypes  and the lack of detected sequence differences in the latter, it appears that the expression differences in this gene are downstream consequences of melanophore death in the midas, which contrasts with its upstream role in causally determining the phenotype in zebrafish  <cit> . since some of these genes underlie similar phenotypes in other organisms  <cit> , it would appear that they could potentially be good candidates for the midas cichlid gold locus. however, none of these genes map to the gold locus as determined by positional cloning experiments . nevertheless, the coding regions of the genes known to underlie similar phenotypes in other organisms were sequenced from gold and normal samples to rule out an obvious difference that could account for the phenotype. but, so far no potentially causal polymorphisms  were detected.

tyrosinase gene family
the five members of the tyrosinase gene family  were clearly negatively correlated with the amount of melanophores in the tissues of the different groups . this is consistent with the role of this gene family in the enzymatic conversion of tyrosine to melanin. tyr is the rate-limiting enzyme in the cascade that produces melanin  <cit> . dct is expressed exclusively by melanophores and melanoblasts . the level of expression of this gene was found to be very low, with a maximum number of  <dig> mapped reads in one normal sample. this naturally precludes it from being detected in the global de analyses.

despite having retained functional paralogs of several pigmentation pattern genes, the expression patterns of the paralogs seem redundant. this redundancy is consistent with the observed pattern in other teleosts. the impact of the fsgd on the evolution of coloration was recently reviewed  <cit> . in particular, the tyrp <dig> paralogs were found to have functionally diverged in a lineage-specific manner: tyrp1a is expressed in melanophores and tyrp1b in the retinal pigment epithelium in medaka. the expression of both paralogs overlaps in zebrafish  <cit> . here, one copy of mreg and pmel was found to be de and this might also indicate that they diverged in function from their paralogs.

CONCLUSIONS
rnaseq was successfully employed to investigate the transcriptome wide expression levels in a non-model organism, the midas cichlids of nicaragua. the different color morphs examined here are known to mate assortatively and have diverged significantly suggesting that genes differentially expressed in the different morphs may be playing a role in speciation. we identified both well-known and as of now uncharacterized genes associated with melanophore maintenance, cell death and clearance as well as potential regulatory target genes . our results also illustrate how parallel phenotypes can evolve in different lineages by using genes of the same pathways . other genes that are known to determine similar phenotypes in other organisms  <cit>  did not show clear trends in our study. the degs detected here likely represent novel pigmentation genes of interest to evolutionary biologists generally and to the community of cichlid biologists in particular as candidates for influencing naturally occurring and also parallel phenotypes  <cit> . therefore, further characterization of the unknown degs identified in the present study is warranted. interestingly, degs found to be upregulated in transitional fish also bear resemblance to patterns observed in melanoma formation  <cit>  and psoriasis  <cit> . the evolutionary conservation of the major pigmentation pathways  <cit>  opens the possibility that the other genes that conformed to expression pattern  <dig>  also constitute potential markers for the development of melanoma or other pigmentation disorders.

