BACKGROUND
operons are multigene arrangements transcribed as a single mrna and are one of the
defining features found in bacterial and archaeal genomes. this arrangement allows
genes to be co-regulated, and members of operons are usually involved in the same
functional pathway  <cit> . although operons are prominent features in the genomes of bacteria and
archaea, the evolution and mechanisms that promote operon formation are still not
resolved and a number mechanisms have been proposed  <cit> . these mechanisms involve dynamic genetic events that include gene
transfer events, deletions, duplications, and recombinations  <cit> . since operons are prominent features in bacterial genomes, and often
encode genes with metabolic potential, it may be assumed that their evolution is
under some selection pressure, thus allowing prokaryotic cells to rapidly adapt,
compete and grow under changing environmental conditions.

the metabolic capability of an organism can be a function of its genome size and gene
complement and these greatly affect its ability to live in diverse environments. the
alpha subdivision of the proteobacteria includes some organisms that are very
similar phylogenetically but inhabit many diverse ecological niches, including a
number of bacteria that can interact with eukaryotic hosts  <cit> . the genome sizes of these organisms varies from about 1 mb for
members of the genus rickettsia to approximately 9 mb for members of
the bradyrhizobia  <cit> . comparative genomic studies of this group has led to the supposition
that there has been two independent reductions in genomic size, one which gave rise
to the brucella and bartonella, the other which gave rise to the
rickettsia <cit> . in addition, it also suggests that there has been a major genomic
expansion and that roughly correlates with the soil microbes within the order
rhizobiales  <cit> . the genomes of rhizobia are dynamic. phylogenetic analysis of 26
different sinorhizobium and bradyrhizobium genomes recently showed
that recombination has dominated the evolution of the core genome in these
organisms, and that vertically transmitted genes were rare compared with genes with
a history of recombination and lateral gene transfer  <cit> . in this manuscript we have utilized comparative genomics in a focused
manner to investigate the evolution of genes and loci involved in the catabolism of
the sugar alcohols erythritol, adonitol and l-arabitol, primarily within the
alpha-proteobacteria.

the number of bacterial species that are capable of utilizing the common  <dig> carbon
polyol, erythritol, as a carbon source is restricted  <cit> . catabolism of erythritol has been shown to be important for competition
for nodule occupancy in rhizobium leguminosarum as well as for virulence in
the animal pathogen brucella suis <cit> . genetic characterization of erythritol catabolic loci has only been
performed in r. leguminosarum, b. abortus and sinorhizobium
meliloti. in these organ-isms erythritol is broken down to
dihydroxyacetone-phosphate using the core erythritol catabolic genes
eryabc-tpib <cit> . during characterization of the erythritol locus of s. meliloti,
it was observed that despite the close homologies of core erythritol genes, the
genetic content and arrangement of the locus was drastically different from the
previously characterized loci of b. abortus and r. leguminosarum <cit> . in particular the locus encodes the catabolism of two 5-carbon pentitols
 in addition to erythritol. it was shown that the abc
transporter encoded by mptabcde and erythritol kinase encoded by
erya can also be used for adonitol and l-arabitol, and several genes in
the locus are involved in adonitol and l-arabitol, but not erythritol catabolism
including lala-rbtabc <cit> .

the differences between the erythritol loci in the sequenced s. meliloti
strain rm <dig>  <cit> , and r. leguminosarum, led us to question what the relationship
of these erythritol catabolic loci may be to other putative erythritol catabolic
loci in bacterial species. in this work we focus on this question by analyzing the
content and synteny of loci containing homologs to the erythritol genes in other
sequenced organisms. the results of the analysis lend support to several hypotheses
regarding operon evolution, and in addition, the data predicts loci that may be
involved in polyol transport and metabolism in other proteobacteria.

methods
identification of erythritol loci
the data set of erythritol loci utilized in this work was constructed in a
two-step process. first blastn was used to identify sequenced genomes containing
homologs to the core erythritol catabolic genes r. leguminosarum and
s. meliloti <cit> . the use of blastn rather than blastp at this stage allowed us to
refine the search to bacteria with sequenced genomes. furthermore, limiting the
search to genes with highly similar sequences by using blastn allowed us to
limit our search to only genes that are likely involved in erythritol
catabolism, since all of these genes encode proteins in highly ubiquitous
families found throughout bacterial genomes. initially blastn searches were
performed using all the core erythritol genes shared between r.
leguminosarum and s. meliloti . however, the search using erya provided the most
diverse data set that also showed a sharp drop in e-value and query coverage.
using either erya from r. leguminosarum, or erya from
s. meliloti for the blastn search resulted in an identical data
set. genomes containing homologs to erya were selected on the basis of
e-values less than  <dig> e- <dig>  in cases where multiple strains of the same
bacterial species were found to have highly homologous putative erythritol genes
 only a single representative of the species was used to avoid
redundancy. additionally b. melitensis 16m and b. suis 1330
were chosen as representatives of the brucella lineage despite a large
number of brucella species that were identified in our search due to
the high degrees of similarity between their erythritol catabolic genes.

second, the genetic region containing erya in these organisms was
identified and analyzed using the img ortholog neighborhood viewer
  <cit>  in order to construct the gene maps . the amino acid sequence
of erya from s. meliloti was used as a query for the img ortholog
neighborhood viewer search.

to analyze the genetic content of organisms in our data set, the amino acid
sequence encoded by each gene involved in erythritol catabolism in r.
leguminosarum, or in erythritol, adonitol or l-arabitol catabolism in
s. meliloti, was individually used in a blastp search of the 19
genomes in the data set. the sugar binding proteins of the s. meliloti
and r. leguminosarum transporter were used as representatives of the
entire abc transporter. identity cut-off values that were used to delineate
potential homologs to erythritol proteins were unique to each query amino acid
sequence. cut-off values were as follows: mpta: 56%, eryd: 44%, erya: 46%, rbta:
50%, eryb: 65%, lala: 49%, rbtb: 51%, rbtc: 40%, eryc: 68%, tpib: 69%, eryr:
61%, eryg: 73%. these values were manually determined and generally correlated
to a large drop in percentage identity within the blastp hits.

homologs identified that were not within the primary erya containing
loci were used as a query within img-ortholog neighborhood viewer to analyze the
region surrounding them. secondary loci containing homologs to some of these
genes were identified in mesorhizobium sp. and sinorhizobium
fredii. these loci are putative erythritol loci based on homology to
known loci involved in erythritol catabolism in sinorhizobium meliloti <cit> , rhizobium leguminosarum <cit> and brucella abortus <cit> . despite not having been experimentally verified we will refer to all
loci in our data set as erythritol loci for the purpose of this manuscript.

phylogenetic analysis
amino acid sequences of homologs to proteins previously shown to play a role in
erythritol, adonitol or l-arabitol catabolism from each of the organisms in the
data set were collected and used for phylogenetic analysis. the 16s
rdna and rpod sequences were also extracted from the ncbi database
for species examined in this study in order to obtain a potential species tree
that could be compared with the various phylogenetic gene trees obtained from
the individual genes located within the polyol  utilization loci. amino acid sequences were aligned using clustal-x  <cit>  and praline  <cit>  the resulting alignments were refined manually with the genedoc
program v <dig> . <dig>  <cit> .

phylogenies were generated with maximum likelihood analysis  as implemented
in the molecular evolutionary genetic analysis package   <cit>  and with mrbayes  <cit> . mega <dig> was used to identify the most suitable substitution models for
the aligned data sets. in order to evaluate support for the nodes observed in
the ml phylogenetic trees bootstrap analysis  <cit>  was conducted by analysing  <dig> pseudo replicates.

the mrbayes program  was used for bayesian analysis  <cit>  and the parameters set for amino acid alignments were mixed models
and for the 16s rdna gamma distribution with  <dig> rate categories. the models used
 for generating the final 50% majority rule trees were
estimated by the program itself. the bayesian inference of phylogenies was
initiated from a random starting tree and four chains were run simultaneously
for  <dig>  <dig>  <dig> generations; trees were sampled every  <dig> generations. the first
25% of trees generated were discarded  and the remaining
trees were used to compute the posterior probability values.

phylogenetic trees were constructed for rpod, 16s rdna and all the key genes
associated with the erya genes. phylogenetic trees were plotted with the
treeview program  <cit>  using mega <dig> and/or mrbayes tree outfiles. final trees were annotated
using adobe illustrator.

RESULTS
phylogenetic distribution of putative erythritol loci
based on homology to erya from sinorhizobium meliloti and
rhizobium leguminosarum we have compiled a data set of  <dig> different
putative erythritol loci from  <dig> different proteobacteria . previous studies suggested that erythritol loci may be
restricted to the alpha-proteobacteria  <cit> . while a majority of the erythritol loci we identified followed this
scheme, surprisingly we identified putative erythritol catabolic loci in
verminephrobacter eiseniae  and
escherichia fergusonii . erythritol loci
are not widely distributed through the alpha-proteobacteria. a majority of the
loci we identified were within the order rhizobiales. outside of the rhizobiales
we also identified erythritol loci in acidiphilium species and
roseobacter species. within the rhizobiales, erythritol loci were
notably absent from a large number of bacterial species such as rhizobium
etli, agrobacterium tumefaciens and bradyrhizobium japonicum
that are closely related to other species that we have identified that contain
erythritol loci. we also note that erythritol loci appear to be plasmid
localized only in s. fredii and r. leguminosarum. in all other
cases the loci appear to be found on chromosomes.

mesorhizobium ciceri bv. biserrulae
genetic content of loci
the genetic content of each of the organisms ery loci were analyzed by
conducting a blastp search to the  <dig> genomes in our data set of the amino acid
sequence of each gene associated with erythritol catabolism in r.
leguminosarum, or erythritol, adonitol or l-arabitol catabolism in
s. meliloti. the results of the blast search are presented in
table   <dig>  depicting the presence or absence of
homologs to erythritol, adonitol or l-arabitol catabolic genes in each of the
genomes that was investigated. gene maps of erythritol loci were constructed
based on the output of our img ortholog neighborhood viewer searches and are
depicted in figure   <dig> 
proteobacteria. genes are represented by coloured boxes and
identical colours identify genes that are believed to be homologous.
gene names are given below the boxes for sinorhizobium meliloti
and rhizobium leguminosarum. loci arrangements are depicted
based on the output from the img ortholog neighborhood viewer primarily
using the amino acid sequence erya from sinorhizobium meliloti,
and rhizobium leguminosarum. gene names in the legend generally
correspond to the annotations in r. leguminosarum and s.
meliloti.

+ indicates presence of homolog in the genome, - indicates absence of
homolog in the genome, ++ indicates presence of  <dig> homologs in
genome.

genes encoding homologs to the core erythritol proteins erya, eryb and eryd were
ubiquitous throughout our data set . with
respect to the remaining genes, the genetic content of the species can be
grouped into three broad categories.  species that contain genes encoding
homologs associated with erythritol, adonitol and l-arabitol catabolism. this
includes s. meliloti, s. medicae, s. fredii, m. loti, m. opportunism, m.
ciceri, r. denitrificans and r. litoralis. these genomes
contained homologs to genes that encode enzymes specifically involved erythritol
catabolism such as eryc, and tpib as well as specifically involved in adonitol
and l-arabitol catabolism including lala, and rbtbc. they also contain
genes encoding an abc transporter homologous to the s. meliloti
erythritol, adonitol and l-arabitol transporter  and do not encode
homologs to the r. leguminosarum erythritol transporter . one
notable exception is m. ciceri which encodes eryefg homologs rather
than mptabcde .  species that contain
all the genes associated with erythritol catabolism, but lack the genes
associated with adonitol or l-arabitol catabolism. these species include r.
leguminosarum bvs. viciae and trifolii, a.
radiobacter, o. anthropi, b. suis, b. melitensis, and e.
fergusonii. these loci encode eryabcdr-tpib as well as homologs to the
r. leguminosarum abc transporter eryefg, but lack genes encoding
homologs to enzymes associated specifically with adonitol and l-arabitol
catabolism or the s. meliloti transport protein mptabcde. e.
fergusonii contains the most minimal set of homologs to erythritol
genes of all the genomes investigated, and did not encode eryr and tpib. 
species that do not encode the specifically erythritol associated eryc, eryr,
and tpib, but encode the adonitol/l-arabitol catabolic complement lala-rbtabc
and homologs to the s. meliloti polyol transporter mptabcde. these
include bradyrhizobium spp. btai <dig> and ors <dig>  a. multivorum, a.
cryptum and v. eiseniae.

the genetic structure of erythritol loci
the genetic context of erya in each of the genomes in our data set
supported that each of these organisms contained an erythritol locus. a physical
map of the loci in each of these organisms is depicted in figure   <dig>  of note, a number of putative erythritol loci were
identified in organisms with incomplete genome sequences at the time of
analysis, and thus are not discussed here, including: octadecabacter
antarcticus, pelagibaca bermudensis enterobacter hormaechei,
fulvimarina pelagi, aurantimonas sp. si85-9a <dig>  roseibium sp.
trichskd <dig>  burkholderia thailandensis and stappia aggregata.

the putative erythritol loci of bacteria in our data set ranged in genetic
complexity with the loci from s. meliloti and s. medicae
containing  <dig> different genes, to the simplest being the locus of e.
fergusonii, which contained only two divergently transcribed operons
that are homologous to the eryefg and eryabcd loci of r.
leguminosarum. a number of species contained loci that were identical
in content and arrangement to the r. leguminosarum erythritol locus
including members of the brucella, ochrobacterum, and
agrobacterium. the only species that contains a locus identical in
content and arrangement to s. meliloti is the closely related
sinorhizobium medicae. the locus of sinorhizobium fredii
ngr <dig>  contains all but one of the genes  found in the other
sinorhizobium loci .
species phylogeny; evidence for horizontal gene transfer. erya
phylogenetic tree  and rpod species tree  were constructed
using ml and bayesian analysis. support for each clade is expressed as a
percentage  adjacent to the nodes that supports the monophyly of
various clades. v. eiseniae was used as an outgroup for both
trees since it was the most phylogenetically distant organism. a tree
including branch lengths for erya is included as additional file 1: figure s <dig> 

the loci of mesorhizobium species were varied, however all three
mesorhizobium sp. contained an independent locus with homologs to
lala and rbtbc elsewhere in the genome . interestingly, while mesorhizobium loti and
mesorhizobium opportunism both contain transporters homologous to
mptabcde, mesorhizobium ciceri bv. biserrulae
contains a transporter homologous to eryefg. this operon also contains
the same hypothetical gene that is found at the beginning of the r.
leguminosarum eryefg transcript. the transporters however, are
arranged in a manner similar to that seen in s. meliloti and the gene
encoding the regulator eryd, is found ahead of the transporter genes,
whereas in r. leguminosarum and brucella, eryd is
found following eryc . we also
note that whereas m. loti and m. opportunism both contain a
putative fructose  <dig>  bis phosphate aldolase gene between the
eryr-tpib-rpib operon and eryc, a homolog to this is also
gene is found adjacent to the rpib in brucella.

bradyrhizobium sp. btai <dig>  and ors <dig>  a. cryptum and v.
eiseniae all have similar genetic arrangement to that of s.
meliloti, except that they do not contain a homolog to eryc,
or an associated eryr-tpib-rpib operon. these loci also differ
primarily in their arrangement of lala-rbtbc .

the phylogenies of erythritol proteins do not correlate with species
phylogeny
the dna sequences of 16s rdna  as well as the amino acid
sequences of rpod were extracted from genbank to analyze the phylogenetic
relationships of the organisms examined in this study, using the most
phylogenetically distant organism verminephrobacter eiseniae as an
out-group. the results of the 16s rdna and rpod sequence analyses were
in concordance with each other and are consistent with phylogenies that have
been previously generated  <cit> . initial comparison of the operon structures with the generated
phylogenies suggested that the operon structure did not correlate with the
species phylogeny. since the structure of some operons did not correspond well
with the species phylogenies we wished to determine if operon structure did
correlate with any of the erythritol genes found at the s. meliloti
loci. since homologs to erya, eryb and eryd were ubiquitous through the data
set, it was decided to construct phylogenies based on maximum likelihood and
bayesian analysis using the erya, eryb and eryd data sets. the topology of the
phylogenetic tree using erya is presented in figure   <dig>  a tree including branch lengths is included as additional file
1: figure s <dig>  v. eiseniae was also the
most distant member with respect to the erya phylogeny and again used as an
outgroup. the phylogenetic trees of eryb and eryd are not shown but were
generally consistent with the erya phylogeny. the species tree, based on rpod,
was included as a mirror tree with the erya tree to demonstrate possible
horizontal gene transfer events .

the data show that there is a high degree of correlation between the loci
configuration and the erya phylogenetic tree . we note the similarity of the loci of
a. radiobacter and r. leguminosarum to brucella
species and o. anthropi but not to the more closely related
sinorhizobium species. this suggests that a horizontal gene
transfer may have occurred between these organisms. this is in agreement with
what has been previously reported  <cit> . it also seems likely that a horizontal gene transfer event may have
occurred between the brucella and e. fergusonii. this may
explain the unique occurrence of the loci’s presence in a member of the
gamma-proteobacteria. finally, our mirror tree suggests that a horizontal gene
transfer of the more complex erythritol locus may have occurred between m.
loti and an ancestral species the sinorhizobium species
.

modes of evolution for the polyol utilization loci
comparison of the phylogenetic trees of erya, eryb and eryd to the arrangement
and content of the loci led us to more thoroughly investigate the phylogenies of
a number of proteins that stood out as unique within the data set. these
phylogenies have led us to postulate modes of evolution that may have occurred
in these loci.

blastp analysis showed a clear distinction between the type of transporter
encoded by each of the loci and the remaining genetic content. in general, loci
that contained adonitol/l-arabitol type genes contained a transporter homologous
to the s. meliloti mptabcde . loci that contained only erythritol genes
contained a transporter homologous to the eryefg of r. leguminosarum.
one exception to this correlation was m. ciceri bv. biserrulae
which contained a homologous transporter to eryefg rather than mptabcde. this is
interesting because m. ciceri groups with the other
mesorhizobia in the eryabd trees. in order to analyze the evolution
of these transporters more clearly, phylogenetic trees were constructed of
homologs to eryg and homologs to mpta . in
general the phylogenies are in agreement with the eryabd phylogenies, with the
exception of m. ciceri which falls on a basal branch of the eryg
phylogeny. the disparities between the eryg and eryabd phylogenies of m
ciceri strongly suggest that parts of its erythritol locus have a
different origin. this may have been the result of horizontal gene transfer of a
second r. leguminosarum type erythritol locus, followed by
recombination between the two.
phylogenetic tree including putative homologues to the sugar binding
protein mpta of sinorhizobium meliloti and eryg of
rhizobium leguminosarum . support is provided for
the node that clearly separates the putative homologues into two
distinct and distant clades. separate phylogenetic trees for erythritol
transporters homologous to mptabcde and eryefg are depicted  using aligned amino acid sequences of the putative sugar
binding proteins mpta  and eryg  as representatives
of the transporters phylogenies. the branch that shows the anomalous
placement of the mesorhizobium ciceri bv. biserrulae
within the tree of eryefg homologs is highlighted in red. trees were
constructed using ml and bayesian analysis. support for each node is
expressed as a percentage based on posterior probabilities  and bootstrap values . the branch lengths are based on ml
analysis and are proportional to the number of substitutions per
site.

in two organisms, apparent duplications of genes were present. in m.
loti one homolog of lala was present in the erythritol locus,
while a second copy was present elsewhere in the genome adjacent to homologues
of rbtb and rbtc, consistent with its location in the other
two mesorhizobium genomes. in s. fredii homologs to the
apparent small operon that contains eryr-tpib-rpib were found both, as
expected, in the erythritol locus, but also elsewhere on the chromosome in the
same arrangement. to analyze the evolutionary history of these duplications
phylogenetic trees were constructed for the lala and tpib homologs . the two copies of the
lala gene in m. loti are most likely an example of
paralogs, as they still group within the same clade among other lala
homologs . the tpib genes
 in s. fredii are possible
examples of xenologs  <cit>  as the phylogenetic tree shows that the two versions of the
tpib gene in s. fredii are only distantly related, with
one homolog grouping within the expected clade that includes s. medicae
and s. meliloti and the second homolog 
showing monophyly with those found in a clade containing r.
leguminosarum sp., b. suis, etc. .
phylogeny of the l-arabitol catabolic gene lala is depicted.
mesorhizobium loti contains a copy of lala within
an independent suboperon like the other mesorhizobium species,
as well as a second lala homolog within the erythritol locus
. the branch corresponding to the
additional homolog within the erythritol locus is highlighted in red.
the tree was constructed using ml and bayesian analysis. support for
each node is expressed as a percentage based on posterior probabilities
 and bootstrap values . the branch lengths are
based on ml analysis and are proportional to the number of substitutions
per site.
sinorhizobium fredii contains a second suboperon that
appears homologous to the eryr-tpib-rpib suboperon in the
erythritol locus . the tpib amino
acid sequence was used as a representative of this suboperon to
construct a phylogenetic tree. the branch corresponding to the tpib
encoded outside of the erythritol locus is highlighted in red. the tree
was constructed using ml and bayesian analysis. support for each node is
expressed as a percentage based on posterior probabilities  and bootstrap values . the branch lengths are based on ml
analysis and are proportional to the number of substitutions per
site.

discussion
a number of models that are not mutually exclusive have been proposed to account for
the formation and evolution of operons. two broad aspects need to be considered,
transfer of genes between organisms, as well as gathering and distributing genes
within a genome. there is strong support for horizontal gene transfer as a driving
force for evolution of gene clusters  <cit> . more recently, it has been shown that genes acquired by horizontal gene
transfer events appear to evolve more quickly than genes that have arisen by gene
duplication events  <cit> . within a genome the “piece-wise” model suggests that complex
operons can evolve through the independent clustering of smaller
“sub-operons” due to selection pressures for the optimization for
equimolarity and co-regulation of gene products  <cit> . finally it has been suggested that the final stages of operon building
can be the loss of “orfan” genes  <cit> .

the data presented here provide examples supporting these models of operon evolution.
the components of the polyol catabolic loci we have identified have been involved in
at least  <dig> horizontal gene transfers within the proteobacteria . in addition, components such as the transporter
eryefg have been moved from the r. leguminosarum clade of loci
into the m. ciceri bv. biserrulae polyol locus . the later species based
on its phylogenetic position and category of polyol locus 
would have been expected to contain the mtpa gene. the presence of possible
paralogs of lala  and the presence of
tpib xenologs  are also evidence
for duplication and horizontal transfer events. since s. fredii also
contains a homolog to tpia of s. meliloti , to our knowledge, this is the only example of an organism
containing three triose-phosphate isomerases .

a striking example of a horizontal gene transfer and genetic rearrangement is
exemplified by m. ciceri . it is likely that an exchange between m.
loti and a common ancestor of s. meliloti, s. medicae and s.
fredii ngr <dig> occurred. m. loti is located in the same clade as
the brucella and o. anthropi in the species tree . despite this, m. loti contains many of the
genes corresponding to the adonitol and l-arabitol type loci of other species that
cluster close to the base of the species tree such as bradyrhizobium spp.
. the presence of these factors in addition to
the chimeric composition of the m. loti locus leads us to hypothesise that
an ancestor of m. loti may have contained both an erythritol locus like
that of the brucella as well as a polyol type locus like that seen in the
bradyrhizobia, a. cryptum and v. eiseniae.

the lala, rbtb, rbtc suboperon appears to be the key component of the polyol
locus in the bradyrhizobium type loci . among the  <dig> loci identified, these three genes can be linked into a
suboperon, embedded within the main locus  or split among
two transcriptional units . as well, the gene module  eryr, tpib- rpib is
presumably found in all erythritol utilizing bacteria. the acquisition of this
module along with the lala, rbtb and rbtc suboperon may have
allowed for the evolution of the more complex s. meliloti type locus .

the absence of fuca in s. fredii ngr <dig> and m. loti
appears to be an example of the loss of an “orfan” gene event having
occurred. the gene is still present in s. meliloti however it has been
shown that it is not necessary for the catabolism of erythritol, adonitol, or
l-arabitol  <cit> . it is likely that it was lost during the divergence of m. loti
and s. fredii ngr <dig> from their common ancestors to s. meliloti.
if this is true, it may be reasonable to assume that fuca may eventually
also be lost from the s. meliloti erythritol locus.

in s. meliloti, erythritol uptake has been shown to be carried out by the
proteins encoded by mptabcde <cit> , whereas in r. leguminosarum growth using erythritol is
dependent upon the eryefg <cit> . although both transporters appear to carry out the same function, the
phylogenetic analysis clearly shows that they have distinct ancestors and may be
best classified as analogues rather than orthologues . in addition, it has been shown that mptabcde is also capable of
transporting adonitol and l-arabitol  <cit> . we note that these polyols appear to have stereo-chemical identity over
three carbons and that erya of s. meliloti can also use adonitol and
l-arabitol as substrates  <cit> . it is unknown whether erya from r. leguminosarum has the
ability to interact with these substrates.

the three distinct groups of loci we have identified probably correspond to the
metabolic potential of these regions to utilize polyols. the locus of s.
meliloti has been shown to contain the full complement of genes required to
confer growth on using both erythritol and adonitol and l-arabitol as sole carbon
sources  <cit> . given that s. fredii ngr <dig> and m. loti each contain
homologs to all of these genes, except for fuca which is not necessary for
the catabolism of any of the sugars  <cit> , it follows that these two loci may also be capable of catabolising all
three polyols. it has also been established that the b. abortus and r.
leguminosarum type loci are used for erythritol catabolism, and given the
annotation and degree of relatedness  of proteins belonging
to all species in the clade, it is not expected that these loci would be capable of
breaking down additional polyols  <cit> . this is supported by the fact that the introduction of the r.
leguminosarum cosmid containing the erythritol locus into s.
meliloti strains unable to utilize erythritol, adonitol, and l-arabitol
were unable to be complemented for growth on adonitol and l-arabitol  <cit> . it is however necessary to remember that some of identified loci are
only correlated with polyol utilization based on our analysis and that basic
biological function, such as the ability to utilize these polyols has not been
previously described.

with the advent of newer generations of sequencing technologies a greater number of
bacterial genomes will be sequenced. it is likely that more examples of
rearrangements of catabolic loci through bacterial lineages will be observed. since
the ability to catabolize erythritol is found in relatively few bacterial species,
operons that encode erythritol and other associated polyols may be ideal models to
observe operon evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we show that there are at least three distinct erythritol/polyol loci
arrangements. two distinct abc transporters can be found within these within these
loci and phylogenetic analysis suggests these should be considered analogs. finally
we provide evidence that suggest that these loci have been horizontally transferred
from the alpha-proteobacteria into both the beta and gamma-proteobacteria.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contribution
bag collected the data set, performed the analysis and contributed to writing of the
manuscript. gh provided advice and assistance with the analysis as well as
contributed to the writing of the manuscript. ijo provided advice for the analysis
and contributed to the writing of the manuscript. all authors read and approved the
final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1: figure s1
erya phylogenetic tree was constructed using ml and bayesian analysis.
support for each clade is expressed as a percentage  adjacent to the
nodes that supports the monophyly of various clades. the branch lengths
are based on ml analysis and are proportional to the number of
substitutions per site. this phylogenetic tree was used in the mirror
tree in figure  <dig> without branch lengths due to space
restrictions.

click here for file

 acknowledgments
this work was funded by nserc discovery grants to ijo and gh. bag was funded by
an nserc cgs-d. the authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewer’s
suggestions that greatly improved the manuscript.
