BACKGROUND
the process of mrna 3' end formation requires pre-mrna cleavage followed by polyadenylation. recent reports support the hypothesis that cleavage occurs during transcription and directly influences transcription termination in yeast and human cells  <cit> . mrna cleavage in mammals is thought to be controlled by two dominant sequence signals, the well defined polyadenylation signal  located 10– <dig> bases upstream of mrna cleavage site  and a less conserved u-rich sequence, called downstream sequence element  and located within the first  <dig> nucleotides downstream of the cs. protein complexes involved in cleavage and polyadenylation have been identified: the pas is bound by the cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor , while the dse recruits the cleavage stimulation factor  .

in mammals, the pas has been identified early on from its high degree of conservation  <cit>  and studies have shown that point mutations of the consensus sequence aauaaa decrease or abolish polyadenylation efficiency  <cit> . however, genome-wide analysis of pas clearly shows that some variants which are less efficient in vitro are functional in vivo  <cit> . the second important region, the dse, is less conserved in mammalian genes and no clear consensus signal has been defined  <cit> . tabaska and zhang suggested a consensus motif based on motif searches in ~ <dig> test sequences  <cit> . counting overrepresented words identified u-rich hexamers in genome-aligned fly ests  <cit> , but failed to identify a conserved dse motif in human <cit> . selex experiments reported binding of cstf to a small number of related sequences , while nmr studies suggested that a stretch of two adjacent uridines is crucial for cstf binding  <cit> .

the position of the cs was shown to be primarily defined by the distance between the pas and the dse, and to occur preferentially 5' of an adenine  <cit> . survey of unigene clusters show that the positions in the css of individual ests in a cluster tend to vary over a distance of 30– <dig> nucleotides  <cit> . this micro-variability in the cleavage position further suggests that the fixed anchors governing the cleavage process are the pas and dse and not the cs itself.

accurate characterization of 3' termination is particularly relevant for gene prediction programs. to define the 3'-ends of genes, the hmmgene program scans for the occurrence of the aauaaa hexanucleotide  while genscan  <cit>  applies a simplified model of the mrna cleavage site that uses an approximate scoring for the pas irrespective of the presence of a dse. thus, these programs are prone to false positives and ignore mrna css that do not match this motif. attempts to take into account other sequence features of the cs region in human sequences used different computational approaches. in a program called poladq, tabaska and zhang  <cit>  included the dse motif using a quadratic discriminant function. legendre and gautheret  <cit>  designed a weight matrix based on the nucleotide composition in the  <dig> bases following the pas. both programs search the genomic sequence for the occurrence of a pas, and then scan the putative positives for further signals. recent reports have successfully demonstrated the applicability of hidden markov models  to the problem in s. cerevisiae  <cit>  or c. elegans  <cit> .

here, we take advantage of the systematic mapping of the raw data from >1'500' <dig> human 3'ests  <cit>  and of >30' <dig> drosophila 3'ests to their respective genomes to model and compare pas and dse signals in both species using a hmm framework. this study establishes that the main features of mrna cleavage regions are clearly conserved between both species, with a highly conserved pas signal and the presence of a dse in both species. model assessment showed that including the dse in hmms significantly improves the accuracy of cs predictions.

RESULTS
3'utr length
we compared the length of human and drosophila 3'-utrs defined as the distance between the stop codon and the cs . to avoid ambiguities, only sites from genes with a unique stop codon, documented by at least one entry in refseq were included. both length distributions are good exponentials with characteristic lengths of  <dig> bases in human and  <dig> bases in drosophila.

polyadenylation signal variants
we investigated the frequencies of pas variants reported in  <cit> , in the  <dig> bp upstream of cs documented by 3' tags. tags with matches to multiple variants were attributed to the most common variant, so that each tag counted only once.  <dig> % of human and  <dig> % of drosophila sequences had the main pas variant aauaaa, while 16%  had the second motif auuaaa. less common motifs were present within both species, but interestingly 15% of human bona fide cleavage sites  had none of the previously reported pas motifs . this suggests that cleavage can be induced by yet unknown signals and/or mechanisms. however, we were unable to find such signals in this dataset.

compositional bias near mrna css
to examine the nucleotide composition of all polyadenylation regions, we considered for each site the  <dig> bases consisting of the  <dig> bases upstream of the cs followed by  <dig> bases from the genomic sequence. collected tags are then aligned on the position of mrna cleavage occurring between position  <dig> and  <dig>  following reports showing that mrna cleavage occurs preferentially 5' of an a  <cit> . if the nucleotides immediately 5' of the mrna cs are one or several a's, the mapping procedure causes an unavoidable ambiguity in the real position of the cleavage. this is reflected by the absence of a's at position  <dig> and the amplification of the sharp peak in position  <dig>  nevertheless, simulations show that the human cleavage regions  have significantly higher a frequency at position  <dig>  than random sequence with identical nucleotide composition .

other noticeable features include an a-rich region 15– <dig> bases upstream of the cs , and a u-rich region 10– <dig> bases downstream of the cs . the a-rich region upstream of the cs is followed by a narrower  u-rich peak, then a small a-rich region, and possibly another u-rich peak immediately before the mrna cs. an increase in gs is visible between  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides after the cleavage site, partly overlapping with the broad u-rich peak.

interestingly, all features described above are conserved in drosophila . the a frequency at position  <dig> reaches 90%, which is noticeably higher than in human regions. we computed the average a frequency in the  <dig> bases encompassing mrna cs. in human the a frequency in this region is  <dig> %, which is close to the average sequence composition of the polyadenylation regions. drosophila sequences show a local increase to  <dig> % a's near the cs compared to a  <dig> % average a content. the coarse compositional bias in the mrna cleavage region is clearly conserved between both species, pointing to a functional conservation of mrna cleavage and possibly a participation of several observed regions in the cleavage process.

sequence motifs near cleavage sites
using unsupervised motif searches, we investigated whether specific sequence motifs would further characterize the neighborhood of the cs. for humans  3'utr tags were searched in groups of  <dig>  and two dominant signals were identified. figure 3a shows the positional bias of both signals and this information was incorporated in our definitions of the weight matrices .

aauaaa was unambiguously found as the dominant signal in both species, followed by weaker u-rich signals downstream of the cs. no other motifs occurred systematically. the human polyadenylation signal  shows a very strong aauaaa consensus, with a substitution of a to u at position  <dig> occurring in ~20% of the cases, consistent with observed frequency of the auuaaa variants . the drosophila pas  is remarkably similar , and the differences reflect the slight variations in proportion of different variants shown in table  <dig>  although the significance of the second motif  was marginal, its consistency across independent sets and positional bias suggested that we identified a putative human dse . notice that this dse seems related to that identified by tabaska & zhang  <cit> , albeit shorter by  <dig> nucleotides. information content  did not support this extension in our dataset. scanning by information content  indicated that a longer descriptor did not improve performance in our dataset. the second motif identified in drosophila is also u-rich, and similarly positioned relative to mrna cs as the human dse . however, the profile is clearly different . based on its sequence and nucleotide composition, we refer to this motif as the drosophila dse.

hmm model for polyadenylation sites
to establish whether the dse element would help to predict cleavage sites, we constructed a hmm model for the detection of polyadenylation sites in genomic sequences . the model uses the two matrices, linked by a spacer with gaussian length distribution of mean  <dig> bases and standard deviation   <dig> in human and drosophila. these parameters are close to those estimated from figure  <dig> and showed optimal behavior in the predictions. we investigated several other sequence features, such as dinucleotide frequencies at the cs, extended pas and dse matrices, or different background emission probabilities in each background region, including first order dinucleotide background models. with the exception of the second matrix, we found no evidence that any of these additions would improve polyadenylation site prediction using our evaluation procedures . we therefore restricted further study to the one  versus two matrix  model .

model parameters were optimized and performances were evaluated using two different approaches, one in which we compared optimal scores  for real polyadenylation sites-containing sequences with scores obtained from randomized sequences, and the other in which we evaluated the performance of the model in predicting the positions of documented polyadenylation sites.

specificity assessment by comparison to randomized sequences
our aim was to confirm that the identified dse elements improved prediction of mrna cleavage sites. to this end, the hmm models shown in figure 4a and 4b were optimized on training sequences consisting of  <dig> bases downstream of unique stop codons in humans . receiver operating characteristics  analysis was used to compare predictions from the various models . in both human and drosophila, the models including both pas and dse weight matrices were clearly more specific than the single weight matrix model. the erpin program  <cit>  achieved optimal predictions using the  <dig> bp downstream of the pas, which do not systematically include the dse according to our distance estimates. the comparison of our model to erpin  <dig> , using our test sets and following the protocol described by the authors  <cit>  confirms the higher specificity of our model.

furthermore, to assess the specificity of the dse weight matrices, we substituted the dse matrix with u-rich profiles. the dse matrix was replaced with a profile of the whole u-rich region . the use of this 25-nt weight matrix decreases the specificity of polyadenylation site prediction in both human and drosophila 3'utrs . both dse profiles include specific positions that have strong preferences for non-u  nucleotides . to assess whether these significantly contributed to the dse specificity, positions  <dig> and  <dig> in the human dse matrix and position  <dig> in drosophila dse were replaced with background nucleotide frequency. each of these small changes of the dse profiles resulted in a systematic decrease in specificity .

prediction of 3' mrna termination
since mrna cleavage is thought to occur at the 5'-most site having a sufficiently strong cleavage signal  <cit> , we designed a prediction paradigm that mimics the biological cleavage process. after model optimization , we computed the posterior label probability  of the pas for each nucleotide in each human test sequence. to measure the sensitivity and specificity of the predictions, a range of thresholds in plp was chosen. for each fixed threshold and each sequence, we checked if the first position after the stop codon with a plp above the threshold matches a known polyadenylation site. more precisely, the prediction was considered a true positive  if its position occurred at most  <dig> bases upstream of the 5' end of a documented site . predictions falling outside were considered false positives  and sequences having no prediction exceeding the threshold were counted as false negatives . as our specificity and sensitivity assessment relies on the assumption that all existing mrna cleavage sites have been documented, we applied this procedure only to human 3'utrs. for drosophila, the coverage of 3p tags is unlikely to be complete.

the sensitivity and specificity analysis shows that incorporation of the dse improves the prediction quality for all plp thresholds tested . the increase in specificity due to the dse is between  <dig> and 5%, and is relatively uniform as a function of sensitivity although it slightly increases at higher sensitivity . for human 3'utrs of  <dig> bases, we achieved a specificity of 77% when setting the sensitivity to 50% . legendre and gautheret  <cit>  expressed their results by comparing the predictions on  <dig> bp long 3'utrs to a series of control sets, such as shuffled 3'utrs and intron sequences. for a sensitivity of 55%, they reported a specificity of  <dig> to 84% for their program depending on the control set, and  <dig> to 82% for the program of tabaska and zhang . to avoid variation due to selection of the control set, we quantified our predictions by comparing them to experimentally documented polyadenylation sites. using this strategy, we achieved specificity and sensitivity values comparable to those reported by legendre and gautheret, even though we scanned sequences that were three times longer.

discussion
sequence characteristics around the mrna cleavage site
to investigate polyadenylation signals we used an exhaustive and unbiased database of css based on systematic mapping of all expressed sequences  to genomes. applying the same protocol to human and fly allowed pointing out strong similarities in the organization of their mrna cleavage site regions. based on these datasets, we identified pas and dse in both species, and confirmed the specificity and relevance of these signals for mrna cleavage site prediction.

we defined as trustable css all genome-aligned est reads containing a polya sequence not present on the genome. thus, our data differed from those assembled by  <cit>  or  <cit>  in two main aspects. first, we did not require the cs ests to overlap with a refseq, which allows us to take into account distant polyadenylation sites that might not be covered by mrna sequences in refseq, which are very often incomplete at their 3' ends. similarly, in  <cit> , the candidate est tags were derived from unigene clusters, which might also counterselect distant downstream polyadenylation sites. secondly cs were not selected for the presence of well-described pas variants. in fact, scanning our css for the  <dig> common pas variants  <cit>  confirmed most of them and revealed very similar distributions in both species. the relative frequency of pas motifs might reflect the efficacy of their recognition by the cspf, and suggests that the specificity of this enzyme is well conserved between the two species. interestingly, 15% of human mrna cleavage sites  do not have any of the previously described pas motifs. absence of over-represented signals in these suggests that cleavage might happen via an alternative mechanism. compared to the numbers reported by beaudoing at al  <cit> , and tian et al  <cit> , we observe a lower frequency of all known polyadenylation variants, and a higher proportion of sequences without any known variant. we performed additional tests that ruled out a widespread contamination of our dataset with false priming sequences. rather, detailed analysis suggests that the proportion of the main pas variants increases with the number of tags documenting a pas, so that the lower numbers that we observe are due to the more complete coverage of our dataset. consistently with what was found in  <cit> , the fine structure of the features observed in the nucleotide profiles in human mrna cs region is largely conserved in drosophila, while studies of css in c. elegans  <cit>  and s. cerevisiae  showed different profiles. recent phylogenetic studies confirm that arthropods are closer to chordates than to nematodes  <cit> . our observation is thus consistent with this finding, and may indicate that cs organization in human and drosophila melanogaster sequences evolved before separation of arthropods and chordates.

the similarities between human and drosophila mrna cs regions led us to search for finer sequence motifs. we consistently identified the well-known pas motif aauaaa and a weaker u-rich motif that we interpreted as the dse. our consensus sequence for the human dse  is u ucu u. tabaska and zhang identified a similar dse using a much smaller dataset and a motif-search tool  searching for two copies per fragment, while we required only one occurrence per sequence. a recent detailed study focusing on motifs involved in alternative polyadenylation  <cit>  reports  <dig> conserved ug-rich motifs in the dse regions, one of them  is very similar to the motif we found in all polyadenylation site tags. dse weight matrices derived from human 3utrs with one of the four main pas variants  are extremely similar, although they slightly more polarized in the sequences lacking the aauaaa variant. our refined dse motif, a u-rich motif with conserved g residues, confirms the presence of a dse in drosophila, as suggested earlier in word-searches using a smaller set of ests  <cit> . its similarity with the human dse is consistent with observations that crucial residues for rna binding in c-terminus of the rna-binding domain of cstf- <dig> are conservatively substituted in drosophila  <cit> . it is possible that the lower information content of the dse as compared to the pas reflects true biological variability of dse, important for the control of alternative polyadenylation. variability in dse motifs might influence this process as it was postulated that the presence of sub-optimal dse sequences causes a differential choice of polyadenylation sites depending on the expression level of cstf protein  <cit> . we investigated the relationship between the pas and dse motifs, but we do not see significant difference between the dse wms derived from sequences with different pas variants . however, the dse motifs could be tissue-specific. different consensus sequences might be bound by tissue-specific isoforms of cstf-rna binding subunits  <cit>  or competitor proteins  <cit> .

prediction of 3' mrna termination
we used the derived pas and dse motifs to build a probabilistic model of human and drosophila mrna css. previously constructed tools for human cs prediction used a quadratic discriminant function  <cit>  or were based on rna secondary structure  <cit> . both tools require the presence of the main aauaaa or auuaaa variants of the polyadenylation motif. we chose the hmm framework, which makes our approach suitable for easy incorporation in gene prediction programs <cit> . similar approaches have been used for prediction of mrna cleavage in yeast  <cit>  and c. elegans <cit> , with more complex models of the polyadenylation region including  <dig> to  <dig> distinct subsequent signal regions interspersed with higher order background models. our model consists of the pas and dse weight matrices chained together by a gaussian zero-th order background spacer reflecting the distance between the  <dig> motifs . we have verified that higher order background models did not change the predictions significantly. in both human and drosophila, inclusion of dse elements in hmms increased the accuracy of the model predictions. however, our model does not include a signal for the cs itself. these putative signals cover only one or two bases, and have variable locations with respect to both pas and dse . using cs signals did not improve our predictions. we assessed the performance of the model in human sequences using documented mrna cleavage sites and our model performed better in mrna cs recognition than previously reported tools . in test sequences containing 3' <dig> bp downstream of the translation stop codon, we achieved a specificity of 70% for a sensitivity of 80%. notice that we did not require the presence of the main variants of the pas. however, as this matrix is more informative than the dse, plp scores are dominated by the pas and sites strongly differing from the consensus will tend to be missed . so even though our prediction specificity is high, differentially weighting the pas and dse might lead to further improvements. in fact, the reported specificity might be underestimated, since our evaluation procedure assumed that all existing polyadenylation sites are documented with 3' tags. this probably results in our overestimation of false positives. one extension to improve our current model would be to exploit comparative genomics to define more precise dse weight matrices, which should be possible for both mammals and insects.

CONCLUSIONS
we analyzed the sequence region encompassing mrna cleavage site in human and drosophila ests, derived pas and dse motifs for both species and proved their specificity. we integrated these motifs into a hmm which predicts mrna cleavage and polyadenylation sites with higher specificity than previously published tools.

moreover, we show that the sequence regions involved in polyadenylation are highly conserved between these two species. our study underlines the value of using the primary sequence data derived from est projects, as well as genome sequences, for the large-scale documentation and analysis of polyadenylation sites. with the constantly increasing number of available ests, future studies might uncover sequence signals that control tissue specific regulation of alternative polyadenylation.

