BACKGROUND
as the transcriptional landscapes of eukaryotic genomes are defined, it appears that overall transcription is much more prevalent than previously thought, perhaps by as much as 10-fold greater than that needed to generate mrnas encoding the majority of protein coding genes  <cit> . abundant noncoding rnas, both short and long, have been identified but for the most part their functional significance remains unknown. among recently discovered small rnas, the best characterized thus far are micrornas   <cit> . direct cloning strategies and bioinformatic predictions based on the presence of conserved hairpin structures and sequences have suggested that animal genomes encode hundreds, perhaps thousands, of mirnas  <cit> . cell movement, specification, and development are regulated, in part, by mirnas, consistent with the fact that expression of these rnas is highly regulated in a tissue and time-specific manner. mirnas originate from rna polymerase ii transcripts  <cit>  requiring processing by the rnase iii-like enzyme, drosha before nuclear export. from the large primary transcripts, drosha releases hairpins that are ~ <dig> nucleotides long with extensive pairing of approximately  <dig> base pairs in the stem  <cit> . hairpin precursors are exported from the nucleus in a ran-gtp dependent manner using exportin  <dig>  <cit> . in the cytoplasm, mirna precursors are further processed by a second rnase iii-like enzyme, dicer, releasing mature mirna duplexes of ~ <dig> nucleotides  <cit> . typically, only one strand of the duplex pairs with a target mrna as part of a larger dynamic ribonucleoprotein complex referred to as the rna induced silencing complex . argonuate proteins are key components of riscs and are thought to play an important role in whether the target mrna is subject to translational repression or cleavage followed by degradation  <cit> .

mirnas usually pair with sequence elements  within the 3' utr of their target mrnas but there have been limited examples of pairing in the 5' utr  <cit> . since mirnas usually pair with incomplete complementarity to their targets, bioinformatic approaches to identify targets are limited and functional analysis is required to prove mrna:mirna interactions. because of this challenge, only a small number of targets have been experimentally proven. further, since each mirna can target multiple mrnas and a single mrna can be targeted by multiple mirnas, significant work remains to characterize the full range of mirna function  <cit> .

zebrafish have proven to be a valuable model system to investigate mirna function and characterize mirna:mrna interactions. since the creation of active mirnas requires cleavage by dicer, zygotic dicer mutants and maternal zygotic dicer mutants have helped define the role of mirnas during development  <cit> . zygotic dicer null mutants live approximately  <dig> days, because there is sufficient maternal dicer mrna deposited into the oocyte  <cit> . maternal zygotic dicer mutants exhibit more severe developmental defects and die after only  <dig> days  <cit> . thus, the regulation of mirna expression is critical for early zebrafish development. for example, mir- <dig> is required for proper muscle formation, mir- <dig> is needed for pancreatic islet development, and the large mir- <dig> family is needed for deadenylation and clearance of maternal mrnas at the midblastula transition  <cit> .

external fertilization, fast development, and ease of genetic manipulation make zebrafish a powerful system to study vertebrate development and analyze mirnas. to facilitate this work, microarrays and in situ hybridization experiments have provided a wealth of knowledge regarding temporal and spatial expression of mirnas during zebrafish development  <cit> . small rna cloning coupled with bioinformatic prediction have enabled the identification of many zebrafish mirnas but since genome sequencing and annotation is not yet complete, the exact number of mirnas remains to be determined. here, we have utilized existing databases and newly available genomic sequence information to identify and catalog all known and predicted zebrafish mirnas.

RESULTS
zebrafish mirnas and genomic locations
currently, the microrna registry lists  <dig> mirnas in the zebrafish genome  <cit> . inclusion in the registry implies experimental validation through direct sequencing, northern blots, or microarray approaches. as the zebrafish genome is not fully sequenced and annotated, it is likely that the sum total of zebrafish mirnas will be larger than currently contained within the mirna registry. we took the approach to use sequence conservation across species and prediction algorithms to identify additional zebrafish mirnas. such algorithms have been applied to the human, c. elegans, and pufferfish genomes to identify mirnas by searching for conserved hairpin structures of 60– <dig> nucleotides containing no branches with only a few mismatches or bulges  <cit> . using mirscan, the sanger microrna registry, and rnafold, we analyzed the zebrafish genome and identified  <dig> new zebrafish mirnas . first, mature mirna sequences from mouse and human were compared to the zebrafish genome using blast to identify conserved sequences. the criteria for inclusion required perfect seed sequences and less than 3– <dig> mismatches in the 3' ends. next, candidate zebrafish mirnas were examined for their genomic position to determine whether they resided in conserved genes or transcripts compared to mouse and human. sequences adjacent to candidate mirnas were then subjected to rnafold to identify the presence of conserved hairpin structures. hairpin structures and sequences were then compared across human, mouse, and zebrafish using mirscan and clustal w to confirm the presence of conserved sequences resembling mirnas. such analyses resulted in the identification of  <dig> new potential mirnas bringing the total to  <dig> when combined with previously documented mirnas and including those cases where both strands are utilized. we also compared the new predicted mirnas to the takfugu rubripes  genome and found that  <dig> of the new mirnas were conserved between the two genomes. since the fugu genome is considerably smaller than the zebrafish genome and may lack a number of elements including noncoding rnas, we focused more extensively on sequence conservation across the zebrafish, human, and mouse genomes.

conserved mouse mirna sequences within the microrna registry were used to conduct blast searches of the existing zebrafish and fugu genomes. candidate sequences  were further analyzed using mfold and mirscan. for those sequences that matched mirnas from other vertebrate species, the same numbering system was applied resulting in the mirnas listed above. mirnas with an sterisk indicate that both strands of the dsrna precursor are packaged into rna induced silencing complexes . 

next, we determined the chromosomal location of all mirna genes in zebrafish. figure  <dig> shows the location of mirnas across the  <dig> zebrafish chromosomes. some chromosomes are relative mirna deserts  whereas others encode large numbers of mirnas . strikingly, the mir- <dig> family contains two large clusters of  <dig> and  <dig> genes on chromosome  <dig> . such large copy numbers are consistent with the function of the mir- <dig> family to target and degrade the wide variety and number of maternally deposited mrnas coincident with zygotic transcription at the midblastula transition  <cit> . mirna genes that could not yet be mapped were listed by sequencing scaffold numbers rather than chromosomal assignment and are included in additional file  <dig>  this table also contains current information for those mirnas whose temporal and spatial expression patterns have been reported as well as a listing of validated mrna targets.

based on chromosomal location and additional genomic analysis, we were able to tabulate those mirnas that are encoded as distinct transcripts versus those that are encoded within the introns or exons of other genes . in mammals, approximately 50% of mirnas are encoded within the introns of protein coding genes whereas the remainder are independently synthesized as either mono- or poly-cistronic noncoding transcripts  <cit> . for zebrafish, most mirnas  are found in intergenic regions while only 12% exist within the introns of other genes . we defined introns and exons only in the context of protein coding genes which may account for part of the differences between reported mammalian and zebrafish percentages. some mirnas are encoded within "host" genes that are split into exons and introns and therefore subject to splicing but we elected to refer to these mirnas as independent transcripts since no proteins are apparently encoded in the host gene . as more genes are annotated within the zebrafish genome, some of the mirnas we defined as intergenic may in fact reside within other rna polymerase ii transcribed genes.

the location of zebrafish mirnas was analyzed to determine whether individual mirnas are encoded within exons, introns, or as independent intergenic transcripts. polycistronic transcripts indicates that two or more mirnas are located within  <dig> kb of one another.

zebrafish mirna transcriptional units
since mirnas can originate from either mono- or poly-cistronic transcripts, we next identified zebrafish mirnas that are closely linked in the genome and attempted to classify mirnas as part of polycistronic transcripts based on position and expression analysis  <cit> . we decided to include mirnas as part of polycistronic transcripts if the mature sequences are within  <dig> kb and our array data indicated similar or identical expression patterns. the decision to use  <dig> kb as a distance between mirnas was arbitrary and is almost certainly an underestimate. nevertheless, as shown in table  <dig>  a large number  of zebrafish mirnas were found to reside within  <dig> kb of another mirna suggesting that zebrafish mirnas are extensively encoded within polycistronic transcripts. recent analysis of mirna target specificity determinants suggested that mrnas containing multiple mres that can be targeted by co-expressed mirnas increases the likelihood of targeting  <cit> . thus, knowing which mirnas are transcribed as part of polycistronic transcripts will help to identify potential targets for a given mirna.

the identity of individual mirnas that reside within  <dig> kb of one another is shown along with chromosomal assignment. predicted polycistronic transcripts were compared to known expression data to determine if the mirnas had similar expression profiles.

mirna families
the seed region is defined as nucleotides 2– <dig> from the 5' end of the mirna and is a key determinant in pairing with target mrnas  <cit> . mirnas can be grouped based on sequence identity within the seed region with the prediction that specific mrnas can be targeted by multiple mirnas provided these mirnas contain identical seed sequences even if other downstream nucleotides vary. we therefore examined zebrafish mirnas and placed those with identical seed sequences in the same family . as above, the best example of this is the mir- <dig> family which is the most abundant zebrafish mirna discovered thus far. there are  <dig> members of the family with over  <dig> copies apparently transcribed as part of  <dig> different rnas. family members bind to a common sequence found in the 3' utr of maternal transcripts  <cit> .

mirna with identical seed sequences were grouped into distinct families are shown.

discussion
as more and more mirnas are identified, it has become ever more apparent that understanding global gene regulation requires identifying the targets of every mirna and the functional consequences of such targeting. microarrays have been used extensively to determine global mirna expression patterns. complementing such analyses with in situ localization of mirnas greatly facilitates testing of candidate target genes during zebrafish development  <cit> . because of imperfect mirna:mrna pairing, computer algorithms to identify specific mirna targets typically produce lists of several hundred candidate genes. such lengthy lists can be partially refined by integrating spatial and temporal expression data for both mirnas and their targets. further, because many mirnas share identical seed sequences , it is important to identify all mirnas that may target a given mrna. here, we have analyzed the existing zebrafish genome to expand the list of mirnas to  <dig>  we determined the chromosomal location for each mirna and grouped them into seed sequence families. in addition, we compiled existing expression data and listed validated mrna targets. together, additional file  <dig> provides an easy to access database that should prove valuable for those interested in understanding the role that mirnas play in regulating gene expression.

the ease with which gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments can be conducted in zebrafish makes it an attractive model system to study mirna function. for loss-of-function experiments, whether in zebrafish, cultured cells, or other model organisms, it is imperative that all members of a given family be effectively knocked down to generate consistent phenotypes. by examining the data in this paper and in additional file  <dig>  it is possible to quickly determine functional redundancy between one or more mirnas. such knowledge will help to design antisense morpholino oligonucleotides when entire mirna families need to be knocked down  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
based on sequence conservation, we identified  <dig> new zebrafish mirnas bringing the total number of mirnas encoded by the zebrafish genome to  <dig>  bearing in mind that the zebrafish genome is not completely sequenced and annotated, analysis of the existing data suggests that the majority of mirnas thus far evaluated are encoded as distinct, tissue specific transcripts with an even split between those contained as part of polycistronic transcripts versus those encoded as monocistronic transcripts.

