BACKGROUND
several fields of research in biology and genetics make use of molecular markers to address various questions relating to population biology, quantitative genetics, forensics, parentage analyses and conservation genetics, for example  <cit> . in this context, microsatellites, or simple sequence repeats  are commonly used, as they have a number of desirable features, such as ease of use, codominance and high mutation rates  <cit> . in population genetics and genomics, the polymorphism of microsatellite markers is thought to provide insight into the evolutionary events occurring within and between populations, in individual genomes  <cit> . the markers used are generally assumed to be representative in population genetics. however, this assumption of representativeness is particularly critical in several other fields, such as population genomics  <cit>  and genome mapping  <cit> , because such studies explicitly require large numbers of markers representative of the evolution of the entire genome.

information about the representativeness of markers is directly available for sequenced genomes. by contrast, the extent to which microsatellite loci may be considered independent, and the extent to which their relative proportions and distributions may be considered representative in unsequenced genomes remain largely unknown. this is largely because only small numbers of sequences tend to be available for such genomes, as they are generally obtained by strategies based on sanger sequencing, which is very time-consuming. the advent of new high-throughput sequencing technologies has made it possible to produce extensive sequence data for previously unsequenced genomes, providing new opportunities to assess the extent to which microsatellite sequences are representative. in particular, the coupling of multiple, simultaneous enrichments of microsatellite motif-enriched libraries  with high-throughput  <dig> pyrosequencing provides a theoretically efficient procedure for efficient microsatellite isolation. however, the question of the extent to which the sequences obtained in this way are representative of the genome sampled has never been addressed. in this study, we aimed to determine whether multiplex enrichment followed by pyrosequencing introduced any bias, in terms of i) the relative proportions of microsatellite motifs and ii) their distribution on and between the chromosomes of the organisms studied.

heterogeneity in the proportions and distributions of microsatellite may arise for several reasons, related to the combination of various evolutionary processes  <cit> . microsatellites are clearly not evenly distributed within genomes, because their frequencies in coding and non-coding sequences are different  <cit> . moreover, comparisons of frequency data for different genomes  strongly suggest that microsatellite distribution is not merely a reflection of the base composition of the genome, with the dna repair system instead playing an important role in determining the microsatellite distributions of different species  <cit> . variability in the evolutionary dynamics of microsatellite loci has been demonstrated in eukaryotes  <cit> . recombination rate plays an even more important role. recombination maintains diversity against purifying selection involving both linkage disequilibrium and homogenization, but this process also reorganizes the diversity of bivalent chromosomes. recombination strongly influences both the polymorphism and distribution of microsatellite loci  <cit> . finally, genome duplication is recognized as one of the most important driving forces in genome evolution  <cit> . evolutionary events of this type create paralogous sequences that may later be reshuffled in the diploidization process  <cit> , greatly modifying the structure of the genome  <cit>  and therefore also the distribution of microsatellite sequences  <cit> . this diversity of mechanisms and their combination produce different proportions and distributions of microsatellite motifs within the genome that may be unique to the genome concerned.

we addressed the key question relating to whether the pyrosequencing of multiplex-enhanced libraries raises any representativeness issues of general concern.

we decided to tackle this question by studying the complete published genomes of model organisms with highly heterogeneous genomes, potentially resulting in distortion of the relative proportions of microsatellite motifs and increasing the extent to which certain areas of the genome are likely to be under- or overrepresented when pyrosequencing multiplex-enriched libraries. the honey bee, apis mellifera linnaeus,  <dig> , is a good candidate organism for studies of heterogeneous microsatellite distributions within the genome. this species has  <dig> chromosomes for a total genome size of  <dig> mb and has a particularly high recombination rate . however, despite the relative uniformity of the rate of recombination over a large scale, the genome is nonetheless punctuated by numerous recombination hotspots. this feature is of particular interest in our framework, as at least some ssrs are considered to act as recombination hotspots  <cit> . the observed positive correlation between the occurrence of microsatellite loci and recombination rate shapes the distribution of microsatellites within the honey bee genome, with these markers tended to be found within recombination hotspots  <cit> , resulting in a highly heterogeneous distribution of microsatellites on the chromosomes .

the zebrafish, danio rerio  , was also selected as a model organism for this study. it has an estimated haploid size of  <dig>  gb and the telomeric and centromeric chromosome regions have been shown to be rich in long arrays of various mono-, di-, tri-, tetra-and hexanucleotide motifs in telesostean fishes  <cit> . however, it remains difficult to assess the representativeness of microsatellites in telomeric and centromeric regions with traditional isolation techniques  <cit> . an analysis of the distribution of microsatellites in the published genome sequence of the zebrafish, as detailed in the additional file  <dig>  provided information consistent with published findings, with a heterogeneous distribution of microsatellite loci such that these loci tend to concentrated in the telomeric regions.

in silico analyses of the assembled genome sequences of the two model organisms studied showed that the different dynamics of genome evolution in these two species translated into differences in the heterogeneity of microsatellite distribution, through different mechanisms. these published sequences provide a useful framework for assessing the representativeness of the microsatellite sequences obtained by the pyrosequencing of multiplex-enriched libraries. for comparisons between the in silico reference sequences and pyrosequencing data, we generated enriched libraries based on the hybridization of biotinylated probes -- a procedure widely used in microsatellite development  <cit>  -- multiplexing various sets of hybridization probes selected after a comparative analyses of the many metazoan genomes available . we then constructed libraries from these enriched subsets of total dna and sequenced them with the  <dig> titanium pyrosequencing reagents . we assessed the extent to which enriched libraries were representative by comparing simulated and observed indicators: distribution on the chromosomes, proportion and abundance of microsatellite motifs and the length of the sequences obtained.

RESULTS
isolation and pyrosequencing of microsatellite loci
three libraries enriched with two, five and eight probes were constructed for a. mellifera and d. rerio. the sequences obtained for each library are provided in additional file  <dig>  the number of sequences obtained is summarized in table  <dig> and was smaller than expected on the basis of the manufacturer's specifications  for all libraries, particularly for d. rerio. the underlying cause of this discrepancy may have been specific to this organism or the number of biotinylated beads may occasionally have been misestimated during preparation of the  <dig> library. sequencing artifacts would be observed for both species, whereas problems associated with one of the three enrichment protocols  would be reflected in the corresponding libraries, regardless of the organism considered.

for all libraries, 65% to 76% of the sequences obtained were within the size range selected for further analysis . the percentage of these sequences with a microsatellite motif was between 69% and 85%, depending to the species and the probe set used . enrichment was less efficient for a. mellifera than for d. rerio . motif enrichment greatly increased the total number of sequences containing microsatellites over that obtained with a protocol not including enrichment . above all, motif enrichment provided many more reads for these loci, making it possible to detect the polymorphism in flanking regions of particular interest for primer design  <cit> . the bioinformatics pipeline qdd  <cit>  was used to filter for redundancy and to check for multiple copies, resulting in a final set of sequences for which we were able to design primers. the higher redundancy observed in a. mellifera is not surprising, because the genome of this species is only one seventh the size of that of d. rerio, so random high-throughput sampling of the enriched libraries is more rapidly saturated. this feature may have affected the number of sequences usable for primer design, but the most striking difference between a. mellifera and d. rerio was the high proportion  of sequences in a. mellifera discarded by filtering. this filtering was based on the selection of a percentage of similarity for use as a threshold for homology . for d. rerio, only 20% to 25% of the sequences were discarded. this difference may reflect a signature of transposition, recombination and/or duplication events in a. mellifera  <cit> . this procedure for sequence filtering opens up new possibilities for the optimization of primer design. single copy-specific primers minimize the number of null alleles and multiple pcr products  <cit> . finally, for the two-, five- and eight-probes libraries, we obtained between 138/166/ <dig> loci in a. mellifera and 283/382/ <dig> loci in d. rerio for which primers were successfully designed . we deliberately chose to use stringent parameters for primer design , as we considered efficiency to be more important in time-consuming laboratory work , but other parameter values in the quantity/quality trade-off for primers would be as valid as those used here, and could easily be implemented in the qdd pipeline. however, we used this set of parameters in the application of this methodology to the isolation of microsatellites as it led to the rapid and efficient development of  <dig> microsatellite loci in zingel asper   .

representativeness of the genome features as revealed by  <dig> pyrosequencing
the analysis in silico of the reference genomes digested with rsai is detailed in additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig>  however, it is useful to bear in mind the general tendencies of the reference genome. the a. mellifera and d. rerio genomes are not structured in the same way. the a. mellifera genome has one microsatellite motif  overrepresented with respect to theoretical homogeneous relative proportions, and d. rerio has two such motifs . the chromosomes of a. mellifera have many stochastic high densities of microsatellites and an unbalanced distribution of loci in one arm for most chromosomes . by contrast, the d. rerio genome, after digestion with rsai, was found to contain an excess of microsatellites in the telomeric regions of the chromosomes .

we assessed the representativeness of the sequences obtained from the multiplex-enriched libraries, using the distribution features of enriched fragments from the eight-probe multiplex-enriched libraries for both a. mellifera and d. rerio. we evaluated the extent to which these distributions matched the corresponding assembled reference genomes, to detect deviations in the enriched libraries. the variables used in this analysis were: i, the different chromosomes; j, the regions of each chromosome; k, the length of the sequences obtained and l, the motifs . reference distributions of these parameters were obtained by in silico digestion of the two published reference genomes with rsai . the results obtained for each of the above variables in the eight-probe context are described below.

location on the various chromosomes
an analysis of the location of the motifs on the various chromosomes indicates whether certain chromosomes are favored over other in enrichment and pyrosequencing methods. for d. rerio, we observed no significant deviation from the theoretical expected distribution of microsatellites for  <dig> of the  <dig> chromosomes . three of the five chromosomes displaying significant discrepancies  were overrepresented with respect to the number of microsatellites found in the  <dig> sequences, whereas the other two  were underrepresented . the situation was very different for a. mellifera, for which no significant bias in the experimental results was observed for only four of the  <dig> chromosomes . for the  <dig> chromosomes for which a significant difference from the expected distribution was observed, seven  were overrepresented and five  were underrepresented .

the regions of each chromosome
the two genomic reference models  displayed different distributions of microsatellites between the  <dig> regions of each chromosome, with each region defined as 10% of the chromosome length . in d. rerio, the frequency of microsatellites was much higher in the telomeric regions of the chromosomes than elsewhere, whereas, in a. mellifera, microsatellite frequency was generally highest in region  <dig>  but with differences between the chromosomes . the  <dig> data distribution fit the reference chromosome regions better for d. rerio, for which seven regions  were correctly represented . the other three regions were regions  <dig> and  <dig>  which were overrepresented, and region  <dig>  which was underrepresented. for a. mellifera, four regions  were correctly represented by the experimental data , three were overrepresented  and three were underrepresented .

sequence length distribution
the distribution of sequences lengths deviated significantly from the expected reference proportions for both the biological models studied , with overrepresentation of sequences between  <dig> and  <dig> bp in size  and an underrepresentation of other lengths . this pattern probably resulted from a problem with the  <dig> pyrosequencing process for this run.

relative abundance of the eight selected microsatellite motifs
the reference relative proportions of motifs were generally correctly estimated from  <dig> data for d. rerio. however, marginal significant deviations were observed for the ac motif, which was overrepresented, and the ag motif, which was underrepresented . for a. mellifera, the relative proportions of only four of the eight selected motifs were correctly estimated . two motifs  were overrepresented and the two dinucleotide motifs  were underrepresented.

thus, the results obtained for d. rerio were more representative than those for a. mellifera . sequence length distribution displayed a similar bias in the two species, and the other features identified highlighted only occasional deviations related to the organism studied, with no other bias linked to the methodology itself detected.

is the multiplexing of probes a suitable strategy and are there biases into the enriched libraries obtained?
multiplexing, with the simultaneous use of up to eight probes in the enrichment process, overcomes the problems of probe selection in the absence of knowledge about the genome. however, competition between probes is a potential problem that may arise with this approach. the nested design used here for the two-, five- and eight-probe enriched libraries made it possible to test whether the addition of probes led to particular deviations in motif distribution.

no adverse effects of competition were consistently detected in the motif-enriched libraries. multiplexing strategies based on eight motifs may therefore be a useful surrogate method for the evaluation of microsatellite diversity in unknown genomes. the deviations in the proportions of the ac and ag motifs were of only marginal significance and differed between the enriched libraries, varying with the number of probes: from over- to underrepresentation with increasing number of probes for ag and from non-significant to underrepresentation for ac. nevertheless, these shifts were observed only in a. mellifera, and may be accounted for by the highly heterogeneous nature of the genome of this species, as repeatedly demonstrated in previous studies, and by the higher frequency of these motifs than of the others studied, increasing the sensitivity of detection for statistically significant deviations.

finally, we assessed the combined deviations of all four variables tested , by studying the distribution of the χ <dig> statistic . this approach made it possible to assess the deviations of  <dig> data distributions from the theoretical genome distribution for the two-, five-, and eight-probe enriched libraries . for example, for the chromosome × chromosome region interaction, χ <dig> distributions did not differ significantly between the two-probe and five-probe enriched libraries, for either of the organisms considered . however, the distribution obtained for eight-probe enrichment was significantly different from those for two- and five-probe enrichment, regardless of the genome considered , although this difference became non-significant for an α-value =  <dig>  before multiple testing . moreover, for d. rerio,  <dig> / <dig> / <dig> % of the χ <dig> values  was below the theoretical limiting value χ <dig> . this was not the case for a. mellifera, for which only  <dig> / <dig> / <dig> % of the χ <dig> values  was below the  <dig>  threshold. the homogenization involved in this procedure highlighted the significantly lower level of representativeness of a. mellifera libraries than of d. rerio libraries, regardless of the number of probes used. the difficulties experienced in correctly representing the a. mellifera genome resulted from the uneven distribution of microsatellites over the chromosomes and between different regions of the chromosomes, as shown by the large variance of the distribution of their probability of being found throughout the genome . this bias was detected only for a. mellifera and may be further exacerbated by the sequence length distribution obtained during pyrosequencing, with an absence of fragments of more than  <dig> bp in length, as more than  <dig> % of the complete genome sequences containing motifs in this species are of this size.

discussion
genome evolutionary dynamics and microsatellite representativeness
the composition and structure of genomes depend largely on the interaction of events in the evolution of a species and evolutionary processes, such as duplication  <cit> , recombination and transposition  <cit> . the uniqueness of the resulting distribution of microsatellite loci makes direct comparison between model organisms very difficult and calls into question the generalization of the deviations in representativeness analyzed to even closely related taxa. we chose to analyze the representativeness of microsatellite distributions in the genomes of honey bee and zebrafish, not because these model organisms are emblematic and widely studied, but because they are the archetypes of genomes for which particular evolutionary events have had a major effect on the heterogeneity of genome composition and structure  <cit> . there may be many reasons for heterogeneous microsatellite contents, potentially leading to a loss of representativeness in the libraries isolated by methods such as that described here, combining several sensitive steps . despite the very large differences in both the proportions and occurrences of motifs on the chromosomes in the two reference genomes studied here , losses of representativeness in the enriched libraries obtained were found to be limited and of only marginal significance.

efficiency and representativeness of the method
multiplexing with up to eight probes in enrichment phases greatly improves the isolation process in terms of the diversity of motifs obtained for a given cost or amount of time spent, and is of particular interest for evolutionary studies  <cit> . this phase is very flexible, with the possibility of using different panels of probes for different organisms of interest, thereby optimizing isolation according to current best knowledge about the organism and avoiding selection biases  <cit> . one potential concern is competition between probes during enrichment. our results are reassuring in this respect, because no consistent bias related to the proportions of motifs was detected for either of the reference genomes. indeed, motif proportions as high as 1/ <dig> to 1/ <dig> were correctly reproduced by this method, both in danio rerio  and in apis mellifera . this non biased distribution of the proportion of motifs between the sequenced libraries indicates that the efficiency and affinity of the multiplex probes used for enrichment were not density-dependent, as very large differences in motif proportions were correctly represented in the data obtained, even for very rare loci.

the heterogeneity of microsatellite sequences along chromosomes was largely reproduced in the data, although the global test highlighted a departure from the expected distribution. for example, chromosome  <dig>  region  <dig> of apis mellifera was found to have  <dig> times as many microsatellites as chromosome  <dig> region  <dig> in this species, but both regions were well represented in terms of proportions. more generally, we observed marginally significant departures from the reference distribution, and hence deviations in the representativeness of the data obtained empirically, whatever the heterogeneity in the distribution among regions of chromosomes and between chromosomes, for both model organisms. however, the intensity of the deviation, for most of the variables, was very limited given the very high level of heterogeneity of the reference genomes.

moreover, the combination of motif proportions and heterogeneities in occurrence between chromosome regions were also well estimated. for example, the  motif on chromosome  <dig> is  <dig> times more abundant than the acat motif on chromosome  <dig> for a. mellifera and the  motif on chromosome  <dig> is  <dig> times more abundant than the  motif on chromosome  <dig> for d. rerio. in both cases the relative proportions of the corresponding loci were correctly assessed whatever the region and motif considered.

finally, it could be argued that this method fails to deal with the distribution of isolated loci with fragment sizes greater than  <dig> bp. this is perfectly true, as we are constrained by advances in pyrosequencing technology, which is currently unable to yield longer sequences. at first glance, this might appear to be an important issue, but this is actually not the case when practical aspects are considered. indeed, the size range currently provided by pyrosequencing  encompasses the sizes of fragment currently used to design microsatellite markers for analysis anyway.

overall representativeness is not a trivial outcome, as multiple artifacts may bias the overall result during the process, making it impossible to decipher the causes of distortions. probe enrichment efficiency did not depend on the density of sequences with target motifs. this and the small number of pcr cycles used ensured that no technical issue resulted in biased estimates of microsatellite genome content. the multiplexing strategy of motif enrichment followed by  <dig> pyrosequencing used here therefore appears to be a very promising technique for improving the development of microsatellite markers.

CONCLUSIONS
the possibility of unraveling biases related to molecular techniques in the different organisms remains a rare opportunity, even for the geneticists of today. this study of the contrasting model organisms honeybee and zebrafish revealed common misrepresentations of sequence length distributions due to  <dig> titanium series pyrosequencing. there may be a number of reasons for this lack of representativeness, including enzymatic digestion, enrichment, or emulsion-pcr differential efficiencies. sequence lengths may also be shortened by the microsatellites themselves, as the sequencing process cycles nucleotides one after another. progress and hypothesis-testing, based on the conclusions drawn here, will undoubtedly lead to rapid improvements in the process. however, as the detected potential sequence length biases do not make it impossible to obtain usable microsatellite loci, this drawback does not invalidate the process as a whole. the simultaneous analysis of two organisms  with profoundly different genome features provided important information about the method used. indeed, we found that although genome features may be misrepresented, particularly for a. mellifera, which displays a high level of heterogeneity, the general trends of distributions are conserved in the experimental acquisition of sequences, even when the genomes differ in as extreme a manner as those studied here. even more important for most potential projects, the good fit to reference data obtained for over proportions of motifs, in both organisms, and the very large number of loci obtained, are encouraging. all these features should ensure a promising future for this method in the high-throughput isolation of microsatellites.

