BACKGROUND
large-scale rnai screening is a widely used technology to knock-down expressions of genes and study their protein function in a biological process of interest
. in several published studies in the field of infection biology, cells perturbed with sirnas were exposed to pathogens and differences in phenotypic outcomes were measured in order to identify the genes involved in successful infection or to develop functional models of host signaling and trafficking pathways
.

rnai libraries are mostly sold in formats containing enough material for numerous large-scale screens. therefore, several large-scale sirna screens are typically performed using the same libraries within a unit such as a university or company in order to optimize material costs and to simplify plate handling. however, parallel screens are typically performed and analyzed separately without common protocols or analysis pipelines. therefore, comparing results between the screens is challenging. co-operative efforts, such as assays using common key parameters for imaging and data analyses, could enable to produce more comparable results and gain parallel information for each individual screen. in the field of rnai screening, there has been progress in relation to the standardization of data publication formats, in particular in the context of the “minimum information about an rnai experiment”  and genomernai
 <cit>  efforts. however, the provided metadata information and data analysis approaches are often diverse so that data comparison between the screens from different laboratories is very difficult.

poor reproducibility rates of large-scale rnai screens are a common concern. they are mostly caused by strong off-target effects from particular sirnas
. strategies have been proposed to alleviate the confounding effects of rnai screens, including experimental
 <cit>  and statistical approaches
. in this study, we aim to use the parallel screening structure in order to gain statistical power for hit selection in large-scale rnai screens. we generated high-content sirna datasets that are uniquely comprehensive in terms of the sirna libraries and various pathogens used. we employed highly unified protocols for parallel screens and common data analysis pipelines to allow a direct comparison between the readouts of different pathogen screens. in addition to obtain a list of hits for individual pathogens, our aim was to discover shared mechanisms between pathogens. to this purpose, we propose a new statistical method – the parallel mixed model . our approach simultaneously takes into account the knock-down effects of several non-identical screens performed in parallel with the same rnai libraries. additionally, the pmm provides a local false discovery rate  for every gene, resulting in a probability estimate that a gene is a false positive. we will show that the model improves statistical power thanks to parallel screening and that it yields stable hits, novel to the studied pathogens, without compromising the detection of unique hits for any given single screen.

RESULTS
high-content sirna screening
our infectx consortium, consisting of eleven research groups, generated kinome-wide sirna screens for five bacterial pathogens  and three viruses  and systematically analyzed the biological pathways leading to successful infection in human host cells . this choice of bacterial and viral pathogens covered a wide variety of mechanism to invade host cells. b. henselae, for example, invades host cells by invasome structures
 <cit> , the pathogens s. typhimurium and s. flexneri use the trigger mechanism, while l. monocytogenes uses the zipper mechanism
 <cit> . adenovirus and rhinovirus enter by a dynamin and clathrin dependent pathway
 <cit>  and vaccinia virus by macropinocytosis
 <cit> .figure  <dig> 
overview of infectx high-content datasets, image analysis, and parallel mixed model .  the figure shows example images of the different pathogens after sirna transfection and the infection phase. the arrows indicate typical infectious phenotypes for each pathogen. the list shows an example of three single cell features that we extracted to identify infected cells for l. monocytogenes. the scale bar has a length of 50 μm.  for each selected feature, we defined the optimal threshold that separated best between uninfected and infected cells via histograms. we used the thresholds in the decision tree infection scoring  algorithm to classify between infected  and non-infected cells . we optimized this procedure for each pathogen separately.  for each well in a 384-well assay plate, we calculated the infection index by dividing the number of infected cells  by the total number of cells .  the figure shows a schematic representation of the input data for the statistical analysis. each point represents the average infection index over all its replicate wells .  the parallel mixed model  algorithm fits via a normal distribution for an overall effect a
g to all data of gene g. the second plot shows the correction of the overall effect a
g within every pathogen by an estimate b
pg in order to obtain to an pathogen and gene specific effect c
pg. the different sizes of the data points refer to weights w
s which can be incorporated in the pmm to depict the quality of the sirna.  the figure shows a schematic representation of the final output of pmm. the model estimates gene effects c
pg for each gene and pathogen and provides corresponding local false discovery rates q
pg.



we conducted the screens in a highly parallel manner under one common protocol for all eight pathogens. we carried out all screens in the same hela atcc-ccl- <dig> cell line and with the same reagent batches of shared providers. the set of  <dig> targeted genes comprised almost the whole kinome, plus selected kinome-associated genes, and we targeted each gene by a total of eleven independent sirnas coming from three manufactures: ambion  with  <dig> sirnas per gene, qiagen  with  <dig> sirnas per gene and dharmacon  with  <dig> sirnas per gene. additionally, we performed screens where we targeted each kinase with a pool of the four dharmacon sirnas . however, not all of the  <dig> genes have a full set of  <dig> sirnas and  <dig> sirna pool available. depending on the pathogen and library, we independently repeated the screens one to six times as replicates . to obtain an optimal dynamic range of infectivity, we chose the pathogen dose and entry time to be pathogen specific . we fixed and stained the cells using dapi or hoechst to detect nuclei, fluorescent labeled phalloidin to detect actin filaments and the cell body, and a pathogen specific marker to detect infected cells. in a final step, we imaged the screens using microscopes of the same brand. thus, we only permitted deviations from the common protocols when the infection assay required it.

we separately optimized image analysis for each pathogen and established for each pathogen a list of image features that described the phenotypes of infected cells. for example, for s. flexneri, we chose as one feature the rfp intensity of the extracted bacteria objects and for l. monocytogenes the mean cy <dig> intensity of the cell . in the next step, we classified the cells in each well as infected or uninfected with a decision tree infection scoring  algorithm  and obtained a rate of infection per well  . besides assay-specific readouts the image analysis also provided several assay-independent readouts . we alleviated possible batch effects, dependencies to the population context, and further experimental confounders by data normalization 
. we performed all analyses presented in this paper with the normalized infection index readout, unless otherwise stated.

data reproducibility
our data confirmed the reported
 <cit>  low reproducibility rates of sirna data originating from different sirnas targeting the same genes. the normalized infection indices of two different sirna sets targeting the same genes showed a pearson correlation coefficient r between  <dig> and  <dig>  depending on the screens . adding independent sirnas to the screen yielded an increase in the correlation coefficients, but the correlation still stayed at an unsatisfactory level, even with six separate sirnas targeting each gene . in contrast, replicate screens  were reproducible  . for practical reasons, assuming a similar assay quality as ours, performing screens in duplicates seems sufficient since having more replicates does not improve the data to a great extent . on the other hand, performing screens at least in duplicates is necessary for quality control and performing only single screens is therefore not recommendable. the cell number readouts  showed qualitatively similar results for data reproducibility. in summary, the main error source in our sirna screening was the bias caused by varying specificity of sirnas and not by technical variability of the screens.figure  <dig> 
using more sirnas adds power and yields reproducible results.  the three boxplots show pearson correlation coefficients r between screens performed using the same sirna set. the numbers  <dig> to  <dig> correspond to the total number of replicate screens that we averaged and compared to another distinct set of replicate screens, averaged over the same number. we resampled the replicate screens up to  <dig> times. the scatter plot shows an example for the correlation of infection indices from the duplicate of adenovirus dharmacon pooled screen.  the set of six boxplots shows the pearson correlation coefficients of the averaged readouts from  <dig> to  <dig> sirna sets. the scatter plots depict the correlation of infection indices for adenovirus, the first between two different single sirnas and the second between each an average over six sirnas.



parallel mixed model 
assuming that the sources of variability between different sirnas targeting the same gene are statistically independent, we can benefit from the fact that the true signal is enhanced by using more sirnas targeting the individual genes
 <cit>  . in order to increase the statistical power of individual sirna screens, we performed screens with  <dig> sirnas  targeting each gene. moreover, when using the parallel structure in the data and combining data points from all pathogen screens together, we reached 8×12 =  <dig> data points for every gene . we propose the parallel mixed model  as a suitable approach to model the distribution of the sirna readouts using all data together, including all available sirnas and pathogen screens.

pmm is composed of a linear mixed model and an assessment of the local false discovery rate  . the linear mixed model is an extension of the ordinary linear model by random effects
 <cit> . in particular, random effects are not determined by fixed coefficients, but by gaussian distributions. therefore, we can incorporate the variation among the sirnas in form of random effects and estimate all effects for different pathogens simultaneously. to be more precise, the linear mixed model consists of a fixed effect μp for pathogen p and two random effects ag for gene g and bpg as a correction term for gene g within pathogen p:
  

where ypgs denotes the readout  of pathogen p and gene g knocked-down with sirna s and ϵpgs denotes the unobserved error term. we fitted the linear mixed model by using the “lmer” function from the “lme4” r-package
 <cit> . the sum of two random effects ag and bpg describes the total effect of the sirnas within pathogen p. we define the estimated effect cpg for gene g within pathogen p as
  

a positive estimated cpg effect means that the infection level was enhanced if the corresponding gene g is knocked down. a negative effect means that the infection level was reduced. to distinguish hit genes, pmm provides as second step an estimate qpg of the local false discovery rate . we computed the local false discovery rate using the approach presented in
 <cit>  and the “locfdr” function in the r-package of the same name
 <cit> . we assigned the local false discovery rate to every gene and interpreted it as the probability describing how likely the corresponding gene is a false discovery . the pmm method is published as “pmm” r-package on the infectx data-access page.

as a first verification for the increase in power by simultaneously using the parallel screening structure, we resampled datasets, each consisting of a fixed number of sirnas and pathogens, and fitted the pmm, respectively the moderated t-test 
 <cit>  for the case of one pathogen . we evaluated the mean and variation  of the ranks in the ordered lists of genes based on their estimated cpg values over  <dig> resampling runs for met , mtor  and a non-hit alk as control . the results showed, in particular in the case of mtor, that the rank and its stability improved by simultaneously using more sirnas and pathogens. in the case of met the use of parallel screens did not cause an increase in statistical power, since met was a hit for l. monocytogenes only. however, for met there was no reduction of statistical power either. these examples already indicated that the parallel screening structure and pmm can be used to more reliably discover expected effector genes even in the case where only a fraction of effector genes is shared between the screens.figure  <dig> 
parallel screens add power to find more shared hits.  we varied the number of used sirnas and pathogens and calculated the rank of met for l. monocytogenes in the ordered list of hit genes. we used pmm  over  <dig> random resampling rounds with replacement. the color corresponds to the variation of the observed ranks. the boxplot shows that met is a unique strong hit among the studied pathogens. the star indicates the boxplots that are significantly different from  <dig> .  the figure shows the same experiment as in , but now with mtor for vaccianiavirus. the boxplot shows that mtor is a shared significant hit for several pathogens.  the figure shows the same experiment as in  but with non-hit alk for b. abortus for control.



analysis of sirna libraries
pmm allows the assignment of weights to each sirna . with weighting, we can assign more power to sirnas that are estimated to have little off-target effects and strong knock-down efficiencies. within this study, we weighted sirnas according to the reproducibility in terms of correlation of their corresponding library to other libraries . there are several potential other ways how weights could be determined. however, we did not follow them further within the context of this paper.figure  <dig> 
statistics on used sirna libraries and hits.  we weighted sirnas based on their library quality. each vertical compartment in the plot corresponds to a training set of sirnas. we averaged data in the training set from the sirnas of the specific manufacturers. each boxplot corresponds to a test set of single sirnas from different manufacturers . y-axis refers to pearson correlation coefficients r between the training and test sets. a star corresponds to significant differences in the correlation coefficients  between pairs of manufacturers. we used all screens, infection index, and cell number well readouts in the analysis. we used the results of this analysis to assign sirna weights to sirnas from different library manufacturers as shown below the plot.  the histogram shows obtained fdr q-values from all screens using the infection index readouts. the red line shows the fdr-threshold of  <dig> .  the bar shows number of up and down hits for different pathogens.  the bar plot shows the number of hit genes that were shared between pathogens.



we cross-validated different libraries to each other by fixing one library manufacturer  at a time . we averaged phenotypic readouts from sirnas targeting the same gene in the training set in order to obtain reference gene readouts. in this analysis we used both infection index and cell number readouts. we then compared single sirna readouts of the remaining two library manufactures  to the reference gene readouts. the pearson correlation coefficients of the test sets enable to quantify which of the two test manufacturers produces more reproducible results. by repeating the procedure for all manufacturers as the training set we could order the manufacturers in terms of their reproducibility performance. our results based on phenotypic readouts showed that the pooled dharmacon library performed the best. the pooled library was followed by the unpooled libraries of ambion, dharmacon, and qiagen in this order. however, there were no statistically significant differences  between dharmacon pooled and ambion single, and dharmacon single and qiagen single sirna data reproducibility. in addition, the data showed that the averaged single sirnas of dharmacon performed at most as good as the single pooled sirna consisting of the same sirnas. this indicated that for most screening purposes, it is more practical to use the pooled library instead of several unpooled libraries. this result of better performance of pooled libraries compared to averaged single sirna libraries is in contradiction with what has been reported in
 <cit> . however, good quality single sirna libraries  performed nearly as well as pooled libraries of less good single sirnas . following the results of the library analysis, we assigned a higher weight to dharmacon pooled and ambion libraries  than to the unpooled libraries dharmacon and qiagen . pmm benefitted from the assigned library weights. the residual standard error of the linear mixed model reduced from  <dig>  to  <dig> .

sharedness of detected significant genes
by fitting pmm to our data, we found a left tailed local false discovery rate distribution, ending with a set of  <dig> different genes that reached the threshold of  <dig>  . we selected threshold  <dig>  as a reasonable hit threshold for this study since the difference was small compared to the set of hits with the commonly used threshold  <dig>  and 40% false-positive rate was still acceptable in biological follow-up studies for us. the number of up and down hits varied between the pathogens . using fdr threshold  <dig> , 80% of hits were unique and 20% of hits were shared between two or more studied pathogens . this provided a rough estimate that about 20% of genes gained statistical power from the parallel analysis using the pmm with our data. to quantify the hits according to their level of being shared between screens independently from the fdr-threshold, we developed the following “sharedness score” sg:figure  <dig> 
summary of screening hits for all pathogens.  the heat map shows all genes which were significant  at least for one pathogen. we ordered the genes by their averaged c-values over all pathogens. the colors correspond to the estimated c-values. the black outlines indicate significant hits  and the green outlines high-light the strongest down and up hits for each pathogen. the rightmost column shows the sharedness scores for each gene.  the network shows the hit genes  and their direct neighbors that had connections between kinases in string database . the edges are functional interactions in the string database with edge threshold  <dig>  we removed genes that were not connected to any other gene from the network. each node consists of a colored pie chart, in which each piece corresponds to a pathogen.



  

here p is the total number of pathogens . the sharedness score is a combination of two quantities. the first part defines the shift away from  <dig> and the second part describes how many pathogens support this shift . the score returns a value between  <dig> and  <dig> for each gene. score  <dig> indicates that a gene is not shared among the pathogens and score  <dig> indicates that the gene is significant among all pathogens . since the sharedness score takes only the strength of a gene and not the directionality into account, a gene can be also highly shared if it inhibits in one pathogen and enhances the infection by another pathogen. therefore, a gene shared between pathogens should be interpreted as being involved in the entry of these pathogens.

result comparison to existing hit ranking methods
in order to validate the pmm approach and its results we compared it to other existing hit ranking methods and performed different kind of statistical tests. as reference methods we selected the moderated t-test 
 <cit>  and redundant sirna activity 
 <cit>  which are commonly used in high-throughput rnai screening. we could not apply other widely used hit ranking methods, such as strictly standardized mean difference 
 <cit>  or percent inhibition
 <cit>  since many of our pathogen screens did not have effective and reliable positive and negative control wells.

as a first test, we analyzed the stability of the obtained gene rankings with respect to the estimated cpg values
 <cit> . we resampled with replacement  <dig> datasets  and calculated the number of genes that appear with high probability  in the top of the ordered lists of genes based on their estimated cpg values . this measure of stability showed similar results for pmm and the reference methods mtt and rsa .figure  <dig> 
performance statistics of hit ranking methods.  the figure shows stability curves using the three different methods . the y-axis denotes the number of genes that were found with probability higher than  <dig>   and  <dig>   in the top k  of the list of ranked genes. the curves show the average over all eight pathogens.  the figure shows hit overlaps of cross-validated sirna sets between the set of  <dig> unpooled sirna libraries and the remaining sirna library using the three tested gene ranking methods as a function of hit threshold k. the curves show the average over all eight pathogens.  the figure shows roc-curves for pmm, mtt and rsa applied on simulated data containing only hits that were shared between all pathogens. the dashed and solid lines indicate whether the shifts were generated by a low or high shift away from zero. the pmm method outperformed the reference hit detection method.  the figure shows roc-curves for pmm, mtt and rsa applied on simulated data containing only unique hits for all pathogens. pmm and moderated t-test performed equally well.  the figure shows roc-curves for simulated data with a mixed hit structure of both unique and shared hits. the pmm method outperformed the reference hit detection method.



to mimic primary and validation screening setup and to study hit reproducibilities of the gene ranking methods we performed a leave-one-out cross-validation experiment. we used the sirnas of unpooled libraries  and left one sirna set at a time away. we ran pmm, mtt, and rsa on the data sets consisting of  <dig> individual sirnas and compared the resulting gene ranking to the ranked gene list of the remaining sirna set. the averaged hit overlaps over all pathogens as a function of hit threshold k are illustrated in figure 
6b. pmm performed the best indicating that the hits found by pmm are more reproducible by an independent sirna screen than the hits found by the other methods.

in order to further estimate the hit-calling performance for different methods we performed data simulation with a-priori known hit structure. data simulation was required since reliable ground truth hits are not generally available for the real biological systems. we simulated data by generating  <dig> gaussian distributed screens for each pathogen with four sirnas. we selected four sirnas since it makes up a realistic screening approach. we incorporated hits in each simulated screen by randomly selecting 10% of the genes and shifting them away from zero. we distinguished between three types of simulated data. in the first case the hits were different for each pathogen  and in the second case all hits were shared between the pathogens. the third case is probably the most realistic scenario containing both unique and shared hits to a varying degree . we then applied pmm, mtt, and rsa to the simulated data and evaluated them by receiver operating characteristic  -curves . the results showed that pmm performed the best especially in the case of shared hits. for the case of unique hits pmm and mtt exhibited about the same performance while rsa performed the worst. as expected, with a higher shift of the hit genes the roc curves got better for all methods.

we also studied how simultaneous modeling affects the ranking of genes in individual screens using pmm. we performed a test where we selected a pathogen and created two datasets. the first dataset was the full data without any changes and the second dataset had the original data for the selected pathogen and randomized data for the  <dig> other pathogens. we then compared the gene rankings obtained by pmm performed using both datasets for the selected pathogen. the results for l. monocytogenes are illustrated in figure 
7a . the correlation graph shows that the addition of parallel screens had only a mild effect on the overall gene ranking. however, when considering the number of significant genes , pmm mainly added genes to the list of significant genes  and only few genes  were dropped off the list. in general, we concluded that using parallelism added novel significant genes while losing almost none. moreover, the few lost hit genes had high fdr values, just slightly below the selected threshold fdr <  <dig> .figure  <dig> 
summary of differences of pmm top hits compared to other hit scoring methods.  y-axis shows the pmm gene ranking for l. monocytogenes. x-axis is the same, but we randomized the other  <dig> parallel assays. the colors correspond to hit genes  in different cases. parallelism yielded only a slight effect on the ranking, but added genes to the list of significant hit genes.  the scatter plot shows pmm hit ranking  compared to the mtt hit ranking  for l. monocytogenes. the dot size corresponds to the sharedness score of each gene. some genes with high sharedness scores gained statistical power.



in the next step we analyzed the differences between the resulting gene rankings of the tested methods. differences in gene rankings between pmm and other hit ranking methods were not very strong . genes that had a high sharedness score and had an effect on the screen of interest  gained statistical power from the simultaneous analysis and were pushed up in the gene ranking. on the other hand, we observed that pmm detected several genes with low sharedness scores, indicating that unique hits were not neglected.

in order to evaluate the biological relevance of observed hits, we calculated pathway enrichment scores separately for each pathogen by the gene set enrichment analysis  algorithm
 <cit>  using as input the results from the three hit ranking algorithms pmm, mtt, and rsa . we selected all pathways that were significant  for at least one pathogen and method pair. we used the ranking of infection indices as the input for gsea and focused on hits that reduce infection levels. by assuming that most pathways in the used database are biologically valid, we would expect that better hit detection methods give a higher number of enriched pathways than less powerful hit detection methods. however, we only screened kinases and the applicable pathways are limited to those that are highly enriched in phosphorylation events and it may be that some pathogens do not show strong enrichments within this set of pathways. moreover, differences in pathway enrichments between methods may have occurred because they treated missing values differently. therefore, the enrichment results should be evaluated with caution. additional file
1: figure s <dig> illustrates the observed significant pathways. the number of enriched  pathways for each method was an indication that pmm detected biologically more relevant hit genes than the other methods.

biological inquiry on detected significant genes
the performed screens yield several interesting hits of which most are novel to the corresponding pathogen . many of the strongest hits, including mtor, tgfbr1/ <dig> for negative hits and ilk for positive hits, were shared between most of the studied pathogens. this was also illustrated by the sharedness scores of detected hit genes. many of the strongest shared hits were related to src, mtor, or cdk related pathways. although src and cdk <dig> were not part of the hit lists  for any of the pathogens, they exhibited consistent semi-strong effect for most pathogens. a network analysis of hit genes showed that several of the shared hits can be described as “network hubs” that are involved in many cellular processes and highly connected to other genes  
 <cit> . mtor is a mammalian target of rapamycin, serine/threonine protein kinase that regulates cell growth, cell proliferation, cell motility, cell survival, protein synthesis, and transcription. the involvement of mtor in adenovirus, poliovirus, enterovirus <dig>  coxackievirus, vaccinia virus and other pathogens has already been established
 <cit> . our data also reproduced the established role of mtor during s. typhimurium infections, since s. typhimurium depends on a reactivation of mtor during its course of infection in order to escape autophagy
 <cit> . interestingly, tgfbr <dig> and tgfbr <dig> came up both as strong hits for many pathogens. tgfbr <dig> and tgfbr <dig> proteins must heterodimerize to form a functional tgf-beta receptor at the plasma membrane. their similar strong infection reducing knock-down phenotypes, seen in most independent pathogen screens, indicated the validity of these hits and suggested a broad, yet poorly understood, function of this membrane protein for various pathogens. in particular, there are suggestions
 <cit>  that the tgfb pathway might be important for b. abortus infection since in chronic brucellosis patients there is increased tgf beta production and this could aid infection by depressing lymphocyte functions. in addition, our study confirmed the role of dyrk family members  as they have been identified to be general regulators for several viruses in snijder, sacher et al.
 <cit> .

despite the overall similarity of infection patterns between pathogens, most pathogens also contained hits that were specific for the pathogen . some of the hit genes have previously been found to be effectors, for example met for l. monocytogenes. l. monocytogenes enters host cells by triggering signaling cascades activated through interaction of bacterial internalin a  or inlb with the adherens junction protein e-cadherin or the hepatocyte growth factor receptor met <cit>  respectively. since e-cadherin is not expressed in hela cells, which were used for our sirna screens, the inlb / met pathway is the only route of entry in this cellular system. in fact, met <cit>  was one of the strongest hits for l. monocytogenes. the exact roles of most hit genes of all pathogens are largely unknown, but several hit genes create interesting hypotheses for follow-up. for example, it was proposed based on microrna analysis of infected macrophages, that ampk might be a target gene that promotes intracellular survival during b. abortus infection
 <cit> . pik3r <dig>  a semi-strong hit for several pathogens in our data was identified as a hit in an rnai screen of drosophila s <dig> cells, in agreement with the importance of pi3k during b. abortus infection
 <cit> . pik3ca probably plays a role also in b. henselae infection through actin modulation. pik3ca levels influence rhoa and rac <dig>  which are involved in actin dynamics
 <cit> . furthermore, pik3ca is involved in pip <dig> production, which is a signaling molecule and has recently been shown to be related to the formation of dynamic f-actin-related structures
 <cit> . ulk <dig>  plays an important role in autophagy as well as hepatitis c virus infection. therefore, ulk <dig> has a possible link to rhinovirus induced autophagy. col4a3bp is possibly linked to rhinovirus entry through ceramide-enriched membrane platforms
 <cit>  since col4a3bp specifically phosphorylates the n-terminal region of the non-collagenous domain of the alpha  <dig> chain of type iv collagen, known as the goodpasture antigen, also involved in ceramide intracellular transport .

CONCLUSIONS
we produced a uniquely wide high-content sirna dataset, in terms of used sirna libraries  and eight different pathogens. our highly unified protocols and common image analysis as well as similar data analysis pipelines enabled a direct comparison between the phenotypic readouts of the different pathogen screens. the unified structures of the datasets also aided discovering shared mechanisms between the studied pathogens.

using our novel statistical approach pmm we detected several interesting and new hits from our kinome-wide pathogen screens. the hits will require further follow-up work in order to understand the exact biological mechanisms of the genes. in addition, we discovered shared effector genes between the studied pathogens including mtor, tgfbr <dig> and tgfbr <dig> that were strong hits for almost all studied pathogens. in particular, the obtained sharedness scores indicated whether a hit gene has a very specific function for a single pathogen or a more generic cellular function that is shared between many pathogens and thus gave us the first indications of the gene’s roles. pharmaceutically oriented follow-up studies could take advantage of this concept. for example, if we were interested in general regulators we could focus on genes with high sharedness scores. on the other hand, regulators that have a very specific effect and a low sharedness score could probably have fewer side effects.

we showed that the reliability of hit scoring in individual rnai screens improved by using pmm that takes advantages of the parallelism in rnai screening. pmm can, in principle, be applied to any kind of parallel rnai screens almost independently of the underlying biology or field of application as long as the readouts of the screens are measured on the same scale. we can often obtain this by applying z-scoring or similar normalization methods to the well readouts. the difference to other approaches aiming at the comparison of independent parallel rnai screens is that pmm takes simultaneously all screening data into account. for example, for the comparison of insect and human data in
 <cit>  the hit lists were derived by separate statistics on each screen. by taking all data into the analysis the statistical power can be increased. based on our results, we expect that the more similar the parallel screens are in the sense of biological focus or protocols, the more statistical power can be gained from the simultaneous analysis. even a slight overlap between the underlying biological pathways of the parallel screens can improve the hit detection in individual screens without compromising the detection of unique hits for any individual screens. provided that the large-scale rnai screening community reaches standardized data publication and sharing standards through projects such as miare and genomernai, the pmm approach could be expanded to include the vast number of different rnai screens performed in different laboratories worldwide that used the same sirna libraries. in principle and as a vision, this opens up great opportunities for simultaneous statistical approaches such as pmm. every new screen could potentially gain statistical power by using the public resources. in addition, pmm can potentially be used to gain power for secondary validation screens. such validation screens are typically performed with several independent sirnas targeting the same gene under various conditions and pmm would be directly applicable. a beneficial feature of pmm is the possibility to assign weights to the sirnas. the weights can incorporate a-priori information about the performance of individual sirnas and their phenotypical readout. this concept of weighting can be expanded over what we presented in this paper. in particular, statistical and bioinformatics analyses on seed sequence induced off-target effects could potentially be used as basis for weights. naturally any additional high-throughput data, such as proteomics analyses on cells under sirna perturbations, or genomic analyses on specific cell lines, could be used to assign realistic sirna weights to improve hit scoring.

we aimed to take a step forward in determining minimal requirements for image-based rnai screening data publication. all the raw images, library metadata, single cell measurements, and well measurements are publicly available through our openbis based publication portal. in addition, we provide easy-to-access data aggregates in standardized tabular formats with all the necessary metadata information. our uniquely wide datasets provide a large resource for infection biologists, image analysts, and statisticians for future research.

