BACKGROUND
essential resources tend to be clustered, rather than uniformly distributed in the natural environment. accordingly, animals use a range of behavioral strategies to search for resource rich areas  <cit> . search behaviors have been characterized in invertebrate species , including in c. elegans, where detailed underlying neuronal circuits have been described . although sophisticated search behaviors under natural conditions have also been catalogued in vertebrates, surprisingly few studies have exploited vertebrate models to probe genetic factors and neuronal connections that initiate and maintain active search states .

to date, the powerful repertoire of neurogenetic tools available in zebrafish have been primarily applied to decoding neural mechanisms for acute behavioral responses to sensory stimuli  <cit> . for instance, larval zebrafish show phototaxis toward restricted areas of illumination in dark environments  <cit> , maneuver within thermal and chemical gradients  <cit> , and actively oppose water currents by swimming against whole-field visual motion. thus, larvae use sensory information in several modalities to actively navigate within the environment, initiating approach or avoidance behaviors as required. however, much less is known about whether larvae efficiently locate resources that are not in the immediate vicinity. search behavior requires the maintenance of an internal state that appropriately regulates motor activity, and potentially also modulates sensory thresholds to facilitate the discovery of desirable resources  <cit> . short-term internal states such as arousal and hunger, and movement profiles consistent with exploratory behavior are present in larval stage zebrafish , raising the possibility that autogenic search behavior has also developed.

one promising avenue to investigate search behavior is the hyperactive response of zebrafish larvae to a complete loss of illumination . at the onset of darkness, zebrafish larvae become hyperactive for 5–10 min, before settling into a low-activity sleep-like state. the hyperactive state is referred to as the visual motor response, or dark photokinesis  <cit> . hyperactivity propels larvae out of dark regions – slower movement in the light causes larvae to aggregate in illuminated regions, an example of classical photokinesis behavior  <cit> .

here, we investigated whether the locomotor hyperactivity that occurs during dark photokinesis is randomly directed or rather shows spatial patterning that might facilitate light-search behavior. we found that larval swim trajectories during the first few minutes of photokinesis possess characteristic features of a widely utilized animal foraging strategy known as area-restricted search  <cit> . area-restricted search is a strategy for temporarily restricting movement to the region where a specific resource was last detected. typically, area-restricted search is a transient behavior that transitions to a roaming search strategy if the resource is not quickly located  <cit> . similarly, we show that after 2–3 min of locally restricted movement, larval swim paths transition to an outward trajectory, consistent with a roaming strategy for light sources that are outside the initial visual range. we demonstrate that the distinct swimming patterns associated with area-restricted and roaming search states respectively increase the ability of larvae to find local and remote light sources. using high speed recording, we reveal the swim motor patterns associated with area-restricted search and roaming, and show that area-restricted search is generated by utilizing an efficient helical swim pattern composed of same direction turns. finally, we establish that initiating area-restricted search requires retinal input while the deep brain photoreceptor opn4a and otpa-specified somatostatin releasing neurons control the transition from intensive local search to a roaming state.

RESULTS
helical swimming follows loss of illumination
the visual motor response is a 5- to 10-minute period of hyperactivity that occurs after loss of illumination  <cit> . in previous studies, the visual motor response has usually been elicited in larvae confined in multi-well plates, precluding the observation of a possible spatial structure in the response. therefore, to determine whether movement shows a specific spatial pattern or is undirected, we tracked the three-dimensional swim paths of larvae in a large volume chamber  . during full-field illumination, locomotor trajectories were primarily in the x–y plane with relatively little vertical displacement . conversely, during the first minute after loss of illumination, larvae increased downward movement and reduced net displacement in the x–y plane . these changes reduce net three-dimensional displacement compared to baseline . intriguingly, we noticed that descent trajectories had a helical shape, which was especially apparent when the swim path was projected onto the x–y plane . after 3 min in sustained darkness, we observed that movements were similar to baseline, again primarily directed in the horizontal plane  restoring net three-dimensional displacement . thus, initially after loss of illumination, larvae do not move randomly, but show a strong tendency to slowly swim downwards in the water column, within a spatially restricted region in the horizontal plane.fig.  <dig> changes in 3d swim trajectories after loss of illumination. a diagram of 3d recording set up. a mirror was positioned adjacent to arena in order to simultaneously view xy and z planes. b representative 30-s path trajectories of larvae  during illuminated baseline conditions , immediately  or 3–5 min after loss of light . black traces show 2d projections in yz and xy planes. chamber size: 85 × 85 × 75 mm. c mean displacement per 30-s recording period in xy and z axes during baseline swimming , during the first minute  and 3–5 min after loss of illumination . * p <  <dig>  versus baseline. d mean position of larvae in 80-mm deep chamber during baseline illumination  and sustained darkness . n =  <dig> groups of five larvae. * p <  <dig>  versus baseline mean




we next separately analyzed the x–y planar and vertical components of the response. taking the vertical component first, we confirmed a previous observation that larvae tend to swim near the top of the water column, and after loss of illumination, swim downwards  <cit> . however when tested during prolonged loss of illumination, we noted that the ‘diving response’ was transient, lasting for around 1 minute before larvae slowly returned to their baseline position in the water column . the mean rate of descent following the loss of illumination was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm/s , two orders of magnitude slower than the velocity of burst swims   <cit> , which are a characteristic feature of escape movements in larvae. downward swimming is therefore unlikely to be part of a defensive response. thus, in the vertical dimension, the response to loss of illumination has two phases: a slow downwards swim, followed by a gradual return to the water surface.

local movement shows characteristic features of area-restricted search behavior
to study responses in the horizontal plane, we used a large shallow arena  and tracked individual larvae continuously . during baseline conditions, larvae tended to move in long arching paths with relatively low amplitude trajectory changes . in contrast, after light extinction, larvae initially remained in a restricted area and then gradually transitioned to an outward pattern of swimming similar to baseline . accordingly, for the first 3 min after the onset of darkness, travel distance was strongly reduced compared to baseline, confirming that movement was spatially restricted  consistent with reduced displacement in the x–y plane seen in the three-dimensional environment.fig.  <dig> locally restricted swimming after loss of illumination. a representative path trajectories for a larva during full field illumination  and during the first 10 min after loss of illumination . arrowheads denote starting position and numbers indicate time . color scale indicates fractal dimension in 30 s windows. main scale bar 10 mm, chamber is 200 × 200 mm. arrowhead length equivalent to larva length. b–e displacement, meander, fractal dimension, and trajectory bias for larvae measured during 10 min of full field illumination , followed by 10 min darkness . n =  <dig>  * p <  <dig> , paired t-test compared to corresponding baseline time-point. see methods for description of measurements




spatially restricted movement forms part of a behavioral strategy that is used by many animals, known as area-restricted search. area-restricted search occurs during foraging and mate-search behavior in insects, birds and mammals  <cit> , and during navigation to a shelter or nesting site . characteristic features of area-restricted search are  a reduction in travel distance,  an increase in movements that cause a change in orientation,  an increase in movement path complexity, and  a directional bias to movement trajectories  <cit> . collectively, these changes allow efficient sampling of the local environment  <cit> . similarly, for the first 2–3 min after loss of illumination, in addition to reduced displacement, we found an elevated rate of re-orientation  and greater path complexity .

we used two methods to test for directional bias in movement trajectories. first, we noted that, during the initial movement phase, individual trajectories consistently looped either leftward or rightward resulting in a high mean trajectory direction bias . second, we directly measured the frequency of sequential same-direction turning movements. locomotion in zebrafish larvae consists of discrete maneuvers that are separated by periods of immobility. under baseline conditions, larvae primarily generate slow swim  and routine turn  maneuver types , which generate forward propulsion and a change in orientation respectively  <cit> . directional bias has been measured using the lock index , which represents the normalized frequency of sequential maneuvers performed in the same direction  <cit>  . consistent with a recent report, we found that under baseline constant illumination, larvae tended to perform sequential swim maneuvers in the same direction, a weak but statistically significant effect  <cit>  . for example, during baseline swimming, larvae predominantly executed scoot/scoot maneuver pairs, for which the li was small, but non-random . however, during the local movement phase after loss of illumination, there was a  <dig> -fold increase in the frequency of r-turn/r-turn maneuver pairs and a two-fold increase in li, confirming a strong bias in movement direction . in contrast, during outward swimming, although larvae maintained an elevated rate of r-turn initiation , the li for r-turns declined to baseline levels , consistent with the sustained high frequency of re-orienting and loss of directional bias measured using trajectory analysis . thus, for the first few minutes after loss of illumination, swim trajectories show a strong directional bias and thus manifest four salient characteristics of area-restricted search behavior.fig.  <dig> local search is generated by increased utilization of same direction r-turn maneuvers. a representative 10-s path trajectories of individual larva during baseline  and dark  conditions. arrows indicate path direction of the larva. scoot  and r-turn  maneuvers are indicated along each path. lock index  for each recording noted at bottom. scale bar 2 mm. frequency  and li  of maneuver pairs during full-field illumination  and during the first 10 s after loss of illumination . baseline n =  <dig>  t0
n =  <dig>  maneuver frequency analysis excludes o-bends triggered by the sudden reduction in illumination and infrequent fast burst swims. c baseline maneuver pair lis are significantly increased over  <dig> for scoot-scoot , turn-turn , and turn-scoot pairs . scoot-turn maneuver pair li was not significantly different from  <dig> . f frequency of r-turn initiations . n =  <dig> groups of  <dig> larvae each. * p <  <dig> . g li for sequential r-turns during sustained loss of illumination. n =  <dig> larvae ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> . * p <  <dig>  compared to baseline time-point




as for other short-term internal states, search behaviors are typically time-limited and reversible  <cit> . if a resource is not located within the local environment, a roaming search strategy is often initiated, which is characterized by an outward movement profile  <cit> . similarly, spatially restricted movement by larvae persisted only for about 2 min after loss of illumination, after which movement parameters transitioned toward baseline levels. intriguingly though, two measures, namely displacement and the rate of reorientation, did not match baseline levels even after 10 min . principal component analysis confirmed that trajectories in the first minute after loss of illumination were distinct from baseline movements , whereas trajectories after 10 min sustained dark did not form a separate group but distributed with either the baseline or first-minute dark response trajectories. thus, the apparent gradual change in mean trajectory parameters after loss of illumination may in fact be due to changes in the frequency with which larvae switch between discrete episodes of spatially restricted movement, and a movement profile similar to baseline . nevertheless, episodes of spatially restricted behavior declined in frequency after loss of illumination, confirming that this response is time-limited .

behavioral search states are also terminated if a resource is located. to mimic the effect of a successful search, we restored illumination. all locomotor parameters immediately returned to baseline levels when light was resumed either during the local movement phase  or during the outward movement phase . thus, after loss of illumination, larvae manifest a time-limited and reversible behavior in which they initially swim downwards, while repeatedly executing r-turn maneuvers in a spatially restricted region in the horizontal plane, establishing a helical trajectory. this movement profile is similar to area-restricted search, enabling larvae to intensively survey the three-dimensional environment. if larvae do not locate light, then a new movement profile gradually emerges in which r-turn maneuvers remain elevated but are no longer executed continuously in a single direction, thereby generating outward trajectories. these observations suggest that local movement and outward swim trajectories represent area-restricted and remote light-search behaviors, respectively.fig.  <dig> light reverses changes in locomotor profiles during local and outward swimming. a rate of re-orienting  for larvae measured for 5 min after loss of illumination, either in constant darkness , or when illumination was restored after 30 s darkness . * p <  <dig>  for corresponding time-points in sustained dark and after re-activation of the light. b meander for larvae measured for 10 min after loss of illumination, with darkness maintained  except during 1 min, when the light was re-activated . n =  <dig>  * p <  <dig>  compared to constant illumination. dashed lines in  indicate mean meander for larvae measured during constant illumination




local and outward movement patterns differentially facilitate light-search behavior
motivated behaviors such as search-states are goal directed, in that they promote specific objectives  <cit> . therefore, to rigorously test whether local and outward movement patterns facilitate light-search behavior, we developed two novel phototaxis assays. first, we established a covert phototaxis assay to test whether spatially restricted movement promotes the discovery of light in the immediate environment. using real-time tracking we positioned a small  light spot two body lengths directly behind the larva . because the eyes are positioned laterally and angled slightly forward, the spot was not visible to the larva  <cit> . we then measured the time taken by larvae to swim into the spot. larvae reached the spot 34% more quickly when tested during the local movement phase , than when tested during the outward movement phase . accelerated phototaxis during the local movement phase could reflect either increased light sensitivity, or earlier light spot detection due to the high rate of re-orientation. to test visual sensitivity, we measured how accurately larvae turned toward a target light within their visual range  <cit> . turn movements were strongly biased toward the light during the local movement phase, but not during the outward movement phase . thus, during the local movement phase, larvae not only change orientation more frequently than during the outward movement phase, but also show increased responsiveness to a source of illumination.fig.  <dig> local and outward movement strategies differentially facilitate locating local and remote light. a schematic of covert phototaxis assay. the light spot  was projected 7 mm directly behind a freely swimming larva. we then measured the time for the larva to enter the light spot. b time to light spot perimeter when activated either 2 s  or 3–5 min  ) after loss of full field illumination. controls: no target light. n =  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> . c turn maneuver trajectories for larvae oriented with the light spot to their right, when tested 2 s  or 3–5 min  after loss of full-field illumination. d r-turn direction bias during phototaxis relative to a static light spot. light spot  was illuminated either 2 s  or 3 min  after loss of full field illumination. orientation of larvae relative to the target spot is indicated. * p <  <dig>  between t <dig> and t <dig> orientation-matched groups. bias is the proportion of r-turns directed toward the target spot, normalized between – <dig>  to + <dig> . e phototaxis in a large area  using a 55-μw light spot. representative swim trajectories for larvae tested when the light spot was activated 1 s  or 3–5 min  after loss of illumination. arrowheads indicate start positions. box plot shows closest approach to the light spot for larvae tested 1 s  or 3–5 min  after loss of illumination, and for trials where the light spot was not activated . n =  <dig> larvae ,  <dig> . f representative swim trajectories for larvae tested when the light spot was activated 1 s  or 3– <dig> minute  after loss of illumination. arrowheads indicate start positions. g quantification of concealed target test. closest approach to the light spot for larvae tested 1 s  or 3–5 min  after loss of illumination with either no target light , or targets of the indicated intensities. horizontal black line represents position of barrier. n =  <dig> larvae ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> . # p <  <dig> , * p <  <dig>  between t <dig> and t <dig> groups. experiment was performed as for  except with an interior barrier




we next employed a concealed target assay to determine whether outward movement promotes discovery of light that is not in the immediate environment. here, we used real-time tracking of larval position to project a light spot on the opposite side of a central barrier. the spot was illuminated either 1 s or 3–5 min after loss of full-field illumination to test larvae in the local and outward movement phases, respectively. in trials without a central barrier, larvae rapidly navigated to the light spot regardless of the duration of time spent in the dark . conversely, in the presence of the barrier, larvae only initiated phototaxis if they first swam to the edge of the barrier . during control trials  larvae infrequently circumnavigated the barrier . similarly, when the spot was illuminated 1 s after loss of full-field illumination, larvae did not reach the edge of the barrier and therefore did not initiate phototaxis . in contrast, most larvae tested 3–5 min after loss of full-field illumination swam to the edge of the barrier, then quickly navigated to the light spot . the difference in final proximity to the light spot was significant , demonstrating that larvae locate remote light sources more rapidly during the outward movement phase.

during the concealed target assay, larvae rarely swam continuously beside the barrier, but often appeared to contact it then move away. this was surprising because several studies have argued that zebrafish larvae perform thigmotaxis  behavior  <cit> . however, supporting experiments used an arena with square or concave walls where it is difficult to distinguish true thigmotaxis from mere wall-following due to outward swim trajectories. in fact, under baseline conditions, larvae tended to swim in close contact with the walls of a concave arena but did not show a significant preference to swim in contact with a convex barrier , indicating that continuous contact with the perimeter of a chamber is a trivial consequence of outward movement trajectories. in contrast, after loss of illumination, larvae tended to avoid the edges of the concave arena . local and outward movement phases are thus associated with wall-avoidance behavior.

retinal signaling is required to initiate the local movement response
larval zebrafish detect and respond to changes in illumination using retinal signaling and intrinsically light sensitive central neurons . in particular, both retinal and non-visual photoreceptors drive increased activity after loss of illumination  <cit> . to assess retinal signaling, we enucleated larvae, then performed kinematic and trajectory analysis. after loss of illumination, the r-turn li for enucleated larvae increased, confirming a role for non-retinal photoreceptors . however, the li was 48% reduced compared to intact controls, and trajectory analysis indicated that the increase in locked r-turns was insufficient to drive locally restricted movement . in contrast, after loss of illumination, the rate of re-orientation for enucleated larvae immediately increased to the level produced by controls during the outward movement phase . ablating the pineal complex had no effect on local or outward movement parameters . therefore, retinal signaling is required to initiate the local movement phase but extra-retinal signaling mechanisms outside of the pineal are sufficient to drive outward swimming behavior.fig.  <dig> retinal input is required to initiate local but not outward movement. a lock index for r-turns during baseline and immediately following loss of light  during 10 s recordings, for sham operated  and enucleated  larvae. n =  <dig> larvae ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> . * p <  <dig> . b, c fractal dimension  and meander  of path trajectories during dark response for control  and enucleated larvae . * p <  <dig>  for control compared to enucleated larvae. dashed lines show mean values for enucleated larvae under full-field illumination. inset: representative traces of first 2 min of dark for control  and enucleated  larvae. scale bar 20 mm. d mean meander for enucleated larvae during full-field illumination  compared to the first 2 min after loss of illumination  and from 3–10 min after loss of illumination . * p <  <dig> , paired t-test compared to baseline




orthopedia-specified somatostatin-releasing neurons and melanopsin are necessary for search strategy transition
hyperactivity after loss of illumination is impaired in the otpa mutant, a null for the orthopediaa homeobox transcription factor  <cit> . after loss of illumination, the r-turn li in otpa mutants was significantly greater than for controls  and, accordingly, locally restricted movement was strongly potentiated and persisted for significantly longer, with the movement path complexity remaining elevated throughout the 10-min recording period . thus, in the absence of otpa the local movement phase is potentiated and the transition to outward swim trajectories is impaired.fig.  <dig> loss of somatostatinergic neurons and opn4a expressing deep brain photoreceptors potentiates local search. a r-turn lock index for otpa wildtype siblings and mutants during full-field illumination  and immediately following loss of illumination . n =  <dig> larvae ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> . b representative path trajectories for an otpa mutant larva during 10-min recording periods during baseline  and after loss of illumination . arrowheads denote starting positions. chamber: 200 × 200 mm. scale bar 2 mm. color represents fractal dimension. c fractal dimension of path trajectories for otpa wildtype siblings  and mutants . * p <  <dig>  for mutants versus siblings. dashed line shows mean for mutants under full-field illumination. d schematic diagram showing neuronal cell types within orthopedia expression domain. labeled neuron types correspond to the neuronal markers with reduced expression in the otpa mutant background. e mean fractal dimension during 3–5 min following loss of illumination. control group was injected with sgrna against gfp in tg transgenic larvae. controls n = 26; otpa
n = 31; mi174
n = 13; trh
n = 37; sst <dig>  
n = 22; opn4a
n = 36; valopa
n =  <dig>  * p <  <dig>  for mutant groups versus control group. f representative path trajectories of individual larva for a 10 minute duration following loss of illumination. top left: crispr injected control; top right: trh; bottom left: sst <dig> ; and bottom right: opn4a. arrowheads note starting position at time of light extinction. chamber: 200 × 200 mm. color represents fractal dimension, with scale as for 




enucleated otpa mutants did not react to the loss of illumination, confirming that retina- and otpa-specified neurons account for all pathways required to initiate local and outward movement profiles . we therefore asked which otpa-specified neurons drive transition to the outward movement phase of the response. otpa specifies multiple neuronal cell types within the larval zebrafish brain, including ventral diencephalon dopaminergic neurons , and thyrotropin-  and somatostatin-releasing neurons    <cit> . we tested the contribution of these cell types using mutant lines, and by directly generating homozygous mutant larvae using crispr  <cit> . for crispr mutants, we controlled for off-target cutting by replicating our results using independent guide rnas against different loci within the target genes. loss of sst <dig>  recapitulated the delay in swim trajectory transition observed in otpa, whereas no significant changes in locomotor output were observed after loss of da neurons or trh neuropeptide . otpa mutants also lose light-sensitive melanopsin -expressing neurons in the anterior preoptic region  <cit> . accordingly, opn4a mutants exhibited a delayed transition to outward swim trajectories, whereas transition was normal after loss of the non-visual opsin valopa, which is not specified by otpa . thus, among otpa-specified neurons, somatostatinergic neurons, and non-visual opn4a-expressing photoreceptors drive the transition from local to outward swimming movements .fig.  <dig> model for induction of light search behavior by retinal and deep brain photosensory systems. a loss of light detected via the retina drives an initial strong local search . simultaneous stimulation of opn4a and sst <dig>  signaling drives outward locomotor patterns for remote light sources . local search activity initially masks extended search locomotor features. b in enucleated larvae, lack of retinal drive allows remote light-search patterns to emerge immediately after loss of illumination. c in the absence of opn4a and sst <dig>  to promote outward search in otpa mutants, retinal signaling continues to drive local search patterns for a longer period of time, as outward search drive is absent




discussion
we previously proposed that the hyperactivity manifest by larvae in the minutes after loss of illumination promotes aggregation in illuminated regions via photokinesis. photokinesis is a simple behavioral strategy for navigation that uses rapid non-directional movement in dark areas and slower movement in illuminated regions. however, we now demonstrate that the locomotor activity after loss of illumination is not undirected. rather, movement trajectories are highly spatially structured and change during the first few minutes in darkness. for the first 1–2 min after loss of illumination, larvae turn intensively to the same side in the horizontal plane, while gradually swimming downwards, resulting in a helical trajectory. after 3 min, larvae continue to execute re-orienting movements at high frequency, but no longer continuously in the same direction; swim trajectories thus propel larvae out of the local environment.

we considered various interpretations of these movement profiles. for instance, light extinction may trigger an aversive or flight response. indeed, larvae perform a vigorous o-bend response in the first second after loss of illumination  <cit> ; however, because swim travel distance thereafter diminishes below baseline levels, local and outward swim profiles are inconsistent with escape behavior. alternatively, the high fractal dimension and slow descent during the local movement phase might suggest a disorganized or confused behavior, but this is contraindicated by the highly-accurate light-orientation behavior, efficient phototaxis, stable same-side turning and wall-avoidance that also occur during this period. finally, these movement profiles are inconsistent with behavioral sleep, which includes reduced sensory thresholds and substantial reductions in locomotor activity  <cit> .

rather, we interpret the local and outward movement phases as sequential light-seeking responses. initially, larvae execute an area-restricted light-search behavior, which if unsuccessful, is followed by a remote light-search behavior. multiple lines of evidence support this view. first, swim trajectories during the local movement phase  are similar to characteristic features of area-restricted search. similar three-dimensional helical foraging trajectories have been documented in drosophila and microzooplankton and proposed to yield an optimal search strategy when searching for sparsely distributed food sources  <cit> . second, changes to swim profiles were time-limited and rapidly reversed upon restoring illumination, consistent with other motivated states. third, as for other short-term internal states  <cit> , larvae manifest changes in responsiveness to sensory cues, namely increased sensitivity to a light-spot during the local movement phase, and greater wall avoidance during both local and outward movement phases. finally, functional tests of light-seeking behavior support this interpretation – larvae more rapidly reached a nearby patch of light during the local movement phase, and conversely located distant illuminated regions only when tested during the outward movement phase. these changes fulfill operational criteria for defining motivated states  <cit> , in that loss of light produces a change in behavior that  is maintained internally,  is reversible, and  facilitates a specific objective. we therefore propose that the swim profiles seen after loss of illumination constitute internally driven search behaviors that enable larvae to efficiently navigate back into illuminated regions. during active phototaxis, movements that re-orient larvae away from a light-spot are rapidly corrected by contraversive turns  <cit> . however, in the natural environment, a more extensive area-restricted search may be triggered after larvae swim into a small patch of thick foliage or if light is obscured by falling debris. in contrast, sustained remote search activity may be deployed after water currents sweep larvae into large regions of dense undergrowth.

locomotor responses to loss of illumination are driven by both retinal signaling and otpa-specified deep brain photoreceptors  <cit> . our results now reveal that retinal signaling and deep brain photoreceptors differentially trigger local and roaming search states; retinal signaling is required for local movement, whereas otpa-dependent sst <dig> -expressing neurons and opn4a-expressing deep-brain photoreceptors sustain roaming search behavior. however, search strategy transition was less impaired in sst <dig>  and opn4a mutants than in otpa mutants. possible reasons are the presence of supernumerary oxytocin expressing neurons in otpa mutants  <cit> , and the presence of  <dig> nonvisual opsins in the zebrafish  <cit> , raising the potential for uncharacterized additional photoreceptive neurons in the otpa expression domain. nevertheless, our data suggests that after loss of illumination, retinal signaling activates an intense area-restricted search, after which sst <dig> - and opn4a-dependent pathways gradually drive the transition to a roaming search state. indeed, somatostatin signaling regulates other motivated behaviors, tuning response thresholds during reward  <cit>  and defensive  <cit>  behaviors in mammals. in our current model, otpa neurons provide a relatively weak drive, which predominates only when the local search state declines. this idea is supported by the finding that enucleated larvae acutely increase re-orientation rates immediately after the loss of illumination. somatostatin and opn4a may therefore continuously drive the roaming search state in darkness, an impulse which is normally masked by retinal-driven local search. conversely, in the absence of otpa circuitry, retinal signaling is unimpeded by remote search drive, prolonging the local response.

light-search behavior is likely impelled by dwindling nutritional resources. by  <dig> dpf, yolk supplies are almost depleted and larvae actively pursue prey. predation requires visual input; larvae are almost completely unable to locate food in darkness  <cit> . accordingly, larvae are hard-wired to seek and remain in illuminated regions, demonstrating vigorous phototaxis behavior toward restricted areas of light. during phototaxis, sensory information signals through retinal on and off pathways to trigger forward swims and turns, respectively  <cit> . our new results reveal that, in the absence of directional light cues, loss of illumination triggers sequential internally driven light-search strategies involving, first, an area-restricted search for light in the immediate vicinity, followed – if unsuccessful – by a roaming search for light in distant regions.

an unresolved question concerns the “baseline” state of larvae. after 1–2 min of local search, larvae continue executing turn movements at a high rate, but no longer strongly biased to one side, thereby causing outward swimming. although functionally, outward swimming enabled larvae to locate remote light sources more quickly than during the local movement phase, principle component analysis indicated that outward movement parameters clustered either with local search or baseline swim profiles. thus, the outward swimming phase, while occasionally interrupted by episodes of local search behavior, showed similar trajectory characteristics to baseline activity under full-field illumination. nevertheless, wall-avoidance and meander measurements revealed differences between baseline and outward swimming, indicating distinct behavioral states. a strong possibility is that “baseline” behavior under full-field illumination is actually a food-search state; unfed  <dig> dpf larvae, their yolk supplies exhausted, may already be in a roaming search for food, an idea which is consistent with recent work analyzing movement under constant illumination  <cit>  and changes in sensory responsiveness after feeding  <cit> .

unexpectedly, net locomotor activity decreased after a loss of illumination. reduced activity contrasts sharply with many studies on the visual motor response, including from our laboratory, reporting that loss of illumination triggers 5–10 min of hyperactivity  <cit> . we speculate that chamber size accounts for the discrepancy. in most previous work, movement has been constrained using small wells in which larvae constantly encounter the edge of the arena. however, we found that after loss of illumination, larvae avoid barriers, suggesting that in small arenas such as multi-well plates, where the perimeter is frequently encountered, wall avoidance may trigger increased activity. the rationale for wall avoidance after loss of illumination remains unclear, possibly reflecting a strategy to reduce collisions in darkness, or alternatively facilitating exploration by moving larvae away from barriers that prevent them from detecting distant light sources.

CONCLUSIONS
larval stage zebrafish larvae maintain distinct behavioral states, including arousal and sleep . our new findings reveal that internal drives in larvae can additionally produce sophisticated motivated behaviors such as search activity. it is likely that larvae exhibit additional types of autogenic search behavior provoked by exposure to, or loss of stimuli in other sensory modalities. the finding that non-retinal photoreception by melanopsin and somatostatin signaling play a selective role in driving remote light-search is consistent with the idea that non-visual photoreceptors are intimately linked to motivational state control , and provides the opportunity to dissect the ancient evolutionary pathways that allow organisms to adapt to short-term challenges and opportunities in the dynamic natural environment.

