BACKGROUND
the gram-negative bacterium xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris  is the causal agent of "black rot" disease in crucifers, which include a number of plants of economical importance. xanthomonas campestris can be subdivided into different pathovars according to their host range  <cit> . xanthomonads invade compatible host plants via hydathodes, stomata or wound openings. the infection process itself is facilitated by high temperatures and humidity, which are climatic characteristics of a multitude of developing countries in latin america, africa and asia, where xanthomonas epidemics account for substantial economical losses  <cit> . to gather a deeper understanding of how these bacteria cause disease in different plants, the genome sequences of four different xanthomonas pathovars were established  <cit> . furthermore, recent sequencing projects have revealed the genomic information of three different xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris strains  <cit> . this plethora of genomic information is a useful resource to identify genes involved in host specific pathogenicity and in more general virulence mechanisms. the specific host range determining mechanisms are orchestrated by the fine tuned interaction of pathogen derived effector proteins and structures within the host cell  <cit> . these proteins are commonly directly delivered into the host cell by the type-iii secretion system , which is highly conserved among gram-negative pathogens. the components of the ttss are usually encoded by the so-called hrp-operon , which consists of approximately  <dig> genes, of which nine are highly conserved and therefore termed hrc  <cit> . the transcription of the hrp-genes is tightly controlled and only activated in environments that resemble the host  <cit> . one of the key proteins of the ttss is the hrpf pore, which is inserted into the host's plasma membrane and enables the pathogen to channel effector proteins into the host cell  <cit> . general virulence mechanisms involve proteins responsible for trace element acquisition , extracellular proteins with lytic functions as well as protein complexes involved in their secretion  <cit> . these proteins aid the colonization of the host and a saprophytic lifestyle in later stages of disease.

only recently, the role of outer membrane derived vesicles, so-called outer membrane vesicles , have been studied in detail. they have been found to act as vehicles for the transport of virulence associated compounds into other cells  <cit> . omvs are known to be constantly liberated from the outer membrane of most gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . it has been demonstrated that they contain outer membrane and periplasmic proteins and in some cases dna or cell-cell signalling molecules  <cit> . this makes omvs an ideal structure to transport hydrophobic compounds like membrane proteins into the host. the best-studied membrane anchored virulence factor is the clya protein from enterotoxic bacterium e. coli, which forms pores inside the host membrane and thus causes lysis. it has been demonstrated that clya is inserted into the outer membrane of the pathogen as inactive monomers, which are then released and embedded in omvs where they are converted into an active form that assembles into the multimeric membrane pore. upon fusion of the omv with the host membrane a functional clya pore is inserted  <cit> . this clearly indicates the potential of omvs to deliver membrane active virulence factors into the host.

in this study, we present the proteome of omvs isolated from the culture supernatant of the xcc strain b <dig>  furthermore, we could demonstrate that the composition of the omv proteome differs from that of the outer membrane implying some kind of protein sorting mechanism. a considerable amount of proteins identified in the omv fraction are assigned virulence factors or are connected to effector protein transport indicative of the probable involvement of omvs as vehicles for these compounds.

RESULTS
omvs are released from the outer membrane of xcc during growth
electron microscopy of an omv fraction isolated from the culture supernatant of m <dig> minimal medium was performed to determine whether xcc releases omvs into the medium and to test the applicability of the purification method. the electron micrographs of negatively stained outer membrane vesicles mounted on glow-discharged carbon-coated nickel grids indicate that most vesicles have a spherical shape. a few dented vesicles can also be observed . the dents may be a result of dehydration, which occurs during the preparation of the vesicles. the vesicle diameters range from  <dig> to  <dig> nm with an average diameter of  <dig> ±  <dig> nm . immunogold-labeling of whole cell and vesicle preparations was performed using an anti-xcc antibody  <cit> . as displayed in fig. 1b and 1c, the antibody specifically recognized the xcc cells and thus xanthomonas surface-derived compounds in the omvs. furthermore, a lipopolysaccharide -specific sds-page was performed to compare the lps composition of whole cell preparations to that of the omvs . the lanes on the gel loaded with the crude lps preparation and the hot-phenol purified sample displayed bands representing lps , the core attached to lipid-a and free lipid-a. the bands located between the core and lps represent lps synthesis intermediates consisting of the core and different amounts of oligo-saccaride subunits. the lane loaded with the omv sample only displays a band representing the mature lps structure and free lipid-a. this indicates that the omvs are derived from the outer membrane and more interestingly only contain mature lps whilst the whole cell preparations also contain intermediates of the lps biosynthesis.

the omv proteome of xcc contains outer membrane and virulence-associated proteins
to analyse its protein cargo, the omv fraction was harvested from the cell-free culture supernatant of m <dig> cultures and subjected to sds-page. previous attempts to resolve the omv protein fraction using two-dimonesional gel electrophoresis failed due to the high amount of exopolysaccharides that are co-purified with the vesicles. another problem was the low amount of proteins  that could be purified from o litre of culture supernatant, which prohibited further purification steps. therefore, a combination of sds-page and nano-lc-esi-ms/ms of tryptically-digested gel-sections was employed to identify the proteins that associate with the omv fraction. this method has been described previously for various membrane proteome studies  <cit> . the resulting coomassie stained sds-page revealed approximately  <dig> protein bands, which were excised in vertical sections comprising 2– <dig> protein bands per section for subsequent trypsin digestion . the trypsin-generated peptide masses, as well as their fragment ions were determined by nano-lc-esi-ms/ms. this data was the basis for a mascot aided database query, which led to the identification of  <dig> different proteins . a query result was only considered as significant if the overall score was higher than  <dig>  more than two tryptic peptides as well as their fragment ions matched to the protein in question and the calculated molecular weight fitted to the initial gel section. to verify the esi-ms/ms results, individual protein bands were excised from the sds-page and treated as already described. the tryptic peptides were analysed using a maldi-tof-ms approach and the resulting peptide mass fingerprints were used for a mascot aided database query. in this approach, only scores higher that  <dig> were considered significant. only seven proteins could not be verified using the maldi-tof-ms approach . they can also be considered as "insecure" candidates also because their mascot-significance scores are close the threshold . three proteins, hrcu, ompa and ompw <dig>  could be identified in more than one gel section. since they were in neighbouring sections, it can be assumed that they originate from protein bands, which were located in the section border. according to the function or cellular localization it was possible to cluster the proteins into  <dig> groups . five of these groups consider the localization of the proteins within the cell and were termed "cytosol", "inner membrane", "periplasm", "outer membrane" and "exported". the remaining two groups harbour proteins involved in virulence, including "virulence factors" and proteins of the "type-iii secretion" system . the two major protein groups in the omv proteome of m <dig> cultivated xcc cells associate with the "outer membrane" , its majority being tonb-dependent receptor proteins, and the virulence-associated group , which consists of "virulence factors" and "type-iii associated" proteins. the virulence-associated group does not only consist of the membrane attached hrc, hrp  and hrpf proteins but also of "virulence factors"  consisting of avirulence proteins and two cell wall degrading enzymes, a cellulase  and a xylosidase . furthermore, the omvs contain 13% periplasmic proteins, which may be entrapped in the vesicle lumen during their releases from the outer membrane. a software-aided analysis of the c-termini of all identified proteins revealed that 39% have a putative secretion signal, which makes them targets for the general secretion pathway.

the section indicates the gel-section excised from the corresponding sds-page. the values indicated under mw gives the calculated molecular weight of the identified proteins. the size range relates the excised gel-section with regard to the molecular weight standard on the sds-page. score  and coverage  relate to the two approaches  utilized for the identification of the proteins on the sds-page.

in summary, the proteome of the omvs mainly consists of proteins associated to the outer membrane and proteins either located in the periplasm or travelling through it.

omvs do not contain all high abundant proteins present in the om proteome
a comparison of the proteins extracted from omvs and the outer membrane  was conducted to analyse if there is a preference for certain proteins to be located in the omvs. the outer membrane fraction was also separated by sds-page and sectioned as already described . each gel section was digested with trypsin and analysed by nano-lc-esi-ms/ms. the comparison of the sds-page patterns of the omv and om proteome revealed a clear difference between the two proteomes . the mascot software-aided database query using the esi-ms/ms data resulted in the significant identification of  <dig> different proteins . this number clearly does not reflect the exact number of proteins present in the om fraction but rather stands for the most abundant proteins in each gel section. the om protein preparation contains  <dig> different outer membrane proteins, most of them being tonb-dependent receptors . since most of these  <dig> proteins have probability scores above  <dig> it can be presumed, that they belong to the group of high abundant outer membrane proteins. interestingly, only half of these proteins are also present in the omv protein fraction. there are five further outer membrane proteins with probability scores greater than  <dig> that can only be identified in the om proteome. furthermore, only three of the nine tonb-dependent receptors can be found in both protein preparations. the om protein fraction revealed  <dig> non-outer membrane proteins, among those are six secreted, four inner membrane-associated and one cytosolic  protein. the inner membrane-associated proteins are co-purified with the outer membrane, since the ultrasonification process will also liberate inner membrane fragments. the secreted proteins could be co-purified whilst they are associated with one of the membranes during the secretion process. among this class of non-outer membrane proteins are three that could be identified in the om and omv fraction alike . only two proteins, a cellulase  and a β-glucosidase , could be assigned as virulence factors. surprisingly, no type-iii secretion-associated proteins, which are present in abundance in the omv proteome, are among the identified in the om fraction.

the section indicates the gel-section excised from the corresponding sds-page. the values indicated under mw gives the calculated molecular weight of the identified proteins. the size range relates the excised gel-section with regard to the molecular weight standard on the sds-page. score  and coverage  relate to the two approaches  utilized for the identification of the proteins on the sds-page.

although the omvs originate from the outer membrane only less than half of the most abundant om proteins could also be identified in the omv fraction. noteworthy is that all but one of the virulence associated proteins of the omvs are among the high abundant proteins of the outer membrane. therefore,  <dig> proteins, most of them virulence-associated, seem to be enriched in the omv fraction.

the growth medium has an influence on the omv protein composition
the xvm <dig> medium, which is known to induce genes coding for the type-iii secretion system and virulence factors  <cit> , was used to study the influence of growth conditions on the omv proteome. the omv proteins isolated from xvm <dig> cultures were treated as already described. this procedure led to the identification of  <dig> different proteins using the lc-esi-ms/ms approach . the maldi-tof-ms approach could verify the identity of all but five proteins . these proteins can be regarded as "insecure" identifications. nonetheless, 50% of the identified proteins belong to the group "outer membrane". most  of them are also present in the proteomes of the om and omvs isolated from m <dig> cultures. furthermore, seven proteins could only be identified in the omv fractions isolated from both culture conditions; these include three type-iii secretion-associated proteins , three virulence factors  and only one additional protein that is not involved in virulence . another  <dig> proteins are unique to omvs of the xvm <dig> culture. one of these proteins is hrpxv, the regulator of the type-iii secretion system, which might be induced by the culture condition. how this protein associates with the omv fraction, however, is unclear. a noteworthy protein, which also belongs to the unique proteins, is the adhesion protein xada <dig>  which might be co-regulated with the hrp-regulon. the omvs isolated from m <dig> medium contain  <dig> unique proteins. interestingly,  <dig> of these proteins belong to the type-iii secretion system , which should not be induced under this culture condition. also noteworthy are  <dig> lipoproteins, which are exclusive to omvs from the m <dig> culture. this indicates that the growth medium has a clear influence on the protein composition of the omvs. however,  <dig> proteins can be regarded as the core-proteome. they reflect the outer membrane origin of the omvs, since they are also among the most abundant om proteins. the  <dig> proteins common to omvs isolated from both media seem to be characteristic for the omv proteome and a majority of them are involved in virulence.

the section indicates the gel-section excised from the corresponding sds-page. the values indicated under mw gives the calculated molecular weight of the identified proteins. the size range relates the excised gel-section with regard to the molecular weight standard on the sds-page. score  and coverage  relate to the two approaches  utilized for the identification of the proteins on the sds-page.

discussion
outer membrane vesicles are released from the bacterial surface and contribute membrane proteins to the extracellular proteome
previous work of our group describes a comprehensive study of the extracellular proteome of xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris. there we identified some outer membrane proteins among the most abundant extracellular proteins   <cit> . since outer membrane vesicles  are known to be constantly liberated from the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, we suspected that omvs could be the source of outer membrane proteins in the culture supernatant  <cit> . thus we first employed electron microscopy to demonstrate that xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris strain b <dig> releases outer membrane vesicles. the omv proteome revealed that the outer membrane proteins found in the extracellular proteome are also present here. furthermore, two other proteins could be identified in both proteomes, the cellulase egl  and a putative secreted protein . this indicates that omvs contribute to the extracellular proteome by releasing outer membrane proteins into the environment. outer membrane vesicles of other gram-negative bacteria have been described to contain outer membrane proteins, periplasmic proteins, lipopolysaccharides, phospholipids, dna, toxins and other factors associated with virulence  <cit> . previous studies have demonstrated that bacterial omvs can interact with membranes of other gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, which can result in lysis of the target organism  <cit> . furthermore, wai and co-workers  <cit>  could demonstrate that omvs can even deliver toxins into the membrane of a eukaryotic host cell.

electron micrographs demonstrate that vesicles produced by xcc are spherical with a diameter ranging between  <dig> and  <dig> nm with a mean diameter of  <dig> nm. these omvs are much smaller than those described for mammalian pathogens, e.g., enterotoxic e. coli or helicobacter pylori, which have diameters ranging up to  <dig> nm  <cit> . the reduced omv size could be an adaptation towards the plant cell wall, which does not permit the passage of large structures. immunogold electron microscopy with xcc surface-specific polyclonal antibodies indicates that the omvs are released from the surface of xanthomonas cells and therefore originate from the outer membrane. the lps-specific sds-page confirms this finding, indicating that the omvs contain lps. interestingly, however, they do not contain any or comparable amounts of lps synthesis intermediates as could be displayed with whole cell lps preparations. therefore, it can be proposed that the omvs are released from sites of the outer membrane that mainly consist of mature lps.

the omv proteome does not contain all high abundant outer membrane proteins
the results from the proteome experiments also clearly indicate that the omvs originate from the outer membrane. the comparison between the omv and the most abundant om proteins only permits a closer look at the outer membrane protein composition, since the om fraction is contaminated with inner membrane fragments. among the most abundant proteins in the om fraction are  <dig> outer membrane proteins of which only eight are also present in the omv proteome. the  <dig> non-outer membrane proteins are probably loosely associated with either the inner or outer membrane. interestingly, three of these proteins could also be identified in omvs. how proteins, that associate with the inner membrane like the signal recognition particle ffh and the type-ii secretion atpase end up in the omv fraction is unclear. among these non-outer membrane proteins is also the elongation factor tufa. this protein is known to be released or leaked from cultures of numerous bacteria and can therefore be identified in many protein fractions  <cit> . however, tufa cannot be identified in the omv protein fraction, indicating that the omv release from the outer membrane is not an effect of damaged cells. furthermore, no cytosolic proteins could be identified in the omv fraction and only one inner membrane protein was present in the omv sample. this is also an indication that these structures are not products of cell degradation, since we would expect a higher amount of proteins from the inner membrane and of cytosolic origin.

omvs isolated from m <dig> and xvm <dig> medium contain known virulence-associated proteins
a comparison of the omv proteomes obtained from different growth conditions revealed a clear influence on the protein composition. interestingly, the xvm <dig> medium did not elevate the amount of type-iii secretion associated proteins. the only hrp protein, which was not identified in the m <dig> sample was hrpxv, which is known to be the regulator of the hrp-operon and induced by xvm <dig>  <cit> . the adhesin xada <dig> was also among the xvm <dig> induced proteins. it could play a role in the attachment of omvs to the host surface as it has been described for lipopolysaccharides mimicking the lewis blood antigens present on the surface of omvs from helicobacter pylori  <cit> . the omvs were also found to contain a vesicle specific core proteome of  <dig> proteins, which are not among the most abundant om proteins. this group of proteins mainly consists of virulence associated proteins, which may indicate a putative role of these structures in the pathogenicity of xcc. virulence related proteins are also present in the group of proteins that differ between the cultivation conditions. unexpectedly, we identified the so-called avirulence proteins avrbs <dig> and avrbs <dig>  which are transported via the type-iii secretion system  <cit> . since they do not have trans-membrane segments  <cit>  it can be assumes that they are located in the lumen of the omvs. another interesting omv protein is hrpf, the putative translocon of the type-iii secretion system. this protein is proposed to be inserted into the host membrane and serves as attachment site for the type-iii conduit  <cit> . how this protein it transported into the membrane is not entirely clear. one model proposes, that hrpf is transported via the type-iii system attached to the tip of the conduit and then pushed through the host membrane  <cit> . we offer a model in which hrpf is inserted into the bacterial outer membrane and then released into the medium packed in omvs. these omvs could then first attach to the host membrane and then fuse with it to insert hrpf. a similar mechanism has been described for the cytotoxic clya protein of enterotoxic e. coli strains. subunits of this protein are inserted into the bacterial outer membrane and released into vesicles where they multimerise to give rise to the mature pore. upon fusion of the omv with the host membrane the cytotoxic pore is inserted and causes lysis of the host cell  <cit> .

we could demonstrate that xcc releases omvs from its cell surface packed with virulence-associated proteins. furthermore, a comparison with the most abundant proteins from the outer membrane revealed that some proteins are enriched in the omv fraction. further experiments will indicate if omvs serve as vehicles for virulence factors like hrpf and avirulence proteins into the plant cell.

CONCLUSIONS
the plant pathogenic bacterium xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris liberates omvs from its outer membrane during growth. we could demonstrate that these structures not only contain membrane-associated proteins, but also soluble periplasmic proteins, which are probably entrapped in the omv lumen. a comparison with the most abundant proteins from the outer membrane fraction revealed, that not all high abundant proteins are released with omvs, suggesting that some proteins are favourably released with these structures. this may be connected to the membrane composition of the omvs, which differs from whole cell lps preparations  <cit> . nearly half of the proteins that associate with the omv fraction are involved in virulence either being part of the ttss, putative virulence factors or cellulytic enzymes. from the results presented in this study we conclude that plant pathogenic bacteria like xcc can liberate membrane- and virulence-associated proteins attached to omvs into the culture medium. further experiments will have to prove if omvs can attach and fuse with plant membranes. this would indicate whether omvs from plant pathogenic bacteria can deliver virulence-factors as it has been demonstrated for mammalian pathogens.

