BACKGROUND
alternative splicing  is a topic of increasing interests because it has been suggested to be an important contributor to transcriptome/proteome complexity, gene function, and a wide variety of biological processes  <cit> . previous studies have reported that as high as 40~80% of human genes undergo as  <cit> . of the observed as events in mammals, the most common as event is "cassette exon". it can add or remove an individual exon in a transcript  <cit> . cassette exons are sometimes referred to as alternatively spliced exons   <cit> . it has been suggested that ases and constitutively spliced exons  are under different selection pressures and evolve at distinct rates – the former have higher nonsynonymous  substitution rates but lower synonymous  substitution rates than the latter  <cit> . ases are regarded as under relaxed selection pressure because of their dispensability in transcripts. also, conserved ases  have been suggested to be constrained for preservation of the reading frame  <cit> . many studies have pointed out that preservation of reading frame may indicate functional selection pressure of an as event  <cit> .

recently, the alternative splicing database  project at european bioinformatics institute   <cit>  further classifies cassette exons into simple and complex cassette exons . complex ases differ from simple ones in that the former change the lengths of one or both of their flanking exons when they are included in the transcripts, whereas the latter do not . therefore, inclusion of a complex ase results in simultaneous changes of two or three exons. in contrast, inclusion of a simple ase does not alter its flanking exon and appear to cause fewer changes. chen et al. have reported that simple ases have higher ka and lower ks than cses, whereas complex ases have evolutionary rates to the opposite of simple ases vs. cses  <cit> . they also found that gc contents and codon usage bias are associated with increased ks values in complex ases but not in simple ones  <cit> . such observation modified the previous view that ases accelerate evolution of protein subsequences. however, whether simple/complex splicing pattern is related to preservation of reading frame has not been investigated.

RESULTS
since ases in one species may be cses in the other , it is necessary to specify the splicing pattern of the exons studied. therefore, we classify ases into three major groups according to splicing pattern conservation . each group is subsequently divided into four subsets . we then compare the frequencies of reading frame preservation  between simple and complex ases . for group a, the frfps for human  simple and complex ases are  <dig> %  and  <dig> % , respectively. in comparison, the frfps of cses approximate 40% . it has been well recognized that cses have lower frfps than ases. however, we find that although this is true for simple ases , it does not seem to hold for complex ases. the frfps are higher in cses than in complex ases in both species, though the differences are not highly significant . overall, our results indicate that simple and com1plex ases are under opposite selection pressure for protein reading frame preservation. particularly, complex ases differ significantly in frfp from commonly regarded ases, which are dominated in number by simple ases. we then extract conserved ases  from group a. note that "conservation" here refers to the conservation of the ase/cse splicing pattern between human and mouse, rather than the simple/complex pattern. we find that the frfp of group c simple ases increases to  <dig> % in human and  <dig> % in mouse . meanwhile, for group c complex ases, the frfps decrease to <35%  . it is obvious that simple ases in group c have higher frfps than in group a, whereas the reverse is true for complex ases in both human and mouse. we then compare the frfps of simple and complex ases with those of cses. for simple ases, group a has lower frfps than group c, while both groups have higher frfps than those of cses . however, for complex ases, the trend is reversed. even if the expected frfp of cses is set as 45%  <cit> , the trends still hold well in conserved ases. therefore, simple and complex ases seem to cause frfp changes to the opposite ends when compared with cses. note that the "cses" stated above are those with unspecified splicing pattern conservation. we therefore retrieve  <dig>  pairs of conserved cses for comparison. the frfps of conserved cses are  <dig> % in human and  <dig> % in mouse, respectively. these figures further confirm our observations that cses tend to have higher frfp than complex ases but lower frfp than simple ones. overall, our result supports chen et al's suggestion that simple and complex ases cause evolutionary changes to the contrary ends with cses in-between  <cit> .

note: all exons include cses and all ases. all ases include simple ases, complex ases, and ase type uncertain. lineage-specific and conserved ase groups are subsets of the ase conservation unspecified group.

to further probe the effects of splicing pattern conservation on frame preservation, we compare the frfps between conserved and lineage-specific ases . as shown in figure  <dig>  for simple ases, conservation of ase/cse splicing pattern results in an increase in frfp. in contrast, splicing pattern conservation causes the frfp to drop in complex ases, such observation disobeys the previous view  <cit>  that conserved ases have a higher probability to be frame-preserving than lineage-specific ones.

on the other hand, also see table  <dig>  we find that >70% of the ases  have cse counterparts in the other species, indicating that as patterns tend not to be evolutionarily conserved in human and mouse. if only conserved ases are considered, the simple splicing pattern has a much higher probability of being conserved between human and mouse than the complex splicing pattern . the result indicates that most complex ases are lineage-specific.

another issue of interest is that, since a complex ase looks like a simple event plus one  exon extension/truncation event , the frfps of complex ases may in fact reflect the effects of exon extension/truncation events. however, as shown in table  <dig>  we find that the frfps in the lineage-specific exon extension/truncation events are around 50%, whereas in conserved events, the frfps significantly increase to over 60% . such an increase in frfp towards conserved ases is similar to what is observed in simple ases. therefore, exon extension/truncation events and complex ases may be under different selection pressures for reading frame preservation. we speculate that a complex splicing event is rather an integrated "module" that requires synchronized changes in neighboring exons, than merely a simple ase accidentally coupled with exon extension/truncation events. to find support for this hypothesis, we further analyze whether the length changes caused by complex ases and their flanking exons can offset the frame-shifting effects of each other and retain the upstream reading frame. we find that the frfps of complex ases coupled with flanking exons  are close to those of simple ases . in group c, the frfps of complex+flanking exons  are significantly higher than those of conserved cses . therefore, the selection pressure for frame preservation may apply to transcripts as a whole, but not to complex ases per se. furthermore, our results imply that in an alternatively spliced transcript, neighboring exons of an ase may evolve in a coordinated way to avoid protein dysfunction.

note that "reading frame preservation" here means that the changes in exon length caused by such events are multiples of  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
in sum, one surprising finding of this study is that the frfp of complex ases is lower than that of cses. our result suggests that the frame-shifting effects of complex ases are rescued by the compensatory changes in the flanking exons, thus leaving the downstream protein reading frames unaltered. therefore, complex ases appear to be more relaxed from selection pressure than simple ones in terms of reading frame preservation. one possible reason is that most observed ases  are simple ases  and the previously analyzed results are likely dominated by the effects of these exons. if we divide ases into simple and complex ases, the opposite evolutionary effects between them are observed. previously, we have reported that complex ases are under stronger selection pressure against amino acid changes than simple ones  <cit> . in addition, we find that exons that participate in both simple and complex as events have intermediate frfps, which fall between those of simple and complex ases . in sum, our results reveal that, simple and complex ases have quite distinct evolutionary features. it appears that both simple and complex as patterns have functional importance in view of the two different forms of selection pressure  for which they are constrained. although the biology of complex ases has rarely been documented, it is likely that this ase type has resulted from a different molecular mechanism and played a different role from that of simple ases.

