BACKGROUND
in protein sequences, compositionally biased  regions are segments whose amino acids’ composition is significantly different from the average amino acid usage of the proteome  <cit> . cbs are abundant in proteomes and significantly diverge from one protein family to another depending on function  <cit> . these regions often exist in intrinsically disordered domains together with ordered domains in the same proteins and are, most of the time, involved in regulatory functions  <cit> . the cb regions are found in all the three domains of life   and has also been reported in viral genomes  <cit> . ekman et al.  <cit>  reported that cb are contained in highly connected “hub” proteins compared to non-hub proteins. few studies have investigated protein regions with biased composition in positive  or negative amino acid  . these clusters of charged residues are often grouped, producing hence local concentrations of charge within cb, called charge clusters. these regions are most of the time present at the surface of the tertiary or quaternary structure of proteins and contribute to their stability, folding and/or activation as have been supposedly suggested for some proteins families  <cit> . they have been described for the first time in association with functional domains of cellular transcription factors by brendel and karlin  <cit> . they are also thought to facilitate intramolecular folding and cooperative protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions. charge clusters, named also runs of charge residues, appear to play important roles in protein transport, localization, and function regulatory . in fact, the flexible nature of regions lacking well-defined folding structures may be responsible for their versatile binding within different targets  <cit> . for example positive charge clusters  are generally associated with signal transduction in the cytoplasm and act as linkers binding within transmembrane proteins  <cit> . on the other side, negative charge clusters  are involved in cation coordination   <cit> . moreover, the presence of both positive and negative charge clusters in the same protein sequence, named mixed charge clusters, is thought to contribute in stabilizing and facilitating quaternary structure formation  <cit> .

the identification of charge clusters and their mapping within protein sequences is of great interest. in fact, it might bring new insights into the mode of interaction between these regions and other regions in target proteins and provide a better understanding of several biological and pathological processes. only few algorithms dedicated to the identification of these clusters have been described in the literature  <cit>  but, none of them allowed specific identification of cc in proteins. we recently developed a tool called “finding charge cluster in protein sequences”  and reported its efficient use in detecting cc in eukaryotic proteomes  <cit> . in this study we identified linear and disjoint ccs within protein sequences and get accurate information about the number and position of ccs in proteins of different eukaryotic proteomes. here we investigate some virus proteomes that have not been addressed before. the only reported work was related to low complexity region as support for source of variability in viral proteins  <cit> . furthermore, blaisdell and karlin  <cit>  is the only published screening of distinctive cluster charge in epstein-barr virus proteome. in this study, a proteome-wide scan of linear ccs in  <dig> human viruses was performed to identify significant ccs in viral proteins and discuss their potential functional properties.

RESULTS
description of studied proteomes
in this study, the biggest proteome was that of the human cytomegalovirus  which contained  <dig> proteins and the smallest one contained just a single protein and this was the case of  <dig> viruses . the distribution of the length of all studied protein sequences is shown in fig.  <dig>  the average length was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  amino acids  .fig.  <dig> the distribution of the length of all studied protein sequences


mean ± standard deviation


ncc negative cluster charge, pcc positive cluster charge




no positive charge clusters  were detected in the single-protein viruses and the rate of cc-free proteins varied from 94 to 92 %, respectively for pcc and ncc. the difference between the average length of protein sequences with and without charge clusters is significant  whatever the cluster type considered. regarding the mean length of proteins sequences, it was significantly different between pcc and ncc . nccs were more prevalent than pccs, with  <dig> ncc against  <dig> pcc detected in the overall  <dig> protein sequences.

occurrence of positive charge clusters
one hundred sixty two  pcc were identified in  <dig> protein sequences. among these, only  <dig> proteins contained two pcc while all others had just only one. the pcc-containing proteins belong to  <dig> virus families  and to  <dig> different virus groups  .

the highest prevalence of positive charge clusters was found in herpesviridae family  followed by papillomaviridae . though, the poorest proteomes in charge clusters were picobirnaviridae, paramyxoviridae and hepadnaviridae . we noted that the pcc were more prevalent in dsdna  than ssrna or dsrna  groups .

the average size of pcc-containing proteins was 522 ±  <dig> aa and 75 % of these proteins are smaller than  <dig> aa.

the analysis of variance revealed significant differences for the length of protein sequences between groups of virus  and families . the size of pccs varied from <dig> to  <dig> aa. the average size was 21 ±  <dig> aa. a significant difference for the cc size was noted between group of virus  and families .

the shortest pcc was found in epstein - barr virus and was conserved within  <dig> strains, for the same protein . this latter maintains ebv latent infection of b-lymphocyte, by preventing lytic reactivation of the virus in response to surface immunoglobulin  cross-linking. it acts as a dominant negative inhibitor of the sig-associated protein tyrosine kinases, lyn and syk. it also blocks translocation of the b-cellantigen receptor  into lipid rafts, preventing the subsequent signaling and accelerated internalization of the bcr upon bcr cross-linking. it serves as a molecular scaffold to recruit syk, lyn and e <dig> protein-ubiquitin ligases, such as itch and nedd4l, leading to ubiquitination and potential degradation of both tyrosines kinases. it also possesses a constitutive signaling activity in non-transformed cells, inducing bypass of normal b lymphocyte developmental checkpoints allowing immunoglobulin-negative cells to colonize peripheral lymphoid organs  <cit> .

the longest pcc  belongs to unclassified anelloviridae family and seems to play a role in the self-assembly of the icosahedral capsid. in addition, the pcc  was detected in capsid protein sequences and particularly within torque teno virus.

mapping of positive charge clusters relative to protein domains
according to pfam  <cit>  database, the pccs are more commonly located in the functional domains , than in n-terminal  or in interdomain  or c-terminal regions  the fisher exact test also showed a significant difference between virus groups according to the functional domain classifications  .

a significant difference in distribution was also observed between pcc and ncc  with the occurrence of ncc being more frequent in c-terminal region and of pcc within functional domains .

occurrence of negative charge clusters
the number of ncc detected was  <dig> in  <dig> protein sequences. the majority of the proteins  had only one ncc while  <dig> proteins have two nccs, three proteins contained  <dig> ncc and only two proteins had  <dig> ncc.

the average size of ncc-containing proteins is 1264 ±  <dig> aa and about 75 % of the proteins having nccs have a size higher than  <dig> aa. the ncc were screened in  <dig> virus families .

similar to pcc, the families with the highest number of ncc in proteome are the herpesviridae  followed by papillomaviridae virus  .

the analysis of variance revealed significant differences for the length of protein sequences between virus groups  and families .

the size of nccs varies from  <dig> to  <dig> aa. the average size was 25 ±  <dig> aa. a significant difference in ncc length was noted between virus groups  and families .

while the smallest ncc  was detected in an uncharacterized protein rl <dig> from cytomegalovirus, the largest  one was found in tegument protein ul <dig> homolog from varicellovirus. this protein is reported to bind to various rna transcripts, plays a role in the attenuation of selective viral and cellular mrna degradation by modulating the activity of host shutoff rnase orf17/vhs. possible involvement in the primary envelopment of virions in the perinuclear space, probably by interacting with two nuclear egress proteins orf <dig> and orf <dig> was also described  <cit> .

there was a significant difference between the distribution of ncc and pcc among virus families and groups . also, a significant difference of size between ncc and pcc was found . in fact, nccs are in average three times more prevalent than pccs in ssrna viruses and this ratio varied among groups .fig.  <dig> the ratio of nccs and the number of pccs in virus groups




likewise, the ncc were more prevalent in the functional domains  than in c-terminal , interdomain  and n-terminal regions . the fisher exact test also showed a significant difference between virus groups according to the functional domain classifications  .

mixed charge clusters
only  <dig> protein sequences contained both type of ccs . in fact, these proteins hold exactly one pcc and one ncc, except for one protein  which has two pccs and one ncc and is found in unclassified anelloviridae. it is a protein involved in the self-assembly of icosahedral capsid  <cit> .

the protein sequences with mixed ccs are involved in several functions including self-assembling, cleavage of the polyprotein into functional products, up-regulation of the viral expression and regulation of productive infection.

these mixed charge clusters were present in four families   and four groups of viruses  . both ncc and pcc in proteins having mixed cc, are located in interdomain and in domains at equal rates . no significant difference in their distribution was found .

conserved charge clusters
the conserved pccs are found between two to eight proteins. in fact, the eight proteins having a conserved pcc are non-structural polyprotein 1ab and 1a; these proteins contained the viral protease participating in the cleavage of the polyprotein into functional products. it contains also the activities necessary for replication of genomic rna, as well as transcription of subgenomic mrna  <cit> .

conserved ncc were found in two to nine proteins. these proteins were involved in genome replication. they also played a crucial rolein the formation of virus factories  when associated with another non structural protein . these viroplasms are large inclusions in the cytoplasm where core-like replication intermediates are assembled and rna replication takes place. they may regulated nsp2-rna interactions during genome replication, since non structural protein  <dig> competes with rna for the same binding site on the nsp <dig> octamer. these proteins bind to either ssrna or dsrna with similar affinities  <cit> .

the number of conserved clusters varied between  <dig> for the pcc to  <dig> for the ncc. a difference was illustrated between the distribution of conserved pcc and conserved ncc within virus groups  and families .

also, a significant difference of size between ncc and pcc was found . both conserved charge clusters were predominatly located in domains within quite difference concerning the ncc conserved that are present also in interdomain .

identification of de novo motifs
in order to identify new motifs present within pcc or ncc screened, we generate two types of fasta files from the charge clusters detected. these files were submitted separately to meme   <cit>  to discover de novo motifs shared between clusters. three motifs were found for ncc with significant e-values .

multiple alignments were done, despite the fact that clusters detected have different lengths, but for the two cases of charge clusters. there are three regions conserved between clusters . these results confirm the presence of conserved motifs shared among clusters. we also used scanprosite to scan proteins for matches against the prosite collection  <cit>  of motifs including user-defined patterns . no hits were detected.

discussion
we examined the proteomes of a large number of annotated human viruses that are representative of all virus groups, for the occurrence of runs of charged amino acids  using a specific tool  that we have recently developed  <cit> .

in fact, few analyses of cc in proteins have been studied, mostly in cellular genomes. the screening of distinctive ccs in proteins has been reported for the first time  <dig> years ago in epstein-barr virus  <cit>  but no exhaustive study was performed. indeed, additional studies have been made since that velasco et al.  <cit>  reported a computer analysis of low complexity regions  present in glycoprotein <dig>  from hiv <dig>  their results suggest that lcrs may represent an important source of antigenic variation in hiv- <dig> population with high number of glycolysation sites. but they did not provide a systematic tool for detecting theses sequence patterns. in fact, since brendel and karlin  <cit> , few algorithms have provided a general methodology to assess statistical significance of charge configuration. in their work, karlin and brendel  <cit>  provided an application in viral genes for few proteins from epstein barr-virus. although, they demonstrated also that aggregate significant charge configurations and repeats, found in ebna1-ebna <dig>  ebna <dig>  lydma bzlf <dig>  are important functionally for the latent existence and for the initiation of lytic cycle and may be characteristic of these conditions.

in this work, we present the first systematic and proteome-wide analyses of the occurrence of charge clusters in viral proteins. our tool  has already been used to identify significant and disjoint ccs in seven eukaryotic proteomes  <cit> . in comparison with our previous work  <cit> , we found also that the ncc were more prevalent than pccs in all studied  proteomes. we also demonstrated clearly that human viral proteomes harbor less charged than eukaryotic proteomes, but based on our studies there seems to be no significant difference in the relative frequencies of ncc and pcc in both proteomes.

brendel et al.  <cit>  have also reported that proteins with charge structures are much more predominant in animal dna viruses as compared to both animal rna viruses and prokaryotic viruses. in fact, we noticed that charge clusters were quite frequent in capsid and core proteins, whereas surface  proteins contain very often nccs. pccs or nccs were abundant in regulatory proteins implicated in transcriptional transactivation and cellular transformation. this contrast might reflect the role of protein charge structures in facilitating competitive virus-host interactions involving the cellular transcription, translation, protein sorting, and transport apparatus  <cit> .

for all proteins screened which structures have been resolved, we found that all cc  were detected in intrinsically disordered domains that are also more easily cleaved, confirming similar findings reported by freire et al.  <cit> . indeed, this occurs to facilitate the conversion of separating viral in flaviviruses  <cit> . moreover, the multi-functionality in rna-interacting proteins via disordered domains is frequent even among non enveloped viruses  <cit> . despite the fact that the roles of these proteins in genome packaging and rna chaperoning are to some extent well described and characterized, their roles in the intermediate events, comprising viral fusion and genome delivery into cytoplasm, remain poorly understood.

as reported in the study of freire et al.  <cit> , we also found that supercharged viral proteins are almost exclusively capsid proteins and per consequence they might confer evolutionary advantage to some virus. so, capsid protein may have genomes transported across membrane among their multiple functionalities  <cit> .

to understand the mechanism by which the membrane translocation functionalities are embedded in viral proteins, we screened our pcc for correspondence to cell-penetrating peptides  using two online databases: cellppd  <cit>  and cpppred  <cit> . the results showed that cell-penetrating domains were found even in the other regions of proteins screened . in fact, all our pcc encompassing 7– <dig> amino acids and highly positively charged were predicted as cpps, for the rest, they cannot be screened, due to the size limit of prediction tools. experimental investigations are needed to validate these findings.

the abundance of cpp sequences in viral proteins revealed that virus can be explored for drugs and drug carriers in biotech pharmacology and can be considered as valuable tools for drug delivery across membranes mainly in genetic therapy  <cit> . moreover, viral-derived cpps my replace viruses themselves as nanocarriers, showing advantage with respect to the potential biological hazards associated with viruses and the cost of the therapy .

the presence of cpps in viral proteins suggests that their function/requirement is conserved and optimized through evolution. due the poor understanding of anionic cpps class and the fact that they do not form a class by their own and they are assigned to different classes on a case-by-case basis, we cannot confirm that our ncc screened are genuine cpps. an experimental validation of ncc as cpp is needed based on cell culture and murine models.

for the de novo motifs screened, no match was found against the prosite collection of motifs. these results are expected; first, because these regions were defined as compositionally biased  regions and per consequence were automatically filtered by the program. secondly, the viruses are deeply under represented in these databases. obviously, the  can be a source of hypervariability providing a panel of antigenic variation like in hiv- <dig> and enhancing the capacity of virus to avoid host immune system  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the identification and the screening of clusters charges in proteins is a key analysis to asses any quantitative structure-function correlation in proteins. in this work, we tried to find for the detected linear clusters a function or role in protein interaction in viral proteomes . different approaches have been adopted to elucidate the multitude of viral structural proteins’ functions and to explain how they can co-evolve/interact with their hosts. our suggested program provides a valuable tool to screen charge clusters in viral proteomes that may enrich our vision in determining the potential role of these clusters and enhance the research to better the current understanding of the molecular events driving virus transfections. our tool has generated potential repository databases of anti-viral targets delivery and vaccines that can be explored for infectious diseases or treatment. in fact, this kind of targeting strategy can be used in cancer tumor, or on diagnosis and drug delivery vehicles that can locate cancer cells and helps treat or remove tumors  <cit> .fig.  <dig> the main steps of screening cluster charge




