BACKGROUND
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor  is a hematopoietic growth factor involved in the generation of granulocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells from hematopoietic progenitor cells  <cit> . the gm-csf receptor is a heterodimer of the gm-csf receptor α subunit and the β subunit which is not directly involved in binding gm-csf. gm-csf is used clinically in the field of oncology and hematology  <cit> . recently we have identified gm-csf as a neuronal growth factor in the brain which counteracts apoptosis, and reduces infarct size in stroke models in vivo  <cit> . gm-csf has also been identified as a factor involved in arteriogenesis after brain ischemia  <cit> . gm-csf is therefore the third hematopoietic factor after epo and g-csf that has functions in the brain.

gm-csf has very similar characteristics to g-csf in the brain in terms of patterns of expression, anti-apoptotic functions, and neuroprotective effects  <cit> . g-csf has a prominent effect on the neuronal differentiation of adult neural stem cells  <cit> . we therefore determined whether gm-csf might have a similar role also on the differentiation of stem cells.

RESULTS
the gm-csf receptor alpha is expressed on adult neural stem cells
the gm-csf receptor is expressed in a broad variety of brain regions, with a preferentially neuronal expression pattern  <cit> . we also detected expression in regions where neural stem cells persist in the adult brain, such as the dentate gyrus. gm-csfr α was expressed by cells in the subgranular zone, and in cells of the granular layer that are reminiscent of migrating stem cells . we also detected expression of the receptor on adult neural stem cells from the hippocampus, that also stained positive for the stem cell marker nestin . stem cells in culture also expressed the gm-csf receptor as judged by rt-pcr .

gm-csf promotes neuronal differentiation of adult neural stem cells
we therefore asked whether gm-csf influenced the differentiation of adult neural stem cells. to determine if gm-csf potentially influenced the generation of mature neural cell types we assayed the expression of the neuronal marker genes β-iii-tubulin and neuron-specific enolase , the oligodendrocytic marker proteolipid protein , and the astrocytic marker glial fibrillary acidic protein  by quantitative pcr  in adult neural stem cells .  <dig> days after gm-csf treatment  of adult neural stem cells we detected a significant induction of β iii-tubulin, and a non-significant elevation of nse, whereas regulation of plp or gfap was not detectable .

to determine whether this induction of mature neuronal marker expression was concentration-dependent, we assayed gm-csf-induced differentiation by a luciferase reporter assay  <cit> . adult neural stem cells were transfected with the pgl3-p-βiii-tubulin reporter vector and stimulated with increasing concentrations of gm-csf . we detected a concentration-dependent activation of the β iii-tubulin promoter after  <dig> h of gm-csf exposure . as positive control, nscs were treated with the standard differentiation protocol involving withdrawal of egf and bfgf, and addition of fcs.  <dig> ng/ml gm-csf had the same induction potential compared to this standard protocol.

while the above assays measure marker induction on the cell population level, we used fluorescence-activated cell counting to determine differentiation on the cellular level. the percentage of map-2-positive cells doubled under gm-csf treatment . in summary, gm-csf promoted neuronal differentiation of neural stem cells in vitro.

discussion
recently we uncovered that the hematopoietic factor gm-csf is also a neuronal growth factor with strong anti-apoptotic actions on neurons  <cit> . this characteristic is shared with two other important hematopoietic factors, epo and g-csf. on top of these anti-apoptotic properties, both hematopoietic factors also display neurogenic activities. epo enhances neuronal differentiation of neural stem cells in vitro  <cit> , epo-receptor deficient mice display reduced embryonic neurogenesis  <cit> , mice with a brain-specific knock-down of the epo receptor show a decrease in stroke-induced neurogenesis and migration  <cit> , and exogenously added epo enhances neurogenesis and behavioural outcome after injury models in vivo  <cit> . likewise, the g-csf receptor is expressed on neural stem cells in the brain and in vitro  <cit> , g-csf stimulates neuronal differentiation of neural stem cells in vitro  <cit> , and treatment of animal injury models with g-csf enhances neurogenesis and functional recovery  <cit> . positive effects of g-csf on neurogenesis in an animal model for alzheimer's disease have also been described  <cit> . the multimodal efficacy of these factors, combined with their established safety in other indications, has led to a number of clinical trials in stroke patients  <cit> . gm-csf is a likewise attractive candidate for clinical development, because it is clinically in use for a number of years in hematological indications, is anti-apoptotic and neuroprotective in vivo, passes the intact blood-brain barrier  <cit> , and also has a neurogenic potential, likely beneficial for long-term stroke recovery. further studies need to address issues of functional recovery and neurogenesis in rodent stroke models.

presence of the gm-csf receptor has also been identified on neuroepithelial cells from embryonic mouse brains  <cit> . addition of gm-csf at concentrations of  <dig>  to  <dig> μg/ml for  <dig> h inhibited staurosporine-induced apoptosis, and increased the number and diameter of stem cell colonies. with addition of  <dig>  μg/ml gm-csf for  <dig> h the authors report a diminished number of map- <dig> and gfap-positive cells, indicating a potential negative impact of gm-csf on  differentiation. in general these data from the embryo support our findings on adult neural stem cells, with regard to presence of the receptor on neural stem cells, and anti-apoptotic actions of gm-csf  <cit> . however, there is an apparent discrepancy in the role of gm-csf in differentiation. while it is possible that there is a principle switch in the function of gm-csf from a more proliferation-enhancing growth factor at the embryonic stage to a differentiation-enhancing factor in adult life, there are a number of important differences between both studies that make final conclusions difficult. the most prominent relate to the concentrations of gm-csf employed by kim et al., that appear unphysiologically high for a growth factor . at least for epo, similar functions on embryonic and adult stem cells have been described  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
here we have shown that the gm-csf receptor is expressed on adult neural stem cells, and that gm-csf induces dose-dependent neuronal differentiation of these cells. this property places gm-csf together with other hematopoietic factors that have recently been shown to function also as growth factors in the brain. on hematopoietic stem cells, gm-csf induces the generation and maturation of neutrophilic granulocytes and monocytes/macrophages. a similar role of gm-csf in hematopoietic and neural differentiation underlines the similarities that exist between the two stem cell populations  <cit> . it appears that the hematopoietic factors epo, g-csf, and gm-csf have all evolved to serve basic cellular functions such as anti-apoptosis and differentiation in two different body compartments.

