BACKGROUND
relative quantification of mrna transcripts requires endogenous normalizers, i.e. reference genes. the normalization of the expression of target genes favors the elimination of unspecific variation caused by differences in starting material, rna extraction, enzymatic efficiencies, transcriptional activity and presence of inhibitors in the samples. a suitable reference gene has to i. be adequately expressed in the tissue of interest, ii. not be co-regulated, and iii. show comparable expression levels with target genes. in addition, it should show reduced variability in expression levels among samples and experimental conditions  <cit> .

a brief review of the literature shows that a limited number of genes is commonly utilized in rt-qpcr experiments as reference. however, strategies have been developed to validate the use of reference genes experimentally  <cit>  and to apply computational approaches that allow to monitor the stability of genes in respect to others in all samples  <cit> , thus allowing proper normalization of rt-qpcr data.

the aim of the present study is to identify candidate genes in the cephalopod mollusc octopus vulgaris that could be used in rt-qpcr experiments as internal reference  to normalize the expression of target genes. such an approach is novel for this taxon and may result of great advantage in future experiments given the complexity of the behavioral repertoire of this animal when compared with its relatively simple neural organization  <cit> .

RESULTS
the brain  and, as control tissue, the mantle of naïve o. vulgaris were utilized as samples in this study. two different sets of individuals were used: a broad collection  caught throughout the year  and a restricted sample  collected exclusively during the summer .

expression stability of candidate reference genes
likewise other studies, we chose 16s rrna , β-actin , elongation factor 1a  and α-tubulin  as candidate reference genes . in addition, partial sequences of 18s rrna and ubiquitin  were also identified for this work .

primer sequences , amplicon size in bp  and calculated reaction efficiencies  for rt-qpcr experiments are also reported. newly identified genes in o. vulgaris are marked by an asterisk.

a. according to gene ontology  for each gene is listed a go accession number.

b. efficiency for each primer pair was derived from standard curves using five serial dilutions of cdna samples, as described in methods.

the range of cycle thresholds for the hkg analyzed  resulted quite different among samples. it is noteworthy to report that 16s rrna exhibited the highest range of variation in ct , when compared with the other genes, in all tissues considered . in addition, as expected for a cytoskeleton structural gene, the expression of actb was higher in the mantle than in the brain  also when compared with the other candidate reference genes .

the gene expression stability of the candidate reference genes for our two octopus samples sets was evaluated with bestkeeper  <cit> , genorm  <cit>  and normfinder  <cit> . a tabularized overview of the results is presented in figure  <dig>  a stepwise elimination of reference genes according to the results obtained from each analysis provided differences and commonalities in the results of the application for the three algorithms. interestingly, a different result was obtained for each set of samples  and when the different tissues were considered . when analyzing all tissue samples together for animals belonging to set a , bestkeeper and normfinder revealed ubi as the best candidate. genorm suggested the pair tuba-ubi to be the best combination of two genes, but with m values above the recommended threshold. in addition, the expression of tuba was considered too variable for bestkeeper.

the analysis of samples taken from a more homogeneous set of animals  provided, as expected, a consensus between the three algorithms. in fact, each software indicated the pair tuba-ubi as the best combination of reference genes .

a different pattern appeared when both sets of samples were considered . again, genorm was not capable to provide a combination of reference genes because the variability in expression resulted in m values above the suggested level of acceptance. similarly, bestkeeper indicated tuba as the best reference gene, but suggested that the levels of ubi mrna in the different samples were too variable to be recommended as reference. normfinder found ubi as the best hkg.

normfinder also allows to define experimental conditions/samples in a data set  <cit> . for our purposes, here we considered the mantle as control tissue when studying the expression of different genes in the brain. in these circumstances, normfinder revealed ubi and tuba as the best combination of reference genes for evaluating the expression of target genes in animals belonging to different sets.

expression level of target genes
in order to apply this pair of reference genes , we analyzed the relative expression of target genes in the two sets of animals in different tissues . the two transcription factors considered in this study  did not have significantly different levels of expression in different tissues, similar to what resulted by analyzing the expression profile of dopamine transporter  in the octopuses . on the contrary, tyrosine hydroxylase  mrnas reached expression levels in the optic lobes that were significantly higher when compared with those observed in other tissues .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we analyzed the expression profiles of some genes here identified for octopus vulgaris for the first time. we applied rt-qpcr analysis, which is unprecedented in cephalopods, and, as a prerequisite, we also validated candidate reference genes. normalization strategies are required to correct sample-to-sample variability in order to reveal gene-specific variation among experimental conditions and/or tissues. similarly to what occurs in other animal models , normalization of mrna levels to the cell number is not possible for o. vulgaris tissues.

our experiments showed that the expression of several so called housekeeping genes vary among different conditions  and/or tissues , but also when the different parts in the brain of the octopus  are considered. however, in such circumstances an algorithm that takes into account different conditions in a given experimental design  results to be beneficial for the identification of suitable reference genes to be used in rt-qpcr experiments. this was our case. normfinder allowed us to identify ubi and tuba as the appropriate reference genes for most of the analyzed samples. moreover, this gene pair resulted to be chosen as the best combination when a tissue  is used as control to study the expression of different genes in the brain. we applied this reference gene pair to analyze the level of expression of our target genes  in different regions of octopus brain applying a geometric approach that take into account primer efficiencies for both reference and target genes.

in our experimental conditions, 16s and 18s rrnas, eef1a and actb resulted not reliable as reference genes in terms of stability and relative levels of expression, in analogy to what is reported for other species .

in particular, the expression of 16s rrna allowed to identify two discrete groups of animals  in our sample. this did not correlate with sex, seasonality or the body size of the animals and was independent from the tissues considered. the fact that 16s rrna is a mitochondrial gene suggests that this may be related with physiological  status of the animals. similarly, we cannot exclude that 18s rrna expression may be influenced by physiological conditions. moreover, we found that actb reached higher levels of expression in the mantle when compared to the brain; it also resulted expressed with high interquartile ranges among samples, similarly to what resulted in other experimental settings  <cit> . surprisingly, the three algorithms did not indicate eef1a as a suitable reference gene in our experimental conditions . however, its expression is comparable to the other putative reference genes . this resembles what recently found in other systems  <cit> .

in order to account for the largest inter-individual variability in the octopus, we analyzed some target genes separately in two different groups of animals, one representing the whole population  and one more restricted to sub-adults of the summer season . the expression levels detected for each animal group suggest a correlation between data set heterogeneity and gene expression variability as deduced by the elevated ct value variability obtained from samples belonging to octopuses of set a.

moreover, octopuses of our samples showed low expression levels for transcription factors when compared with mrna coding for proteins highly utilized in the metabolic pathway . it is interesting to note that dopamine-related genes were abundantly expressed in the optic lobes of o. vulgaris, confirming previously published data .

in conclusion, we were able to identify reference genes to be utilized for normalization in particular conditions in rt-qpcr experiments designed to test gene expression in different tissues of o. vulgaris and to describe inter-individual variability in gene expression in naïve octopuses.

