BACKGROUND
microarray hybridization has been used to study the global gene expression from many different kinds of tissues and cell lines  <cit> . when it is desired to apply this technique only to certain cells that exist in a heterogeneous tissue, surrounded by cells of other types such as connective tissue cells, it is essential to minimize the contribution of mrna from undesirable cells by enriching the percentage of desirable cell types  <cit> . laser capture microdissection  is a valuable tool that makes this possible via the visual  identification of cells of interest in intact tissues, followed by their excision and subsequent rna extraction and analysis by microarray hybridization analysis  <cit> . frozen sections are highly recommended to maximize quantity and quality of rna recovery  <cit> . however, in frozen sections it is often difficult to recognize histological details after routine staining, such as hematoxylin & eosin , in part because lcm requires desiccated sections with no cover slip. specialized staining methods may be helpful for distinguishing cells of interest from surrounding stroma, e.g., nissl stain , immunofluorescence , and immunohistochemistry   <cit> , but these reagents potentially could result in rna damage. methyl green pyronin  is a special stain that has been useful in identifying plasma cells, a major interest of this laboratory, owing to its staining of the nucleus dark blue and the cytoplasm bright pink in visible light or fluorescing red under uv illumination of paraffin-imbedded sections  <cit> . although mgp and all histological stains yield significantly less detail on frozen sections than on paraffin-embedded tissue, mgp did enable identification of plasma cells in the midst of other cell types in oil granulomas . since the pyronin reagent reacts with rna, we worried that mgp might damage the rna and compromise the subsequent gene expression profiling. therefore, we investigated whether mgp or other commonly used staining methods themselves would affect gene expression profiling and to what extent.

usually, a minimum of 5– <dig> μg total rna is required for indirect or direct labeling of cdna, respectively, with fluorochromes such as cy <dig> and cy <dig> to perform hybridization on one microarray chip to analyze gene expression  <cit> . rna yields of this magnitude are usually impossible from the small number of cells that typically comprise lcm-derived samples, requiring amplification to make cdna microarray analysis possible. rna amplification by rna polymerase-based in vitro transcription is thought to introduce the least bias to gene expression profiling  <cit> , although it is possible that amplifications methods have the potential of amplifying the effect of damage to mrnas introduced during lcm processing.

it has not been determined to what extent each of the steps in lcm sample processing damages the rna, potentially leading to loss of representation of certain genes when amplified, reverse transcribed, labeled and hybridized to a microarray containing a wide spectrum of cdna targets on a glass slide. the purpose of the present study was to assess how much the choice of histological staining before lcm would contribute to gene loss, recognized as dropout of hybridized spots, when compared with unstained samples. to render our analysis statistically significant we performed four biological replicates for each staining protocol, starting with  <dig> individual lcm-derived tissue samples. each of these  <dig> was compared with a pool of rna from an identical pellet of cells. we found that the mgp staining method, which included rnaase inhibitor, was the least detrimental to the rna, while the nissl method, which had no rnaase inhibitor, inflicted the most damage to the rna.

RESULTS
rna was extracted from pellets of cultured tepc  <dig> murine plasma cell tumor cells, which had been flash frozen immediately after harvest. lcm-derived rna was isolated from samples of microdissected frozen sections of an identical cell pellet, which had been treated with different staining methods. to obtain a sufficient amount of total rna from lcm-captured cells, we procured cells with 2000– <dig> hits of laser . all lcm-captured samples yielded sufficient total rna  that could be quantitated by the low-range ribogreen rna quantitation kit . each rna sample was evaluated for suitability for use by electrophoresis using agilent rna pico chips. rna that was not degraded should have two clear bands representing the 28s and 18s rrna, with ratios of 28s/18s absorbance exceeding  <dig> . in addition, the rna sample should be low in genomic dna contamination, which would appear as bands larger than 28s rrna. rna from the unprocessed cell pellet had an acceptable 28s/18s rrna ratio of about  <dig> . the four lcm samples also showed clear  <dig> rrna and  <dig> rrna bands, but the 28s/18s ratios were different:  <dig>  for the unprocessed cell pellet ,  <dig>  for mgp,  <dig>  for h&e,  <dig>  for nissl,  <dig>  for if, indicating that a small amount of degradation appeared in the nissl rnas  the only sample with a ratio less than  <dig> . the unusually high ratio on the h&e lane appears to stem from the unusual and not yet understood high background, since substantial amounts of 28s are clearly visible to the naked eye. five ng of total rna from all samples were subjected to  <dig> rounds of amplification. all samples yielded sufficient amplified antisense rna for microarray hybridization. after two rounds of amplification the total yield of antisense rna from all samples ranged from  <dig> μg to  <dig> μg. the size of the antisense rna after  <dig> rounds of amplification was in the expected and satisfactory range between  <dig> nt to  <dig> nt for all the samples , indicating that these antisense rnas could be used directly for cdna synthesis and probe labeling for microarray hybridization. we did not perceive any consistent difference in yield or size of amplified rnas that could be attributed to the method of staining.

comparisons between lcm subgroups
we found significant differences between the molecular profiles of each "lcm + staining" group and the unprocessed cell pellet . one-sample t-tests identified  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> genes differently expressed at the  <dig>  significance level between the unprocessed cell pellet and mgp, h&e, ns and if, respectively. testing  <dig>  probes at this significance level, we expected that the average number of spuriously significant  results would be nine or less. thus, the expression profiles in the staining groups are significantly different from those of the unprocessed cell pellet. among these genes,  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> had at least 2-fold mean expression difference for mgp, h&e, ns and if, respectively  of which  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> had lower expression. the heat map for the union of the genes differentially expressed  between each lcm + staining sample and the pool of cell pellet preparations  confirmed graphically that the mgp staining method introduced the fewest differences. the mgp vs. a comparison in the  <dig> left-most columns showed the largest number of black elements that indicate neither loss nor gain of signal following staining.

in addition, we tested the difference in expression profiles among the h&e, ns, if samples and the mgp samples . the number of genes significant at the  <dig>  level and with a mean expression difference greater than 2-fold is equal to  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> for h&e, ns and if, respectively. most of these genes  had weaker signals in these three groups of samples, compared with the mgp-stained group, suggesting loss of signal at additional spots, owing to rna damage acquired during staining. the global permutation tests also showed that the overall signals in the h&e, ns and if samples were significantly weaker than in the mgp samples .

loss of mrna suitable for hybridizing to some of the cdnas was the result expected from damage during processing, and this loss was expected to show no gene specificity. the accuracy of this prediction can be visually appreciated in the heat maps presented in figure  <dig>  thus, no additional analysis was done to analyze which specific genes were involved in expression changes among the individual chips.

superimposed upon this experimentally induced spot drop out are the differences inherent in the microarray hybridization method. the number of spots that show increased intensities  may be a rough measure of this effect in each subgroup. thus, we subtracted this value form the number of spots with lower intensities in the stained samples to yield a value that can be used for inter-group comparison.

discussion
the cdna microarray hybridization method is now widely used to analyze simultaneously the expression of thousands of genes in cancer tissues  <cit> , but the contamination of tumors by epithelial, stromal or immune cells presents problems for obtaining accurate expression profiles. microarray analysis coupled with lcm is a good way to solve this problem. however, cdna microarray analysis requires a large amount of total rna . it has been shown that one or two rounds of amplification can be used reliably, without compromising rna quality or gravely skewing patterns of gene expression, when only small initial amounts of total rna are available  <cit> . in this study, we used two rounds of amplification to obtain amounts of antisense rna sufficient for microarray hybridization yielding strong signal intensities, permitting statistical data processing.

to positively identify the specific cells desired for the microdissection, a staining protocol must be used, which permits identification of plasma cells in desiccated cryosections. such sections, without cover slips, are required for microdissection and may pose a critical problem, since desiccate cryosections are not optically ideal for histological examination . however, staining solutions may react with cellular components, such as rna, potentially adversely affecting rna integrity. in addition, the aqueous components of the staining reagents may contain or activate intracellular rnaases and result in rna degradation. for this reason, it was important to test different conditions for tissue staining and section dehydration to assure high quality of rna from lcm samples. to assure ourselves of adequate numbers of uniform populations of plasma cells, which are scarce in most tissues, we utilized pellets of cultured plasma cell tumor cells that were sectioned and stained as if they had been collected by lcm. we used this approach, because obtaining large enough sample of plasma cell tumor cells from tissues by lcm would have been impracticable.

our modification  to the standard mgp staining method has made it suitable for use with lcm. sections treated as described here can be used to prepare total rna of good quality. though pyronin is a fluorescent molecule that can bind to rna, we detected only  <dig> changes when compared with unstained lcm samples. this amounted to less than  <dig> % of the analyzed microarray elements, and less than one half of the number changed due to the other staining methods tested.

it appears that inclusion of rnaase inhibitor in staining solutions can prevent rna from damage by endogenous and exogenous rnaase. the nissl-stained group was the only staining protocol that did not include rnaase inhibitor. the number of genes in this group with 2-fold changes,  <dig> spots, was the highest among all four groups, indicating that this staining procedure damaged the most mrnas.

in summary, we performed a statistical analysis of  <dig> cdna microarray chips comparing fluorescent-labeled cdna generated from amplified rna from  <dig> independently isolated and processed, lcm-procured, stained frozen sections with amplified rna from an identical pellet of plasma cell tumor cells. this showed that a variable amount of spot fall-out was seen after staining of the frozen sections, depending on the staining method, indicating that the choice of staining method can be important in minimizing loss of mrnas from microarray analysis of lcm-derived rna. happily, the degree of mrna damage was small with the commonly used h&e method, so long as rnaase inhibitor was included in the aqueous hematoxylin solution. nissl staining solution, which may not be compatible with rnaase inhibitor addition, introduced the greatest degree of damage. fortunately, for our ongoing study of plasma cell tumor development, the mgp stain, chosen for its unique ability to flag plasma cells in tissue sections, was the least destructive of all. our analysis suggests that maximizing the use of non-aqueous staining solutions is recommended for other specialty stains that might be advantageous for identification of other cell types in studies that require use of lcm. the inclusion of rnaase inhibitor in aqueous solutions appears to be important in rendering histological staining procedures suitable to extraction of intact rna.

CONCLUSIONS
rna damage can occur during the staining steps preparatory to laser capture microdissection, resulting in loss of representation of certain genes in microarray hybridization analysis. inclusion of rnaase inhibitor in aqueous staining solutions appears to be important in protecting rna from loss of gene transcripts.

