BACKGROUND
bovine enterotoxemia caused by clostridium perfringens, is a sudden death syndrome with necro-hemorrhagic lesions in the small intestine, which mainly affects suckling calves and veal calves  <cit> . in veal calves, predominantly beef cattle breeds are affected. the syndrome accounts for approximately 20% of the mortalities in these calves, compared to 4% in dairy and mixed breed veal calves  <cit> . clostridium perfringens is an anaerobic gram-positive spore-forming bacterium, which is a commensal of the gastrointestinal tract of both humans and animals, and is also ubiquitous in soil and sewage  <cit> . strains of c. perfringens are classified into five toxinotypes  based on the presence of four major toxin genes   <cit> . mainly strains of type a are recovered from enterotoxemia cases but also from the intestine of healthy cattle and other warm-blooded animals as well as from the environment  <cit> . c. perfringens type a has the ability to produce numerous extracellular toxins and enzymes, of which alpha toxin is the most toxic  <cit> . recently alpha toxin, a phospholipase c, and perfringolysin o, a pore forming cytolysin, have been proposed as essential factors for induction of enterotoxemia  <cit> . in addition to these toxins, other potential virulence factors might have a role in the pathology of enterotoxemia. possible virulence traits can be proteolytic factors that degrade the protective mucus layer and extracellular matrix components or intra-species inhibitory antibacterial substances that confer a selective advantage to the producing strain, as suggested for necrotic enteritis strains in broilers  <cit> .

it is hitherto unclear whether the c. perfringens type a strains isolated from enterotoxemia cases are more virulent than other type a strains. in a calf intestinal loop model, it has been shown that c. perfringens strains isolated from healthy and enterotoxemic cattle as well as from other host species are all capable of inducing necro-hemorrhagic intestinal lesions  <cit> .

the purpose of this study was to analyze the expression of virulence factors that are potentially involved in enterotoxemia. to approach this, the alpha toxin and perfringolysin o production, the mucinolytic and gelatinolytic activity as well as the intra-species inhibitory activity of a collection of strains originating from enterotoxemia cases was compared to bovine strains isolated from healthy animals and to strains isolated from other animal species.

RESULTS
clostridium perfringens strains from enterotoxemia cases are not superior alpha toxin and perfringolysin o producers
to determine whether alpha toxin and perfringolysin o levels differ between bovine enterotoxemia strains and strains from other sources, the culture supernatants of various type a strains were tested . lecithin breakdown was used as a measure of alpha toxin activity. the supernatants of the different strains showed high variability in alpha toxin activity, independent of their origin. in eight strains, the alpha toxin activity was below the detection limit of  <dig>  10- <dig> u/ml . perfringolysin o activity was determined by measuring the hemolysis of horse erythrocytes. supernatants of strains originating from bovine enterotoxemia cases showed a high variability in hemolytic activity. the mean erythrocyte hydrolysis by strains from bovine enterotoxemia was not significantly different from other strains, independent of the origin . for both alpha toxin and perfringolysin o, no significant differences between enterotoxemia strains and other c. perfringens strains could be observed.

mucinolytic and gelatinolytic activity is not higher in clostridium perfringens strains from bovine enterotoxemia cases
the thickness of the mucin layer reflects an equilibrium between synthesis by the host and bacterial degradation by the intestinal microbiota. we tested the mucinolytic activity of c. perfringens strains from enterotoxemia cases and from other sources to evaluate whether enterotoxemia strains have higher potential to degrade the protective mucus layer. all strains exhibited similar mucinolytic activity . to elucidate whether c. perfringens proteases might have the potential to contribute to the pathology of enterotoxemia, gelatinolytic activity was investigated as a measure for degrading extracellular matrix components within the gut. gelatin was used as a specific proteolytic substrate to screen for clostridial protease activity that might contribute to intestinal host matrix degradation. a high variability of gelatinolytic activity was seen. the mean gelatin breakdown by strains from bovine enterotoxemia was not different from other strains, independent of the origin . no significant difference between the groups could be observed.

enterotoxemia strains have no increased intra-species growth-inhibitory activity
the intra-species growth-inhibitory activity is shown in figure  <dig>  of all tested strains, sixty-one percent was able to inhibit growth of at least one other c. perfringens strain. there was a lot of variation between the inhibitory spectra of the tested strains. some strains inhibited only a limited number of strains, while others had a broad inhibitory spectrum. five out of eight enterotoxemia strains, eight out of twenty-three strains from healthy calves, four out of five ruminating bovine strains and one out of five sheep strains were unable to inhibit growth of any other strain. no significant differences between the groups could be observed.

discussion
clostridium perfringens type a strains isolated from bovine enterotoxemia cases showed no difference in in vitro expression of a selection of potential virulence factors compared to strains from healthy cattle as well as various other animal species. this is in accordance with the capacity of lesion induction in a calf intestinal loop model, in which all tested strains are capable of inducing necro-hemorrhagic intestinal lesions, independent of the origin of the isolate  <cit> .

no increased activity of the alpha toxin and perfringolysin o was detected in bovine enterotoxemia strains. in a recent study carried out with alpha toxin and perfringolysin o mutants we demonstrated an essential role of both toxins in bovine enterotoxemia  <cit> . the alpha toxin is the most toxic enzyme produced by c. perfringens type a strains and hydrolyses two major constituents of the eukaryotic membrane  causing membrane disruption and cell lysis  <cit> . in sublytic concentrations, alpha toxin leads to activation of signal transduction pathways and uncontrolled production of intracellular mediators  <cit> . perfringolysin o is a pore-forming cytolysin which has the ability to kill eukaryotic cells by punching holes in their membranes  <cit> . as shown in vitro and in a calf intestinal loop model, alpha toxin and perfringolysin o seem to have a synergistic action in bovine enterotoxemia  <cit> . considering this essential role of alpha toxin and perfringolysin o in bovine enterotoxemia, c. perfringens type a strains with higher activity of these toxins might be more virulent. despite the importance of alpha toxin and perfringolysin o in enterotoxemia, strains originating from diseased animals showed no higher activities of these toxins in vitro.

no increased collagen degrading and mucinolytic potential was detected in strains from enterotoxemia cases. collagen is widely distributed throughout the body and is an integral component of the connective tissue. collagen disruption by bacterial collagenases may result in the loss of tissue integrity and subsequent tissue necrosis in the infected host and allow penetration of bacterial toxins to deeper tissues  <cit> . therefore, the ability to produce collagenase may play an important role in the tissue destruction observed in bovine enterotoxemia. this in vitro study showed no difference in collagen destroying potential between c. perfringens strains from bovine enterotoxemia cases compared to strains from healthy cattle, sheep and chickens.

in addition to the collagen degradation, the mucinolytic activity of the c. perfringens strains may also contribute to the pathology of bovine enterotoxemia. the gastrointestinal tract represents a large surface of the host that interacts with the external world. a protective mucus layer covers the epithelial surface, forming a barrier between the lumen and the intestinal epithelium. it is a potential binding site for both commensal and pathogenic organisms  <cit> . c. perfringens type a strains with stronger mucinolytic activity may have an advantage in colonizing and degrading the protective mucus layer, which may lead to a compromised barrier function. enterotoxemia strains, however were not different from the other strains with respect to their mucinolytic activity in vitro.

another possible virulence trait that was explored is the ability to cause intra-species growth-inhibition. the potential of a pathogenic strain to suppress the growth of other c. perfringens strains has been shown in necrotic enteritis in broiler chickens, leading to single clone dominance in a broiler flock suffering from necrotic enteritis  <cit> . in contrast to the situation in broiler chickens, our results showed no difference in intra-species growth-inhibition between the enterotoxemia strains and other c. perfringens strains. in addition, a clonal population of c. perfringens does not seem to be essential for the development of bovine enterotoxemia as seen by rapd . together this suggests that intra-species growth-inhibition probably does not play a role in the pathogenesis of bovine enterotoxemia.

none of the possible virulence traits examined in this study were distinctive for c. perfringens type a strains isolated from bovine enterotoxemia cases in vitro. this is in accordance with a recent observation from our laboratory that, when the conditions are favorable, strains from different origin are capable to provoke necro-hemorrhagic lesions in an intestinal loop model  <cit> . it cannot be ruled out that other possible virulence factors may be involved in disease. this was the case for necrotic enteritis in broiler chickens, an enteric disease caused by c. perfringens type a strains. the essential virulence factor for causing disease remained unclear until the netb toxin, a previously unknown toxin specific for necrotic enteritis, was found  <cit> . although the presence of such an undiscovered toxin in the pathology of bovine enterotoxemia cannot be excluded, it is unlikely because type a strains originating from bovine enterotoxemia cases as well as from healthy cattle and other animal species are capable of inducing lesions in an intestinal loop model  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
strains from bovine enterotoxemia cases did not have a higher alpha toxin, perfringolysin o, mucinolytic or gelatinolytic activity in comparison to strains isolated from healthy cattle and other animal species. also production of intra-species inhibitory substances was not higher in bovine enterotoxemia strains. this could indicate that yet another, hitherto unknown, c. perfringens virulence factor might be involved in the pathogenesis of calf enterotoxemia. taking these results together with our previous observations that strains from various origin can induce the typical lesions in an intestinal loop model  <cit> , it seems however more plausible that the primary trigger in bovine enterotoxemia is not c. perfringens and that c. perfringens is merely responsible for propagating and exacerbating the intestinal damage to the point that it becomes hemorrhagic and necrotic.

