BACKGROUND
many complex systems can best be analyzed as networks where the basic building blocks of the system are represented as nodes and their interactions as links: recent studies of systems as disparate as the network of scientific co-authorships, sexual contacts and the world-wide-web have revealed unexpected similarities, suggesting that their structure and growth is ruled by a set of generic organizing principles  <cit> . a variety of biological systems, like food webs and the various biochemical interactions between genes, proteins and metabolites, have been found to exhibit similar large-scale traits  <cit> . the most prominent is the scale-free property of the connectivity distribution. when combined with a modular structure, the resulting network consists of a hierarchy of interwoven clusters  <cit> .

protein crystallography reveals that the fundamental unit of protein structure is the domain. independent of neighboring sequences, this region of a polypeptide chain folds into a distinct structure and mediates biological functionality  <cit> . comparing domain architectures of proteins in multicellular organisms evidence emerged that preexisting domain architectures have predominantly been supplemented with single domains at their terminal sites  <cit> .

functional links between proteins have also been detected by analyzing the fusion patterns of protein domains. two separate proteins a and b in one organism may be expressed as a fusion protein in other species. a protein sequence containing both a and b is termed a rosetta stone sequence. however, this framework only applies in a minority of cases  <cit> .

the structure of the protein domain network, where individual domains are nodes and their co-occurrences in a protein are interpreted as links, also displays a scale-free structure  <cit> . domains that are involved in cell-cell interactions, signal transduction and cell differentiation have been found to accumulate links, reflecting increasing complexity of the organisms specific evolutionary development in going from bacteria to eukaryotes.

in a recent study  <cit> , we classified yeast proteins as being either globally or locally central according to the number and density of links in their network neighborhoods. in particular, we applied an iterative decomposition method  that systematically uncovered core networks with nodes having degrees of at least k. in nesting through the different cores, we gradually defined highly connected proteins in the innermost cores as globally central while we call proteins that have been placed in cores on the periphery locally central. this categorization allowed us to demonstrate that globally central proteins participate in a substantial number of complexes while simultaneously displaying a high level of evolutionary conservation. here, we apply this core decomposition method to study the properties of the protein domain co-occurrence networks of the eukaryotes s. cerevisiae, c. elegans, d. melanogaster, m. musculus and h. sapiens, allowing us to classify the various domains as either globally or locally central. in going from the single celled yeast to the considered highly evolved multi cellular organisms we find that the number of globally central domains increases with the organisms level of evolutionary development. also the overlap network which consists only of the nodes and links shared by all the organisms specific cores reveals those domain fusions that have been preserved through evolution. comparing the co-occurrence networks to the physical protein domain interaction network of s. cerevisiae  <cit>  we find that links that appear in the innermost cores of the co-occurrence network of higher eukaryotes strongly coincide with physical interactions. the co-occurrences of domains that make them end up in the innermost cores of the co-occurrence networks might represent evolutionary patterns that serve as a putative proteome backbone. since we find the driving force behind fusion events not to be a high frequency of interactions between a given protein domain pair but a large number of individual interaction partners, we conclude that links appearing in the innermost cores of the co-occurring networks are the result of underlying important domain interactions.

RESULTS
statistics of domain networks
cores of domain networks
due to the size of the domain co-occurrence networks considered we find different numbers of k-cores. while the networks of h. sapiens and m. musculus are decomposed into  <dig> nested k-cores, where k =  <dig>  ...,  <dig> we find  <dig> k-cores in d. melanogaster and c. elegans . there are only  <dig> in s. cerevisiae . the placement of a node in a certain core allows an assessment of its meaning for the topology. a hub – a highly connected node – that is only a member of the peripheral k-cores is defined as locally central, while nodes  being members of the innermost cores are globally central . in table  <dig>  we compiled lists of the highest connected domains in each core layer, being the set of nodes two consecutive cores do not have in common. notably, the innermost k-core is not populated by the largest hubs, indicating that a high degree alone does not necessarily imply a central placement in the network. in fact, we observe that with even a considerably low degree domains can be placed in the innermost cores.

in fig. 2a–e we show the two innermost cores of the protein domain networks of s. cerevisiae, c. elegans, d. melanogaster, m. musculus and h. sapiens, respectively. we observe that the increase in the organisms complexity is not only reflected by higher numbers of cores, but the innermost cores differs in size. we find, that h. sapiens has  <dig> domains in the innermost core, while we find  <dig> in m. musculus and d. melanogaster,  <dig> in c. elegans and  <dig> in s. cerevisiae. reflecting the increasing evolutionary development of the underlying organism, the cores are enriched with domains predominantly associated with functions such as cell-cell contact and signal transduction. this observation agrees well with the known evolutionary development from the single cellular s. cerevisiae to the multicellular higher eukaryotes. in particular, the innermost core of s. cerevisiae  consists of the following clique of interconnected domains:  pkinase and  pkinasec which are signal transduction domains,  dag-pe-bind, a domain which binds diacyl-glycerol, activating the family of the previously mentioned kinases,  hr <dig> which is involved in binding the small g-protein rho, and  c <dig>  a ca2+-dependent membrane-targeting module found in many cellular proteins that are involved in both signal transduction and membrane trafficking.

nesting through the innermost cores of the more evolved organisms, we find that the initial small innermost core of yeast is enriched with clusters of densely connected domains . obviously, this expansion of the innermost core is mostly caused by domains which are involved in signal transduction and cell-cell contacts as well as cell development, suggesting that the demand to maintain a multicellular organism is the driving force for fusing protein domains. in particular, we observe that domains providing these functions, such as pdz, efhand, sh <dig> and sh <dig> to name a few , increasingly populate the innermost cores. however, the affiliation of one domain to a certain core is not inevitably constant. in fact, we observe that pkinasec which appears in the innermost core of the yeast domain network occurs in the 2-core of the network of the multicellular organisms. the affiliation of hr <dig> to the innermost core of yeast appears to be the effect of a single protein architecture which contains numerous domains, since this particular domain does not appear in the inner cores of the other organisms. since the majority of yeast proteins only has one to two domains, being teamed up with a reasonably large number of domains in a given protein is beneficial for a domain to make it to the innermost cores. in multicellular organisms, the number of proteins with a large number of domains increases, inevitably resulting in an inflation of the inner cores. consequently, the evolutionary significance of a domain is well reflected in its ability to remain present in the inner cores of different organisms.

domain interaction network
information about protein domain interactions as of the interdom database  <cit>  constitute an undirected network of yeast protein domain interactions. in contrast to domain co-occurrence networks, each link has a weight which reflects the frequency of the corresponding interactions relative to a random background distribution  <cit> . the degree distribution of the domain interaction network  is well fitted by a generalized zipf-law p ~ α-γ, suggesting that a few ubiquitous domains  dominate the web of domain interactions. the network's inherent modularity is expressed by the power-law form of the degree dependent clustering coefficient ⟨c⟩ ~ k-δ . in order to combine the impact of topology and weights, barrat et al.  <cit>  introduced a series of measures that allowed a more significant assessment of the impact weights have on the networks statistical properties. in a weighted representation of a domain interaction network the strength of a domain is the sum of the weights wij carried on each link,  . in the inset of fig. 3b, we observe that the strength of the average interaction weakly decreases with increasing degree k. assessing the distribution of weights, we define the average strength per link by . this measure allows us to observe a decreasing trend of s with k  as a power-law, suggesting that domains with many interaction partners only occasionally interact with each partner.

how is then the domain interaction network related to the domain co-occurrence network? in each core of the domain co-occurrence networks, we calculated the fraction of links present in the yeast domain interaction network. fig. 4a shows these frequencies of links for the eukaryotes s. cerevisiae, c. elegans, d. melangaster, m. musculus and h. sapiens, all displaying a decreasing trend that a fusion is accompanied by the physical interactions of domains when going from the innermost to the outermost core. calculating the mean strength of domains based on the links that are present in the different cores by superimposing the respective weights wij from the domain interaction network, we observe an ascending trend when nesting outwards toward the periphery of the domain co-occurrence networks . we interpret the observations that  domains which appear in the inner cores likely physically interact with  a low average strength as follows: domains with numerous interaction partners have an elevated chance of being fused in a higher eukaryote, while domains which interact frequently are less likely to be fused. indeed, the innermost cores display the lowest average strengths, confirming that the driving force behind the fusion of a domain pair is not their frequent interaction, but rather the engagement of the two domains in a multitude of interactions with other domains.

overlap of domain network cores
many of the domains appear ubiquitous to the innermost eukaryotic cores of the co-occurrence network . as already mentioned, the evolutionary and functional significance of a domain is indicated by its presence in the innermost cores of many organisms. similarly, the conservation of links represents an evolutionary and functional signal. so far, it is unclear if links between these globally central domains have been preserved in all the eukaryotes. fig. 5b–d shows the domain links simultaneously present in the four central cores of s. cerevisiae, c. elegans, d. melanogaster, m. musculus and h. sapiens. note that all the links in fig.  <dig> have been preserved during evolution, suggesting the existence of a deeper reason why these domains seemingly always appear together in proteins. to be more specific: the central core of this domain-overlap network consists of a triangle set up by c <dig>  pkinase and dag-pe-bind . nesting outward through the cores, we find a further accumulation of triangles, all established by such prominent domains as ph, sh <dig> and rasgef . in the subsequent overlap of cores  we observe the presence of the important signaling domains zf-ccch, zf-c2h <dig> and zf-c3hc <dig> from the zinc-finger family. note that all of the  links in the overlap networks correspond to physical interactions between the domains, i.e. the fraction of links in the overlap cores that are present in the interaction network is  <dig> .

discussion & 
CONCLUSIONS
although the pfam database provides comprehensive domain information, it covers only a part of the considered proteomes. similarly, the determination of putative domain interactions depends on the quality and completeness of the underlying sets of protein interactions. yet, the heterogeneity of scale-free networks indicates that the general characteristics of domain co-occurrence and interaction networks are independent of the webs actual size  <cit> . in particular, such networks are governed by the presence of highly connected hubs and cohesive areas, factors that not only influence their integrity but also the determination of k-cores. since biological networks have been found to be stable upon random perturbations, we expect that the addition of new data will not dramatically impact our findings. the idea of analyzing the protein domain co-occurrence network as a sequence of nested cores and comparing the overlap between the central cores of eukaryotic organisms with increasing level of evolutionary development, gives new and fundamental insights into the qualitative arrangement and evolutionary utilization of the proteome. the evolutionary trend toward multicellularity requires proteomes capable of new and additional complex cellular processes such as signal transduction or cell-cell contacts. on a node based level, this trend toward higher complexity is reflected by an considerable heightened connectivity of domains that support such functions in multicellular organisms  <cit> . turning our attention to a link-based level, panels in fig.  <dig> suggest an analogous result. the steadily increasing size of the innermost k-cores allows us to observe that the demand of maintaining complex cellular process does not only impact the level of single domains, but also operates on a combinatorial level of domain arrangements. nevertheless, many protein families involved in inter- and intracellular signaling pathways, apoptosis  <cit> , development, and immune and neural functions  <cit> , are indeed augmented in h. sapiens relative to d. melanogaster and c. elegans. although human phenotypic complexity by far exceeds that of d. melanogaster and c. elegans, proteome dimensions remain surprisingly similar, allowing us to conclude that increased functional complexity is not simply a matter of proteome size but strongly underlines the role of innovations on the level of domain  arrangements.

in fact, a significant portion of the protein architecture is found to be homolog in h. sapiens and d. melanogaster while substantial innovation in the creation of new protein architectures also has been detected  <cit> . the expansion of selected domain families and the accompanying evolution of complex domain architectures by joining presumably pre-existing domains coincides with the increase in the organisms level of evolutionary development. in particular, changes in the domain architectures are the consequence of a cellular mechanism commonly known as 'domain shuffling', appearing in different disguises  <cit> . in simple cases of creating a new domain architecture, domains are simply inserted in already preexisting domain arrangements, a mechanism known as domain insertion while domain duplication refers to the internal duplication of at least one domain in a gene. comparing domain architectures of proteins in multicellular organisms evidence emerged that preexisting domain architectures have been supplemented with single domains at their terminal sites, another mechanism that is known as domain accretion  <cit> . our results do not favor one mechanism over the other. yet, the panels in fig.  <dig> support the assumption that domain arrangements massively helped to evolve complex proteomes that are capable to maintain complex cellular processes, that have not been possible with the extension of single protein domain families alone. in the same way, network patterns we obtained from the comparison of cores which appear in all organisms under consideration will not tell us which mechanism predominantly gave rise to their emergence. yet, we see that such small sized network patterns  presumably represent a repository of domain combinations around which the individual proteomes unfolded. these patterns predominately contain domains that play dominant roles in proteins which are essential for the inner workings of a multicellular organism, presumably serving as a possible backbone for the evolution of proteins mainly involved in signal transduction and cell-cell contacts.

the decomposition of the domain co-occurrence networks into k-cores allows us to uncover those sets of domains that are embedded in densely connected areas of the networks. the high connectivity as well as the nature of the partners those domains appear with indicate a central topological and functional role in the proteome of the considered organisms. nesting toward the innermost cores the significance of these links is supported by the observation that pairs of co-occurring domains increasingly are present as physical interactions in yeast. utilizing the combined information of the co-occurrence network and the physical interaction network, we also find that domains tend to interact infrequently if they have many different interaction partners. in contrast, we observe that domains interact increasingly frequently once they have a small number of partners. although we considered domain fusions on an indirect and qualitative basis this series of observations suggests that the driving force behind domain fusion events is not frequent interactions. in fact, it seems that the number of interactors, the connectivity, of the domains mainly influences a domains propensity to fuse with other interactors. the trend to spatially organize otherwise randomly diffusing domains might help to organize the flow of information in cells. concluding, we find that domain fusion is a tool to superannuate the random diffusive interaction of a domain pair by embedding them in an architecture which ensures their interactions that would be difficult by random diffusion in a cell alone.

