BACKGROUND
driven by the common disease-common variant  hypothesis  <cit> , genome-wide association  studies have demonstrated its power in the identification of genetic variants underlying the diseases  <cit> . the completion of the human genome sequence  <cit>  and the international hapmap project  <cit>  as well as the advent of highly efficient and affordable genotyping technologies made gwa within reach. the phase ii hapmap contains more than  <dig>  million common snps and the coverage is estimated to capture 94% of common variation in ceu and chb+jpt and 81% in yri with r <dig> ≥  <dig>  <cit> . several high-throughput and cost-effective technologies for genotyping that are currently being used, they are taqman assay  <cit>  and genechip array  <cit>  , snpstream system  <cit>  and goldengate assay  <cit>  , invader assay  <cit>  , and sniper  <cit>  . though different reaction mechanisms are employed in different methods, fluorescence detection is widely employed in the process of the specific allele detection.

to deal with abundant genotype data produced by various genotyping platforms, quality control  to ensure the accuracy of allele call becomes a critical issue. when genotyping errors occur, its effects on linkage analysis  <cit> , ld measures  <cit> , tagging snp selection  <cit>  and the subsequent association tests  <cit>  have been widely and carefully investigated. various strategies of detecting genotyping errors or removing its effects on analyses, especially on linkage analysis have been proposed  <cit> . in addition to genotyping errors, missing calls seem to be abundant in high-throughput genotyping. for example, in the data of the phase i hapmap, less than 20% data that failed to pass qc was due to genotyping error , while more than 65% of the markers show missing data in over 20% individuals  <cit> . the presence of missing calls was even more prominent in the phase ii data of hapmap  <cit> . however, the effect of missing call on the subsequent analyses has been largely ignored.

strong emphasis on the accuracy of allele calls and technical success to achieve that has made the effect of missing call largely overlooked. it was suggested that 'no-call' procedure should be taken where observations of borderline quality be removed from allele calls in order to keep the genotyping error rate as low as possible  <cit> . this 'no-call' principle becomes a common practice in genotyping procedures. however, it should be noted that the validity of the 'no-call' principle relies on an implicit assumption that genotyping frequencies in no-call individuals are equal to those in the population. under this hypothesis, missing data from the no-call procedure simply leads to a power loss due to a decreased sample size, and does not affect the estimation of allele frequencies at all. in this report, we started with a close examination of the validity of the 'no-call' principle by regenotyping those individuals whose genotypes that cannot be unequivocally determined and therefore would have been otherwise discarded. the objectives of this report are  to demonstrate experimentally how widely and seriously the problem of missing call bias  exists,  to investigate theoretically the effects of mcb on the subsequent analyses, especially on association studies, and  to provide suggestion on dealing with observations of borderline quality and re-evaluate the current qc standards, through comparing the effects of mcb and genotyping errors on allele frequency estimation and association studies.

RESULTS
there are two major causes for missing calls. one is due to poor quality of dna samples, which often fails to be amplified and to generate strong enough intensity of fluorescence signals over the background. the other arises when an observation, i.e., a read out of fluorescence signals, cannot be assigned unequivocally to any of the clusters of genotype, therefore, is subject to 'no-call' procedure. in this report, we mainly focus on the missing calls due to the failure of being assigned to any clusters of genotype.

nature of no-calls: results of sequencing
to evaluate the nature of no-calls in reality, four different widely-used high-throughput genotyping platforms were included in this study, and they are genomelab™ snpstream genotyping system , beadlab snp genotyping system , taqman® snp genotyping assays  and genechip® human mapping  <dig> k array set . eight snps were selected and subjected to regenotyping of equivocal observations  through sequencing. the criteria for the selection of snps and samples for sequencing were presented in methods.

the genotype distribution of the observed data at each locus which were produced by the respective genotyping technology was compared with that of no-calls which were obtained by sequencing . statistically significant differences were observed in snpstream, illumina and genechip  <dig> k, indicating that the mcb indeed exists in widely-used genotyping technologies and it would lead to a biased estimation of allele/genotype frequencies. the genotype-specific call-rates ci were calculated, most of which were above  <dig> , but it could be as low as  <dig>  for genechip  <dig> k.

pval is the p value calculated by fisher exact test to show whether the genotype counts called by the software provided by the respective platform  were significantly different from the no-calls' counts by sequencing . ci is the genotypic specific call-rate for aa, aa and aa.

in the subsequent sections, in order to explore the effects introduced by mcb, we proposed a model to investigate the nature of no-calls. typically an equivocal observation occurs as follows . for the data points that lie between the cluster of homozygotes of minor alleles  and the cluster of heterozygotes , the real genotypes could be either homozygotes of minor alleles  or heterozygotes . for those that lie between the cluster of homozygotes of major alleles  and the cluster of heterozygotes , the real genotypes could be either heterozygotes  or homozygotes of major alleles . when the observations that cannot be called unequivocally are discarded, scenario ii is equivalent to scenario iii. to facilitate discussion, we assumed no-calls only happen in a specific genotype with the genotype-specific call-rate c .

effect of mcb on type-i error rate for hwe
hardy-weinberg equilibrium has been repeatedly recommended as a measure for qc in the context of genetic association studies  <cit> . in the following, we will show that mcb is one of causes for the departure from hwe.

the type-i error rate for departure from hwe disturbed by mcb is inflated with the increasing of c . when mcb happens in homozygotes , it leads to a departure from hwe because of excessive heterozygotes. the inflation is similar for aa and aa for a given c. when mcb happens in heterozygotes , excessive homozygotes result in the departure from hwe. the inflation is more pronounced for mcb in heterozygotes than that in homozygotes. for example, the type-i error rate is  <dig>  ~ <dig>  in scenario i and scenario iv, while it can be  <dig>  ~ <dig>  in scenario ii & iii under different mafs in the presence of mcb  for a population  under hwe in the significant level of  <dig> . however, hwe still holds, as expected, when missing equivalently but unbiasedly across different genotypes .

effect of mcb on allele frequency estimation
the accuracy of allele/genotype frequency estimation is of special importance since many analyses such as association studies, inference of haplotype, and inference of population structure rely on it. ubm does not affect allele/genotype frequency estimation although it reduces the sample size. however, mcb does. when missing bias in scenario i and scenario ii & iii, maf is underestimated; and when in scenario iv, maf is overestimated and this change is larger than the former two . it should be noticed that the change of allele frequency in scenario iv can be quite serious, especially for the locus with rare maf. for instance, the change of maf can be  <dig>  with c =  <dig> ,  <dig>  with c =  <dig> , and even to  <dig>  with c =  <dig> , while the real value of maf is only  <dig> .

effect of mcb on association studies
the development of high-throughput genotyping technologies make association study widely conducted for identification of disease loci underlying complex traits. we now examine the effect of mcb on association using various disease models and statistical tests.

power issue is of special importance in association studies  <cit> . to investigate the effect of mcb on the power of association studies, mcb was introduced into disease models . here, the sample size is  <dig> for both case and control groups, and mcb are identical for both groups.

it has been commonly assumed that missing calls would lead to power loss due to decreased sample size, which only holds in absence of mcb. in the presence of mcb, the power can be affected by both the sample size and the biased estimation of allele and genotype frequencies . the change of power by mcb is usually larger than that by ubm. for example, the power loss by ubm is all less than 5% for the locus with maf =  <dig>  under various disease models  when c =  <dig> , while the change can be around and even more than 10% when disturbed by mcb .

maf is  <dig>  and the sample size in case and control is  <dig> respectively. null, the power in absence of missing; mcb, the power affected by missing call bias; ubm, the power when missing equivalently but unbiasedly across different genotypes.

for the χ <dig> test based on genotype frequencies, mcb always leads to power loss in all scenarios under different disease models compared with the null  . but for the χ <dig> test based on allele frequencies, it even can gain the power in some scenarios, because of the biased estimation of allele frequency . genotypic χ <dig> test seems to be more robust to the changes of power in association studies than allelic χ <dig> test in the presence of mcb .

the changes of power vary in different disease models. it can be summarized that for the disease model with dominant relationship , the power change in scenario iv  is most; for the disease model with recessive relationship , the power change in scenario i  is the largest; for the disease model with overdominant relationship , the power change in scenario ii & iii  is the most; and for the disease model with additive relationship , the power change in scenario i is similar to that in scenario iv, especially when c is small, while the decrease of sample size in quantity differs greatly . the influence under the disease model with multiplicative relationship  is similar to that with additive relationship .

in addition, though the minor allele of a in the current settings of disease models is susceptible to the disease , the conclusions drawn above can also be extended when a is a protective one . moreover, in the disease model , the type-i error rate in mcb remains to be  <dig> , indicating that mcb does not inflate the false positive rate for the association studies, under the assumption that the extent of missing is identical in both case and control.

tradeoff between mcb and genotyping errors
in the previous section, we showed that mcb is common in the current genotyping technologies, and it could affect the subsequent analyses seriously and lead to false conclusions. the key issue is how to deal with those equivocal observations which apparently are responsible for mcb. two alternative options are available. the first option is to discard the observations of borderline quality using the 'no-call' procedure which may lead to mcb. the second option is to assign these observations to one of the genotypes at the cost of increasing genotyping errors. here, we compare the overall outcome  of these two options and try to offer guidelines for different scenarios to minimize the biases caused by the equivocal observations. in addition, we evaluate the overall call-rate and genotyping error rate in the two options respectively and intend to re-examine the current qc standards.

to facilitate the presentation, the genotype-specific call-rate c was set to  <dig> , a moderate mcb as shown previously. for the second option, we assumed all of the equivocal observations are called and the proportion of accurate calls among these equivocal ones is denoted by conf . the genotyping error rate increases with decreasing conf. for instance, if conf =  <dig>  it means all of the equivocal observations are called accurately; whereas, if conf =  <dig>  all of the equivocal ones are misclassified.

both mcb and genotyping errors will possibly lead to inaccurate estimation of allele/genotype frequencies and in turn distorted association. when 'no-call' procedure is applied to those observations of borderline quality, we showed earlier that the biased estimation is dictated only by maf and c. when the equivocal observations are called, the bias in allele frequency estimation depends on conf in addition to maf and c. in particular, the bias in allele frequency estimation reflected by the changes of maf estimation increases with the decreasing conf . fixed maf and c, the biased estimations caused by mcb and by genotyping errors are comparable. the bias introduced by mcb is certain, whereas the bias caused by genotyping errors changes with the conf monotonically. interestingly, when the conf is large enough , the biased estimation of maf caused by genotyping errors are smaller than that caused by mcb. therefore, it would be more beneficial to call the equivocal observations in this case . however, when the conf is below the solid line indicated in fig. 3b, the biased estimation of maf caused by genotyping errors is more and 'no-call' procedure is recommended . it should be noted that the bias in estimation of allele frequency in scenario i by mcb is the greatest, more so than in genotyping errors, even with the highest error rate . therefore, it is suggested that 'no-call' principle should not be taken in scenario i if the objective is to minimize the biased estimation of maf .

in the following section, we explore the performance of association studies affected by mcb and by genotyping errors. here, mcb  and genotyping errors , are assumed to be identical for case and control groups. mcb and genotyping errors were introduced to the disease models with various modes of inheritance relationship  respectively according to methods. the power affected by mcb was discussed previously. the power affected by genotyping errors were shown in additional file  <dig>  for χ <dig> test based on genotype frequencies, genotyping errors may have no effect on association studies sometimes, i.e., in scenario i and scenario ii for the dominant disease model ; otherwise, it may cause power loss. but for χ <dig> test based on allele frequencies, it may occasionally cause power gain because of the biased estimation of allele frequency. though the power affected by genotyping errors is complicated in different scenarios and disease models, the power either does not change or changes monotonically with the conf given the scenarios and disease models . therefore, similar to the previous study on allele frequency estimation, a threshold of conf  is expected as well. if the conf is below the threshold, the power loss caused by genotyping errors is larger than that by mcb; therefore, 'no-call' procedure should be taken . otherwise, it is better to call the observations of borderline quality at the cost of genotyping errors . for instance, for a locus with maf =  <dig> , when 'no-call' procedure is taken for the equivocal observations happened in scenario i , the overall call-rate can still achieve at  <dig> %. the power is  <dig> % in mcb compared with  <dig> % of the null in the multiplicative disease model for allelic χ <dig> test. however, if these equivocal observations are called even though they are completely misclassified , the power with genotyping errors can be  <dig> % at least. it indicates that in order to reduce the power loss caused by the equivocal observations, it would be more beneficial to call the equivocal observations with a genotyping error rate  <dig> % than 'no-call' with an overall call-rate  <dig> % .

as shown above, the commonly-used 'no-call' principal for the observations of borderline quality is not always the best choice. by weighing the influences on the performance of association study and allele frequency estimation, it is therefore preferable to force the calling of, even though they can be erroneous, these equivocal observations when they lie between the cluster of homozygotes of minor alleles and that of heterozygotes . when the equivocal observations lie between the cluster of homozygotes of major alleles and the cluster of heterozygotes , the loss of power introduced by mcb is more pronounced than that by genotyping error when these equivocal observations can be accurately called; but when the calling accuracy cannot be granted , the power loss is affected more by the genotyping error and it may be better to invoke 'no-call' procedure. in addition, with different disease models, different decisions for dealing with these equivocal observations may be made. a program called qc-tradeoff is available online to suggest whether 'no-call' procedure could be conducted  to minimize the biases caused by the equivocal observations.

in the above analyses, for the models of genotyping errors, we assumed all of equivocal observations were called to facilitate the discussion. here, we extended a general model to explore the joint effects caused by mcb and genotyping errors. we assumed only % of equivocal observations  were called with accuracy still denoted by conf. the genotype frequencies in this joint model were illustrated in additional file  <dig>  when α =  <dig>  this model is equivalent to the model of mcb; and when α =  <dig>  this model is equivalent to the model of genotyping errors. we introduced this joint model  to the disease models denoted in table  <dig>  fig.  <dig> and additional file  <dig> illustrated the power of association tests in the presence of mcb and genotyping errors, and the corresponding overall call-rate and genotyping error rate. an interesting finding is that the influences of the power caused by the equivocal observations always change monotonically with α from  <dig>  to  <dig>  it indicates in order to minimize the biases caused by the equivocal observations on association studies, the validate procedure is either no-call resulted in mcb or call all of the equivocal observations with genotyping errors, which we had discussed above.

given the knowledge of relationship of bias in allele/genotype frequency estimation and in association study with the magnitude of mcb and genotyping errors, it is therefore likely to develop a strategy to minimize the bias by choosing proper cut-offs for call-rate and genotyping error rate .

disccusion
the advent of high-throughput genotyping technologies led to an exciting era of genome-wide associations. genotype data with good quality are imperative in ensuring the creditability of a study. missing calls in high-throughput genotyping has long been ignored in genetic studies. in this study, we demonstrated experimentally the prevalence and severity of the problem of missing calls, especially mcb, in the current genotyping technologies.

we also showed theoretically how mcb could lead to biased conclusions in the subsequent analyses including estimation of allele/genotype frequencies and association tests. mcb leads to power loss in most cases, and such loss may lead to false negative conclusions. compared with allelic χ2test, genotypic χ <dig> test is more robust to mcb. various modes of inheritance relationship  were considered in our study. we also showed that when missing bias happens in the genotype whose contribution to the disease differs most, regardless whether it is susceptible or protective to the disease, it affects the power of association studies most.

in this study, we investigated the bias of association in the presence of both mcb and genotyping errors, and demonstrated that they contributed to the bias differently. this result is of special importance in determining the cut-offs used for qc in the current practice of gwa. the question is whether the current qc standards are optimal. if the objective is to minimize the bias in allele/genotype frequency estimation and in association tests, the cut-off for call-rate and that for genotyping error rate should be properly coupled in gwa. this leads to a re-examination of the existing qc standards for both call rate and genotyping error rate that are widely used in various association studies.

a commonly used qc standard for call rate is 80% and 95% or above for the first screening and fine mapping, respectively, in gwas . although we demonstrated that the bias in allele frequency estimation and in association study discussed in results  is not negligible when 'no-call' procedure is applied, their call-rates are all above 80% and even can be above 95%. it suggests that the existing cut-offs are not sufficiently stringent to filter out the loci which may suffer from mcb.

a genotyping error rate < 1% is considered acceptable  <cit> . this is an extremely stringent cut-off in the presence of equivocal observations, given that such a stringent cut-off would force to invoke 'no-call' principal whereas would not lead to a reduction of bias. our results indicated that in most cases, the bias can be greatly reduced by increasing the call-rate at the cost of genotyping error rate, i.e., < 5% . therefore, we suggested that the ongoing qc cut-off for call-rate should be increased, while the cut-off for genotyping error rate can be reduced properly.

a program called qc-tradeoff is available online to provide a conf threshold. if the threshold is high, it is conservative to take 'no-call' procedure to reduce the power loss in association studies introduced by the equivocal observations; otherwise, the equivocal ones could be called even though genotyping errors may be occurred. moreover, we showed that the missing calls can usually be reduced sufficiently but with certain accuracy using the current technologies, indicating that the value of conf in reality is usually high enough. through adjusting relevant parameters which are implemented in the calling software provided by genotyping platforms , it allows either higher call rates or greater genotyping rate. for example, we adjusted quality value of taqman from  <dig>   to  <dig>  to illustrate the change of calling in the two loci rs <dig> and rs <dig>  after a change of the quality value, the overall call-rate increased substantially. in particular, when the quality value is  <dig> ,  <dig> and  <dig> calls were not called for the loci rs <dig> and rs <dig>  respectively. when  <dig>  was chosen as the quality value, only  <dig> were not called at rs <dig> and  <dig> at rs <dig>  subsequently, the number of genotyping discordance between the genotyping results and sequencing results was  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the locus rs <dig> and rs <dig>  respectively.

furthermore, our results also suggested that mcb does not inflate type-i error rate for association studies. but it should be noted that the conclusion made here is under the assumption that the extent of missing is same to case and control. sometimes differential bias between case and control is unavoidable, i.e., for the different sourcing of samples. in this case, effects of mcb and genotyping errors could be more complicated. clayton et al.  <cit>  showed case-control differential bias and calling inaccuracies can lead to differential misclassification, and consequently, to increase false-positive rates. plagnol et al.  <cit>  from the same lab found case-control bias associated with missing data can increase the false-positive rate as well and recommended to use 'fuzzy' calls to deal with uncertain genotypes that would otherwise be labeled as missing.

CONCLUSIONS
missing calls in high-throughput genotyping has long been ignored in genetic studies. however, it had been illustrated that the problem of missing call bias does exist widely and sometimes seriously in prevalent high-throughput genotyping technologies. missing call bias could lead to biased conclusions in subsequent analyses, including allele/genotype frequency estimation and association studies. the commonly used 'no-call' procedure does not always a best option for observations of borderline quality. our results indicated that in most cases, the biased conclusion can be greatly reduced by increasing the call-rate at the cost of genotyping error rate. therefore, the existing qc standards should be modified that the cut-off for call-rate and that for genotyping error rate should be properly coupled in gwa. a program called qc-tradeoff is available online to suggest call or no-call the equivocal observations according to the case the user faced to minimize the power influences in association studies, and illustrate the acceptable qc standard in the corresponding case.

