BACKGROUND
a number of mechanisms can generate duplicate copies of genes, ranging from single gene duplications to regional and whole genome duplications  <cit> . large increases in gene number have been coupled to increases in organismal complexity and radiative divergence at several points in the history of metazoans including during the chordate/vertebrate transition and during the teleost fish divergence  <cit> .

metazoans differ from prokaryotes in their much smaller effective population sizes, where theory predicts that neutral stochastic processes will be relatively more important than adaptive processes in the expected case that adaptive mutations are rarer than nearly neutral mutations  <cit> . large scale analyses, based upon the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous nucleotide substitution rates  <cit>  or macdonald-kreitman statistics  <cit>  have indicated small to intermediate degrees of positive selection  in mammals, but these clearly do not represent the majority of substitutions. in such studies, it appears to be specific positions in protein-encoding genes, rather than the genes as a whole that are under positive selection  <cit> . even examining substitution as a neutral walk through sequence in a folded protein  has shown such a process to have fairly complex dynamics  <cit> . from this, it is relevant to examine population genomic phenomena, like the fates of duplicated genes, in the context of physical models of proteins. further, it is not possible to systematically identify fates of real genes , so modeling under increasingly realistic conditions is likely to be the best way to understand evolutionary mechanisms.

pseudogenization or nonfunctionalization is a purely neutral process that ultimately eliminates one of the duplicated copies as a functional gene and is the most common fate. subfunctionalization, is an alternative neutral process that leads to an increase in organismal gene number for genes or functions that show modularity . neofunctionalization is an alternative process leading to an increase in organismal gene number, but dependent upon rarer adaptive mutations. neofunctionalization can include the evolution of a completely new binding capability  or modification/improvement of existing binding capabilities under positive selection after removal of pleiotropic constraint. these alternative fates are presented in the context of a lattice model in figure  <dig> 

lattices are models of folded proteins in square or cubic shapes . the folding of a lattice is dictated by the contacts from amino acids that are not adjacent in the primary sequence . because lattices are small and the folding rules are simple, they can be used for evolving populations of proteins to study their structural properties.

lattice models have previously been used to make important predictions about the behavior of proteins in evolutionary contexts, including their metastability  <cit>  and the evolvability of new folds  <cit> . lattices that bind to peptides  <cit>  and small hydrophobic molecules  <cit>  have been described and the latter used to show that subfunctionalization can lead to an increase in duplicate gene retention rates. here, model genes that fold into lattices and bind peptides were duplicated, with neofunctionalization and subfunctionalization  or just neofunctionalization  as possible events that would preserve duplicated copies in a genome, with nonfunctionalization  as an alternative fate . the relative levels of duplicate gene preservation and the importance of both neofunctionalization and subfunctionalization were assessed.

RESULTS
a set of  <dig> stably folded lattices was designed to each bind to  <dig> different ligands at overlapping sites. a third ligand was present in the cell, but did not bind at either site at the start of the simulation. the lattice was duplicated in a constant population of  <dig> cells, where those cells that bound the third ligand were 5% more likely to appear in the next generation . in each generation, 10% of molecules became nonfunctional at random through transcriptional knock-out. the fitness function required molecules to fold and genomes to have binding capabilities for the first two ligands. cells were selected under the constraint that the first and second ligands needed to be bound, but could be bound by either molecule  in simulation a. the second simulation  tightened this constraint and required both ligands to be bound to the same molecule . in simulation b, only neofunctionalization is possible as a mechanism to preserve both copies non-redundantly. neofunctionalization can occur through two mechanisms, a pleiotropic mechanism where the third ligand binds at a site that is also capable of binding one of the other two ligands and a non-pleiotropic mechanism, where the third ligand binds to an inactive site. the average values of each fate  in each of the two simulations are shown in tables  <dig>   <dig> 

while initially, both models generate similar levels of neofunctionalization, with time model a begins to show significantly more neofunctionalization. in model a, the total number of subfunctionalized genes, including those that have also neofunctionalized increased initially, but then reached a plateau. these results are shown in figures  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> . it is clear that allowing subfunctionalization results in a greater retention rate of duplicate genes with less nonfunctionalization, although subfunctionalization without neofunctionalization never accounts for a large fraction of the duplicate genes at any point in evolutionary time . figure  <dig> indicates that the retention profile is completely different when subfunctionalization occurs compared to when it does not. it is also clear in these simulations that there is not a strong selective pressure to retain robustness through redundancy, as seen in figure  <dig> 

the role of subfunctionalization as a transition is based upon increasing the mutational space accessible to duplicates to neofunctionalize with removal of selective constraint at a binding site. this walk will differ for different lattices , modulating the importance of the effect of subfunctionalization. the rate of neofunctionalization in the absence of gene duplication  is also related to the accessibility of this pleiotropic walk, but is expected to be even slower than that of neofunctionalization in the absence of subfunctionalization.

while it is not possible to systematically analyze duplicated fates and classify duplicated proteins as neofunctionalized, subfunctionalized, or redundant, this study has implications for our understanding of the role of duplication in the evolution of genomes. protein segments that have lost function but are stably maintained in an expressed form will drift through sequence space until they achieve a function that makes them the targets of selection. looking back to the origin of chordates, there is little doubt that gene duplication and the evolution of new function  went hand in hand. however, it may be that subfunctionalization initially played an important role in preserving copies that subsequently neofunctionalized over the past hundreds of millions of years.

CONCLUSIONS
subfunctionalization has previously been shown to increase the retention rate of duplicate genes using a similar approach  <cit> . however, when neofunctionalization is included as a possible fate for duplicate genes, subfunctionalization is still important in short time frames after duplication. however, with increasing time, subfunctionalization decreases in importance and its role seems to be to preserve duplicate copies for eventual neofunctionalization, a role as a transition state. subfunctionalization can still play an important role with larger finite population sizes, but the importance of neofunctionalization as a terminal fate becomes even more dramatic with increasing population size.

