BACKGROUND
microarray gene expression profiling provides an unbiased, comprehensive view of an entire molecular system, and is well suited to identify the relevant factors that define the cancer phenotype. however, the success of this method can be impeded by problems arising from the parallel measurements of tens of thousands of gene expression levels sampled in a far lower number of tumor specimens, typically a few hundred at most. two specific problems have impacted cancer research: first, overfitting has produced several seemingly promising diagnostic patterns that have not been verifiable in independent studies  <cit> . second, redundant information in the form of strongly correlated genes has led to the repeated "discovery" of diagnostic patterns detecting a single robust phenomenon, such as the cell proliferation pattern that is prognostic in estrogen receptor  positive breast cancer  <cit> . one approach to these problems is to reduce the dimensionality of the data by combining  genes into a small number of metagenes.

several gene combinations have been used to characterize the cancer phenotype  <cit> . for example, the linear combination of proliferation associated genes and estrogen regulated genes provides a better predictor of outcome in tamoxifen treated er-positive breast cancer than does either class of genes alone  <cit> . although several supervised methods to find biologically relevant linear gene combinations are available, finding such predictive metagenes in an unsupervised fashion remains a challenge  <cit> . in breast cancer, expression profiles can easily discriminate between er-negative and er-positive tumors, which have very different clinical behavior. for this reason it is also easy, but not clinically useful, to develop trivial predictors of outcome in cohorts of mixed er subtype. within the er-positive subgroup, several predictors of response to chemotherapy have been described  <cit> . however, supervised methods have not yielded highly accurate predictors of chemotherapy response in dnbc  <cit> . this molecularly and clinically distinct subset of breast cancers represents approximately 20-25% of all breast cancers and can be treated only with chemotherapy. about 25-30% of these cancers respond favorably to treatment, but the remainder has very poor survival despite current best therapies  <cit> .

here we describe an unsupervised method to derive metagenes by leveraging the consistent expression patterns found in multiple gene expression data sets of the same cancer subtype. our approach is based on the postulate that analogous microarray data sets, such as those from patient cohorts selected under similar criteria, are representative collections from a larger population "expression space". in this expression space, individual samples are robustly separated by a set of metagenes, some of which may be clinically relevant. however, each individual data set may be adulterated by sampling artifacts and with data set specific noise. therefore, our approach is to derive metagenes that are consistently observed in several cohorts and are likely representative of the entire population. by first identifying metagenes in an unsupervised fashion, and then evaluating association between the metagenes and clinical outcome, we reduce the risk of overfitting.

using this method we derived metagenes from expression profiles of dnbc, stage iii ovarian cancer and early stage lung cancer, respectively. then we verified the association of these metagenes with clinical outcome in independent validation cohorts of the three cancer types.

RESULTS
derivation of dnbc-specific consistent expression indices 
we created a reference data set of dnbc from five previously published breast cancer cohorts that were all profiled on the same microarray platform  and were without neoadjuvant drug response data  <cit>  . from a total of  <dig> tumors we identified a subset of  <dig> dnbc based on expression levels of esr <dig> and erbb <dig>  <cit>  .

first, we used principal component analysis  as an unsupervised method to identify a subset of genes representing highly variable patterns in dnbc expression profiles. in pca, each principal component  is defined by a vector of gene expression weights. we hypothesize that the between-sample variability of tumor is driven by a finite number of biological effects, which are summarized into the principal components. hence a finite number of components will explain the majority of the variation of the data matrices. therefore, we define the likelihood as the fraction of total variance that is explained by the given number of principal components. for each individual data set, we performed pca and used the bayesian information criterion  to select a set of 3- <dig> pcs that best represent the predominant variation in the data without including components that are likely to represent noise . we expected to find any clinically relevant information enriched in these top pcs, since as the variance diminishes it becomes more difficult to distinguish signal from noise. for each reference data set, we distilled the pcs to include only the genes with a substantial contribution, as determined by the correlation between gene expression levels and pc scores across all samples. hierarchical clustering of these distilled pcs revealed six distinct groups, or consistent principal components , with at least two members. we identified  <dig> genes with a substantial contribution to at least two pcs in any of these clusters, hypothesizing that these genes are likely to capture consistent biologically-relevant information about dnbc  .

to validate the consistency of these cpc genes, we collected four independent dnbc data sets and subjected them to pca using only the  <dig> cpc genes  <cit> . as result, the first and the second principal components of the cpc genes are highly consistent across the four test data sets, suggesting that these genes correspond to conserved biological variation in dnbc . when we applied this gene set to the er-positive her2-negative subset of the same cohorts, we found that the resulting top pcs were distinct from those of the dnbc samples . thus, the cpc genes represent a specific type of variation of gene-expression within dnbc, which is highly conserved in multiple different cohorts.

next we used factor analysis  to distill the information in the cpc genes into six biologically relevant metagenes . fa can be considered an extension of pca in which an additional rotation maximizes variance of the gene weights. this additional rotation step results in a more even distribution of variance among components than does pca alone. in general, fa is often preferred when the goal of the analysis is to understand and explain the structure in the data  <cit> . using only the cpc genes in the combined reference data sets, we identified six factors that together explained 57% of the variance in the cpc genes . in order to estimate the contribution of these factors in other data sets, we defined six consistent expression indices  based on the sign of the non-trivial gene weights from each factor; thus each cei comprises between  <dig> and  <dig> of the cpc genes . at this point the ceis were finalized, and in all subsequent analysis the ceis were applied to the data sets without further adjustment. thus, the ceis were derived entirely from expression data, without consideration of any functional annotation or clinical outcome.

association between ceis and clinical outcome in double-negative breast cancer
we hypothesized that the six ceis, which account for highly conserved biological variation among dnbc cases in the five reference data sets, are also associated with certain clinical phenotypes of the tumors. we investigated whether the ceis were predictive of response to specific treatment regimens in four independent test cohorts in which expression profiles were obtained from dnbc samples prior to neoadjuvant therapy . two of these cohorts, mda <dig>  <cit>  and mda/maqc  <cit> , were similar: the samples were acquired by fine needle aspiration, and the patients received paclitaxel, fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide . in contrast, the two other data sets were derived from core biopsies; one cohort, eortc, received fluorouracil, epirubicin and cyclophosphamide   <cit> , whereas the other cohort, jbi <dig>  received only epirubicin  <cit>  .

each cei was evaluated as a univariate predictor of pathological complete response or residual disease using the area under the roc curve . chemotherapy regimens are indicated: a, doxorubicin; c, cyclophosphamide; e, epirubicin; f, 5-fluorouracil; p, either cisplatin or carboplatin; t, either paclitaxel or docetaxel. the ceis were derived from four independent dnbc cohorts not shown in this table. * p <  <dig> ; ** p <  <dig> . r: auc is estimated based on association to residual disease .

we evaluated the association between pathologic complete response  and each of the six ceis using area under the receiver operating characteristic  curves . in the mda <dig> data set we observed a strong positive association between cei <dig>  cei <dig> and pcr . similar associations were also observed in the second tfac data set, mda/maqc .

in the two cohorts in which patients received neoadjuvant chemotherapy without taxane, we found cei <dig> is significantly associated with residual disease , a typical poor pathological response . on the other hand, there is no detectable association between cei <dig> and response to either fec or epirubicin treatment . these associations between ceis and pathological responses in the validation cohorts was stronger than any we observed using published predictors  <cit>  or using predictors we derived using conventional methods .

since pathological response to chemotherapy is based only on short-term follow-up, we also examined the association of these ceis and long-term clinical outcome after chemotherapy. in a pooled dnbc cohort of  <dig> patients for which follow-up data is available , of all the six ceis, we found that binary classification based on cei <dig> was significantly associated with disease-free survival of patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy within  <dig> years of follow-up .

to test whether the ceis were simply capturing known metagenes, we compared the six ceis with  <dig> signatures reflecting tumor-associated biological processes or infiltrating cell types  <cit> . we used a meta-analysis based on seven data sets and found cei <dig> was negatively correlated with er/luminal-basal metagenes and erbb2-molecular apocrine tumor metagenes; whereas cei <dig> was positively correlated with the proliferation/aurka metagene . we also observed other correlations: cei <dig> negatively correlated with the stroma and adipocyte metagenes. however, none of these metagenes was reported to hold similarly strong and consistent predictive power in the original studies as that of cei <dig> and cei <dig>  <cit>  . this may suggest that synergistic effects of multiple biological processes are more deterministic of the response to therapy than any single ones. in addition, cei <dig> and cei <dig> were not correlated with any of the known metagenes. therefore, these two ceis may reflect some biological processes relevant to dnbc but not yet described as such in any previous study.

comparison with existing methods
in order to compare the performance of the cpc approach to existing algorithms, we assessed several supervised and unsupervised methods for their ability to generate metagenes predictive of treatment response.

for supervised methods, we first selected genes that are significantly associated with pathological response to taxane-based neoadjuvant therapy in the mda <dig> data set based on pearson's correlation coefficients, diagonal linear discrimination analysis  <cit> , student's t-test, wilcoxon's rank sum test, or nearest shrunken centroids  <cit> . we validated the predictive power of these metagenes in two other cohorts, mda <dig> and eortc. metagenes based on pearson correlation coefficients and nearest shrunken centroids yielded consistently significant predictions in the test data sets whereas the rest of the methods did not . however, the predictive power represented by the area under the curves  of all gene-by-gene methods decrease in the validation cohorts, suggesting overfitting..

for unsupervised methods, we pooled the five dnbc data sets and subjected it to independent component analysis   <cit>  or sparse principal component analysis   <cit> . three of the six top ica components were predictive of pathological response in mda <dig> and mda <dig> data sets; and three of the six top spca components were predictive of pathological response in mda <dig> and jbi <dig> data sets; whereas with the same number of components, consistent expression indices were predictive in four cohorts. more importantly, these methods produced less consistent results in terms of their predictive power in the two cohorts with similar treatment regimen. none of the components derived by ica and spca, predicted the pathological response in the two taxane-based neoadjuvant trials  in a consistent fashion. in particular, the third and fifth independent components  predicted outcome the opposite direction, high values predicting favorable response in one and unfavorable response in the other cohort .

other cancer types
er-positive her2-negative breast cancer
the er-positive her2-negative tumor is another major subtype of breast cancer and differs from dnbc in both transcriptional and genomic features  <cit> . since some of the dnbc-derived ceis may capture consistent biological variations common to both subtypes, we examined the association between the dnbc-derived ceis and clinical outcome in er-positive her2-negative subsets of the validation cohorts. in a pooled cohort of  <dig> er-positive her2-negative tumors  <cit> , binary classification based on cei <dig> was significantly associated with disease-free survival in tamoxifen-treated patients  as well as in patients not given tamoxifen treatment  . compared to dnbc, where cei <dig> was associated with only pathological response to tfac therapy but not long-term clinical outcome, the prognostic power of cei <dig> in er-positive her2-negative tumors suggests that the same biological process, proliferation, may have different effects in the two different subtypes, which is concordant with previous translational studies performed in er-positive tumors  <cit> .

ovarian cancer
ovarian cancer is represented in only a limited number of microarray data sets and to the best of our knowledge there are no two analogous ovarian cancer data sets for which the same type of clinical outcome data is publicly available. therefore, this type of cancer offered an opportunity to test our proposition that clinically relevant predictors can be extracted from data sets not associated with  clinical outcome data.

we tested whether the ceis derived from three stage iii ovarian cancer data sets, expo‡, aoc and du  <cit> , predict treatment response or clinical outcome in other independent ovarian cancer cohorts . in the bidmc cohort  <cit> , cei <dig> derived from ovarian cancer was significantly associated with overall survival in  <dig> years after chemotherapy . additionally, in the cruk cohort  <cit> , in which patients were assigned randomly to two groups treated with either paclitaxel or carboplatin monotherapy, cei <dig> was associated with good response  to paclitaxel  but with poor response  to carboplatin .

lung adenocarcinoma
finally, we turned our attention to lung adenocarcinoma, for which at least five microarray data sets are publicly available  <cit> . in a recent multi-site blinded validation study, at least eight gene expression based survival predictors were tested in two validation data sets, but none of these predicted clinical outcome in stage i cases in more than one data set unless clinical covariates were included  <cit> . therefore, we applied the same strategy to early stage lung cancer. in order to test our method within the same analytical framework of the original study we applied a cross-validation approach in the four lung cancer cohorts by extracting ceis from each combination of three cohorts  and testing for association between these lung cancer-derived ceis and outcome in the remaining cohort . in three of the four rounds of the validation, at least one of the ceis were significantly predictive of outcome in stage i lung cancer in the validation cohort, without the use of further clinical variables and without any training on outcome . furthermore, we derived four ceis from all four lung cancer data sets  and tested them on a fifth independent lung cancer cohort  <cit>  and found that cei <dig> was predictive of 5-year overall survival in stage i samples .

to understand the biology underlying the predictive power of these ceis, we tested for enrichment of gene ontology  annotations for biological processes in the cpc genes. for the cpc genes of the dnbc derived ceis, the most enriched go categories included immune and inflammatory response. for the lung cancer derived ceis, the top categories included digestion, response to external stimulus, and oxidation/reduction . while the go category analysis did not provide an easy interpretation of the observed predictive power of clinical behavior, a literature analysis identified several genes that were linked to specific chemotherapy response or resistance mechanisms, including gpx <dig>  <cit> , hpgd  <cit> , akr1c <dig>  and akr1c <dig>  <cit> .

discussion
we have presented a method to extract metagenes that consistently distinguish among individual double-negative breast cancers in multiple gene expression data sets. we found a strong association between three of the six ceis and the efficacy of various neoadjuvant treatments in dnbc. this association was stronger than that of previously published predictors and suggests that these gene sets reflect important biological processes that influence sensitivity to chemotherapy. importantly, different ceis were predictive of different regimens. furthermore, some ceis were predictive only in dnbc and not in er-positive tumors.

an attractive feature of the method presented here is that it is unsupervised; i.e. the ceis are derived without information about clinical response or outcome. this holds particular importance for cancer types with only a few existing clinical outcome matched microarray based cohorts  <cit> . in the case of cancer types of higher incidence and easier access to clinical material , multiple analogous cohorts complete with clinical outcome data, often up to six or seven independent data sets, are available for supervised analysis to identify individually informative genes. these genes could then be combined into multi-gene prediction models and independently validated on the various cohorts. in the case of other cancer types , lower incidence, difficulties with obtaining appropriate rna material, or the specific clinical course of the disease results in a lack of clinical outcome matched microarray data sets. in such cases a method that is able to extract potential outcome predictors without training on outcome data may provide a potential solution. given the observation that ceis may already hold predictive value without being fitted to the actual clinical outcome, cpc-based methods may extract testable predictors from microarray data without matched clinical outcome, and the few outcome matched microarray cohorts could then be used for independent validation. for example, prostate cancer is represented by at least fourteen microarray cohorts, but only three of these have clinical outcome published as well  <cit> .

although biological functions of the ceis can be partially understood by methods such as go analysis, our knowledge about these genes still remains very limited. there might be several reasons for this. first, many of the genes listed in the ceis have not been investigated in detail for direct involvement in drug resistance mechanisms. second, drug resistance might be the result of a distinct but complex biological feature which involves a concert of relevant biological mechanisms, such as increased expression of multidrug resistance genes, low proliferation rate, and the combination of these mechanisms might be best quantified by common upstream and downstream markers that reflect the expression level the relevant biological mechanisms. in general, it is desirable for clinical predictors to be associated with uniquely identifiable biological mechanisms so as for therapeutic targetability. however, we emphasize that our approach was designed to overcome the failure of single gene, single biological mechanism prediction of clinical outcome  <cit> . we aimed at determining and testing the utility of the most robust and consistent information in high throughput data sets, which is more likely to capture the most comprehensive and dominant biological variations in human tumors rather than any single unique biological process from limited prior knowledge.

the predictors presented in this paper would need to be refined before introduction into clinical practice. currently each cei comprises up to  <dig> genes, a number that might be impractical for a clinical test such as multiple quantitative pcr. also, treatment decisions are dichotomous; a patient either receives a particular treatment or does not. therefore, the most useful clinical tests have decision thresholds, which will need to be determined for the ceis and will need to be validated in independent cohorts to establish the sensitivity and specificity of a future treatment response test.

CONCLUSIONS
the approach we described in this analysis is well-suited to identify linear gene combinations that express consistent variations in a set of independent but biologically similar datasets, regardless of the observed clinical outcome. the ability of these metagenes to predict response to chemotherapy has been evaluated in completely independent set of cohorts. unlike other existing unsupervised methods, by mandating the consistency of the weights of genes in the loading matrix, the consistent principal components are more likely to yield reproducible predictive power.

