BACKGROUND
data deluge of the post-genomic era is providing scientists with potentially valuable information, but makes difficult to find and extract from the available data those that are most reliable and most related to the biomedical questions to be answered. moreover, such questions are increasingly complex and often simultaneously regard many heterogeneous aspects of an organism and its biomolecular entities. several of these questions can be addressed only by searching, extracting, integrating and comprehensively querying different types of data, which are distributed in several data sources and often inherently ordered or associated with ranked confidence values. usually, scientists manually explore these data using the individual search services available and struggle in combining intermediate results in order to find the most adequate answers to their global questions.

several data integration platforms and workflow systems  <cit>  have been created to query and combine available data and services from heterogeneous sources in order to explore existing information and extract new knowledge. proposed data integration approaches can be grouped with respect to the adopted integration techniques or interaction paradigms. the former ones include information linkage, data warehousing, mediator based systems and service integration methods. information linkage implementations, like srs  <cit>  or ncbi entrez  <cit> , enable users to interrogate several sources through a single web site and provide results with links to the data sources; yet, they do not integrate the retrieved data. fully materialized systems, like ensmart  <cit>  or biowarehouse  <cit> , integrate data within a warehouse according to a local schema. this approach allows performing easily complex computations on the integrated data, but requires updating often the data warehouse, which generally is a complex task. mediator based systems, like tambis  <cit>  or biomart  <cit> , are designed to query remotely distributed sources through a virtual mediated schema; the query on the mediated schema is transformed in queries over the schemata of the diverse sources and the retrieved data are processed locally. in mediated approaches data remain in the original sources without being materialized locally; thus, mediator based approaches provide up-to-date data, but complex computations on the data are a challenging task. service integration approaches require registering the services in order to describe them according to an integration model. among others, mork et al.  <cit>  proposed an entity-based model to integrate data from diverse services; they suggested to register services through a dsl , based on an extensible markup language  file, and map them onto the entities described in the model.

among interaction paradigms, the path-based approach is similar to the exploratory one used in our work; it is founded on a semantic graph, built according to links available between sources, which enables users to compose queries by selecting entities from the graph. biozon  <cit> , genoquery  <cit>  and the bioguide  tool family  are examples of such approach implementations. several other types of query interfaces have also been proposed. recently, latendresse and karp  <cit>  presented their structured advanced query page as an original interface to query a unique integrated database containing multiple data types.

notable examples of workflow systems supporting service and data integration include taverna  <cit> , wings/pegasus  <cit> , galaxy  <cit> , triana  <cit>  and kepler  <cit> . yet, taverna, the most known and used in bioinformatics, and the other available workflow systems do not rely on a general model of the services to be integrated. furthermore, available data integration platforms and workflow systems do not take into account, in the integration process, often available partial rankings of the data to be integrated. thus, they cannot provide support for ranking-aware multi-topic searches. both these limitations are addressed and overcome by search computing . it has been proposed as a new software framework that provides the abstractions, foundations, methods, and tools required to answer complex multi-topic queries over multiple data sources, also ranked  <cit> . it reaches this goal by interacting with a collection of cooperating search services and using ranking and joining of results as the dominant factors for service composition. the diverse services are described, according to a general and flexible service model, at three different levels of abstraction, i.e. at conceptual, logical and physical level  <cit> ; then, they are wrapped, registered in the system and mapped onto the virtual mediated schema, which is built based on the semantic relationships between services described at service registration. these aspects originally differentiate search computing from previous proposals for service registration and integration of data from diverse services, such as the one from mork et al.  <cit> .

here, we illustrate and discuss our novel work to support explorative integrated bio search and ranking-aware combination of distributed biomedical-molecular data, aimed at answering multi-topic complex biomedical questions. this work complements a previous study  <cit>  of the envisaged relevance of search computing to the life sciences, in particular to information integration and support for life sciences ordered data. the foundation of the extension of search computing in support of explorative searches in the complex biomedical-molecular scenarios was shortly introduced in  <cit>  and  <cit> ; here such extension is thoroughly illustrated and discussed, focusing on a paradigmatic bioinformatics use case. by supporting interactive explorative multi-topic data searches, the work here presented significantly extends a previous approach  <cit>  focused only on the efficient execution of predefined single global multi-topic queries over multiple ranked search services. the demonstrator prototype initially developed to implement such previous approach  <cit>  is significantly extended and enhanced by the original web application here presented and made publicly available. besides allowing querying diverse services and integrating their provided data on-the-fly, it additionally supports exploration  of intermediate partial results, as well as their expansion and refinement through search query modification and extension. furthermore, it enables users to attribute different weights to results from diverse sources.

RESULTS
we modelled and registered in the search computing framework, as described in the methods section, a set of bioinformatics services and their semantic connections, thus creating the semantic resource framework shown in figure  <dig>  leveraging it, we created a bioinformatics search computing application   and made it publicly accessible through a web interface at http://www.bioinformatics.deib.polimi.it/bio-seco/seco/. it enables explorative search and automatic ranking-aware integration of bio-data provided by the individual services registered in the framework. in the bio-seco user interface, the registered services can be used and combined, according to their connection patterns defined at service registration time, to explore and globally search the data that they provide. initial individual search results, obtained by setting search input parameters, can be combined, taking into account individual rankings, in order to refine or expand initial searches. in so doing, scientists can easily use the registered services to find, in an explorative way, answers to complex multi-topic biomedical-molecular questions such as "which are the biological functions of the genes known to be significantly over expressed in the anatomical organ × and to have mutations associated with the genetic disorder y?", or "which are the proteins most likely homolog of a given protein × that are involved in biological function y and encoded by genes down expressed in the biological condition z?".

as a use case example of bio-seco, let us suppose a scientist wants to explore available data regarding genes and proteins in order to find which are the genes  that encode proteins in different organisms with high sequence similarity to an amino acid sequence x and have some biomedical features in common . using the resources registered in bio-seco , for example, such scientist can first run a sequence alignment search , in order to look for proteins similar to an amino acid sequence x  in a selected amino acid sequence database . figure  <dig> illustrates the bio-seco interface where the user can specify the input parameters for such a search.

then, the scientist can explore the obtained search results , select the most similar proteins found or some of them  and automatically retrieve the codifying gene of each of them by using the gpdw protein coding gene query service, which is registered in bio-seco as connected to the ncbi blast service. figure  <dig> shows the atom view of the obtained results. such atomic data view implemented in the bio-seco user interface is particularly useful to synthetically display the distinct values found for the relevant attributes of each service involved in the performed multi-topic search. by moving the mouse pointer on a data record found by a service, also the related data record found by the other service involved in the multi-topic search are highlighted. furthermore, also the position of the data record in the global ranking of the search results  is highlighted .

next, the scientist can search for biomedical features shared among the retrieved genes. for instance, by using the array express gene expression search and gpdw gene biological function feature annotation services, he/she can explore if some of the initially found genes are known to be significantly co-expressed  in the same biological tissue or condition y  and involved in a biological process z . figure  <dig> shows the bio-seco interface where the user can set the additional input parameters to refine the obtained search results by using the array express gene expression search service, which is registered in bio-seco as connected to the gpdw protein coding gene query service. using the same interface, the user can also set the single service relative weights used to compute the result global scores.

by performing the exploratory search steps of the use case example above described, the scientist can explore the biomedical-molecular semantic resource framework defined by the bioinformatics services registered in bio-seco . in so doing, he/she can compose and submit a global query that might find the answer to his/her original complex multi-topic question: "which genes encode proteins in different organisms with high sequence similarity to a given protein x, are significantly over co-expressed in the same given biological tissue or condition y and are involved in the biological process z?" the possibility to easily construct in an explorative way such complex biomedical queries and run them efficiently across multiple distributed sources allows global evaluations of available bio-data that can unveil unexpected results and lead to new biomedical knowledge discoveries. on december 18th  <dig>  we run the above example global query by using equal service relative weights and setting input parameter values with the human paired box protein pax- <dig> isoform a protein  id as amino acid sequence x, tumor as pathological biological condition y, and regulation of apoptotic process as biological process z.

unpredictably, in the bio-data then available we found the human pax <dig>  pax <dig> and pax <dig> and mouse pax <dig> genes, ordered by their global scores of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively  . these scores take into account both partial rankings induced by the sequence similarity expectations and gene expression p-values, which both have dimensionless values in the same  interval, provided by the ncbi blast and array express services called in the global query. the four genes found encode, respectively, the human paired box protein pax- <dig>  human paired box protein pax- <dig>  human paired box protein pax- <dig> and mouse paired box protein pax- <dig>  these proteins respectively have  <dig>  e- <dig>   <dig>  e- <dig>   <dig>  e- <dig> and  <dig>  e- <dig> expectation of sequence similarity to the input human paired box protein pax- <dig> isoform a protein. their encoding genes are all significantly over expressed in tumor with  <dig>  e- <dig>   <dig>  e- <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  p-value, respectively, and all of them are involved in regulation of apoptotic process. notice that the human pax <dig> gene, which encodes the input human paired box protein pax- <dig> isoform a protein, is not among the found genes since it is not known to be involved in regulation of apoptotic process. furthermore, although the human pax <dig> gene encodes a protein much more similar to the input protein than the proteins encoded by the other genes found, it is not in the top position of the ordered global results found since it is less significantly over expressed in tumor than the human pax <dig> and pax <dig> genes. this result has been found very quickly thanks to the support provided by bio-seco; to our knowledge currently no other computational systems are able to provide it. furthermore, the explorative search peculiarities of bio-seco enable the user to easily look at the intermediate partial findings that led to discover the final global result, i.e. its supporting evidence based on the available data.

discussion
the created bio-seco application implements a novel exploratory search interaction paradigm and supports the user in performing a progressive step-by-step construction of the search query by exploring the data provided by the available services registered in bio-seco. this aspect of expanding an initial query - according to the liquid query paradigm  <cit>  - after evaluating its provided results, in order to refine or extend them, innovatively differentiates our exploration approach from the path-based one.

conversely, both approaches use a graph of sources to express the queries; thus, figure  <dig> could be obtained also in path-based systems  <cit> . usually scientists perform manually such supervised exploration of data by using the individual tools available, save somewhere  single search results and manually combine/compare them in order to identify common patterns and try to find answer to their global questions. bio-seco offers an integrated environment where to perform such data exploration, which automatically saves intermediate results, combines them taking into account their partial order and supplies ordered global results. furthermore, bio-seco offers multiple alternative and interchangeable types of result visualization, i.e. table, atom and scatter plot views, with also the possibility to easily integrate new advanced visualizations.

the order of the provided results is induced by their global scores, computed on the basis of the fagin's method  <cit>  and according to a score function defined as combination of partial scores of intermediate ranked results, as described in the methods section. this choice seams to be the most appropriate for bio-seco, which aims at quickly giving global ordered answer sets to user complex searches on multiple combined search services that provide individual rankings, possibly incomplete and with ties. it was positively evaluated by the users who provided feedbacks about the relevance of the system and its ranking strategy. an alternative to fagin's method could be the very promising bioconsert method, recently presented by cohen-boulakia et al.  <cit> . they proposed to rank answer sets, retrieved for a user query, according to a median-based consensus ranking generated on the basis of the results of a set of ranking methods and reflecting their common points. since finding a median of rankings with ties is a np-hard problem, they proposed an interesting heuristic to generate such a consensus ranking. it performs well with the datasets considered in  <cit> ; yet, being a greedy heuristic, unfortunately it is not guaranteed to always perform as well for all data sets.

our work here reported enhances and significantly extends an initial demonstrator prototype previously developed, which only supported predefined global multi-topic queries over ranked search services  <cit> . beside modelling and registering in bio-seco additional new services, in our novel work we created a user-friendly interactive web interface that offers public access to bio-seco at http://www.bioinformatics.deib.polimi.it/bio-seco/seco/ and supports explorative multi-topic bio-data searches. it enables the user to explore the very large and very heterogeneous biomedical-molecular data available, allowing he/she to easily expand or refine a previous query, make different attempts, inspect obtained results through topic-driven visualizations and move forward and backward in an activity that would eventually find the most relevant results, in case after several unsuccessful attempts . in so doing, the user interactively constructs a multi-topic global query, by defining query elements and constrains for each considered topic during the exploration of the available bio-data. such global query is then executed in the bio-seco environment, where it is optimized according to the expected invocation costs  of each individual service used to answer the global query.

the future development of bio-seco will focus on further extending its semantic resource framework by registering in bio-seco additional bioinformatics services, thus supporting a wider variety of biomedical questions, even more complex. it will also include the aspect of guiding user exploration of available resources towards the ones that provide more appropriate data according to the user preferences and strategies. to this regard, path-based systems like biozon  <cit>  and bioguidesrs  <cit>  are important reference for systems aimed at assisting scientists in searching for relevant data within external sources while taking their predilections and policies into account.

CONCLUSIONS
by using available services to search biomedical-molecular data and taking advantage of the ranking attributes that they define, the here described bioinformatics search computing application allows efficient exploration of available bio-data and search for globally ranked answers to complex multi-topic biomedical questions. in so doing, it offers a valuable and powerful automated support for exploratory integrated bio searches at the basis of life science data driven knowledge discovery.

