BACKGROUND
rhamnolipids are surface-active compounds that have been extensively studied since their early identification in pseudomonas aeruginosa cultures in the late 1940s  <cit> . however, it was only in the mid 1960s that the structure of a rhamnolipid molecule was first reported  <cit> . due to their excellent tensioactive properties, low toxicity and high biodegradability, these biosurfactants are promising candidates for a variety of industrial applications as well as bioremediation processes  <cit> . furthermore, rhamnolipids have recently received renewed attention because of their involvement in p. aeruginosa multicellular behavior, such as biofilm development and swarming motility  <cit> . rhamnolipids are also considered virulence factors as they interfere with the normal functioning of the tracheal ciliary system and are found in sputa of cystic fibrosis  patients infected by p. aeruginosa  <cit> . moreover, rhamnolipids inhibit the phagocytic response of macrophages and are known as the heat-stable extracellular hemolysin produced by p. aeruginosa  <cit> .

these amphiphilic molecules are usually produced by p. aeruginosa as a complex mixture of congeners composed of one or two molecules of l-rhamnose coupled to a 3-hydroxyalkanoic acid dimer, the most abundant being l-rhamnosyl-3-hydroxydecanoyl-3-hydroxydecanoate  and l-rhamnosyl-l-rhamnosyl-3-hydroxydecanoyl-3-hydroxydecanoate   <cit> . the biosynthetic pathway of rhamnolipids has been the subject of many studies that have demonstrated the implication of three crucially important genes, rhla, rhlb and rhlc. the first enzyme, rhla, is responsible for the interception of two molecules of β-hydroxydecanoyl-acp, an intermediate in the de novo fatty acid biosynthesis cycle, to produce 3-hydroxyalkanoic acid dimers, known as 3-alkanoic acids   <cit> . the second reaction, implicating the membrane-bound rhlb rhamnosyltransferase, uses dtdp-l-rhamnose to add the first rhamnose moiety to an haa molecule, thus forming a monorhamnolipid . finally, an additional rhamnosyltransferase, rhlc, couples a second rhamnose molecule to a monorhamnolipid by the means of another dtdp-l-rhamnose, producing the final dirhamnolipid   <cit> .

previously assigned to the pseudomonas genus, burkholderia spp. are attracting increasing interest because of their involvement in human infections. burkholderia is best known for its pathogenic members like b. pseudomallei, the causative agent of melioidosis, as well as the opportunistic pathogens belonging to the b. cepacia complex  <cit> . two studies have reported evidence of the production of a single dirhamnolipid by b. pseudomallei as well as by another member of the same genus, b. plantarii  <cit> . here, we investigate the production of rhamnolipids by b. thailandensis, a non-infectious burkholderia species closely related to b. pseudomallei  <cit> , and by b. pseudomallei itself. in contrast to the mandated b. pseudomallei guidelines, an advantage to studying b. thailandensis is that it does not require biosafety level  <dig> conditions, and there is no restriction on the use of antibiotic-resistance markers for its genetic manipulation. in addition, numerous studies have shown to what extreme level these two burkholderia species are closely related from a genetic point of view and that b. thailandensis can serve as a surrogate for studying many different traits, including physiological characteristics as well as pathogenic factors in regards to b. pseudomallei  <cit> .

RESULTS
presence of rhlabc homologs in b. thailandensis and b. pseudomallei
following a nucleotide and protein similarity search using algorithms blastn and blastp with standard parameters http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast.cgi, respectively, in sequenced b. thailandensis and b. pseudomallei genome sequences, close orthologs of the p. aeruginosa rhamnolipid-biosynthesis genes rhla, rhlb and rhlc were found in all associated strains as gene clusters. interestingly, both species possess two 100% identical rhl gene clusters on their second chromosome . a search in the partially sequenced genome of b. pseudomallei 1026b , the strain used in this study, indicated the same arrangement as in the completely sequenced strain 1710b. the rhla/rhlb/rhlc orthologs of these two burkholderia species are highly similar to one another with nucleotide identity ranging from 89% to 96%. furthermore, the protein encoded by these genes share almost 50% identity with those of p. aeruginosa pao <dig>  which possesses a single copy of these genes on its genome. another interesting observation is that for p. aeruginosa, rhla and rhlb are found in one operon whereas rhlc is found in a different bicistronic operon . finally, table  <dig> shows that the remaining orfs present in the rhl gene clusters, including the one adjacent to rhlc in p. aeruginosa, all seem to have functions related to transport or efflux.

 <dig> predicted functions from http://www.pseudomonas.com and http://www.burkholderia.com.

predicted functions of the remaining orfs present in the rhl gene cluster in b. thailandensis and b. pseudomallei, including the one adjacent to rhlc in p. aeruginosa.

rhamnolipid production by b. thailandensis and b. pseudomallei
due to the high similarity between the rhla/rhlb/rhlc genes found in p. aeruginosa and their homologs in b. thailandensis, the latter was tested for the production of rhamnolipids. using b. thailandensis in various rhamnolipid production growth conditions, the initial results from liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry  analysis revealed a dominant peak in the total-ion chromatograph . this peak presented a pseudomolecular ion of m/z  <dig> in negative-ion mode, a value that is compatible with a compound consisting of two l-rhamnose molecules as well as two β-hydroxytetradecanoic acids. a corresponding rhamnolipid, 2-o-α-l-rhamnopyranosyl-α-l-rhamnopyranosyl-β-hydroxytetradecanoyl-β-hydroxytetradecanoate , with a molecular weight of  <dig> da, has been previously reported from b. pseudomallei and b. plantarii cultures  <cit> . further experimentation was done to investigate the effects of various growth media and carbon sources on the production of rhamnolipids by b. thailandensis. mineral and rich culture media were assayed: tested substrates included carbohydrates such as mannitol, dextrose, sucrose, glycerol and fructose along with various vegetable oils such as canola oil, olive oil, palm oil and sunflower oil, all at a final concentration of 4% . several studies using plant-derived oils have demonstrated that these inexpensive hydrophobic materials are excellent carbon substrates for biosurfactant production by p. aeruginosa  <cit> . under our experimental conditions, glycerol and canola oil were the best carbohydrate and vegetable oil for rhamnolipid production, achieving concentrations of  <dig>  mg/l and  <dig>  mg/l, respectively, after  <dig> days of culture . in both cases, the dirhamnolipid rha-rha-c14-c <dig> was the most abundant with values ranging from 70% to 77% relative to total rhamnolipids, while its precursor rha-c14-c <dig> dominates the monorhamnolipid category with  <dig>  and  <dig> % of total rhamnolipids. detailed analysis of b. thailandensis cultures revealed a series of long chain rhamnolipids, as shown in table  <dig>  these rhamnolipids are predominately composed of a c14-c <dig> chain length fatty acid moiety as well as others comprised of chains ranging from c10-c <dig> to c16-c <dig> chain length.

 <dig> relative abundance of rhamnolipids only.

 <dig> n/d: not detected.

cultures were grown on 4% glycerol and canola oil as respective carbon sources. lc/ms analysis was performed after  <dig> days of incubation at 37°c.

to confirm that the ions identified by lc/ms are indeed rhamnolipids, they were fragmented and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry . to allow for comparison with p. aeruginosa rhamnolipids, monorhamnolipids obtained from b. thailandensis were fragmented and the observed fragmentation pattern was similar to the one we observed for p. aeruginosa  <cit> . for an isomeric pair of rhamnolipid congeners bearing two 3-hydroxy fatty acids of different chain lengths , the relative abundance of the various congeners was studied. because such isomers cannot be resolved chromatographically, the lc/ms/ms spectrum of their common pseudomolecular ions show fragment ions characteristic of both compounds, as seen in figure  <dig>  as we have previously reported for p. aeruginosa  <cit> , within each isomeric pair, the rhamnolipid congener with the shortest chain adjacent to the sugar moiety is more abundant. to verify whether the rhamnolipids produced by b. thailandensis share this characteristic, they were subjected to an enzymatic hydrolysis of their rhamnose groups with naringinase  <cit>  to produce the corresponding haas. the same stoichiometrical preference was confirmed.

with these results in hand, we investigated the potential of the highly genetically related species b. pseudomallei to produce a range of rhamnolipids other than the previously described rha-rha-c14-c <dig>  figure  <dig> shows the production of the most abundant rhamnolipids by this pathogen. the same long-chain bearing congeners found in b. thailandensis were also discovered in b. pseudomallei, including the dominant rha-rha-c14-c <dig> 

critical micelle concentration  and surface tension assays
to investigate the potential of the long-chain rhamnolipids produced by burkholderia species for lowering surface tension, the critical micelle concentration of this mixture of rhamnolipid congeners was established . at the cmc of about  <dig> mg/l, the surface tension is lowered to  <dig> mn/m.

both rhla alleles are functional and necessary for maximal rhamnolipid production
the contribution to rhamnolipid production of the two identical rhl gene clusters found on the b. thailandensis genome was tested by creating single Δrhla mutants for each allele, as well as a double Δrhla mutant. these three mutants were then investigated for their ability to produce rhamnolipids . five sets of replicates confirmed that the b. thailandensis Δrhla <dig> mutant produces more rhamnolipids than the Δrhla <dig> mutant. the rhamnolipids produced by each of these mutants are composed of the same congeners in the same proportions as the wild type strain and only a quantitative difference is observed. intriguingly, total production of both single mutants do not equal to the production of the wild type strain. finally, the double Δrhla mutant does not produce any detectable rhamnolipids.

swarming motility requires both rhla alleles
in p. aeruginosa, production of rhamnolipids is essential for expression of the multicellular behaviour called swarming motility  <cit> . it was therefore of interest to assess whether rhamnolipids are also important for this type of motility in b. thailandensis. furthermore, since both rhla alleles are functional and contributing to the production of rhamnolipids in this species, we wondered if the amount of biosurfactants produced by the single mutants would be sufficient to permit the swarming phenotype. Δrhla <dig> and Δrhla <dig> mutants of b. thailandensis were thus tested for their ability to swarm. figure 6a  shows the swarming phenotype of the wild type strain as well as the single Δrhla mutants and the double Δrhla mutant. we observe that the single mutants have hindered swarming motility whereas the double mutant is incapable of such motility. thus, one functional copy of rhla does not provide enough rhamnolipid production to allow normal surface translocation on a semi-solid surface. interestingly, the Δrhla <dig> mutant is capable of moving to a greater distance than the Δrhla <dig> mutant . this observation concurs with the above results showing the superior rhamnolipid production by the Δrhla <dig> mutant compared to the Δrhla <dig> mutant . finally, as expected, the double Δrhla mutant is incapable of any swarming.

to test whether swarming phenotype restoration is possible with our Δrhla mutants, swarm assays were performed with the addition of increasing concentrations of exogenous rhamnolipids. we observed that the Δrhla <dig> mutant requires less exogenous rhamnolipids to regain complete swarming motility compared to the Δrhla <dig> mutant, consistent with the finding that this latter mutant produces less rhamnolipids. these results indicate that a critical concentration of biosurfactant is necessary to enable bacteria to swarm. accordingly, the double mutant requires much more exogenous rhamnolipids to restore this phenotype. cross-feeding experiments with both Δrhla mutants were also performed to verify whether swarming phenotype could be regained. interestingly, when the two mutants are mixed before plating, swarming is restored , contrary to when mutants are simply spotted side-by-side .

discussion
b. thailandensis and b. pseudomallei harbor rhla/rhlb/rhlc homologs for the biosynthesis of rhamnolipids
looking through their sequenced genomes, we found that both b. thailandensis and b. pseudomallei harbor on their second chromosome two paralogous rhl gene clusters carrying genes highly similar to the p. aeruginosa genes rhla, rhlb and rhlc, which are involved in the biosynthesis of rhamnolipids. interestingly, in the latter species these three genes are arranged in two physically distant operons, while in the two burkholderia species, they are part of the same gene cluster. the results presented here demonstrate that the purpose of these genes in b. thailandensis, and more than likely in b. pseudomallei, is for the production of rhamnolipids.

genes that share similarities with efflux pumps and transporters are also present within the rhl gene clusters. there is at least one instance of an efflux system implicated in the transport of a biosurfactant. in the gram-positive species bacillus subtilis, yerp, a homolog to the resistance-nodulation-cell division  family efflux pumps, was found to be implicated in surfactin resistance  <cit> . we propose that the other genes present within the rhl gene clusters are involved in the transport of rhamnolipids outside the cell; we are currently investigating this hypothesis.

under our experimental conditions, b. thailandensis is capable of producing rhamnolipids with 3-hydroxy fatty acid moieties that are comprised of chains varying from c10-c <dig> to c16-c <dig>  such long lengths have not been reported for rhamnolipids produced by bacteria other than those of the burkholderia species, with the exception of one publication reporting trace amounts of rha-rha-c10-c14: <dig> produced by p. aeruginosa 57rp and another describing the production of a c14-c <dig> form by p. chlororaphis b- <dig>  <cit> . interestingly, the rhamnolipids produced by b. thailandensis are predominantly composed of dirhamnolipids, whereas monorhamnolipids and haas are only found in much smaller concentrations. although the latter two are produced in smaller quantities by the bacteria, they are nevertheless comprised mostly of the corresponding molecule in the c14-c <dig> chain lengths. the dirhamnolipid versus monorhamnolipid ratio found in this species is approximately  <dig>  whereas we observe a factor of only  <dig> in p. aeruginosa. one possible explanation is that, unlike p. aeruginosa which harbors rhla and rhlb in one operon and rhlc in another, burkholderia species code for the three enzymes from the same gene cluster, predicted to be an operon. we hypothesize this favors the simultaneous production of all the enzymes of the biosynthetic pathway; hence, rhlc would be present simultaneously and in the same stoichiometric ratio as rhlb, therefore favoring the immediate addition of the second l-rhamnose unto the monorhamnolipids. our result adds b. thailandensis to the few bacterial species able to produce rhamnolipids, and shows that rhamnolipids produced by burkholderias are more likely to contain longer side chains than those by pseudomonas species, which are predominantly of the c10-c <dig> chain length.

the above mentioned facts are also true for the rhamnolipids produced by b. pseudomallei. more specifically, fatty acyl chains with carbon lengths of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were observed in b. pseudomallei rhamnolipids, although only dirhamnolipids were detected. while production levels achieve  <dig> mg/l for b. pseudomallei, b. thailandensis can reach  <dig> mg/l under the same conditions . results of the present study further demonstrate that rhamnolipid congeners other than the previously described rha-rha-c14-c <dig> are also produced by this pathogen.

inactivation of each of the two rhla alleles confirmed that both rhl gene clusters contribute to the synthesis of rhamnolipids. rhamnolipid production is observed even when one of the two alleles is not functional, suggesting that one copy does not depend on the other. however, the production levels attained by each of the Δrhla mutants show that the gene cluster containing the rhla <dig> allele contributes about two and half more rhamnolipids than the rhla <dig> allele cluster . since the promoter sequences of the two rhl gene clusters only share approximately  <dig> bp directly upstream of both of the rhla atgs and therefore seem to have diverged, these results suggest that each cluster possesses its unique, differently controlled promoter, which is apparently found upstream of this conserved region. the biphasic shape of the wild-type rhamnolipid production curve supports this conclusion. furthermore, the addition of both levels of production by the two clusters does not reach the wild type production level. this could be explained by some sort of positive retroaction where rhamnolipids stimulate global production and that the gene clusters are in fact interconnected. also, it must be considered that the different rhamnolipid production levels attained by the Δrhla single mutants could also be associated to polar effects on the downstream genes that could possibly interfere with rhamnolipid biosynthesis.

the presence of two paralogous gene clusters is interesting since gene duplication is normally not favored within genomes, as one copy is generally more susceptible to mutations and/or inactivation. however, a duplication event might be preserved if it is immediately beneficial to the organism because of protein dosage effects, e.g. in variable environments  <cit> . we therefore extrapolate that the burkholderia species which harbor twin rhl gene clusters have conserved both copies because it must be advantageous for these bacteria to produce extra quantities of rhamnolipids. the requirement of both rhl gene clusters for normal swarming motility supports this model . the presence of a transposase of the mutator family in close proximity of one of the gene clusters  can also be indicative that a past duplication of an original single copy occurred and positive selection throughout evolution of some bacterial lineages conserved the paralogs.

long chain rhamnolipids from burkholderia: effects on the cmc
considering the length of the carbon chains of the fatty acid moiety of rhamnolipids produced by burkholderia species, it was compelling to determine their effect on lowering the surface tension of water. a total rhamnolipid extract from b. thailandensis lowers the surface tension to  <dig> mn/m, with a cmc value of  <dig> mg/l. these values are higher than those traditionally reported for rhamnolipids produced by pseudomonas species   <cit> ; however, it is only recently that haas have been discovered, as well as their efficacious surface tension-lowering potential  <cit> . thus, we assume that results pertaining to surface tension properties of rhamnolipids published prior to this report could have been biased by a contamination with easily co-purified haas. for the purpose of the present study, we compared our results with those we have published for purified rhamnolipids and haas produced by p. aeruginosa pg <dig>  <cit> . the purified rhamnolipids from this strain lower surface tension to  <dig> mn/m with a cmc value of approximately  <dig> mg/l, while the haa mixtures displays values of  <dig> mn/m with a cmc of approximately  <dig> mg/l. consequently, it is clear that the longer chain rhamnolipids produced by b. thailandensis start forming micelles at a much lower concentration than p. aeruginosa rhamnolipids,  <dig> mg/l versus  <dig> mg/l. these values can be compared as the rhamnolipid mixture from b. thailandensis used for our tests contained only traces of haas. the effect of alkyl ester chain length of sophorolipids, a class of biosurfactants produced by candida bombicola, has been studied with regards to micellization. the study reported a direct effect of carbon chain length on decreasing the cmc. additional ch <dig> groups render the molecule more hydrophobic and thus facilitate micelle formation  <cit> . this might explain the lower cmc value obtained with the longer chain rhamnolipids produced by b. thailandensis in comparison to those obtained by p. aeruginosa.

both rhla alleles are necessary for normal swarming motility
swarming motility always involves biosurfactants. for example, serrawettin w <dig>  a wetting agent produced by serratia liquefaciens, is required for swarming motility in a nonflagellated mutant  <cit> . in regards to p. aeruginosa, biosurfactants such as rhamnolipids and haas are essential for swarming motility  <cit> . only a few studies have reported on swarming motility of burkholderia species, which is at least in part attributed to the lack of knowledge available regarding wetting agents produced by members of this genus. the swarming motility of b. cepacia has been observed, and the authors hypothesized that biosurfactants are involved  <cit> . we have also recently reported conditions under which b. thailandensis can swarm  <cit> .

the present study demonstrates that swarming motility of a b. thailandensis double Δrhla mutant is completely prevented. this is in agreement with previous studies showing that inactivation of rhla inhibits swarming by p. aeruginosa  <cit> . furthermore, a mutation in any of the two rhla genes hinders swarming of b. thailandensis, suggesting that a critical concentration of rhamnolipids is required and that the levels reached when only one of the two gene clusters is functional are not sufficient to allow the bacteria to completely overcome surface tension. the complementation experiment with exogenous addition of increasing concentrations of rhamnolipids further corroborates that there is indeed a critical concentration of biosurfactant necessary for b. thailandensis to swarm, and that both rhl gene clusters contribute differently to the total concentration of rhamnolipids produced. the cross-feeding experiment suggests that rhamnolipids produced by b. thailandensis diffuse to only a short distance in the agar medium surrounding the colony.

CONCLUSIONS
the discovery that b. thailandensis is capable of producing considerable amounts of long chain dirhamnolipids makes it an interesting candidate for the production of biodegradable biosurfactants with good tensioactive properties. furthermore, that this bacterium is non-infectious makes it an ideal alternative to the use of the opportunistic pathogen p. aeruginosa for the large scale production of these compounds for industrial applications. finally, identification of the same paralogous rhl gene clusters responsible of the production of long chain rhamnolipids in the closely-related species b. pseudomallei might shed some light on the virulence mechanisms utilized by this pathogen during the development of infections.

