BACKGROUND
the architectures of most multi-cellular organisms are strikingly modular. on the one hand, such modularity can be spatial. organisms are partitioned into organs and tissues whose cells have specialized functions  <cit> , and where cells of similar types are in close proximity. such spatial modularity also exists within cells. examples include organelles, spatial modules that allow specialized tasks to be performed in localized regions of a cell. spatial modularity can be thought of as functional specialization according to spatial localization.

on the other hand, modularity can be topological, as research of the last ten years has shown. such modularity is evident in biological networks such as protein-protein interaction networks  <cit> , transcriptional regulatory networks  <cit> , or metabolic networks  <cit> . in these systems, the networks - viewed as graphs - contain modules that are subsets of nodes strongly connected to each other but weakly connected to the remaining network. this kind of modularity does not involve explicit spatial location but nevertheless relies on a notion of proximity . if nodes within a module tend to be involved in the same biological or biochemical function, then both spatial and topological modularity point to a general architectural principle: the parts of an organism that perform specific tasks or functions are grouped into modules that can function semi-autonomously.

the prevalence of modularity  in living systems might have several ultimate evolutionary origins . one long-standing idea is that modularity facilitates adaptation, in particular by enhancing the frequency at which new and useful traits appear, and by increasing their heritability. indeed, modules that are semi-autonomous entities can be easily modified, added, replaced, or rearranged in a system through a process that has been called evolutionary tinkering  <cit> . in this view, modularity would be favored by natural selection because it modifies the rate of adaptation  <cit> . this scenario predicts that directional selection will bring forth organisms and networks that are highly modular; it can be particularly relevant for the evolution of complex traits  <cit> . a specific realization of this scenario arises in models of genetic network evolution when the environment is fluctuating and structured; modularity can then arise as a result of selection for a high rate of adaptation in changing environments  <cit> . but modularity in this scenario need not even require environmental change. in particular, it can emerge from innovations that allow adaptation to new ecological niches, as suggested by studies of metabolism  <cit> , or from innovations that increase fitness, as suggested from gene network studies  <cit> .

in other scenarios for the origin of modularity, natural selection on the rate of adaptation does not shape modularity; instead modular architectures follow from developmental constraints, or from other phenomena related to epistasis and pleiotropy  <cit> . in such scenarios, modularity can be the mere consequence of selection on other traits, but researchers do not agree on how general this scenario could be  <cit> .

in the present work we focus on metabolism, and show that modularity in genome-scale metabolic networks may be a by-product of phenotypic constraints. we will show that this scenario is likely to be very general in metabolism for traits related to an organism's ability to live in different environments. we refer to this ability as an organism's metabolic versatility, and explain it further below. specifically, we view metabolism as a complex chemical reaction network inside an organism and ask this question: among all possible metabolic reaction networks with high versatility, do most have modular architectures?

in contrast to many other networks  <cit> , metabolic networks do not just have a static graph structure, but a function that involves the flow of molecules through them. this function can be used to define modules in a network based on fully coupled sets of reactions, as explained in the methods and results sections  <cit> . we will measure a network's modularity by several indices based on these modules, and relate this modularity to versatility, a metabolism's ability to sustain life in different environments. some organisms are metabolic specialists and can live in few environments, others are generalists that can thrive in many different environments. general principles of how a metabolic network must change as an organism's versatility varies remain elusive. one might try to find such principles by studying a broad panel of living organisms that differ in versatility. however, any association between versatility and some other observable quantity, such as modularity, would leave open whether the association between the two is driven by evolutionary forces that act not on versatility but on some other, unknown network property.

to avoid this difficulty, we can take advantage of our ability to create random samples of metabolic genotypes with specific properties, including versatility.  this approach  <cit>  allows us to examine the consequences of versatility for network modularity, in the absence of any other influences. we shall find that the ability to thrive in increasing numbers of environments is strongly associated with greater modularity of metabolic networks. our observations support the idea that elementary properties of metabolic networks, such as their ability to sustain life in multiple environments, can contribute to shaping metabolic network structure and in particular modularity, without the need to consider evolutionary dynamics or selection on a rate of adaptation.

modeling framework
for our study, we use genome-scale metabolic network modeling. the set of chemical reactions that can take place in an organism and their associated metabolites define the organism's metabolic network. each reaction is typically catalyzed by an enzyme that allows the transformation of substrate molecules into product molecules. with the advent of genome-scale metabolic network modeling  <cit> , it has become possible to compute which target products can be synthesized by a given set of enzymes, assuming that the network is in a metabolic steady state, and that specific nutrients are available to the network from the environment. the relevant computational method is based on balancing metabolic flux - the rate at which a reaction converts substrates into products - for all reactions, and is thus called flux balance analysis   <cit> . its predictions are usually in good agreement with experimental data  <cit> , except where enzymes are mis-regulated, such that a network cannot attain optimal metabolic fluxes through all its reactions. 

an organism's set of enzyme coding genes, identified here with a list of reactions, can be viewed as a discretized binary metabolic genotype; for brevity we refer to it from here on as the organism's genotype or metabolic genotype. specifically, given a total universe of n possible reactions, any genotype can be represented by a string of n bits, g =  as illustrated in additional file  <dig> figure s1a. if enzyme i is encoded in the organism's genome, then bi =  <dig>  while bi =  <dig> otherwise. in this framework, the space of all metabolic genotypes contains 2n elements. following previous work  <cit> , we here take the universe of reactions to encompass all known enzyme-catalyzed chemical reactions, as represented in publicly available databases  <cit> . this set of reactions is most likely incomplete, but nevertheless sufficiently comprehensive to produce a vast space of metabolic genotypes, where each genotype contains a subset of these reactions.

if an organism can grow in a specific chemical environment , its metabolic network is able to produce all of its biomass precursors ; we then call the organism  viable. this leads us to define an organism's phenotype via its ability to synthesize biomass in a number of given chemical environments. note that the mapping from genotype to phenotype in our approach is completely determined by the fba framework. previous research has shown that this map is highly degenerate, meaning that a huge number of genotypes will produce the same phenotype; indeed, many reactions in a metabolic network are typically non-essential and can be replaced by other reactions. furthermore, genotypes of identical phenotype are such that small genotypic changes  connect these genotypes into a vast graph; we refer to this graph as a genotype network. a consequence of this connectivity property is that gradual evolution of genotypes is possible, while leaving the phenotype unchanged  <cit> . for this reason, genotype networks can facilitate evolutionary changes and adaptation of genotypes  <cit> . such properties seem to be generic properties of well-studied genotype to phenotype maps, and have been found in many systems. these include rna and proteins, where the genotype is the sequence and the phenotype is the secondary or tertiary structure  <cit> , as well as gene regulatory networks whose genotype specifies a pattern of genetic interactions and whose phenotype corresponds to a gene expression pattern  <cit> .

to characterize metabolic networks of a given phenotype, we cannot examine all genotypes because of their astronomical number. instead, we use a markov chain monte carlo   <cit>  approach to sample a space of genotypes or subsets thereof. this approach is based on performing random walks within that subspace, as illustrated in additional file  <dig> figure s1c. at each step of such a random walk, a small change is applied to the current genotype and the phenotype of the changed genotype is computed; if the phenotype fulfills a pre-specified criterion, the current genotype is updated; if not, the change is rejected, and the current genotype is kept. with appropriate precautions  <cit>  this procedure will create uniform samples of the accessible space of genotypes with a desired phenotype.

RESULTS
fully coupled sets of reactions are proxies of pathways
the analysis of modularity in large graphs or networks is a mature field. not surprisingly, multiple different measures of modularity have been developed  <cit> . identifying all modules of a large network can be computationally intractable, that is, np difficult  <cit> . fortunately, metabolic networks are special, because their analysis can go beyond graph-based representations. the reason is that metabolic networks synthesize biomass, and this function of metabolic networks can be quantified by studying the flow or flux of matter through each reaction in a network. doing so permits an analysis of modularity that is based on network function, not just topology. here we take advantage of the notion of coupling between reaction fluxes to identify sets of reactions that form a metabolic module. such sets have been referred to as reaction/enzyme subsets or correlated reaction sets or fully coupled sets  <cit> . hereafter we will use the term fully coupled set  only. these sets define metabolic network modules that are both biochemically sensible  <cit>  and computationally tractable  <cit> . by definition, two reactions are in the same fcs if the ratio of their fluxes is fixed when considering all possible steady-state flux distributions through the metabolic network. determining all fcss of a large metabolic network can be done efficiently using linear optimization . we note that the different fcss in a metabolic network are disjoint, and that not all of a network's reactions need to belong to an fcs .

the simplest possible fcs involves reactions in a linear biochemical pathway, arguably the most intuitive form of a functional module in biochemistry. however pathways with branches and cycles can also form fcss  <cit> . for illustration, figure  <dig> represents the largest fcs containing a cycle that arises in the e. coli metabolic network; it includes reactions that are involved in cell envelope biosynthesis.

we first asked how modules, as defined by fcss, relate to conventional biochemical pathways, the classical functional modules of metabolism. to this end, we mapped reactions in many different fcss onto biochemical pathways, as defined by standardized annotations  <cit> . we relied on annotations in the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes database   <cit> , a comprehensive metabolic database that annotates biochemical reactions as belonging to a list of pathways. for the metabolic network of e. coli, we find that reactions in the same fcs typically belong to a common pathway. to quantify whether this property was statistically significant, we implemented the following test.

for each fcs, we identified the pathway annotation for all of its reactions. because each reaction can be annotated as belonging to multiple pathways, we identified for each fcs the pathway annotation that is shared by most of its reactions. we defined the quantity q as the fraction of reactions that are annotated as belonging to that pathway, and computed q for each fcs in the metabolic network of e. coli. we observed that in most fcss  all reactions belonged to the same pathway, and nearly  <dig> percent of fcss had more than  <dig> percent of their reactions belonging in the same pathway. this strong association of reactions in an fcs with one pathway is not expected by chance alone, as a randomization test shows . thus, most of the fcss in e. coli can be viewed as biochemical pathways or parts thereof.

the same analysis can be applied to random samples of metabolic networks with specific properties, as generated by our mcmc sampling procedure . specifically, we first identified fcss from  <dig> in silico metabolic genotypes viable in all of the  <dig> carbon source environments we consider . in this analysis, we observed that in most fcss  all reactions belonged to the same pathway, and nearly  <dig> percent of fcss had more than  <dig> percent of their reactions in the same pathway . just like e. coli, the strong association is not expected by chance alone, as a randomization test shows . thus, both for e. coli and for our random samples, most fcss can be viewed as biochemical pathways or as parts thereof. to illustrate such fcss, additional file  <dig> figure s <dig> shows the most frequent fcs comprising five or more reactions that we found in our sampling. this fcs occurred in  <dig> of the  <dig> metabolic genotypes. all its reactions belong to histidine metabolism .

both measures of modularity m and s increase with versatility
we next asked quantitatively how network modularity is affected by environmental versatility. to answer this question, we defined two indices of network modularity, which we call m and s. the first index is the number m of reactions in a network that belong to fcss. then we calculate the average <m>for a sample of networks generated by our mcmc procedure, where each network in the sample needs to be viable in a given set venv of chemical environments . we consider venv as an index of environmental versatility for these metabolic networks. in our analysis, we study up to  <dig> minimal chemical environments that differ only in the sole carbon source they contain . in other words, venv indicates the number of sole carbon sources from which these networks can synthesize all essential biomass precursors. to see how our observations depended on the sets of carbon sources used, we investigated different choices for these sets, where sets of fewer carbon sources were nested within sets of more carbon sources .

in figure 2a we show how <m> depends on versatility venv, both on average , and for multiple different nested sets of carbon sources . the analysis is based on metabolic networks with the same number of reactions as e. coli  <cit> . the data show that greater versatility leads to higher values of the modularity index; this trend is clear when considering the average over all choices of carbon sources, and also when considering the different nested sets.

as a network's versatility rises, does an increase in m - the number of reactions in fcss - occur through an increase in the size of the fcss, or through an increase in the number of fcss, while their size remains constant? to address this question, we next studied the number of fcss, which we denote by s, our second index of modularity. we applied the procedures we described earlier to the same genotypes as before, averaging now the number of modules  rather than the number of reactions in these modules.

the results of figure  <dig> were obtained from networks whose number n of reactions equaled that of the e. coli metabolic network, i.e., n =  <dig>  <cit> . additional file  <dig> figures s <dig> and s <dig> show that the patterns we see are not sensitive to the number of reactions in a network. specifically, additional file  <dig> figure s <dig> shows that the average number of reactions in fcss, <m>, increases with versatility venv also for networks with n =  <dig>  and n =  <dig>  reactions. the sole difference to the data of figure 2a is that the increase of <m>is beginning to level off as venv reaches the largest values investigated here, in particular for n =  <dig>  additional file  <dig> figure s <dig> shows that the average number of modules, <s>, also increases with versatility at n =  <dig>  and n =  <dig>  reactions. however, in contrast to the trend for <m> in additional file  <dig> figure s <dig>  the increase in <s> does not slow down for the largest values of venv we have examined.

modular architecture of the e. coli metabolic network
so far we have shown averages of our modularity measures m and s based on samples of random networks of a given versatility. in such a sample, modularity has a distribution, where some networks are more modular, and others less so. we can use this distribution to ask whether the modularity observed in the metabolic network of an organism such as e. coli is atypically high or low. in other words, the distribution of modularity arising in our samples of in silico metabolic networks can provide a null hypothesis to evaluate whether a biological network shows unusual modularity.

the architecture of the e. coli metabolic network has higher modularity than anticipated, but the large value of m may come from either a greater number of fcss or from an increased size of the fcss. figure 3b shows that the number of fcss in e. coli is just slightly above the position of the distribution's peak in our ensemble, well within one standard deviation. from this observation one can conclude that the atypically high modularity of the e. coli network stems from the fact that e. coli has larger modules  but not much more modules than typical networks allowing growth on  <dig> carbon sources.

reactions in versatility-dependent fcss are just downstream of nutrients
thus far, we saw that metabolic networks sustaining growth on more nutrients have higher modularity, that is, more reactions contained in modules and more modules  . we surmised that these additional reactions would be closely linked to the additional nutrients that metabolic networks must utilize as their versatility increases. in other words, these reactions and the modules they reside in presumably are needed to metabolize these nutrients, and may thus occur just downstream of them. to inquire whether this is the case, we compared the fcss of genotypes with maximal versatility  to fcss of genotypes with venv =  <dig>  specifically, we first extracted the reactions that belonged to fcss and that occurred in more than  <dig> percent of the genotypes in each of the two samples. call these sets of reactions r <dig> and r <dig>  for the ensembles with venv =  <dig> and venv =  <dig>  respectively. at a qualitative level, we find that about 90% of reactions in r <dig> also belong to r <dig>  we then examined the reactions that belong to r <dig> but that are not part of r <dig>  and called this set of reactions r89\r <dig>  are the reactions in r89\r <dig> immediately downstream of the nutrients? the notion of downstream can be made quantitative through the scope algorithm  <cit> . a reaction of scope distance one can use the nutrients as its only substrates, a reaction of scope distance two can use products of reactions at scope distance at most one, and so on.  we applied this algorithm to compare the scope distances of reactions in r89\r <dig> to the scope distances of all reactions in our universe of reactions. figure  <dig> shows a distribution of these distances for both groups of reactions. it indicates that reactions associated in r89\r <dig> generally have smaller scope distance than other reactions. a statistical test  shows that this difference is significant with a p-value of 10- <dig>  in sum, reactions of modules involved in increased versatility tend to be more closely downstream of nutrients, suggesting that they typically belong to pathways metabolizing such nutrients. to illustrate this property with concrete examples, we determined which fcss in r89\r <dig> involved any of the  <dig> reactions occurring at scope distance  <dig> in figure 4b. these fcss have various sizes that range from  <dig> to  <dig> reactions. in additional file  <dig> figure s <dig> we show the three largest of these fcss, all of them with  <dig> reactions, together with the pathways they belong to. these fcss are linear pathways containing reactions of scope distance  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 4; they metabolize the nutrients fucose, rhamnose and 3-hydroxycinnamic acid.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
our work took advantage of a new computational method  <cit>  that uses a combination of flux balance analysis and markov chain monte carlo sampling to create large and random samples of metabolic networks with desired properties from the space of all possible metabolic networks. the property we focused on was environmental versatility, the number of chemical environments a metabolic network can sustain life in. we studied how versatility relates to a network's modularity. for our purpose, we defined modularity as the total number of reactions contained in fully coupled sets. we found that more versatile networks are more modular  than less versatile networks. we emphasize that this does not result from the fact that networks with more reactions are more versatile, because our analysis uses networks with fixed number of reactions. the reactions that form part of newly arising modules in highly versatile networks tend to be close to reactions that process nutrients. the advantage of using random samples of metabolic networks with a specific property for our analysis is that such samples have not been subject to any of the  selection pressures that an organism's metabolism is subject to, and that they can form a useful reference point to ask whether any one organism's metabolic network has typical or atypical properties. in such a comparison, we learned that e. coli's network is significantly more modular than random networks of the same versatility, a feature arising mainly from the fact that it contains larger modules.

modularity in metabolic networks has been studied by several other authors  <cit> . metabolic networks can be represented as graphs, allowing one to study topological  measures of modularity; this approach has been taken for metabolic and other systems, such as protein interaction networks. unfortunately, for any sensible definition of modularity, graph-based module identification is typically computationally very expensive, so in practice one resorts to heuristic algorithms to extract modules  <cit> . additionally, in graph-based representations of metabolism, many metabolites have very high degree . this feature may prevent any clear modules from arising, although various heuristic tricks, such as removing high degree metabolites  <cit>  can be used to skirt this problem. problems like these can be avoided by using functional measures of modularity. commonly used measures involve elementary flux mode or extreme pathways  <cit> , but they are ill-suited for genome-scale modeling because of the complexity in computing them. the measure of modularity we used here was based on the reactions contained in fully coupled sets   <cit> . we showed that most or all reactions in a fully coupled set fall within a single metabolic pathway, which underlines the biochemical relevance of our definition of modularity. two further technical advantages come with our definition of modularity based on fcss:  the approach involves no adjustable parameters;  identification of fcss is computationally efficient even for genome-scale networks.

intriguingly, the extent of modularity found in e. coli is higher than in our in silico genomes. e. coli both has more fully coupled sets and larger fully coupled sets than expected for networks with the highest versatility we consider. this high modularity may reflect the fact that e. coli is even more versatile than the most versatile networks in our samples, networks that are viable on  <dig> carbon sources. for example, it can also grow on sources of sulfur or nitrogen that we did not consider. the high computational cost of our analysis in multiple environments currently prohibits us from extending our study to a larger spectrum of environments. conversely, the high modularity of e. coli might also be caused by other factors, for example, a long record of past evolutionary adaptations that may favor modularity through the high rates of adaptation it may allow and/or its high heritability, e.g. through horizontal gene transfer  <cit> . indeed it has been shown that fcss and operons in e. coli are positively associated  <cit> . only future work will be able to validate which of these causes is more important in e.coli. our network sampling approach has the advantage that it provides a rational expectation for how modular a network can be expected to be based solely on phenotypic constraints. it thus puts answering this question within reach.

given the ubiquity of modularity in biological systems, it is tempting to propose general principles that might explain its appearance. by comparing natural with man-made systems and following the original insights of jacob  <cit>  and others  <cit> , it seems very plausible that modularity should emerge during adaptive evolutionary trajectories because it can increase the rate of adaptive change. this holds true in particular in artificial systems such as factories, companies and even industries, where modularity allows for lower costs and enhanced possibilities for innovation  <cit> . as long as a lineage of organisms is experiencing adaptive evolutionary change, modularity should remain ubiquitous, whereas in long periods of stasis modularity may become reduced. this perspective is appealing but other factors may also influence modularity, which can be seen by considering the modularity of eukaryotic cells. the organization of cells into parts with specialized tasks  suggests that cellular tasks are best performed in specialized modules. one may thus conjecture that modularity has not only the indirect benefit of accelerating the rate of evolutionary change, but also direct benefits such as the possibility to perform certain tasks better, and thereby allow organisms to be better adapted to the complex world around them.

the question whether biological modularity may have a direct benefit can be addressed in systems where a realistically complex yet computationally tractable genotype to phenotype relationship exists. genome-scale metabolic network models are such systems  <cit> . answering the question amounts to finding out whether the best performing genotypes  have a modular architecture. the criterion we used is based on the complex trait we called environmental versatility, the number of environments a metabolic network can sustain life in. the answer we found is clear: requiring viability in additional environments requires additional pathways or modules to metabolize more nutrients and thus versatility enhances modularity.

our analysis shows that modularity can be a by-product of versatility, at least in the framework of our metabolic modeling, because our system has no selective pressure on modularity per-se; highly versatile networks that are also highly modular are simply more numerous than the less modular ones. in the language of constraint satisfaction problems  <cit> , constraints are easier to satisfy using modular architectures, so highly modular solutions will be more numerous than the less modular ones. an analogy with the engineering of network architectures may be appropriate here. consider the circuit layout problem where a circuit's electronic components and wires must be placed on a chip. if no constraints are imposed on the circuit's speed, many different layouts are possible. but, if one focuses on the fastest circuits, one will find that they have shorter wires and are more modular, so modularity is a by-product of circuit speed. in this example, functional constraints change the architectural characteristics in the space of possible solutions. such a property may be expected to arise in both artificial and natural systems.

since versatility corresponds to viability in increasing numbers of environments, it can be considered as a trait associated with fitness itself. our work suggests that modularity can emerge as a consequence of increasing functional constraints. because our work is not just based on one or few metabolic networks from well-studied organism, but on large samples of random viable networks, we also suggest that this scenario may be generally important. recent observations by parter et al.  <cit>  and kreimer et al.  <cit>  where generalists prokaryotes living in many different environments are more modular than specialists are fully consistent with this conclusion.

