BACKGROUND
s-adenosylmethionine synthetase  catalyzes the formation of s-adenosylmethionine  from methionine and atp  <cit> . adomet participates in the regulation of a variety of cellular functions. it is a main methyl group donor and plays a central role in transmethylation reactions and the transsulphuration pathway  <cit> . dna methylation is known to have regulatory effects on dna transcription and chromosome structure. adomet is also involved in the biosynthetic pathway of many secondary metabolites  <cit> . it can undergo decarboxylation to generate a propylamine donor, used in the biosynthesis of polyamines  <cit> . polyamines are required for cellular proliferation and may play a role in the rapid growth of bloom-forming dinoflagellates  <cit> . in plants, it is a precursor in the biosynthesis of ethylene  <cit>  and serves as a methyl group donor in transmethylation of alkaloids  <cit> . cell and life cycle variation in adomet synthetase expression has been observed in yeast and apicomplexa  <cit> . in mammals the mat2a gene  is influenced by the cell cycle and is induced during liver regeneration, malignant liver transformation and t-lymphocyte activation  <cit> . in plants differential expression patterns for adomet synthetase are found in different tissues  <cit> . it is believed that expression of adomet synthetase can facilitate the methylation reaction and polyamine synthesis which are presumably essential during growth and morphogenesis periods.

the structures of e. coli and rat adomets were resolved by x-ray crystallography  <cit> . both results demonstrated an overall fold of the enzyme monomer consisting of three domains related by pseudo 3-fold symmetry: the n-terminal domain , the central domain  and the c-terminal domain . two substrate binding sites are also found. a site for atp binding between the central and c-terminal domains  <cit> , and a methionine binding site between the central and n-terminal domain  <cit> . both models posses a mobile non-visible loop  linking the central domain to the c-terminal domain in close proximity to the atp binding site. the loop is proposed to act as a gate to the site  <cit> . analysis of rat adomets has also revealed a small flexible loop  near the opening of the methionine binding site. this small loop is well conserved and is directly involved in proper positioning of the methionine substrate upon binding  <cit> .

dinoflagellates are a distinct group with a large genome size and permanently condensed chromosomes, but interestingly lack histones and nucleosomes  <cit>  many studies have focused on the mechanism of genes transcription and dna organization within such a huge genome in the dinoflagellate nucleus  <cit> . dna methylation has been shown to have a role in the regulation of gene expression and chromosome structure  <cit> . restriction endonuclease digestion analysis on ribosomal dna of dinoflagellates shows that the genome is extensively methylated  <cit> . it is possible that dna methylation may be involved in regulation of gene transcription and chromosome structure. however no full sequence of adomet synthetase has been reported in dinoflagellates. in this report, we have identified and characterized an adomet synthetase gene of the dinoflagellate crypthecodinium cohnii . cell cycle variations of ccadomets gene and protein expression are described. the state of dna methylation status on ccadomets gene and its possible feedback regulation of adomet synthetase expression were also investigated.

RESULTS
sequence analysis and amino acid sequence alignment
two partial clones showing high homology to adomets were isolated from a crypthecodinium cohnii cdna library during random screening. based on these fragments, a full ccadomets cdna has been obtained . sequence analysis reveals that ccadomets cdna consists of  <dig> base pairs with a putative open reading frame coding for a protein of  <dig> amino acids with  <dig>  kda molecular weight and  <dig>  theoretical pi. the putative 3' utr of ccadomets contains  <dig> base pairs and a poly  tail . sequence alignment of the ccadomets derived from cdna and genomic dna has revealed that there are no introns present within the gene. the sequence of adomet synthetase is highly conserved among all the species tested. ccadomets is approximately 50% identical to other adomet synthetases at the amino acid level .

ccadomets shares three conserved amino acid sequences with other species. these include the conserved methionine binding motif ghpdk, the active signature hexapeptide gagdqg, for atp binding sites, and the conserved nonapeptide gggafsgkd which forms a p-loop for the phosphate-binding region . ccadomets also contains the residues 120pdiaggvhvgkedldi <dig>  suggested to be a flexible loop which moves to gate access to the active site controlling the catalytic efficiency of adomets  <cit> . although adomets are highly conserved among other species, the ccadomets also possess three extra stretches of residues  at the n-terminal and middle portion of the protein .

phylogenetic analysis
phylogenetic analysis of adomets shows two main distinct groupings, eubacteria and eukaryota . surprisingly, among the group of eukaryota, protists and plants form a clade that is distinct from the clade of animal and fungi. ccadomets is found to be immediately related to apicomplexa, a group of the subkingdom alveolata. further phylogenetic analyses would be required to address this plant-affiliation of both the dinoflagellate and apicomplexa adomets . it should be noted that both the dinoflagellate and apicomplexa contain many examples of lateral gene transfer  <cit> . a recent study reported on the presence of the rubisco gene, encoding an enzyme normally involved in photosynthesis, in c. cohnii. associated phylogenetic analysis in the same study supports the notion that this heterotrophic dinoflagellate was derived from a plastid bearing photosynthetic dinoflagellates, and not from early branches of heterotrophic dinoflagellates. this ancestral photosynthetic dinoflagellate was also hypothesized to be at the root of the present day photosynthetic dinoflagellates. the presence of extra sequence in the ccadomets gene may thus represent an ancestral condition before the branching of the photosynthetic species  <cit> .

northern blot and western blot analysis
northern analysis using a probe to ccadomets identified to a single band with size an approximate size of  <dig> bp . the size of transcript was slightly larger than the cdna however the increase in size may be explained if the 5' and 3' utr are considered. western analysis using a polyclonal antibody raised against ccadomets protein recognized a single band with expected size of about  <dig> kda . these results are indicative that the obtained ccadomets is a full-length clone.

functional complementation in yeast
yeast strains cc683-1d, cc683-4b, w744-1a, w744-1a and w744-1a were tested on minimal medium plates supplemented with or without  <dig>  m adomet. the results showed that the strains cc683-1d, cc683-4b and w744-1a could grow on plates while the strains w744-1a and w744-1a could only grow on the plate supplemented with  <dig>  m adomet . these demonstrated that the dinoflagellate adomet synthetase gene can complement the growth of the sam defective yeast mutant w744-1a.

ccadomets transcript and protein levels during cell cycle
the expression pattern of the ccadomets mrna transcript was analyzed by real-time pcr during cell cycling in synchronized cells. adomet synthetase mrna transcript was found to be increased in early g <dig>  while a decrease in transcript was observed in s phase . western analysis indicated that the adomet synthetase protein also increases in late g <dig> phase and decreases in s phase, and again increases in the next g <dig> phase . both ccadomets mrna transcript and protein are expressed higher in the g <dig> phase. in the cell cycle of c. cohnii, daughter cells  spend a considerable length of time inside their mother cells  <cit> . samples taken at t=  <dig> and t =  <dig> would have a significant portion of early g <dig> cells. this would account for the apparently higher level of transcripts and protein of ccadomet in these samples.

efficiency of adomet synthetase gene:  <dig> 

efficiency of actin gene:  <dig> 

the expression level of adomet synthetase at all time points were compared to the expression level of adomet synthetase at t =  <dig> and normalized with actin. each relative expression level ratio is the mean ± standard deviations .

dna methylation of ccadomets
methylcytosine has been reported within the c. cohnii genome, mainly at cpg residues  <cit> . to investigate whether the adomet synthetase gene is methylated genomic dna digested with the restriction enzymes hpaii or mspi was hybridized to a labeled adomets probe. hpaii recognizes and cleaves ccgg sequences but digestion is prevented when the internal cytosine residues within the ccgg sequences is methylated. however mspi, the isoschizomer of hpa ii, cleaves the same dna sequence whether the sequence is methylated or not . inhibition of digestion of the gdna by the methylation sensitive enzyme hpa <dig> was observed. only large dna fragments were observed after dna treating with hpaii. in contrast, small dna fragments smaller than  <dig> kb were produced after digesting with mspi indicated by arrow on fig. 8b. this is indicative of dna methylation sites on ccgg residues within the ccadomets gene. to eliminate the possibility that inhibition of digestion was due to the presence of interference during digestion, bacteriophage λ dna was treated with hpaii and mspi restriction enzymes. all of the enzymes could cleave λ dna to completion. .

two dna methylation inhibitors, 5-azacytidine  and l-ethionine  were used to confirm that the inhibition of digestion by methylation sensitive enzyme was caused by the presence of cytosine methylation on adomets gene. 5aza is a base analogue which can be incorporated into dna during replication. it inhibits dna methyltransferase and prevents the transfer of a methyl group onto the newly synthesized dna strand  <cit> . southern analysis indicated that the genomic dna of 5aza-treated  cells was more susceptible to dna methylation- sensitive enzymes. fragments smaller than  <dig> kbp were observed in both hpaii and mspi digested dna after treating the cells with  <dig> μm 5aza when compared with the control . l-eth is an analog of methionine and produces s-adenosylethionine which competes with adomet in transmethylation reactions  <cit> . after l-eth treatment, southern analysis shows the digestibility of gdna by hpaii increased. hybridized fragments smaller than  <dig> kbp were observed in hpaii digested gdna. however, the increased digestibility of adomets gene when using the l-eth methylation inhibitor was less than found for the 5aza inhibitor. it can be assumed then that the overall reduction of methylcytosine within ccgg sequence in adomets gene by l-eth was less then 5aza . the use of the two dna methylation inhibitors has confirmed that inhibition of hpaii digestion was the result of dna methylation on ccgg residue .

* represents the degree of digestibility and inhibition of dna methylation

southern blotting showing the restriction pattern of c. cohnii dna by hpaii and mspi without any treatment; after treating with  <dig> μm 5aza and after treating with  <dig>  mm l-eth. higher the digestibility of ccadomets gene by hpaii indicated higher degree of inhibition of dna methylation.

effects of dna methylation inhibitors on cell cycle progression
dna methylation sites present on ccadomets, may be involved in the control of cell cycle progression. to investigate this the two methylation inhibitors, 5aza  and l-eth  were added to synchronized c. cohnii cells and cells harvested every two hours for ten hours. flow cytometric analysis revealed a delay at the exit of g2/m phase when the cells were treated with dna methylation inhibitor 5aza. however, a cell cycle delay was observed at the entry of s-phase when treating the cells with l-eth .

ccadomets protein expression after treatment with dna methylation inhibitors
the effect of 5aza and l-eth treatment on adomet synthetase protein expression was also analyzed but in asynchronized cells. two methylation inhibitors, 5-aza  and l-eth  were added to asynchronized c. cohnii cells at day  <dig> independently and untreated c. cohnii cells were used as a control. cells were collected at day  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> and were subjected to western analysis. interestingly, in the untreated control, higher expression of ccadomets protein was observed at day  <dig> compared to the control at day  <dig>  after treatment with 5aza or l-eth, a significant reduction of ccadomets protein expressions was observed. ccadomets protein level in both treated and untreated cells returned to similar level at day  <dig> .

discussion
adomets has a central role in metabolism of all cells. adomets is highly conserved and appears to maintain the same overall structure in different species including ccadomets. sequence alignment of various adomets reveals that ccadomets processes three extra loops, which insert between the positions equivalent to e. coli adomets h80-s <dig> , d195-q <dig>  and s219-a <dig>  . according to the established crystal structure of e. coli adomets, the first two loops  would be located at the opening of methionine binding site, and the loop c would be close to the cleft between the n- and c-terminal domains . based on their sizes and positions, we postulate that loops a and b may pose some effects on substrate binding or product release of the methionine binding site and possibly the reaction kinetics. loop c however is not positioned close to the substrate binding sites nor regions for dimerization or tetramerization  <cit> . on the opposite side of the n-/c- terminal domain cleft of the rat adomets, there is a protein kinase c site  which is responsible for regulation of enzyme activity and dimerization through pkc phosphorylation  <cit> . this threonine residue is conserved in human, plasmodium and the dinoflagellate adometss , but not in yeast and plant enzymes . it is possible that this n-/c- terminal cleft, including the additional loop c in ccadomets, is a potential regulatory region subjected to post-translational regulation systems.

the present study of ccadomets revealed that both the transcript and protein level were relatively higher at g <dig>  in the dinoflagellate pyrocystis lunula, microarray analysis suggested that a putative adomet synthetase transcript level was  <dig>  times higher in the early light phase when compared to that of early dark phase  <cit> . conversely, s-adenosylhomocyteine  hydrolase is downregulated during g <dig> phase in dinoflagellate alexandrium fundyense  <cit> . adohcy hydrolase is the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of adohcy which is formed after adomet transferring methyl group to its acceptor, into methionine and re-enter the methyl-cycle. accumulation of adohcy is showed to be a target for inhibition of cellular methyltransferases and can influence methylation processes  <cit> . it is apparent that enzymes involved in cellular methylation are regulated in a cell-cycle dependent manner. the g <dig> expression of adomets is also consistent with late g <dig> synthesis of saxitoxin  <cit>  in dinoflagellate alexandrium fundyense  <cit> . for toxic bloom-forming dinoflagellates, adomet synthetase may take part in rapid growth and toxin formation. the level of cell-cycle variation of the ccadomets transcripts, from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , is much lower than the previously reported . since c. cohnii is a heterotrophic species, this may reflect that the previous reported variation in photosynthetic species could be contributed by light-dark cycle. plastid-encoded psba proteins were reported to be light-regulated in dinoflagellates <cit> .

upon inhibition of dna methylation, an increase in digestibility of c. cohnii genomic dna by methylation sensitive enzyme was observed. these suggest that methylcytosine was present on ccgg residues of ccadomets gene. in the present study, treating synchronized c. cohnii cells with 5aza and l-eth, delayed cell cycling and changed adomets protein expression. 5aza treatment caused a delay at the exit of g2/m in c. cohnii cell cycle. one of the possible reasons is that 5aza induced dna hypomethylation which may prevent chromosome compaction. moreover demethylated dna may affect dna-protein interactions, e.g. alternation of dna interaction of structural maintenance of chromosomes  family proteins and thereby alters chromosome compaction  <cit> . all these may influence the mitosis process and delay entry into g2/m. 5aza can also be an inducer of chromosome damage  <cit> , which may activate cell cycle checkpoint and delay the progress of cell cycle  <cit> .

another dna methylation inhibitor l-eth caused a delay at the g1/s entry. such a delay was also observed in human lymphocytes cell when treated with l-eth  <cit> . it is believed that dna methylation is critical to the initiation of dna synthesis. some studies reported that the origin of the replication site of e. coli dna is heavily methylated  <cit>  and dna methylation could affect the initiation of dna replication at some origins in mammalian cells  <cit> . dinoflagellates genomes are well known to have both prokaryotic and eukaryotic properties  <cit> , it is possible that dna methylation may have a role in the regulation of dna replication.

for the fast growing log phase c. cohnii cells, higher ccadomets protein expression was observed at day  <dig>  dna methylation inhibitors 5aza and l-eth can cause dna hypomethylation  <cit>  which is normally associated to the activation of gene expression  <cit> , and thus higher expression of ccadomets protein may be expected after treatments with these inhibitors. however lower expression of ccadomets protein was observed after treatment with either 5aza or l-eth. our data implicates that methylation on ccadomets gene may not be the only way to control its expression . further work is required to delineate the exact mechanisms of regulation. a knowledge of the regulatory mechanism of gene expression in dinoflagellates may, in turn, lead the way to dissect molecular mechanism of cell-cycle gating by the circadian rhythm <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
ccadomet is the first full-length adomet synthetase that has been reported from dinoflagellates. this dinoflagellate adomets has three extra loops when compared to other members of this highly conserved gene family. despite this, the ccadomets was able to complement the corresponding mutant in budding yeast . the present study demonstrates that the ccadomets gene is itself methylated. inhibitor studies and cell-cycle expression pattern suggest that ccadomet-mediated dna methylation has a role in the regulation of cell proliferation.

