BACKGROUND
the viridiplantae  include all green algae and embryophyte plants. they represent a monophyletic group of organisms, which display a surprising diversity with respect to their morphology, cell architecture, life histories and reproduction, and their biochemistry. the colonization of the terrestrial habitat by streptophyte algae  <dig> –  <dig> million years ago  was undoubtedly one of the most important steps in the evolution of life on earth  <cit> , which paved the way for the evolution of the various groups of land plants  resulting in our current terrestrial ecosystems  <cit> .

a thorough understanding of the evolution of land plants requires knowledge about the phylogeny of green algae and embryophytes as well as insight into the evolution of plant genomes with special reference to developmental processes. whereas our knowledge about the phylogeny of the viridiplantae has greatly increased over the last years, the latter has hardly been addressed to date.

the viridiplantae are grouped into two divisions: the chlorophyta and the streptophyta  <cit> . the chlorophyta comprise the vast majority of green algae including most scaly green flagellates , the ulvophyceae , chlorophyceae  and trebouxiophyceae   <cit> . the streptophyta include all embryophyte plants and a diverse paraphyletic assemblage of freshwater green algae, the charales , coleochaete, the zygnematophyceae and a few other taxa  <cit> . currently, the charales are thought to be the sister group of the embryophytes suggesting that the evolution of true land plants already started with a complex organism  <cit> . remarkably, only a single scaly green flagellate mesostigma viride lauterborn, has been found to belong to the streptophyta  <cit> . the exact phylogenetic position of mesostigma viride, however, is still controversial  <cit> . mesostigma has recently attracted much attention as a putative key organism for the understanding of the early evolution of the streptophyta  <cit> .

two aspects in the evolution of land plants seem to be important in this respect. first, many key evolutionary inventions of plants took already place within the streptophyte algae. according to graham et al.  <cit>  one can distinguish several major transitions in the evolution of land plants starting with a mesostigma-like flagellate ancestor: development of a cellulosic cell wall, multicellularity, cytokinesis by a phragmoplast, plasmodesmata, apical meristematic cell and apical cell proliferation leading to branching, asymmetric cell division, cell differentiation, retention of zygotes, heteromorphic life history, and a root meristem. of these distinguishing features only the latter two evolved not until the embryophytes emerged. second, the colonization of the terrestrial habitat with its exposure to air, increased solar radiation and life in a desiccating environment led to adaptations of cell architecture, metabolism and body plan to survive in the terrestrial ecosystems  <cit> . the evolutionary history of these adaptations is currently not known. important questions are: how did the green algal progenitor adapt to the terrestrial habitat? which genomic changes were associated with this transition? and which of these genes are derived from streptophyte green algae? to gain insight into these questions we have started to analyze ests from various streptophyte algal lineages.

here, we present an analysis of  <dig>  ests representing  <dig> non-redundant expressed genes obtained from mesostigma viride. we show that the number of genes shared is higher between mesostigma and the embryophytes than between mesostigma and chlamydomonas. comparison of expressed genes from mesostigma with the genomes of arabidopsis, chlamydomonas, the red alga cyanidioschyzon, and rice as well as ests from physcomitrella and porphyra allowed us to identify conserved and derived cellular functions within the different evolutionary lines and to obtain a first insight into the metabolic capabilities of the flagellate ancestor of green plants.

RESULTS
preparation and characterization of libraries
total rna was isolated from an axenic culture of mesostigma viride during the light phase. the culture contained about  <dig> % cell division stages. the isolated rna was used for the construction of  <dig> different cdna libraries . meso  <dig> and  <dig> differed in the size of the cloned inserts. for meso  <dig> and  <dig> full-length enriched cdna was prepared and normalized prior to cloning. meso  <dig> was obtained from the total normalized full-length enriched cdna, whereas for meso  <dig> the normalized full-length enriched cdna was size-fractionated by gel permeation chromatography to remove small fragments. the basic characteristics of the four libraries are given in table  <dig> 

initially, about 100– <dig> ests were sequenced from all libraries and analyzed by blastx against the swissprot and translated genbank databases. since the meso  <dig> and  <dig> libraries containing the larger inserts gave more promising results, we subsequently sequenced about  <dig> additional ests from the meso  <dig> and meso  <dig> libraries, respectively yielding a total of  <dig>  reads . based on comparison with published sequences from mesostigma viride the rate of sequencing error was determined to be generally between 1% and  <dig> %  depending on the quality of the sequence.

ests were assembled using the phrap software yielding  <dig> contigs with an average size of  <dig> bases  after manual curation. further analysis based on sequence similarity searches revealed that  <dig> of these contigs were of plastidic, mitochondrial, or possibly bacterial origin . these contigs were excluded from the data set.  <dig> of the  <dig> contigs analyzed  showed significant similarity at the protein level to sequences from the public databases . hence, approximately 56% of the contigs represent either novel sequences with unknown function or untranslated regions of a gene. however, when the  <dig> contigs with no significant similarity to known proteins were searched against the interpro protein motif database,  <dig>  of these contigs contained a recognizable protein motif . the most common protein motifs found in all  <dig> expressed gene sequences were bipartite nuclear localization signals , proline-rich regions  and cytochrome c heme-binding sites .

a functional catalogue was assembled using the  <dig> mesostigma contigs and the kog-database and is presented in table  <dig>  as expected for an interphase cell, genes in the categories  translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis ,  posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones , and  energy production and conversion  are represented by the largest number of contigs . in the following, the assembled contigs are referred to as  genes.

classification of mesostigma ests according to homologous genes in other organisms
est data represent only a fraction of all genes of an organism. thus, comparisons of est data alone cannot be used to describe unique or shared genes of an organism. for embryophytes, chlorophytes and red algae complete genome sequences of at least one organism exist. this makes it possible to find potential orthologous genes if present. moreover, the surplus of genes of an organism in respect to a complete genome can be detected in est data. in tblastx analyses of the  <dig> expressed genes with similarity to known proteins  <dig>  % matched proteins from streptophytes,  <dig>  % from chlorophytes and  <dig> % from rhodophytes, respectively. in addition,  <dig> genes showed similarity to known proteins, which have not been reported from plants or red algae to date. the overlap of mesostigma genes with different organisms can be visualized in a venn diagram . for  <dig> genes, we detected similar proteins only within the streptophyte but not in the chlorophyte or rhodophyte lineages. conversely, for  <dig> genes we detected similar proteins only within the chlorophyte but not in the streptophyte or rhodophyte lineages. surprisingly, we also found  <dig> genes which showed significant similarity to rhodophyte proteins but for which we could not detect any similar protein sequences within the viridiplantae. removal of blast hits with significant but low similarity  reduced the overall numbers to  <dig> expressed genes, but gave similar results . a complete list of genes showing only similarity to proteins with known functions present in specific subgroups of organisms can be found in supplemental table  <dig> . we will discuss important differences below.

overall protein similarities between various photoautotrophic organisms
to compare the overall similarity between mesostigma and various photoautotrophic organisms with completed genomes or large data sets of ests, we decided to calculate the average identity of a protein between mesostigma and the various organisms. to compare mesostigma genes with the genomes or ests from different organisms, we calculated the average identity  between mesostigma and another organism as the mean value of all pair wise identities of the blast-matches for each organism .

the ai between mesostigma and chlamydomonas or the embryophytes are very similar. the highest ai value obtained was for physcomitrella/mesostigma followed by arabidopsis/mesostigma, chlamydomonas/ mesostigma and oryza/mesostigma. the full data set includes many proteins, which we detected only in some species using mesostigma expressed genes as a query. therefore, we constructed a constrained data set , containing only mesostigma genes which gave matches with all completed genomes from photoautotrophic eukaryotic organisms . this constrained data set represents a conserved core set of nuclear encoded expressed proteins from photoautotrophic eukaryote organisms. we calculated ai values for the constrained data set using complete genomes and the available ests of physcomitrella, porphyra, and chlamydomonas. the results are included in table  <dig>  we obtained the highest ai-values in the constrained data set for the three embryophytes, followed by chlamydomonas. the similar ai values for the three different embryophytes suggest that the overall evolutionary rate was very similar for the embryophytes investigated, when compared with mesostigma .

to test whether the observed differences are significant a paired students t-test was performed, and the results are shown in table  <dig>  applying a significance level of  <dig>   the differences in ai between mesostigma/chlamydomonas and mesostigma/embryophytes are highly significant , whereas the differences in ai among the embryophytes are not significant . furthermore, when we varied the numbers of expressed genes used for the calculation of the ai, we observed that when more than  <dig> ests were included the significance of the differences became very stable . in addition, to evaluate the consistency of the data set we calculated  <dig> times the ai for  <dig> randomly selected expressed genes from the constrained data set. a clear difference between the ai from the various organisms was always observed . the expression level of the expressed genes  had no effect on the differences between the investigated organisms , although highly expressed genes are better conserved .

two other results are remarkable. first, for the calculation of the ai it is possible to use large est-data sets instead of genomes. we obtained the same result for mesostigma/chlamydomonas genome and for mesostigma/chlamydomonas ests . similarly, when mesostigma/physcomitrella ests were compared with the mesostigma/arabidopsis genome and with the mesostigma/oryza genome only small differences were observed . statistical analysis  showed that the observed differences are not significant. furthermore, we note that the genome of the diatom thalassiosira pseudonana shows a similar ai in respect to mesostigma as the red algal genome and ests . the difference values of these distantly related genomes represent presumably an upper threshold for reasonable ai value calculations.

analysis of metabolic pathways
ests have been widely used for the identification of metabolic pathways  <cit> . a complete list of all metabolic pathways identified is presented in supplemental table  <dig> . indeed, many ests showed similarity to proteins required for photosynthesis , nucleotide synthesis , nucleotide sugar conversion, the biosynthesis of precursors of scale polysaccharides , heme and chlorophyll biosynthesis , fatty acid and lipid biosynthesis , terpenoid biosynthesis , glycolysis  and the tca-cycle including pyruvate dehydrogenase and respiration . the biosynthetic pathways for several amino acids were also well represented in our ests . however, for several other amino acids  we did not find a single est which could be matched to the known biosynthetic pathways.

all enzymes except one  of the calvin cycle are represented by at least one est. interestingly, we found several genes coding for subunits of the plastidic gapdh. in angiosperms the plastidic gapdh consists of an a2b <dig> heterotetramer  <cit> . compared to gapdh a, which is present in the plastids of all eukaryotic algae, gapdh b has a c-terminal extension that contains the two conserved cysteine residues, which are required for regulation by the thioredoxin system. to our knowledge, gapdh b has only been reported from streptophytes. two genes of mesostigma showed significant similarity to gapdh b from angiosperms. we present an alignment of the c-terminus of mesostigma gapdh b with the c-terminus of spinach gapdh b in figure  <dig>  the two sequences are very similar and the two cysteines required for regulation by the thioredoxin system are conserved in mesostigma indicating that the activity of plastidic gapdh came under the control of the thioredoxin system early during the evolution of streptophytes. we found no evidence for a gapdh b in chlamydomonas or other chlorophytes. therefore, the evolution of a gapdh b might represent a molecular characteristic  of the streptophytes.

a total of  <dig> expressed genes encode components of the light-harvesting complex. there are some light-harvesting complex proteins, which mesostigma shares only with the chlorophytes and red algae . for others, we detected similar proteins only within embryophytes. however, the lhc proteins form a large superfamily and their phylogenetic analysis is beyond the scope of this study.

several genes encode proteins of the photorespiratory c2-cycle . as in embryophytes, the nadh required for reduction of hydroxy pyruvate is produced by a peroxisomal nadh malate dehydrogenase.

a glycolate oxidase activity was never detected in chlorophytes by biochemical enzyme assays, but one chlamydomonas protein is currently annotated as a glycolate oxidase  we therefore performed a phylogenetic analysis for glycolate oxidases and lactate dehydrogenases, which are both members of the same protein superfamily, from embryophytes, mesostigma, chlamydomonas, cyanidioschyzon, dictyostelium, a few metazoans and some bacteria . the glycolate oxidases from embryophytes, mesostigma and cyanidioschyzon are monophyletic. in contrast, the glycolate oxidase-like sequence from chlamydomonas clusters with bacterial sequences, which are annotated as lactate dehydrogenase and glycolate oxidases. therefore, we conclude that, in agreements with the biochemical findings, chlamydomonas does not contain a plant-type peroxisomal glycolate oxidase.

we did not find evidence for a hexokinase and sucrose biosynthesis in interphase cells of mesostigma. several ests represent plastidic pyruvate kinase, however, only a single est coded for the cytosolic isoform. expressed genes for pep carboxylase and a cytosolic malate dehydrogenase are present, suggesting that malate may be the major substrate for respiration in the mitochondrion of mesostigma as in many embryophytes. the plastidic pyruvate kinase probably functions in the generation of acetyl-coa required to sustain fatty acid synthesis in plastids.

scales consist mainly of the 2-keto sugar acids 3-deoxy-manno-octulosonic acid , 5omekdo, 3-deoxy-lyxo-heptulosaric acid, dha) and gal, gala, gul and some minor monosaccharides  <cit> . expressed genes coding for kdo synthesis, and activation of kdo as cmp-kdo are present. the obtained sequence similar to a cmp-siala transporter might actually be the cmp-kdo transporter necessary for uptake of cmp-kdo into the golgi apparatus, as kdo and siala are structural analogs. interestingly, kdo-synthase and cmp-kdo-transferase are among the most conserved proteins between mesostigma and the embryophytes. as in embryophytes  <cit> , gala is synthesized via the udp-glc dehydrogenase pathway and the myo-inositol oxygenase pathway. we could not detect the latter enzyme in chlamydomonas or red algae.

our est-data support the presence of vitamin b12-biosynthesis and the production of a phosphagen phosphoarginine by arginine kinase in mesostigma.

evolution of metabolism and cell structure
 <dig> expressed genes from mesostigma showed similarity to proteins belonging to various metabolic pathways. a pair-wise comparison of these genes with the genome of chlamydomonas and the genomes and ests of the three embryophytes showed that mesostigma shares more metabolic genes with the embryophytes than with chlamydomonas, however, the overall ai is slightly higher with chlamydomonas than with any embryophyte . statistical analyses showed that the differences in ais for the total metabolic enzyme data set are not significant . however, if we calculate ais for different functional categories separately, we see that metabolic enzymes of the chloroplasts and mitochondria  were generally more conserved between mesostigma and chlamydomonas than between mesostigma and the embryophytes . in contrast, proteins of cytosolic pathways  in mesostigma were more similar to embryophyte proteins ,

genes coding for information storage and processing, and cellular processes and signaling  were overall more conserved between mesostigma and the embryophytes than between mesostigma and chlamydomonas. exceptions to this rule are proteins of the cytoskeleton  and proteins involved in protein folding  and plastidic proteases , which show higher ai values with chlamydomonas than with the embryophytes. if the cytoskeletal proteins are removed from the data set, the differences between mesostigma/chlamydomonas genome and mesostigma/embryophytes are statistical significant . remarkably, the three embryophytes behave differently in our analysis. we obtained higher ai values with physcomitrella regarding the categories protein folding , vesicular transport, transcription, and regulation . in contrast, proteins related to dna structure, replication, cell cycle and rna-metabolism were more conserved between mesostigma and the angiosperms arabidopsis and oryza than between mesostigma and physcomitrella .

discussion
in this study, we have analyzed about  <dig> expressed genes from the scaly green flagellate mesostigma viride. we compared the expressed genes with the complete genomes from the angiosperms arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa, the chlorophyte chlamydomonas reinhardtii, the red alga cyanidioschyzon merolae and the diatom thalassiosira pseudonana, as well as the ests from the moss physcomitrella patens, and the red alga porphyra yezoensis. altogether, the mesostigma proteome is more similar to the embryophytes than to chlamydomonas, although mesostigma and chlamydomonas are both flagellate unicells. mesostigma shares more genes with the embryophytes than with chlamydomonas, including several enzymes confined to the streptophytes , and the average identity of shared proteins is higher between mesostigma and the embryophytes than between mesostigma and chlamydomonas. therefore, we consider mesostigma to be a member of the streptophytes, although mesostigma clearly shares some ancestral characters with chlorophytes. plastidic  and mitochondrial functions e.g. seem to be more conserved between mesostigma and chlorophytes than between mesostigma and embryophytes, i.e. these functions are more derived in embryophytes, probably due to adaptation of embryophytes to the terrestrial habitat. in contrast, other cellular functions except for the cytoskeleton are more conserved between mesostigma and embryophytes than between mesostigma and chlamydomonas. interestingly, in previous phylogenetic analyses plastidic and mitochondrial genes failed to show a clear relationship between mesostigma and the streptophytes  <cit> , whereas actin and nuclear-encoded ssu rdna phylogenies support the notion that mesostigma is a member of the streptophytes  <cit> . the different evolutionary rates for different cellular functions observed in this study might explain this discrepancy.

we calculated the average identity  values from automatically generated blast output alignments. automatically derived alignments are prone to errors. however, we believe that our approach is justified for the following reasons:  the blast alignments cover only the conserved parts of proteins and our calculated ai values indicate that in most alignments more than half of the amino acids are identical enhancing the quality of the automatically produced alignments;  although small mistakes may occur, they are insignificant given the high number of amino acids used to calculate the ai. on average the blast alignments contained about  <dig> amino acids and therefore about  <dig>  amino acid positions were used in the constrained data set. in large data sets small unbiased errors become irrelevant  <cit> . our results indicate that at least  <dig>  expressed genes have to be used to obtain statistically significant results. it could be argued that our analysis uses only similarity values and no real evolutionary distances. ai values can be easily converted into evolutionary distances using an approximation given by kimura  <cit> , with the effect that the differences between the various organisms become larger but no changes occur in the order of relatedness . we conclude that the ai of proteins shared between different organisms represents a reasonable measure of evolutionary relatedness, if sufficiently large data sets are used.

in the following, we briefly discuss some major differences in coding potential observed between the different photosynthetic eukaryotic organisms.

 <dig> of  <dig> proteins included in supplemental table  <dig>  which are shared only by mesostigma and chlamydomonas are associated with flagellar functions such as axonemal dyneins or components of the ift  machinery. most likely, the angiosperms lost these proteins during evolution together with the ability to produce flagellate cells. the absence of these proteins in the ests from the moss physcomitrella, is presumably due to the fact that ests from developing spermatozoids are not available.

proteins shared by mesostigma and the embryophytes but not present in chlorophytes perform diverse functions. there are some well known biochemical differences between chlorophytes and streptophytes such as the presence of  superoxide dismutase  <cit>  and glycolate oxidase in streptophytes  <cit>  but not in chlorophytes. in addition, streptophytes use the dxp and mevalonate pathways for isoprene biosynthesis whereas chlorophytes posses only the dxp pathway  <cit> . for all these functions, we find molecular support in our expressed gene data set except for the mevalonate pathway of isoprene biosynthesis. two genes matched two different enzymes of the dxp pathway; however, no matches for the mva pathway were obtained, although the presence of this pathway has been demonstrated biochemically  <cit> . this could be due to the selective expression of one or the other pathway under different environmental conditions.

remarkably, our list of proteins uniquely shared by mesostigma and the embryophytes includes several proteins involved in steroid biosynthesis , a homeobox protein of the knox family and proteins of the f-box family. the latter protein family underwent a dramatic expansion in the embryophytes .

our expressed protein data set contains sequences similar to a protein involved in vitamin b- <dig> metabolism , an arginine kinase and a arl <dig> protein, the latter two are absent in chlorophytes, embryophytes and red algae. it has been shown that arginine kinase is part of the atp regeneration system in cilia of paramecium  <cit> . chlamydomonas lacks arginine kinase and recently pazour et al.  <cit>  showed that enzymes of the late glycolytic pathway are present in the flagella of chlamydomonas, suggesting that the atp required for flagellar function is produced by the glycolytic pathway in chlamydomonas. the arl <dig> protein has been implicated in protein translocation at the rer  <cit> , although its exact function is still not known.

there are some typical embryophyte pathways that we failed to detect in mesostigma, e.g. sucrose metabolism, hexokinase, and enzymes of cellulose biosynthesis. there are no reports about the presence of sucrose metabolism and hexokinase in green algae in the literature, whereas embryophyte-like ces genes  have been reported in the streptophyte alga mesotaenium  <cit> . although we cannot exclude that mesostigma lost these genes, we do expect to find theses genes in the genome of mesostigma.

evolution of photosynthesis and photorespiration
it is well known that embryophytes and chlorophytes differ in important aspects of photosynthesis and its regulation, and in photorespiration  superoxide dismutase).

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our est analysis shows that mesostigma shares more genes with the embryophytes than with the chlorophyte chlamydomonas reinhardtii, although both organisms are flagellate unicells. thus, it seems likely that many typical biochemical characteristics of streptophytes evolved early during the evolution of streptophytes, i.e. before the transition to land. alternatively, such characteristics may haven been lost in the chlorophyte lineage or remain to be discovered in other chlorophytes. a decision between these alternatives requires further information on the genomes of other preferentially early branching chlorophytes such as pyramimonas.

our est-analysis of mesostigma supports the notion that this organism should be a suitable unicellular model for the last flagellate common ancestor of the streptophytes.

