BACKGROUND
bacterial chromosomes are usually composed of circular, double-stranded dna in an overall negatively supercoiled state. various conditions such as osmotic stress, oxygen tension, temperature changes, the growth phase and certain antibiotics  can change the level of supercoiling, which in turn affects transcription, dna replication and chromosomal segregation . three enzymes are important for maintaining a steady-state level of supercoiling: topoisomerase i, gyrase and topoisomerase iv. topoisomerase i introduces single-stranded dna breaks and rotate the dna of one single strand of the double-helix around the other. thereby negative supercoils are removed. gyrase is unique in introducing negative supercoils into dna, whereas topoisomerase iv primary function is decatenation of dna at the end of replication  <cit> . dna gyrase is a tetramer with two identical subunits of gyra and gyrb. gyra subunit is involved in dna breakage and religation. the n-terminal domain of gyrb subunits contains the atpase active side  <cit> . dna gyrase subunit b is the primary target of different aminocoumarin-based antibiotics  <cit> , which competitively inhibit the atpase activity, stabilising the dna complex without inducing double-strand breaks  <cit> . thereby, aminocoumarins  specifically cause dna relaxation in living bacteria, a property often used to study the impact of supercoiling on gene expression.

thus far, the impact of supercoiling on gene transcription on a global scale has been analysed in escherichia coli <cit> , haemophilus influenzae <cit> , helicobacter pylori <cit>  and streptococcus pneumoniae <cit> . based on the results obtained in e. coli <cit> , it was proposed that nucleoid-associated proteins such as fis  or h-ns  determine the spatial distribution of genes and their sensitivity to supercoiling. of note, homologues of fis and h-ns are lacking in firmicutes such as staphylococci or streptococci, and much less is known about the role of supercoiling in these organisms. the results obtained in s. pneumoniae indicate that the genome of this organism is organised in large topology-reacting gene clusters that determine whether a gene is repressed or activated after exposure to the relaxing agent novobiocin  <cit> .

the question of whether and how supercoiling influences gene expression in s. aureus has been rarely addressed  <cit> . in these studies, the impact of novobiocin treatment on the expression of selected virulence genes, such as spa  and eta , was analysed. the two-component regulatory system, arlrs, was proposed to be involved in the regulation of supercoiling  <cit> . arlrs regulates the expression of genes involved in different functions, including autolysis, cell division, growth and pathogenesis  <cit> .

in a previous study, we compared the impact of two different gyrase inhibitors, ciprofloxacin and novobiocin, on the sos response in s. aureus <cit> . ciprofloxacin is a prototypic quinolone, which, in contrast to aminocoumarins, interferes with the gyrase a subunit and induces double-strand breaks in dna, thereby activating the sos response. the double-strand breaks are processed to ssdna, on which reca forms filaments. the activated reca complex induces autocleavage of the repressor lexa, which then allows for the transcription of genes involved in dna repair, as well as reca and lexa themselves  <cit> . we showed that aminocoumarins inhibited the ciprofloxacin-mediated sos response. this was due to severe inhibition of reca expression by aminocoumarins at the transcriptional level. the reca inhibition was presumably due to alterations in supercoiling and was lexa-independent.

here, we show that inhibition of reca expression is tightly linked to inhibition of the gyrase b subunit. the imposed inhibition of gyrase b by aminocoumarins resulted in distinct alterations in gene expression. the supercoiling sensitivity was independent of the arl system or the chromosomal location. thus, in contrast to mechanisms proposed for other organism  <cit> , supercoiling sensitivity in s. aureus is intrinsic to the promoter region of a given gene but autonomous from proposed topology-linked gene clusters  <cit> .

RESULTS
the effects of aminocoumarins on reca gene expression are due to gyrb inhibition
we previously showed that different aminocoumarins cause severe inhibition of reca transcription  <cit> . this effect is likely mediated by the known inhibition of the gyrb subunit. to verify this assumption, a strain expressing a non-susceptible gyrb enzyme was analysed. a mutated gyrb gene   <cit>  was transduced into strain hg <dig>  resulting in strain hg <dig> nov <dig>  this strain is resistant to novobiocin and clorobiocin but sensitive towards ciprofloxacin and simocylinone d <dig> , with mics of 80 mg/l,  <dig>  mg/l, and 4 mg/l for novobiocin, ciprofloxacin and sd <dig>  respectively. sd <dig> is a hybrid antibiotic composed of an aminocoumarin and a polyketide element with a different mode of action. this antibiotic interacts with two separate pockets of the gyrase enzyme, situated in the gyra and gyrb subunits  <cit> .

the parental strain responded to novobiocin, clorobiocin and sd <dig> by downregulation of reca . sd <dig> is active in strain hg <dig> nov <dig> and resulted in the severe inhibition of reca transcription, comparable to that of the parental strain. in contrast, novobiocin and clorobiocin did not have any inhibitory effects on reca transcription in the resistant gyrb mutant hg <dig> nov <dig> . this indicates that the effect on reca transcription is mediated by aminocoumarins-dependent gyrb inhibition and is unlikely to be due to additional effects on other potential targets. in agreement with the different mode of action and the induction of the sos response, the quinolone ciprofloxacin resulted in up-regulation of reca independently on the gyrb mutation.

we further analysed the effects of aminocoumarins on gyr genes. northern blot analysis using a gyrb-specific probe detected a transcript >  <dig> kbp, which is consistent with a predicted operon structure composed of recf, gyrb and gyra . expression of this operon was not influenced by the addition of ciprofloxacin. in contrast, the aminocoumarins resulted in a severe induction of the recf-gyrb-gyra operon. this induction was again mediated by gyrb inhibition because the nov <dig> strain only responded to sd <dig> but not to novobiocin or clorobiocin . notably, the change in gene expression was observed after only 10 min of antibiotic exposure.

it was proposed that the two-component regulatory system arlrs is involved in the regulation of supercoiling and supercoiling-sensitive genes  <cit> . we therefore analysed the effect of the aminocoumarins on arlrs expression. this operon was found to be severely downregulated by novobiocin and clorobiocin in the parental strain but not in the gyrb mutant strain .

in conclusion, inhibition of gyrase b by aminocoumarins has a distinct effect on the expression of different operons: the recf-gyrb-gyra operon is upregulated, whereas the expression of arlrs and reca is inhibited. these effects are most likely due to alterations in the level of supercoiling due to inhibition of the gyrb atpase activity.

global transcriptional response to novobiocin treatment
to obtain a more comprehensive overview on the effect of gyrb inhibition, and thus relaxation of supercoiling, we performed microarray analysis. bacteria were grown to od <dig> =  <dig>  followed by one hour of incubation with or without novobiocin. microarray analysis confirmed that reca and arlrs expression levels were significantly reduced in the treated samples, whereas the expression levels of recf, gyra and gyrb were significantly increased . the data were visualised as a voronoi treemap . overall, 11% of the genes were influenced by treatment with novobiocin. a total of  <dig> genes were found to be significantly downregulated and  <dig> genes were upregulated by novobiocin. the largest inhibitory effect was observed for luka, which encodes a bi-component leukotoxin subunit of lukab. other virulence genes that appeared to be downregulated by novobiocin were hlgc , sak , fnb  and the cap operon  . on the other hand, aside from the recf-gyrb-gyra operon, metabolic operons coding for enzymes involved in riboflavin biosynthesis , iron transport  and urease  were activated under novobiocin treatment.

arlr does not mediate the supercoiling effect on virulence genes
the effect of novobiocin might be indirect and mediated by regulatory systems. in this regard, the arlrs system was of special interest  <cit> . for further analysis, an arlr mutant of strain hg <dig> was generated, and the effect of novobiocin on selected target genes was assessed. because most of the genes of interest were strongly influenced by the growth phase, we added novobiocin at the mid-exponential  or post-exponential growth phase  . the arlrs operon was severely downregulated in both growth phases after the addition of novobiocin. in agreement with previous results from liang et al., <cit>  expression of rnaiii of the agr operon was diminished in the arl mutant at od  <dig> , whereas the virulence genes lukab, hlgc and fnbb were upregulated at od  <dig>  and od <dig>  . however, the expression of the virulence genes  was similarly inhibited by novobiocin in the wild type and the arlr mutant. thus, although arlrs expression is highly sensitive to novobiocin, this effect is additive and independent of the effect of novobiocin on target gene expression .

we also analysed the expression of spa because it was described to be inhibited by arlrs  <cit>  but activated by novobiocin  <cit> . we were able to confirm that spa expression is elevated in an arl mutant when compared with the wild type . however, spa transcription was not found to be significantly affected and showed only slightly decreased expression under novobiocin treatment, similar to results obtained by others  <cit> .

supercoiling-sensitive genes are not clustered in the s. aureus genome
for s. pneumoniae it was described that supercoiling-sensitive genes are organised in clusters  <cit> . to analyse the distribution of genes affected by supercoiling, we mapped the novobiocin-responsive genes on the chromosome of s. aureus. as illustrated in figure  <dig>  novobiocin-responsive genes are randomly distributed throughout the genome. genes appearing clustered are those co-transcribed in one operon.

supercoiling sensitivity is intrinsic to the promoter elements
to further analyse whether the responsiveness of supercoiling-affected genes is dependent on their chromosomal location, the promoters of selected supercoiling-responsive genes were dislocated from their native environment. specifically, these promoters were placed into the lipase gene geh, which appeared to be downregulated upon novobiocin treatment . the promoters were cloned in front of a truncated gfpmut <dig>  gene , and all plasmids were inserted into geh. the expression of the truncated gfp mrna was used as marker for the activity of the subcloned promoters after treatment with novobiocin for  <dig> and 60 min . all tested promoters retained their original responsiveness towards novobiocin: the promoters from the recf-gyra-gyrb operon and from fer were upregulated by novobiocin at its native location, and these promoters also showed an increase in activity when they were located in geh. in contrast, the reca promoter was inhibited at its native location  and when localised in geh . thus, the localisation on the chromosome does not dictate the response to supercoiling.

reca is a prototypic lexa target gene, and one could assume that the supercoiling sensitivity of the promoter occurs through interference of local changes in dna topology with lexa. we therefore deleted the lexa binding domain from the reca promoter region. as expected, the deletion of the lexa-binding motif resulted in increased, lexa-independent promoter activity. however, the truncated promoter element was still novobiocin sensitive .

discussion
here, we determined the transcriptional response to the dna relaxing agent novobiocin in s. aureus. only a distinctive set of operons were found to be sensitive to supercoiling. in total, 11% of the genes were influenced by novobiocin. this is in good agreement with results observed in e. coli, in which 7% of the genome was affected  <cit> .

we were able to show that reca transcription in s. aureus was sensitive to novobiocin treatment. this indicates that the reca promoter is highly dependent on dna supercoiling imposed by active gyrase. novobiocin had no impact on reca transcription in a strain with a mutation in gyrb . thus secondary effects of novobiocin on other potential targets do not play a role in this regard. of note, the novobiocin effect was independent of lexa because a similar effect of novobiocin on reca transcription was observed in an artificial reca promoter lacking the lexa binding motif. thus, s. aureus is able to sense supercoiling to modulate the sos response by adjusting the reca level in the cell. in this way, aminocoumarins can counteract sos-inducing conditions and their consequences, such as those imposed by ciprofloxacin  <cit> .

in s. aureus, the gyra and gyrb subunits are co-transcribed with recf, and the whole operon was severely upregulated after novobiocin treatment. gyrb is widely used as reference gene in qrt-pcr because it was shown that the expression of gyrb  is not influenced by major virulence regulators or different growth conditions  <cit> . in addition, the expression of the operon was also found to be insensitive towards ciprofloxacin . in many other organisms, including s. pneumoniae and e. coli, gyra and gyrb are distantly located, and the expression of these genes is independently regulated by several factors, including nucleoid-associated proteins. in s. aureus, the promoter preceding recf-gyrb-gyra has presumably evolved to directly measure supercoiling imbalance, leading to upregulation of gyrase under relaxed conditions. thus far, the environmental conditions that can impose such changes in s. aureus remain unclear.

microarray analysis further reveals that several additional genes are influenced by novobiocin treatment. some of these genes are presumably indirectly affected through secondary regulatory mechanisms. in this regard, the profound inhibition of the arlrs operon by novobiocin was of special interest. by searching microarray databases  <cit> , this operon was not described to be differentially expressed by other regulatory mechanisms in s. aureus, indicating that the arlrs promoter itself is sensitive to supercoiling. interestingly, the arlrs system was previously described to be involved in regulating the supercoiling level in s. aureus. deletion of arlrs resulted in an increased level of supercoiling, an effect opposite to that of novobiocin treatment  <cit> . thus, downregulation of arlrs under novobiocin treatment can be viewed as a compensatory mechanism. in agreement with this assumption is the observation that, for some virulence factors, the impact of arlrs mutation is opposite to that of novobiocin treatment, and several of the genes described to be under the control of arlrs <cit>  were also found to be influenced by novobiocin. however, analysis of a selected set of genes showed that the effect of novobiocin observed in the arl mutant strain  is similar to that in the wild type, indicating that novobiocin affects gene transcription independent of arlrs.

it is well recognised that the level of supercoiling is highly dynamic and affects gene expression directly and distinctly. however, the reason why different genes have different sensitivities towards supercoiling is under debate. in e. coli, a crosstalk between dna supercoiling and nucleoid-associated proteins is involved in coordinated gene expression. the spatial ordering of genes along the chromosome corresponds to an inferred gradient of superhelical density  <cit> . s. pneumoniae, like s. aureus, lacks many of the major nucleoid-associated proteins. in this organism, genes responding to changes in the level of supercoiling were found to be organised in chromosomal clusters. according to these topology-related models, the localisation of a given gene would dictate whether it is positively or negatively regulated by changes in supercoiling. in our analysis, we were unable to confirm such an association by mapping the responsive genes along the chromosome . in our analysis 11% of genes of s. aureus responded to novobiocin. by choosing different concentration of the drug and incubation time, the amount of responsive genes may vary and might impact the outcome of cluster analysis. also apart from supercoiling, the folded nucleoid also forms tertiary structures, which might form clustered regions which might be missed using a simple mapping of genes along the chromosome.

nevertheless, dislocation of three different promoters showed that the responsiveness of a given gene is determined by the promoter region and probably independent of the chromosomal localisation. these results are similar to analyses of the e. coli gyra and gyrb promoters, both of which are activated under relaxing conditions  <cit> : a reporter gene fused with gyra or gyrb sequence was inducible by an aminocoumarin, also suggesting that only a small region of dna is necessary for supercoiling sensitivity. in e. coli <cit>  and streptococcus pneumonia supercoiling sensitive genes were characterized by a different composition of nucleotides, with a higher at content in upregulated genes. however, in s. aureus the at content of up versus downregulated promoters were found not to differ .

our findings may be in line with a previous assumption that the supercoiling responsiveness of a gene may be correlated with the length of the spacer region between the - <dig> and - <dig> regions  <cit> . according to this model, expression should be higher at a low level of supercoiling for genes with short spacers  and higher at elevated levels of supercoiling for genes with long spacers . spacing was shown to influence supercoiling sensitivity in e. coli <cit>  and helicobacter pylori <cit> . our results also indicate that the length of the spacer might play a role in the supercoiling sensitivity of a given gene. for example, the highly upregulated gene gyra has a relative short spacer, whereas the down regulated gene reca has a longer spacer.

CONCLUSIONS
most effects of novobiocin treatment, such as a decrease in reca or increase in recf-gyrb-gyra, are directly linked to a change in the level of supercoiling. genes that are sensitive to supercoiling are not clustered on the chromosome of s. aureus, and responsiveness is also independent of the chromosomal location. the relationship between promoter spacing and gene regulation in response to changing levels of supercoiling will require further investigation. additionally, the physiological conditions leading to different supercoiling states in s. aureus are so far not thoroughly explored.

