BACKGROUND
scrapie is a fatal neurodegenerative disease affecting sheep and goats which belongs to the group of diseases called transmissible spongiform encephalopathies . in its classical form, it is a contagious disease with susceptibility influenced by punctual mutations on the prion gene  coding for the prion protein   <cit> . in  <dig>  a new type of scrapie called scrapie nor <dig> was detected  <cit>  and in  <dig> the european food safety authority  defined diagnostic criteria for classical scrapie  and for atypical scrapie , including nor <dig>  based on the results of western blot pattern of the pathogenic prion protein   <cit> . since the diagnosis of as poses some specific difficulties because of proteinase k susceptibility and variable distribution of prpres  <cit> , efsa also evaluated the sensitivity of the different tse rapid tests to detect as on different biological material   <cit> .

as a contagious disease, cs is often clustered within flocks and regions. infected animals usually die at the end of the clinical course of the disease when they are between two to four years of age. animals carrying prp genotypes with v136r154q <dig> and/or a136r154q <dig> alleles are considered most susceptible to the disease  <cit> . in contrast to cs, as is usually detected in older animals   <cit>  and prp genotypes that include alleles a136h154q <dig> and/or a136f141r154q <dig>  are more at risk  <cit> . although the disease has been shown to be experimentally transmissible by intracerebral inoculation to mice  <cit>  and sheep  <cit> , transmission between animals under natural conditions has not yet been demonstrated. as has been reported to have scattered geographical appearance  <cit>  and usually only a single affected animal in a flock has been detected  <cit> . nevertheless, the occurrence of more than one as case in individual flocks has been reported  <cit> . no factors demonstrating horizontal transmission were found in case control studies in norway  <cit>  or france  <cit>  or by network analysis of movement data in the uk  <cit> . furthermore three cases have occurred in an experimental flock presumed free from scrapie and with no explanation for any possible source of contamination  <cit> . due to the different features of as compared to cs it has been suggested that as could develop without exposure to an infectious agent  <cit> .

since  <dig>  intensive active surveillance for tse in healthy slaughter sheep, i.e. sheep slaughtered for human consumption, and fallen stock i.e. sheep which have died or been killed but not slaughtered for human consumption, has been performed within the european union . it has previously been shown that the prevalence of as in slaughtered animals and fallen stock is similar throughout europe  <cit> . when positive cases have been detected through active surveillance legislation requires control measures and further testing of animals in the associated flock  <cit>  - flocks controlled in this way will be designated as "positive flocks" for the purposes of this paper. this can and has lead to the detection of further cases in positive flocks, designated as "additional cases" in this paper. european legislation which has been amended since first inception and common to all member states has allowed for the employment of different disease control options/strategies in member states. specific provisions for control of as were first introduced in july  <dig>  <cit> . it should be emphasised, in relation to animal health, that the suitability of as control measures will depend on whether the disease is contagious or not.

the aim of this study was to investigate, at national level, if the occurrence of additional cases of as could help in clarifying the potential contagious nature of the disease. insights have been gleaned by assessing surveillance data from different european countries and comparing prevalences in different streams of surveillance. the prevalence of as among animals tested in as positive flocks was compared with 1) the prevalence of as in the healthy slaughter surveillance stream, 2) the prevalence of as in fallen stock surveillance stream, 3) the prevalence of as in sheep tested in cs positive flocks and 4) the prevalence of cs in sheep tested in as and cs positive flocks.

RESULTS
from the seventeen countries that had reported at least one case of atypical scrapie from  <dig> to  <dig>  twelve countries answered the questionnaire, three countries declined participation and two countries did not answer. the following eleven countries were included in the analysis: belgium, denmark, finland, france, greece, iceland, italy, netherlands, norway, portugal and sweden. the data from ireland was presented but could not be included in some analyses for various reasons: as prevalence was not estimated because different groups of screening tests/analyses  were used in different streams and different years and cs prevalence was not estimated because for the earliest datasets a precise figure for the number of animals tested from cs positive flocks was unavailable.

control strategies
the applied control strategies by country are shown in table  <dig>  three main categories were defined for each type of scrapie: i) stamping out: all animals from the positive flocks were destroyed and either all or a sample of the adults were tested, ii) selective culling: animals were genotyped and animals carrying certain genotypes  were destroyed and tested, and iii) intensified monitoring: the flocks were not culled, but adults leaving the flocks as healthy slaughter or fallen stock were tested. italy applied an extended selective culling in flocks with as, and this was reported separately. within each of the three categories, differences existed between countries i.e. in some instances animals tested from suspect flocks and contact flocks were included in the reporting, the minimum age of the tested animals varied, the proportion of animals tested among animals destroyed differed and differing genotypes were selected during selective culling and subsequently tested. there were also changes over time within the countries. stamping out was applied in five countries for cs and seven countries for as, selective culling was applied in six countries for cs and eight countries for as and intensified monitoring was applied in one country for cs and seven countries for as .

ยง be: belgium, dk: denmark, fi: finland, fr: france, gr: greece, ie: ireland, is: iceland, it: itlay, nl: netherlands, no: norway, pt: protugal, se: sweden, !: hs: healthy slaughter, fs: fallen stock * all males not arr/arr and all females carrying a vrq allele or not carrying an arr allele, except in italy where animals with ahq and afrq were also culled and in portugal where animals with arr/ahq genotype were culled but not those with arh/arh, arh/alrq or alrq/alrq, ** all males carrying ahq or afrq alleles, *** all males not arr/arr and all females carrying a vrq allele or not carrying an arr allele

as in active surveillance
out of eleven countries that used combinations of rapid tests and samples recommended to detect as  for active surveillance, ten countries had detected at least one positive case of as in active surveillance of healthy slaughter while no positive case had been detected in the netherlands. the prevalences, with a mean value of  <dig>   cases per ten thousand, are shown in table  <dig>  in fallen stock, eight countries had detected at least one positive case of as, with no cases found in greece, iceland and the netherlands. the prevalences, with a mean value of  <dig>   cases per ten thousand are shown in table  <dig>  the prevalences were significantly higher in fallen stock compared to healthy slaughter  =  <dig> , 95% confidence interval, :  <dig>  -  <dig> ). in the netherlands,  <dig> as case was detected out of  <dig>  group  <dig> tests in healthy slaughter and  <dig> cases of as were detected out of  <dig>  group  <dig> tests in fallen stock. no other countries detected as case in active surveillance with group  <dig> tests. in ireland,  <dig> as cases were detected but these cases were detected following clinical surveillance and associated testing regimes  rather than rapid screening testing .

as and cs in positive flocks
all countries had detected at least one case of as and had subsequently tested sheep from as positive flocks. four countries  had detected additional cases with group  <dig> tests using the same diagnostic procedure in positive flocks and active surveillance. the mean national additional as case prevalence in positive flocks was  <dig>  cases per ten thousand. no significant difference existed between prevalences for different control strategies  .

cs cases were also detected in flocks with an index case of as in france and italy , with a mean of  <dig>  cases per ten thousand. in ireland, one additional case was detected out of  <dig> animals tested during stamping out measures in as positive flocks and no additional cases were detected from  <dig> animals tested during further testing in as positive flocks  <cit> .

*genotypes mostly susceptible to cs, see table 1

eight countries also applied control strategies in cs positive flocks during the study period . all these countries detected cs additional cases  and the mean prevalence for cs additional cases the seven countries included in the analysis  was  <dig>  cases per ten thousand. selective culling prevalences were significantly higher compared to stamping out prevalences . selective culling prevalences were also higher when compared to intensive monitoring . as cases were also detected in flocks with a cs index case in france, greece and italy , with a mean of  <dig>  cases per ten thousand. the prevalence rates were not significantly different between the different control strategies. one as case was detected in an irish flock with a cs index case however this case was identified via clinical surveillance testing  rather than group test analyses and was excluded for this reason from data analyses.

the prevalences of additional as cases in as positive flocks were significantly lower than the prevalences of additional cs cases in cs positive flocks .

comparison of prevalence between the surveillance streams
because of small number of additional as cases, only data from four countries  actually contributed to the meta-analysis and french data contributed the most. none of the comparisons showed any significant heterogeneity among the countries . the prevalences of additional as cases in as positive flocks were not significantly different from prevalences of as in healthy slaughter :  <dig> - <dig> ) or in fallen stock .

there was a significantly higher probability of detecting additional as cases in as positive flocks compared to cs positive flocks  in italy and in france . the prevalence of as among sheep tested due to control measures in cs positive flocks was lower than the as prevalence in active surveillance . this result was statistically significant for the mantel-haenszel  fixed effects models and for the dersimonian and laird random effects models applied to fallen stock . the funnel plots  did not reveal associations between results and the size of national sheep populations screened, but few countries contributed to the construction of the plots.

discussion
as is probably not contagious or much less contagious than cs
through a large multicentric study, we found that the prevalence of as among sheep tested during the implementation of control measures in positive flocks was not significantly different from the prevalence of as in the general sheep population tested through active surveillance. these results suggest that as does not cluster in positive flocks, and consequently that as is not contagious or far less contagious than cs. the low odds ratio when comparing the prevalence of additional as cases in as positive flocks with the prevalence of additional cs cases in cs positive flocks illustrates the lower frequency of as aggregation in positive flocks compared with cs. the hypothesis that as is not contagious has also been supported by reports focussing on case descriptions  <cit> . other epidemiological studies also concluded that as is probably not contagious given the risk factors detected  <cit>  and one study considering the prevalence of scrapie within flocks  <cit> . furthermore, histopathological features suggest that as may originate spontaneously  <cit> . a spontaneous, non-contagious aetiology would not exclude a role for genetics  <cit>  and/or environmental factors in the occurrence of as  <cit> . the identification of greater numbers of as cases in flocks wherein animals are exposed to the same factors or where animals have similar genetic background would further evaluate these contributions.

in ireland one additional as case was found among a limited number of examined animals, however this single research flock was investigated with an alternative control strategy and one additional as case was also found in an as positive flock prior to the period covered by data collected  <cit> . this data, which was difficult to combine with other countries data, suggests that prevalence of as in these flocks would be high in comparison with that from the general population. these instances were unique and may have occurred due to chance or to adverse conditions prevailing in these flocks such as high frequency of susceptible animals and/or age structure of the flocks. the fact that additional irish cases were detected after careful, thorough examination of the cerebellum by histopathology and immunohistochemistry as distinct from routine rapid screening testing <cit> , stressed the possible underestimation of as when the cerebellum is not analyzed. as long as the same diagnostic procedures are used in the different streams, the odds ratio of the prevalence in the different streams should not be affected by an underestimation of the prevalence. for the other countries, similar screening procedures were used and so comparisons could be made. as already mentioned there were no indications of a higher prevalence of as in animals from positive flocks. to improve knowledge of as it is important that the test procedures are as sensitive as possible to ensure the detection of cases. in this regard, some improvements could be achieved through sampling and testing cerebellum as recommended by efsa  <cit> . notwithstanding enhancement of the methods of analysis, the collection of data relative to the flock and the animals tested should also be improved to allow proper interpretation of the results.

some countries did detect cs cases in as positive flocks, but not at a higher prevalence when compared with the prevalence of cs detected in active surveillance. thus there was no indication of a link between the two diseases as supported by a study in great britain  <cit> .

the prevalence of as detected in as positive flocks was higher than the as prevalence detected in cs positive in france and in italy. this observation could result from difference in the genetic structure of the different flocks and/or difference in the age of animals tested, which would need further investigation. furthermore some of the scrapie cases detected in cs positive flocks were not typed and could actually have been as cases.

there was no significant difference of secondary cases prevalence among the different as control strategies
we did not detect any significant difference in prevalence of additional as in positive flocks related to the type of control measure applied. however the statistical comparison was only based on data from two countries and thus had low power. despite absence of significant differences, the control strategies might theoretically lead to different detected prevalences and these should be highlighted. the most important differences between control strategies were the selection of animals for culling and testing, on the basis of genotypes. for classical scrapie all countries had chosen the same genotypes to cull, . all countries applying selective culling in as positive flocks  culled and tested the same genotypes as in cs positive flocks, even though these do not include all the genotypes at risk for as  and on the contrary include genotypes where as is seldom found. genetic selection may therefore have affected detected prevalences; a selection of genotypes at risk for cs in both as and cs positive flocks might have overestimated the sample population prevalence of cs and underestimated this sample population prevalence of as. in addition there might be a different age structure of the animals tested in different control strategies. when the whole flock or parts of the flock is culled at one point in time, the culled animals which are tested are probably younger compared with animals leaving the flock at the end of their productive lives and tested as part of intensified monitoring. since as often is found in older animals, this might theoretically result in detected prevalences being higher for intensively monitored subpopulations. furthermore, there were different age limits for minimum age of animals tested ; if the sample contains a large proportion of young animals this might lower estimated of prevalences. furthermore some countries reported that it was possible that there was potential misclassification of some of the samples in the data provided . however, we have no indication suggesting a differential misclassification leading to bias. data on the demographic structure  of each flock would have contributed to quantifying the possible effect of these factors, however this data was not available. theoretically, we would consider that prevalences assessed during intensive monitoring in positive flocks be most comparable to active surveillance prevalences.

study at the european level
in this study data from several countries was included and this was facilitated by common eu legislation. however the legislation requires the collection of data on cases only and not on tested animals  <cit>  and therefore data obtained directly from different countries was heterogeneous in presentation and quality resulting from differing national data collation and organisation. specific assumptions about the similarity of data from different streams were necessary in order to compare prevalences, as has been discussed. in particular it is worth noting that first, despite the lack of significant differences, the control measures were not completely equivalent. second, the prevalences of as within healthy slaughter and fallen stock streams between countries were similar but not exactly the same. the differences probably relate to heterogeneity between national sheep populations and/or different strategies for national active surveillance programme implementation as discussed in  <cit>  and  <cit> . to take these different sources of heterogeneity into account, we considered the use of fixed effect  as well as random effect regression . results for both methods which were similar indicated that heterogeneity was limited. results from the countries without any detected additional as cases in the as positive flocks were included by adding suitable, differing continuity corrections. in the settings examined, the results were similar and the contribution of the countries without any additional as case was negligible; this allowed for presentation of more readable results, without continuity correction.

because important data on the animals tested such as age, prp genotype and the flock of origin were not available, and because of difficulties diagnosing as  <cit> , the as prevalence could have been underestimated. data on the flock of origin could have also been use to consider the geographical clustering of cases but it was not available. the results for cs, based on data collected in the same way, showed a clear clustering of cases in positive herds.

since july  <dig>  eu legislation has allowed for easing of control measures in as positive flocks. these eased controls require that eu member states, as a minimum, intensively monitor positive flocks through testing of fallen stock and animals leaving the flock for slaughter, but with movement restrictions limited to export interdiction  <cit> . these changes are based on the rationale that as is less contagious than cs, which is supported by our results. however, it is difficult to exclude the possibility that as is naturally transmissible at a low level and precautionary measures including the continued monitoring of animals leaving the flock are sound. the results of surveillance should contribute to determining the nature of control measures that should be employed in the future. progress has been made, but further improvements in data collection and aligning diagnostic procedures throughout the eu would be required to achieve further results than this study and justify for the cost of testing.

CONCLUSIONS
within europe, scrapie surveillance has been intensive for several years and eu legislation requires additional testing in positive flocks. in this study we collected data on active surveillance and surveillance in positive flocks and found that the prevalence of additional as cases in positive flocks did not differ from the prevalence in active surveillance . these results indicate that atypical scrapie does not seem to cluster in positive flocks supporting the hypothesis that atypical scrapie, in contrast to classical scrapie, is not a contagious disease.

