BACKGROUND
obtainment of the genome sequences of more and more bacteria have provided researchers a wealth of information to restructure custom-designed microbes for therapeutic and industrial applications  <cit> . one of the most common approaches is sequence-specific deletion or insertion of the target genes or dna fragments, and various methods have been developed based on the reca-independent homologous recombination, such as recet and lambda red recombination system  <cit> . in these recombination events, selection markers, usually antibiotic markers are needed to confirm the modification procedure, which may have influence on further manipulation. to solve this problem, the flp/frt and cre/loxp site-specific recombination systems have been used for the precise excision of selection markers. however, even combined with these systems, one copy of frt or loxp site still remains on the genome after excision  <cit> .

p. aeruginosa is a gram-negative opportunistic human pathogen of growing clinical importance. the sequence analysis on the  <dig>  mb genome of p. aeruginosa pao <dig> revealed  <dig> predicted open reading frames   <cit> . many genetic tools have been developed for its genome-scale and proteome-scale research, such as commercial  p. aeruginosa genechips® for transcriptome analysis and the transposon mutants library for sequence-defined mutants  <cit> . almost in all of these methods, it is necessary to use the suicide vector and the conjugation transfer to isolate the defined mutant, which is a quite tedious process. in addition, to make unmarked deletion mutants, researchers have developed several methods combining the counter-selectable markers  with the site-specific flp or cre recombinase  <cit> . however, these methods can not generate the true "scarless" mutants.

here a two-step approach was described to perform the scarless and sequential genome modification using one-step pcr product with short  homology regions. the homologous recombination process was mediated by an rk2-derived plasmid, prkarared, expressing the genes of lambda-red system  from the arabinose-inducible pbad promoter. single gene modification could be finished in three days and the efficiency is higher than 88%. twelve scarless deletion mutants of different genes, two deletion mutants of large operons, and one single-point mutation were successfully constructed. furthermore a strain pca  with deletions in three genes was also generated, which could produce the phenazine-1-acid exclusively and efficiently. this strategy may simplify the genetic manipulation to p. aeruginosa and fasten relevant research.

RESULTS
lambda red-mediated scarless gene modification in p. aeruginosa
the map of plasmid prkarared was shown in fig.  <dig>  the backbone was originated from pdn <dig>  in which the oriv and trfa regions were used to support the plasmid replication and stable maintenance in p. aeruginosa, orit region was considered functional for the conjugal transfer among any gram-negative bacterial host virtually and teta was a tetracycline resistance gene  <cit> . the pbad promoter was used to regulate the expression of lambda red proteins . the nucleotide sequence of plasmid prkarared was deposited in genbank under the accession number gu <dig> 

initially, phzs was selected as target because the phenotype of the mutant could be differentiated from that of the wild type by its inability to produce the pseudomonas blue phenazine pigment, pyocyanin, lack of which resulting a yellowish culture.

scarless gene modification could be achieved in two steps . first the sacb-bla cassette flanked by short homology regions a and b adjacent to the target was amplified and electro-transformed into the pao1/prkarared competent cells. positive colonies  were then electro-transformed to delete the markers with the sacb-bla removal cassette, which contained the upstream homology region a and the downstream homology region from b to c . and the sucrcarbs colonies were regarded as positive recombinants.

the pbad promoter on plasmid prkarared could be induced by l-arabinose and then the lambda red proteins could be expressed efficiently, endowing the pao1/prkarared cells with recombination capability. we first assessed whether  <dig> bp homology was sufficient to enable efficient homologous recombination between the target and the pcr cassette, which is generally sufficient in e. coli  <cit> . results showed that the recombination reactions with 1× <dig> cells and aliquots of  <dig> or  <dig> μg electroporated pcr products could generate 30~ <dig> carbr transformants, and the colonies number would double approximately when  <dig> μg dna was used. controls  have no transformants. then the insertion of the sacb-bla cassette and the pyocyanin producing ability of all the carbr colonies were analyzed. and almost all the colonies were positive recombinants . the recombination reactions using pcr cassettes flanked by other length of homology regions  were also performed, and the recombination efficiency was slightly increased . therefore,  <dig> bp homology was enough to promote the efficient homologous recombination.

phzs gene was used as target. conditions: a,  <dig> bp homology region, induction of cells with different concentration of l-arabinose during  <dig> hours; b, different lengths of homology regions, induction of cells with  <dig> % l-arabinose during  <dig> hours; c,  <dig> bp homology region, induction of cells with  <dig> % l-arabinose during different time.

a. determined by pcr amplification and dna sequencing

b. screening of carbrsucs colonies

c. screening of carbssucr colonies

the influences of the l-arabinose concentration and the induction time on the recombination efficiency were also analyzed. results indicated that when the concentration of l-arabinose went up, the recombination efficiency also increased gradually which could reach the maximum at the concentration of  <dig> % and keep stable. induction time also had influence on the recombination efficiency and efficient recombination could be achieved after the cells were induced with  <dig> % l-arabinose for at least three hours .

gene modifications in p. aeruginosa pao1
using this prkarared mediated strategy, several mutants were constructed, including twelve deletion mutants of different genes, two deletion mutants of large operons, and one single-point mutation. and the length of modified regions ranged from  <dig> bp to  <dig>  kb . these twelve genes were involved in the synthesis and regulation of pyocyanin and the two operons were the pyocyanin synthesis operons. the point mutation was made at the site  <dig> of the phzs gene, changing the nucleotide a to t, which could produce a bam hi restriction site. typically  <dig> μg dna was electroporated into the pao1/prkarared competent cells and about 26~ <dig> colonies  could be obtained. the recombinant efficiencies were about 94~99%, no significant correlation to the size of target gene . after the second-step recombination and the sucrose counter-selection, nearly all of the survival colonies were positive recombinants. indeed, as summarized in table  <dig>  the overall efficiency of the scarless deletion process ranged from 88% to 98%.

a. determined by pcr amplification and dna sequencing

b. screening of carbrsucs colonies

c. screening of carbssucr colonies

sequential gene deletion and construction of strain pca
two-step homogeneous recombination was required for the modification of each gene and the modifications of multiple genes could be easily achieved after several rounds. on this basis, sequential deletion of two, three and four genes were performed successfully. the construction of strain pca with deletions in three genes, phzh, phzm and phzs, was shown as an example. proteins phzs, phzh and phzm are involved in the conversion of phenazine-1-carboxylic acid  into 1-hydroxyphenazine , phenazine-1-carboxyamide  and pyocyanin   <cit> . after three rounds of the two-step recombination, these three genes were deleted sequentially and scarlessly . as revealed by the hplc analysis, at least four phenazine derivatives could be detected from the cultured media of pao <dig> strain, corresponding to the pca, 1-oh-phz, pcn and pyo, respectively. in the hplc plot of pca strain, only one peak representing pca was detected, and the yield of pca was higher than that of pao <dig> strain , indicating that strain pca could produce pca efficiently and exclusively.

discussion
lambda red recombination system first described in e. coli has been successfully applied to yersinia, salmonella, shigella and serratia  <cit> . the procedures involve the homologous recombination between the region of interest and a pcr product containing antibiotic cassette flanked by homology region. although this efficient method may be applicable to other bacteria, adaptations are frequently required, such as the homology length and recombination steps  <cit> .

in p. aeruginosa, construction of markerless deletion mutants is still a time-consuming and labor-intensive process. two different plasmids were used in the traditional procedure. the first plasmid was transformed for targeting a selected region and the second plasmid was re-transformed for the unmarked deletion of the antibiotic cassette by flp recombinase  <cit> . this recombination procedure including multiple steps needs several days to accomplish one gene modification and the recombination efficiency is not very high. furthermore, the produced "unmarked" deletion is not scarless, as normally one frt site was left. in  <dig>  lambda red system and three-step pcr products were used to replace the target gene with antibiotic cassette in p. aeruginosa pa <dig>  which confirmed the possibility of using the lambda red recombination system in p. aeruginosa  <cit> . however, this method can not produce scarless modification as the antibiotic cassette is still left on the genome dna, quite difficult to perform multiple genes modification in one cell. and its homology regions were quite long, meaning several rounds of pcr amplification and more manipulation steps were needed.

as previously reported, multi-copy red plasmid ptp <dig> failed to promote gene replacement using the pcr-generated substrates with short homology extensions in e. coli, since the linear multimers of this plasmid generated through high dosage of lambda gam protein drove the plasmid replication in rolling circle mode may be toxic to e. coli host or compete with the recombination substrates  <cit> . based on these observations, we constructed plasmid prkarared derived from rk <dig>  low-copy and broad-host-range expression. as expected, plasmid prkarared was able to promote efficient homologous recombination with short homology extension in e. coli, in p. aeruginosa pao <dig>  and also in pseudomonas sp. m <dig> . in e. coli, pcr cassettes flanked by only  <dig> bp homology region could induce the homologous recombination and efficient recombination happened when the pcr fragments flanked by  <dig> bp homology regions were used . but in pseudomonas pao <dig> and m <dig>  almost no transformant could be obtained using the pcr fragments with  <dig> bp or  <dig> bp homology extension, and at least  <dig> bp homology regions were required for efficient recombination . this is consistent with previous results that the minimum length of homology extension required for efficient recombination may be different when the lambda red system is used in different organisms, which may have relevance to the characteristics of the organisms, such as the difference in gc content and so on  <cit> . although the efficiency of recombination in pseudomonas was lower than that in e. coli, plasmid prkarared was still suitable for the gene modification in pseudomonas. differences in the expression of red proteins, dna uptake, sequence contexts and the species-specific restriction may result in the variations of recombination efficiency  <cit> .

the scarless modification strategy based on plasmid prkarared was efficient and rapid. single-point mutation, deletion of large operons and consecutive deletion of multiple genes could be achieved easily. one plasmid and pcr cassette flanked by  <dig> bp homology regions were enough to induce efficient recombination, meaning only one step pcr amplification was needed. and as the marker cassettes could be used repeatedly, only the homology regions should be changed to perform the modifications of different genes, which may alleviate the workload of primer design.

furthermore, the expression of the lambda red proteins were driven by the tightly regulated promoter pbad, of which the basal expression level was very low in the absence of its inducer. this will minimize the unwanted recombination and increase the efficiency of homologous recombination. on the other hand, the sucrose counter-selection procedure could also increase the selection efficiency. therefore, the high recombination efficiency of this strategy could ease the screening step, lessen work intensity and shorten the experimental time.

phenazine derivates have many important biological effects  <cit> . although the pathway of phenazine synthesis in p. aeruginosa has been studied  <cit> , the function mechanisms and regulation networks of phenazine derivates are still poorly characterized. therefore, many knockout mutants need to be constructed, not only single gene mutant, but also the multiple-gene mutants. based on plasmid prkarared mediated method, we successfully obtained a series of scarless deletion mutants of different genes involving in the phenazine synthesis and regulation pathways, such as lasi, qscr, gaca, rsma and etc. using this scarless approach, mutants with modifications of multiple genes could be generated easily for further study of the cumulative effects in different combination styles. strain pca with the deletion in three genes was an example. it could be further used to study the regulation styles and the special functions of this compound without any disturbance of other phenazine derivates.

in a word, the plasmid prkarared mediated method could perform efficient and accurate homologous recombination in pseudomonas and in e. coli. there is only one potential shortcoming of this system, that this plasmid can not be removed easily after all the necessary modifications are accomplished. therefore, further improvements may be done, such as using the conditional replicons  to perfect this system.

CONCLUSIONS
this prkarared-mediated technique could be used efficiently and rapidly to generate scarless and sequential gene modification mutants in p. aeruginosa with one-step pcr product flanked by short homology regions. single-point mutation, large operon deletion mutants and sequential deletion mutants of multiple genes could be achieved easily. this method may give a new way to generate more genetically modified p. aeruginosa strains.

