BACKGROUND
social insects exhibit well-organized social behavior. colony members show caste-specific behavioral variations and are specialized in certain tasks  <cit> . the behavioral differentiation among castes is one of the most important mechanisms to integrate social behaviors, together with social communications. recent approaches to understand the molecular bases underlying social behaviors have revealed that differential gene expressions contribute to caste differentiation in some social insects  <cit> . however, most of those recent studies were concentrated on the honeybee and other social hymenopterans, while only a few studies have been pursued in other social lineages. to understand the general principles of sociality in insects, extensive studies on the molecular mechanisms in various social insects would be required.

termites are the oldest eusocial insects and have developed elaborate social systems independently of hymenopterans  <cit> . the social structures of termites are different from those of social hymenopterans in many aspects  <cit> . one of the most fundamental reasons for the differences is that termites are hemimetabolous, whereas social hymenopterans are holometabolous. young termites possess similar body patterns to imagos and thus move around just after they are hatched; therefore, relatively younger instar juveniles can function as workers. in contrast, juveniles of social hymenopterans require care of workers throughout their larval and pupal stages, and all castes, including sterile and fertile ones, are "adult" individuals  <cit> . these developmental differences with or without metamorphosis trigger the differences in caste systems at least to some extent  <cit> . in the case of termite development, sterile castes are thought to comprise immature individuals, so that some castes can differentiate into others through molting events  <cit> . one of the most representative examples is soldier differentiation, in which extensive morphological modification occurs, resulting in soldier-specific weapons such as exaggerated mandibles and/or frontal glands  <cit> . with regard to evolution, the soldier caste is thought to have first occurred in the ancestral termite and remain highly conserved across all present-day species  <cit> . in other words, the acquisition of soldier caste is one of the key evolutionary changes in termite lineages.

in accordance with morphological modifications, termite soldiers also change their behavioral characteristics dramatically. workers perform helper tasks like foraging, nursing, and nest maintenance whereas soldiers show extensive defensive behavior  <cit> . in response to predatory invasion, workers tend to escape rapidly into the nest and/or show building behavior, whereas soldiers tend to aggregate outside the nest and aggressively attack enemies  <cit> . this behavioral differentiation is accomplished by molting events from worker  to soldier via the presoldier stage, and so can be regarded as age polyethism  <cit> . in contrast, although honeybee workers also change their tasks from nursing to defensive or foraging behaviors depending on their age, that change is more plastic and is unaccompanied by morphological modifications  <cit> .

juvenile hormone  is known to play important roles in soldier differentiation  <cit> . from classic studies to recent molecular studies on termite caste differentiation, many researchers have focused on soldier differentiation because it can be artificially induced by applying juvenile hormone and its analogues  <cit> . this induction method is useful for analyzing the developmental bases of soldier differentiation because individuals undergoing the differentiation are rare under natural conditions. additionally, extensive histological studies have been carried out using this system  <cit> . furthermore, by applying recent molecular techniques to the induction experiments, some genes that are thought to be responsible for the physiological and morphological changes have been shown to be up-regulated during soldier differentiation  <cit> . however, nothing has been elucidated yet about the molecular underpinnings of soldier-specific behavior and neuronal modifications, although the behavioral difference between soldiers and workers is remarkable.

to understand the molecular basis underlying the behavioral and neuronal differences between soldiers and workers in termites, we screened the genes in nervous systems, which were differentially expressed between the two castes, or up-regulated during the course of soldier differentiation in damp-wood termite h. sjostedti. using differential display followed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction , several genes were identified as candidate genes potentially responsible for soldier-specific defensive behavior.

RESULTS
gene screening by differential display
because the availability of genomic information for h. sjostedti was limited, we chose fluorescent differential display  followed by qrt-pcr to identify differential gene expressions in nervous system, which is responsible for caste-specific behaviors in soldiers.

for the first screening to identify candidate transcripts potentially related to behavioral differences between workers and soldiers, we used mrna from the brain and sog  of pseudergates , soldiers , and individuals during soldier differentiation that were artificially induced by applying jha   <cit> . during the differentiation, total rna was extracted from the brains and sogs of 2wkpe  and ps  because many histological events occur around  <dig> weeks after the application, and most of the jha-applied pseudergates molt into presoldiers at around  <dig> weeks   <cit> .

fdd identified  <dig> candidate bands that specifically appeared during the soldier differentiation  and two bands that appeared after the completion of differentiation . in the process of cloning, four or five clones were sequenced for each candidate band and multiple sequences were occasionally identified from a single band, resulting in  <dig> different sequences:  <dig> differentiation-specific and  <dig> soldier-specific sequences .

gene expression profiles examined by qrt-pcr
next, we performed the second screening using qrt-pcr  . in addition to the sample categories  used in fdd, we included "pseudergates during stationary molt " as the control molt and "natural presoldiers " for the evaluation of artificial effects of jha. qrt-pcr evaluations were performed only on  <dig> candidates, for which it was possible to design the qrt-pcr primers . among them,  <dig> candidates  were up-regulated more than  <dig> -fold during the soldier differentiation, i.e., in 2wkpe, ps, and/or nps . among the  <dig> candidates, five were up-regulated both in the brain and sog , whereas only one was up-regulated in the brain  and the remaining seven candidates in the sog . three other candidates  were also identified as up-regulated genes but also highly expressed in sm, suggesting that they would be generally required for molting irrespective of caste phenotype or developmental stage . no soldier-specific candidate showing higher expression after the differentiation was identified. seven candidate genes  showed similar expression levels  during the soldier differentiation, so they were excluded from further analyses .

the strongest differences in gene expression were observed exclusively during soldier differentiation, and not between pseudergates and differentiated soldiers . during the differentiation, extensive modifications to the whole body occur  <cit> , and thereafter the individuals begin to show soldier-specific defensive behavior  <cit> . considering these facts, the up-regulated genes are more likely to be associated with neuronal development than with direct behavioral differences. in addition, the gene expression differences were more distinctive in sog than in brain, in terms of both numbers of genes and their expression levels . these results were consistent with our previous findings in that the sog was much larger in soldiers than in pseudergates, and the enlargement occurred during differentiation  <cit> .

identification of the up-regulated genes
based on gene ontology and blast-x, gene names were assigned to six sequences among  <dig> differentiation-specific candidates . they were provisionally named on the basis of the functions of the sequence descriptions in the blast results, i.e., names of putative orthologous genes, starting with the abbreviated nomenclature of the focal termite, as "hsj + name of sequence description" . these sequences were deposited in the genbank/embl/ddbj database under the following accession numbers: hsj14-3-3e: ab <dig>  hsjtubb: ab <dig>  hsjfib2: ab <dig>  hsjupl: ab <dig>  the sequences of hsjcib and hsjsap were already described in a previous study   <cit> . the detailed expression patterns of these six genes were quantified again by qrt-pcr  .

molecular functions of the identified genes
hsjcib showed the most dynamic expression profile during soldier differentiation, especially in sog . in both brain and sog, the hsjcib was up-regulated before the presoldier molt, whereas at the soldier stage it returned to the same level as at the pe stage. it was reported that ciboulot controls axonal growth during metamorphosis and is essential for the ellipsoid body development in drosophila  <cit> . it encodes a protein with high sequence similarities to beta-thymosins, which control actin polymerization to induce structural changes of neurons  <cit> . in h. sjostedti, hsjcib was first reported as an up-regulated gene in developing mandibles during soldier differentiation  <cit> . moreover, it was recently found that hsjcib was highly expressed in other tissues such as brain, muscles, and epidermis during soldier differentiation  <cit> . hsjtubb encoding beta-tubulin, one of the main components of cytoskeleton, and hsjfib <dig> encoding fibrilin  <dig>  which constitutes microfibrils, showed similar expression patterns to hsjcib, although the expression profiles were not as dynamic .

unlike hsjcib and hsjtubb, hsj14-3-3e and hsjsap showed similarly unique expression patterns only in sog during soldier differentiation . 14-3-3epsilon is an intracellular signaling molecule belonging to the 14-3- <dig> protein family, which is known to be involved with neuronal migrations  <cit> . in terms of molecular function, 14-3-3epsilon maintains phosphorylation of nudel  and lis <dig> proteins, leading to the localization change, which in turn regulates cytoplasmic dynein and kinesin functions in neurons  <cit> . in addition, it was also reported that 14-3-3epsilon controls actin polymerization in neurons by regulating mk <dig>   <cit> . interestingly, in honeybee, 14-3-3epsilon was highly expressed in association with a genotype related to highly defensive behavior  <cit> . hsjsap was previously reported as a gene that was highly expressed in the mandibles of h. sjostedti during soldier differentiation  <cit> . although hsjsap was named for its dna-binding domain  that is involved in chromatin organization  <cit> , it is difficult to speculate on its involvement in neuronal differentiation. in our study, hsjupl, which was categorized as an ubiquitin-protein ligase, did not show significant expression difference during the soldier differentiation .

neural modifications during soldier differentiation
most of the identified genes were up-regulated in the central nervous system  during soldier differentiation, suggesting that the identified factors participate in soldier-specific neuronal modifications. recently, it was reported that the mandibular motor neurons , which are located in the sog and control the mandibles, were enlarged in soldiers in contrast to workers, and the enlargement took place before the presoldier molt  <cit> . in correlation with this, the up-regulated genes were more highly expressed in sog than in brain . in addition, the expression patterns were consistent with the timing of the motor neuron enlargement, and some of them  are known to regulate cytoskeletons or motor proteins. taken together, these genes are suggested to be involved in the motor neuron enlargement during soldier differentiation. furthermore, these genes may indirectly affect mandibular muscle development through motoneuronal inputs, as observed in muscle formation during metamorphosis  <cit> . this situation is specific to termites because these developmental events associated with soldier differentiation occur through molting events, which are unlikely in social hymenopterans  <cit> .

it is also possible that these genes may modify other neuronal networks rather than motor neurons. in honeybee workers, for example, reorganizations of mushroom bodies are known to occur in correlation with the task transitions from nursing to foraging  <cit> . also in other social hymenopterans, it has been reported that histological differentiation in brain is highly correlated with task allocation or social dominance  <cit> , although structural changes in interneuron connections have never been reported in termites. thus, the up-regulated genes may be responsible for the development of unknown neuronal networks, resulting in soldier-specific defensive behavior.

CONCLUSIONS
we compared the gene expression profiles in the nervous system between soldiers and pseudergates, and during soldier differentiation in the damp-wood termite h. sjostedti. the major differences in gene expression were observed during the soldier differentiation, not between the two castes. some of the up-regulated genes are regarded as factors controlling cytoskeletal or motor proteins, suggesting that these are responsible for soldier-specific neuronal modifications. behavioral differentiation among termite castes may occur through such neuronal modifications. this study is the first trial to analyze gene expression patterns correlated with caste-specific behaviors in termites. further studies will reveal more detailed molecular mechanisms underlying termite polyethism and provide new insights into the evolution of social insects.

