BACKGROUND
glutamine synthetase  catalyzes the atp-dependent formation of gln from glu and nh <dig> + and is considered one of the oldest functioning enzymes  <cit> . the gs gene superfamily includes three distinct classes, gsi, gsii and gsiii, each differing in molecular size and number of subunits in the holoenzyme  <cit> . the distribution of the three classes is variable within the three domains of life and instances of multiple gs isoenzymes from different families functioning in the same organism are not uncommon in both eubacteria and eukaryotes  <cit> . these observations suggest the gene families arose early and prior to the divergence of the prokaryotes and eukaryotes  <cit> .

the evolutionary history of the gs superfamily is complicated and gene transfer events are one among many forces that have shaped the history of these genes. among prokaryotes, there is phylogenetic evidence of horizontal gene transfer  of gsi genes between members of the archaea and eubacteria  <cit> . evidence for secondary endosymbiotic gene transfer of gsii from the red algal endosymbiont to the nucleus of the heterokont host has also been presented  <cit> . members of the gsii gene family are found in both eubacterial and eukaryotic lineages. the identification of gsii genes in the plant symbiont bradyrhizobium japonicum lead carlson and chelm  <cit>  to hypothesize that the gene evolved via hgt from vascular plants to bacteria. however, this hypothesis was not supported by subsequent phylogenetic analyses  <cit> , which established distinct eukaryotic  and eubacterial  clades.

the supergroup archaeplastida  <cit> , consisting of glaucophyta, rhodophyceae and chloroplastida, harbors members of gsii gene family that are well characterized in vascular plants but not in other lineages within the supergroup. in general, vascular plants express multiple gs isoenzymes that are localized to either cytosol or chloroplast. the isoenzymes are nuclear encoded, and in most angiosperms a single nuclear gene encodes the chloroplast isoenzyme, while a small nuclear gene family encodes multiple cytosolic isoenzymes that are expressed in tissue-specific and developmentally-regulated patterns  <cit> . previous phylogenetic analyses of chloroplast and cytosolic isoenzymes support the hypothesis that the isoenzymes in angiosperms evolved via a gene duplication event that preceded the divergence of monocots and dicots  <cit> .

biochemical studies of green algae provided the first evidence that, as observed in vascular plants, multiple gsii isoenzymes are expressed and localized to the cytosol and chloroplasts within these organisms  <cit> . phylogenetic analyses incorporating the two gsii isoforms characterized in chlamydomonas reinhardtii  <cit>  uncovered an unusual disparity between the two enzymes  <cit> . the cytosolic gsii sequence clustered with the vascular plants while the plastid sequence branched more basally and appeared to associate with the eubacterial sequences.

here we examined the evolutionary relationship of the gsii gene family and use increased taxonomic sampling in chloroplastida to determine if the basally branching, eubacterial-like gsiib was broadly distributed. gsii sequences were obtained from four members of the trebouxiophyceae  by pcr amplification using degenerate and gene specific primers. additional gsii sequences for members of the green algae  and streptophytes  were obtained from publicly available databases, including genome and est projects. we also increased taxonomic sampling within eubacteria . gsiie and gsiib sequences were identified in members of the green algae and early-diverging streptophytes. phylogenetic analyses provide support for the hypothesis that gsiib was gained in the chloroplastida from the eubacteria via a hgt event after the divergence of primary photosynthetic groups.

RESULTS
amplification of gsii genes
complete gsii mrna sequences were obtained from pseudochlorella sp. ccap211/1a, chlorella luteoviridis, auxenochlorella protothecoides, and prototheca zopfii. a gsii sequence was also obtained for pseudochlorella sp. ccap211/1a that included  <dig> bp of the orf and all of the 3'utr. genbank accession numbers and characteristics of the transcripts obtained in this study are summarized in table  <dig> 

four complete sequences of gsiie and a portion of one gsiib were obtained from cdna for the species listed above. ncbi  accession numbers are given. characteristics of the sequences in terms of nucleotide length , size of open reading frame , and the length of the predicted amino acid sequences  are presented. the % gc content of open reading frame  and the 5'and 3' untranslated regions  of each transcript are presented.

eukaryotic gsii phylogeny
phylogenetic analyses of gsii amino acid sequences resulted in a well-resolved tree. assuming the root of the tree lies outside the major eukaryotic clade, there was a clear separation of the eukaryotic  and eubacterial  enzymes . within the eukaryote clade, the opisthokonts  and photosynthetic eukaryotes formed separate groups . the gsiie proteins from streptophytes, chlorophytes, rhodophytes, and chromalveolates formed distinct clades, each with strong to moderate support. the position of the heterokont sequences within this clade is consistent with previous analyses that provide evidence that gsiie in heterokonts arose via endosymbiotic gene transfer  <cit> . sequences from chlorophyta  diverged from a basal node within the photosynthetic clade and the chloroplastida  were not monophyletic. however, the deeper nodes within the photosynthetic eukaryotic clade were not well supported and thus the branching pattern within the clade is unresolved . the streptophyte gsiie sequences formed two major groupings; one group contained protein sequences targeted to the chloroplast of angiosperms and the other contained protein sequences of non-vascular and vascular plants that are targeted to the cytosol. multiple gsiie genes were also observed in the gymnosperms  but to date, these appear to function in the cytosol and evidence of plastid targeted isoenzymes is lacking  <cit> .

evidence for the hgt of gsiib
the gsiib clade comprised sequences from eubacteria and some members of the chloroplastida . the chloroplastida sequences formed a single clade nested within the eubacterial sequences and branching within the clade was similar to predicted organismal phylogenies  <cit> .

gsiib sequences are not broadly represented among eubacteria but were identified in members of the bacteriodetes/flavobacteria/cytophaga, planctomycetes, verrucomicrobia, actinobacteria, and the α- and γ-proteobacteria . the chloroplastida gsiib was sister to γ-proteobacteria with strong  to moderate support . the γ-proteobacteria + chloroplastida gsiib clade was sister to the actinobacteria, but this association was not strongly supported. the α-proteobacteria gsiib sequences were not closely related to the γ-proteobacteria + chloroplastida gsiib clade, which makes the possibility of gsiib gain via mitochondrial endosymbiosis unlikely. the α-proteobacteria gsiib were nested within the verrucomicrobia and thus, we cannot exclude the possibility of an hgt event within the α-proteobacteria lineage that obscures the mitochondrial origin of the gsiib gene in the chloroplastida. however, the lack of detection of gsiib in genomes of other eukaryotic lineages reduces the likelihood of a mitochondrial origin. in addition, est and genome analyses of other photosynthetic eukaryotes  and extant cyanobacteria  <cit> , have not uncovered gsiib sequences, reducing the possibility that gsiib was acquired via plastid endosymbiosis. thus, we propose that gsiib in the chloroplastida arose via a hgt from γ-proteobacteria early in plant evolution.

gsiib sequences are not broadly distributed among eubacterial lineages and to date, within γ-proteobacteria, only the genera represented in our analyses have annotated gsiib sequences deposited in genbank. assuming the gs superfamily evolved prior to the divergence of the three domains of life  <cit> , the distribution of gsiib sequences suggests the gene has been lost in several lineages of eubacteria and the archaea. the analysis of gsiib may become more robust as additional eubacterial gsiib become available through genome sequencing projects. however, gene loss may make the identification of the true donor of gsiib to the chloroplastida difficult.

an alternative explanation for the limited distribution of gsiib among the eubacteria is that the gene was transferred to the eubacteria from an eukaryotic donor. the possibility of an hgt from chloroplastida to the γ-proteobacteria is not supported by our phylogenetic analyses as it implies that the eubacterial sequences would nest within the gsiie clade; which has not been observed in our phylogenetic analyses. eukaryote to eubacterial hgt might be supported if gsiib were found in diverse lineages of eukaryotes. further investigation of gsii diversity in the eukaryotic lineages not represented in our study  will contribute to our understanding of the distribution and evolution of gsiib. given the data at hand, however, the hypothesis that gsiib arose in the chloroplastida via hgt remains the most parsimonious.

estimating the timing of the hgt
to estimate the relative and absolute timing of the hgt of gsiib, we used bayesian relaxed molecular clock analyses  <cit> . both the uncalibrated  and calibrated analyses  show an overlap of the 95% highest density posterior node ranges of the origin of gsiib in the early-diverging chloroplastida coinciding with the gsiie divergence in the opisthokonts and in the primary photosynthetic eukaryotes . our analyses indicate that gsiib and gsiie may have coexisted for an extended period of time and under this scenario, the putative timing of the hgt event from eubacteria to eukaryotes could be placed either prior to or after the divergence of the primary photosynthetic lineages. at present, there is no evidence of gsiib in genomes of red algae , or the glaucophyte cyanophora paradoxa. we acknowledge that taxon sampling is not extensive within these two lineages and hence cannot exclude the possibility of the existence gsiib in these groups. however, given these limited data it is most parsimonious to assume that gsiib was acquired only by the chloroplastida, early after the divergence from the glaucophyta and rhodophyceae .

the distribution of gsiib within chloroplastida covers the major lineages of chlorophyta . in addition, a partial gsiib sequence was identified in a member of the ulvophyceae . within streptophyta, gsiib genes are present in mesostigmatophyceae , zygnemophyceae , marchantiophyta  and bryophyta . gsiib is absent from the single lycopodiophyta genome  and from all seed plants. hence, we propose that gsiib was lost in the plant lineage after the colonization of land by early plants, marked by the divergence of bryophytes and lycopodiophytes, which is one of the oldest vascular plant lineages  <cit> .

functional localization and gsiib gene duplication
the chloroplastida lineages that contain the gsiib gene also have a gsiie counterpart, which attaches to a basal node within the photosynthetic eukaryotes . both the gsiib and gsiie genes are nuclear encoded and thus we identified the cellular location of each of the gene products based on the presence  or absence  of n-terminal transit peptides using targetp ver.  <dig>  . none of the early-diverging chloroplastida gsiie enzymes contained transit peptides. in contrast, chloroplast transit sequences were identified in the gsiib protein sequences from chlorella sp. nc64a, c. vulgaris and the streptophyte, closterium peracerosum-strigosum-littorale  but not in the moss  or liverwort . mitochondrial-targeting transit peptides were predicted in gsiib sequences from c. reinhardtii, volvox carteri f. nagariensis and scenedesmus obliquus . previous work indicated that chloroplast transit sequences from c. reinhardtii shared features with both mitochondrial and higher plant chloroplast pre-sequences  <cit>  and thus the prediction of a mitochondrial location of gsiib may not reflect its true functional localization. alternatively, gsiib may be targeted to both the mitochondria and chloroplast, similar to what is observed for gsiie in leaves of some vascular plants  <cit> . while experimental evidence is required to confirm the cellular localization of the gsiib, it appears that the gsiib enzymes function in either the chloroplast or mitochondrion in the chlorophytes and early-diverging streptophytes  and that gsiie functions in the cytosol.

the gsiib gene is duplicated in c. reinhardtii, v. carteri f nagariensis and p. patens. the duplicated copies of gsiib in c. reinhardtii and v. carteri f nagariensis were nearly identical  and present in the genome in a head-to-head orientation. similarly, the gsiib genes in p. patens were 98% identical but do not appear to be in close genomic proximity. within our phylogenetic analyses , the duplicated gsiib of c. reinhardtii, v. carteri f. nagariensis and p. patens each formed separate clades, suggesting the genes evolved by independent duplication events. alternatively, the gsiib genes in c. reinhardtii and v. carteri may have evolved via an early duplication within the chlamydomonadales with subsequent gene conversion following the divergence of these lineages. the gsiib are differentially expressed in c. reinhardtii suggesting the need for maintenance of both the copies in the organism  <cit> .

gsiib loss and replacement of function
in contrast to the expression of gsiie and gsiib genes in the early-diverging chloroplastida, the chloroplast- and cytosolic-localized gsii enzymes in angiosperms are both members of the gsiie family and form two distinct clades in our phylogenetic analyses . as predicted in earlier studies  <cit> , the genes encoding these enzymes arose via a recent gene duplication event with further expansion in the number of genes encoding cytosolic isoenzymes in several plant lineages . since gsiib is absent from vascular plants, it appears that the chloroplast function of gsiib has been replaced by a gene duplication event in higher plants allowing for subsequent loss of the gene from this lineage. there is also an expansion of the gsiie gene family in gymnosperms , but the enzymes are all localized to the cytosol and the plastid targeted isoform appears to have been lost from this group. the expansion of the gsiie gene family coincides with the development of vascularization of land plants and maybe correlated with the partitioning of nitrogen assimilation between below and above ground tissue .

CONCLUSIONS
we have provided evidence of an ancient hgt event involving the gene for an essential enzyme, gsii. gsii has been well characterized at the molecular level in angiosperms but has been largely overlooked in the early-diverging plant lineages, which were addressed in the present study. although recent comparative genomic analyses failed to identify bacterial genes in chlamydomonas reinhardtii  <cit> , our discovery of a eubacterial-like gsii in the chlorophytes and early-diverging streptophytes suggests that further exploration within these lineages is merited. the branching pattern within the monophyletic assemblage of the chlorophytes and early-diverging streptophytes is similar to other molecular and organismal phylogenies, suggesting the occurrence of a single hgt event. as a result, gsiib may be useful in resolving taxonomic associations within and among green algal and early-diverging streptophyte lineages.

several genes of bacterial origin have been identified in dictyostelium discoideum and are thought to be advantageous to organisms living in soil  <cit> . more recently, richards et al.  <cit>  identified five genes in plants that appear to be of fungal origin and argue that two may have been advantageous for organisms colonizing a terrestrial environment. we propose that the acquisition of enzymes by hgt results in a more rapid change in enzymatic capacity or kinetic diversity than evolution of isoenzymes by gene duplication and subsequent specialization. biochemical studies have suggested that gsiib has a lower affinity for nh <dig> + and glu than gsiie  <cit> , characteristics that would be advantageous for enzymes assimilating higher concentrations of nh <dig> + from environmental sources, no <dig> - assimilation, or increased rates of photorespiration. increased taxon sampling and an enlarged fossil age constraint dataset will allow for a more detailed examination of the timing of gsii gains and losses over geological history and coupled with major transitions in plant evolution.

