BACKGROUND
inflammatory airway disease  is a non-septic lung disease defined for the first time in  <dig>  <cit>  and that affects the lower airways in horses  <cit> . the syndrome is later defined in a consensus publication  <cit>  as moderate lower airway neutrophilic inflammation or any lower airway inflammation with mast or eosinophilic cells, not associated with signs of labored breathing at rest. iad affects a large number of horses and can impede their performance  <cit> . because the iad phenotype has only been described recently, its pathophysiology is still not understood and is under investigation. knowledge of molecular mechanisms underlying this disease is a fundamental prerequisite to understand the etiology and the underlying inflammatory mechanism involved in iad. recently, the first evidence for a corticosteroids treatment suppressing the airway hyperreactivity featured in iad has been established , submitted). tohver et al. found a significant reduction in airway hyperreactivity and airway hypersensitivity after treatment with either intramuscular dexamethasone or inhaled fluticasone propionate in horses with iad. however, neither of the treatments affected the differential cell count in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid . understanding the pathophysiology of iad as well as the mechanism of action of corticosteroids in this disease implies a better understanding of the inflammatory cells activity. two studies have reported the expression of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in inflammatory cells from the balf in horses with recurrent airway obstruction after treatment with corticosteroids  <cit> , but this is still to be studied in iad.

real-time quantitative pcr is a standard method for accurate, sensitive and rapid quantification of gene expression nowadays  <cit> . relative quantification using pcr allows comparing genes expression between groups, for example before and after a treatment. when analyzing data for relative quantification, results are normalized to a reference. normalization is extremely important to allow accurate comparison of the results between different samples and conditions in gene expression studies  <cit> . there have been a lot of different strategies proposed for normalizing, that range from ensuring that a similar sample size is chosen to the use of an internal reference gene  <cit> . normalizing to a reference gene is a widely used method because it is simple in theory. an ideal reference gene should be stably expressed and unaffected by experimental protocol or disease status  <cit> . commonly used reference genes such as gapdh and β-actin are unfortunately often used without prior validation of their expression stability under the specific study conditions. however, a number of studies have shown that the expression of those genes is significantly altered in some experimental conditions  <cit> . it is therefore necessary to validate the expression stability of reference genes prior to their use in an experimental protocol. ideally, it has been recently recommended that a combination of reference genes should be used to obtain a more stable reference  <cit> .

regarding horses, a number of potential reference genes have been studied in different tissues and cell cultures including normal skin and sarcoids  <cit> , colon, heart, kidney, liver, lung, lymph node, small intestine and spleen  <cit>  and also in peripheral blood mononuclear cells  <cit> . however, although many studies are using the balf as a sample of choice to study the activity of cells in the lungs, the most reliable reference genes in equine balf have not been studied. in addition, robust reference genes are needed when using corticosteroids because of the extensive effects these medications have on cellular metabolism.

the aim of this study was therefore to validate reference genes for gene expression studies in balf of horses with iad irrespective of treatment with dexamethasone  or fluticasone propionate .

RESULTS
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid total and differential cell counts
the results of the balf cytological analysis are shown in figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  the balf total and differential cell counts were not significantly different between the dex and fluc treatment baseline values. the percentage lymphocytes in the balf decreased significantly after dex  . treatment with dex and fluc did not induce any significant change in total cell count or differential cell count for any other cell type in the balf.

* indicates a significant difference between pre- and post- treatment .

purity and quantity of extracted rna
the optical density  ratio a260/a <dig> nm measured with a nanodrop spectrophotometer was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . the average rna concentration after extraction using the rneasy mini kit was  <dig>  μg/μl ±  <dig>  .

amplification efficiency
the amplification efficiencies for individual reactions were calculated using the linregpcr software. the results of the averaged efficiencies are shown in table  <dig>  the amplification efficiencies for the seven candidate reference genes ranged between  <dig> % ±  <dig>   and  <dig> % ±  <dig>  .

primers sequences were determined using primer <dig> software and ensembl genome browser . efficiencies are averages of all individual efficiencies calculated for each reaction using linreqpcr software.

expression levels of candidate reference genes
the cycle threshold  values obtained throughout the study were low enough to pursue the analysis reliably: overall and by combining pre- and post-treatment ct values for each gene, out of the seven genes studied, b2m  and ubb  were expressed at the highest levels, followed by actb , rpl <dig> , gapdh  and sdha . hprt  was expressed at the lowest level in the cells of the balf . prior to any referencing, there was no significant difference in average ct value between sdha and gapdh as well as between β-actin, ubb and b2m. also, the average ct values for hprt and rpl <dig> were significantly different from all the other candidate reference genes.

identification of optimal reference genes
the qbaseplus software was used to confirm the results obtained with genorm and normfinder softwares. the unstable genes b2m and actb were not included in the evaluation. based on the coefficient of variation  value calculated in qbaseplus gapdh was, in agreement with genorm and normfinder, the most stably expressed gene in the study .

m values, which is a parameter for the gene stability, and coefficient of variation  values, which indicates how stably a gene is expressed, show that gapdh is the most stably expressed gene.

determination of the optimal number of reference genes for normalization
in addition to the stability results, the genorm software can determine the optimal number of reference genes necessary to calculate a normalization factor. the results are shown in figure  <dig>  only a combination of the four most stable genes gapdh, sdha, hprt and rpl <dig>  have a pairwise variation value lower than the cut off value of  <dig> . in addition, there is a very good agreement between genorm and normfinder softwares identifying three out of four most stable genes, namely gapdh, hprt and rpl <dig>  we therefore conclude that the combination of gapdh, hprt, sdha and rpl <dig> is the most appropriate normalization approach for gene expression studies in balf of horses with inflammatory lung diseases treated with corticosteroids.

discussion
using reference genes that have a stable expression between the compared groups is crucial in gene expression studies. several studies have shown that the use of different reference genes can change the outcome and conclusions of a study  <cit> . the aim of the present study was therefore to validate, for the first time, reference genes for studies in balf of horses with iad, irrespective of treatment with corticosteroids. we found that using gapdh, hprt, sdha and rpl <dig> as a combination of reference genes is the most appropriate normalization approach in this experimental design and that gapdh is the single most stably expressed gene in the balf of horses treated with corticosteroids. although the present study only used  <dig> horses, which is less than typical studies using mice or human samples, it is comparable to other clinical studies in equine medicine using pcr on  <dig> to  <dig> horses  <cit> . compared to other techniques measuring gene expression, the pcr technique is better suited for samples of smaller size and the number of horses used here allowed obtaining significant findings that are relevant for studies in the field of equine medicine.

to our knowledge, there are only two studies evaluating the stability of reference genes in horse tissues, one being in the skin  <cit>  and the other being in the peripheral blood  <cit> ; no data is available on the stability of reference genes in the lungs of horses to compare our results with. however, cappelli at al. found gapdh as the least stably expressed gene in the panel of candidate reference genes they tested in equine blood lymphocytes during exercise-induced stress  <cit> . this emphasizes the importance of appropriate reference gene validation for every tissue and experimental protocol, even when using the same species. the discrepancy is probably due in this case to the difference in tissues tested as well as to the effect of corticosteroids on cellular metabolism. in addition, a few studies assessed the validity of proposed housekeeping genes in the bronchoalveolar cells of humans with various pathologies  <cit> . using a different method than reported here, a study found that gapdh was the most stable reference gene in the bronchoalveolar samples of people with nonsmall cell lung cancer  <cit> . another study used genorm to test candidate housekeeping genes that were mostly different from those described here and found that gnb2l <dig>  hprt <dig> and rpl <dig> were the most stably expressed genes in alveolar macrophages from  <dig> subjects with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease   <cit> ; they also described that gapdh was inappropriate for these studies. in agreement, one study found that gapdh and actb were not suitable as reference genes in asthma and illustrated it by showing that the use of gapdh vs actb as reference genes would lead to conflicting results  <cit> . lastly, a study used equivalence test as well as the statistical tools bestkeeper, genorm and normfinder to assess the most suitable housekeeping genes in the lungs of a large number of people  irrespective of gender, smoking, lung pathologies, treatments, and bal cytology  <cit> . this study only shared  <dig> reference genes with the data presented here, but found that only rpl <dig> along with the proteasome subunit  <dig>  were stably expressed among bal samples  <cit> . in this sense, rpl <dig> came as the second and third most stably expressed gene in the normfinder and genorm analysis presented here.

numerous methods are available to validate reference genes for relative quantification by qpcr. studies will often use only one method, but one study compared two reference genes validation methods in horse samples  <cit>  and another compared four methods in humans bal samples  <cit> . similarly, to ensure consistency and for comparison purpose, the data was analyzed here using three different softwares . genorm and qbaseplus use a pairwise comparison model, while normfinder uses a model-based approach. in our study, genorm 1) identified gapdh, sdha, hprt and rpl <dig> as the most stably expressed reference genes by calculating a stability parameter   and 2) determined that the optimal number of reference genes to be used was  <dig> , by calculating pair-wise variation  . normfinder defined gapdh as the best reference gene when using the treatment with corticosteroids as group identifiers to calculate a stability value for each candidate reference gene. normfinder takes into account variation across subgroups, thus avoiding artificial selection of co-regulated genes by analyzing the expression stability of candidate genes independently from each other  <cit> . lastly, qbaseplus confirmed that gapdh is the best reference gene in our study design. similarly to previous studies  <cit> , we found a good agreement in the reference genes ranking between genorm and normfinder as they both ranked gapdh as the most stable expressed gene, which was confirmed by the qbaseplus analysis. we also found that the first three most stable reference genes were consistently the same when using genorm and normfinder, even if they were not in the exact same ranking order. there was a slight difference in the top four most stably expressed genes as the four most stably expressed genes ranked by normfinder were, in decreasing order, gapdh, rpl <dig>  hprt and b2m, while they were gapdh, sdha, hprt and rpl <dig> with genorm. very similar discrepancy between the different algorithms has been observed in other studies comparing statistical analysis methods: the only study using horse samples and comparing genorm with normfinder found also that the best three reference genes were ranked differently by the two algorithms and that there was disagreement on the fourth most stable gene  <cit> . another study using bal samples on a large cohort of human patients also found different ranking order and genes identification for the top four most stable reference genes  <cit> . such discrepancy could be explained by genes' co-regulation. indeed, co-regulated genes may become highly ranked independently of their expression stabilities with genorm software  <cit> . in contrast, results obtained with normfinder are not significantly affected by co-regulation of candidate reference genes. in our study, the main difference in ranking involved sdha, which ranked as the fifth most stable gene with normfinder, but ranked second with genorm. although co-regulation has been described for actb, b2m, gapdh and hprt, we did not find evidence for the possible co-regulation of sdha in the literature. to check for possible co-regulation of sdha, we analyzed the data again with genorm, this time excluding sdha from the candidate reference gene panel. we found that removing sdha from the analysis did not resolve the discrepancy in ranking of the candidate reference genes between normfinder and genorm . we thus concluded that the discrepancy in ranking was not caused by co-regulation of sdha.

actb and ubb were ranked by both softwares as unstably expressed genes and therefore should not be used as reference in gene expression studies in bronchoalveolar lavage  cells obtained from horses with iad, which is similar  as another study using humans bal samples  <cit> . it is however in contrast with a study done in normal horses' skin in which actb and ubb came out as the most stably expressed genes from the panel tested with genorm  <cit> . gapdh was however not evaluated in this previous study  <cit> . this shows again that the choice of reference genes cannot be transposed from on study to the other without validation for the specifics of each experimental protocol.

as described above, genorm also provides a measure for the best number of reference genes that should be used for optimal normalization. in agreement with several previous studies, we found that the use of more than one reference gene allows for a more accurate normalization than the use of only one reference gene  <cit> . based on a cut-off point of  <dig>  for the v value, as described by vandesompele et al  <cit> , a combination of the four most stable reference genes was calculated as being optimal for gene expression studies in bal cells of horses with iad treated with corticosteroids .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we recommend using the geometric mean of gapdh, hprt, sdha and rpl <dig> to guarantee suitable normalization in bronchoalveolar lavage cells obtained from horses with iad treated with either dex or fluc. if only one reference gene can be used, gapdh should be chosen because it is unanimously the most stably expressed reference gene tested for this type of studies.

