BACKGROUND
proteins evolve through gene duplication, diversification and domain shuffling, which allow novel proteins to emerge via different domain combinations. many evolutionary mechanisms shaping protein sequence and structure can be probed by studying the length distributions of proteins and protein domains. fusion of single domain proteins and domain accretion, for example, play an important role in the evolution of eukaryotic proteins  <cit> ; as a result eukaryotic proteins on average are longer than bacterial and archaeal proteins  <cit> . moreover, it was shown previously that there exists a correlation between sequence length and protein conservation  <cit> , sequence length and protein expression  <cit> .

diverse multi-domain proteins may consist of homologous domains and knowledge of protein domain evolution may considerably help in reconstructing the evolutionary history of entire proteins. changes in protein domains result mostly from point mutations, insertion and deletion processes. although amino acid insertion and deletion  events in proteins are less frequent than amino acid substitutions  <cit> , they can have a major effect in metazoan protein evolution and indel bias can influence the overall genome size  <cit> . it has been observed that indels most often occur in non-conserved protein loop regions. while proteins seem to be rather tolerant to indels in loops compared to core structure elements, protein loops can not be viewed as "random coils" and indels are under constant evolutionary pressure  <cit> . at the same time, indels can relax structural tension occurring due to amino acid substitutions in some proteins and can lead to significant structural changes  <cit> .

the mechanisms of indel events are not very well understood and there are only few statistical models describing these events in evolution  <cit> . traditionally, indels in sequence alignments are scored using affine gap penalties despite the fact that this model does not adequately describe the evolution of insertions and deletions. in particular, the empirical distribution of indel lengths was analyzed for the alignment of closely related proteins and it was shown that it can be well approximated by the zipfian distribution  <cit> . it has also been found that the probability of a gap in the alignment of two homologous sequences depends on the evolutionary distance and there exists a strong relationship between the evolutionary distance and the indel lengths  <cit> .

in this paper we analyze the size evolution of whole protein domains and indels in protein domains, as judged by changing sizes of whole domains or individual unaligned regions. we study intra-domain events which are not affected by domain shuffling and domain accretion in multidomain proteins. to examine these events on a wide scale of evolutionary distances we use the conserved domain database   <cit>  that provides accurate domain alignments of diverse sequences. we are interested in whether the insertion and deletion events in protein domains as a whole or in individual fragments are balanced and if there exist trends toward increasing or decreasing indel or domain lengths. to answer these questions, we perform an extensive analysis of protein domain families spanning a wide range of different taxonomic and functional categories. the answers which we provide in this paper give the means to model indel events in the evolution of different domain families and to understand the nature of protein domain size diversity.

RESULTS
domain size evolution
protein domain size evolution was studied by examining the correlation between the domain size  and the evolutionary distance from the root of the tree to a given node. we note that there are other domain classifications  <cit>  which may define domain boundaries somewhat differently, but none of them provides conserved domain definitions with the block-based multiple sequence alignments necessary for our study. the regression coefficients  were calculated by approximating this dependence with the linear model and by quantifying the rate of domain size change in evolution in terms of the number of residues per unit of evolutionary distance. the sign of its regression coefficient indicates the tendency of the domain to increase/decrease in size. as a result of the correlation analysis we found that 59–63%  of all domains do not show a statistically significant correlation while for 37–41% of the domains the size does correlate with evolutionary distance . according to the stringent multiple comparison bonferroni test and modified bonferroni tests  <cit>  the fraction of domains with statistically significant correlations is about 19–25%. among domain families exhibiting particularly good linear correlations were tubulin/ftsz , phosphoribosyltransferase , hmg-coa_reductase  and lmwpc . two examples of positive and negative correlations are shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig> 

analyzing domain families with large spacers of more than  <dig> residues long , we investigated the functional and taxonomic assignments for these domains and found that  <dig> of them represent enzyme domains and  <dig> of them belong to the "root" taxonomic category . the probability to observe such bias, given the assumption that families with "inserted domains" are distributed equally among different functional/taxonomic classes, can be estimated from the binomial distribution, which yields a p-value of < 10- <dig> for enzymatic domains and a p-value < 3*10- <dig> for ancient domains. thus, ubiquitous domains with enzymatic activity have a tendency to accommodate very long indels, a similar observation for enzymes having been reported earlier  <cit> . in our dataset we found that the long insertions predominate over long deletions, the number of enzymatic domains with spacers longer than  <dig> residues inserted  is three times larger than the number of domains with long spacers deleted in evolution . in general, the evolutionary mechanism of inserting the whole domain into another protein domain might be different from the mechanisms of short indel evolution, but excluding those domain families with spacers longer than  <dig> residues does not change the overall conclusions reported in this paper .

spacer size evolution
we assigned individual spacers to the functional and taxonomic categories of corresponding cds and performed an analysis similar to that described in the previous section with the only difference that instead of domain sizes, the individual spacer lengths were mapped to the nodes of phylogenetic trees. using this mapping we can calculate the regression coefficients for each individual spacer in each domain. figure  <dig> shows the histogram of regression coefficients for individual spacers from the entire test set , among them 67–71%  are "stable" and do not exhibit any statistically significant tendency to increase/decrease in size with evolutionary distance while 29–33% of spacers show significant correlation . similar to the trend observed for entire domain sizes, the majority of spacers  systematically increase their size in the course of evolution while a small fraction of them  decrease in size . although the number of spacers which increase in size exceeds the number of spacers which decrease in size, the rate of spacer size change is approximately equal,  <dig>  amino acids per spacer per unit of evolutionary distance.

first three columns show the observed and expected number  of decreasing, stable and increasing spacers for different go categories. categories, contributing more than 2/ <dig> of the χ <dig> value due to excess  or shortage  of observed families are highlighted. the last column lists p-value of pearson χ2-test.

discussion
the collection of accurate, curated multiple sequence alignments from cdd gives us an opportunity to study the evolution of domain and spacer sizes on a wide scale of evolutionary distances. thus far the indel events have been studied on sets of relatively closely related species such as human, mouse and rat, where indels can be defined explicitly. it has been found that there exists a 2– <dig> fold excess of deletions over insertions in non-coding regions  from human and murids  <cit>  and much higher deletion bias in drosophila melanogaster pseudogenes  <cit> . moreover, deletions are approximately three times more common than insertions in loci causing mendelian diseases  <cit> . protein coding regions, however, are generally under higher selective pressure than pseudogenes and non-coding regions and as was shown in a recent studies the ratio of deletions to insertions in protein coding regions is much closer to unity compared to non-coding regions. for example, a deletion to insertion ratio of microindels  in non-coding regions of mouse is  <dig>  :  <dig> and this ratio is reduced to a  <dig>  :  <dig> in protein coding regions  <cit> . along these lines, we showed that for eukaryotic domains there exists a bias towards deletions  compared to the overall test set, which is significantly enriched with insertions . as a result, for eukaryotes from our test set the total number of spacers which grow in size in evolution is approximately equal to the number of spacers which decrease in size.

for the entire test set we observed a certain pattern for domains and spacers to increase in size on average, with a two-fold difference between the number of domains/spacers growing in size over those diminishing in size. the overall evolutionary scenario which we can portray based on our study is the following. it has been argued that it is unlikely that early proteins represented long peptide chains. on the contrary, various data suggest that the first protein domains emerged through the recombination of short peptides or a limited vocabulary of structural units  <cit> . apparently, the spacers between the domain core structural elements were minimal in size, just enough to span the spatial gaps, connecting the structure. then, in the course of evolution the majority of ancient domains acquired additional residues through the subsequent set of insertion events, although in a fraction of domains the equilibrium of indels tended towards deletions. a plausible explanation for the prevalence of increasing spacers and domains is the selection for acquisition of novel functions and fine-tuning of existing ones. surprisingly, as we show, the rates of net insertion and deletion size change were not significantly different between each other with the average rate of  <dig> – <dig>  residues per spacer per unit of evolutionary distance. similar observations have been made about the similarity of size distributions of insertions and deletions in three mammalian genomes  <cit> .

for relatively "modern" proteins, however, the trend of domain size evolution was rather different. eukaryotic proteins started losing residues in spacers, indicating that in eukaryotic evolution deletions played as important a role as insertions. eukaryotic novel proteins seem to evolve mainly through acquiring new domains and through domain shuffling which could result in longer proteins with slightly shorter individual domains. at the same time, in bacteria the deletion trend was even more pronounced  and, indeed, it was shown earlier that deletions in e. coli are  <dig> times more frequent than insertions  <cit> . such bias in bacteria towards deletions can be explained by strong selection pressure on genome size which is primarily composed of protein coding regions  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
there are different factors which would favor shorter or longer proteins or spacers in evolution  <cit> . efficiency of protein translation, transcription and the folding process would probably benefit from shorter proteins  <cit> . on the other hand, certain insertions may also be advantageous and subject to positive selection. for example, lineage-specific insertions/deletions in the elastin gene have functional importance in each lineage  <cit>  and housekeeping proteins from pathogenic organisms may contain insertions/deletions responsible for virulence properties  <cit> . our study showed that one third of all protein domains have a statistically significant linear correlation between the evolutionary distance and the domain/spacer sizes and moreover, there is a certain tendency for domain/spacer sizes to increase with evolutionary distance. we do not yet have an explanation for these observations, however, future in-depth studies may provide further insights into these phenomena.

