BACKGROUND
understanding the factors that shape the evolution of parasite life history and virulence is a major issue in evolutionary biology  <cit> , with important implications in applied and medical contexts  <cit> . according to standard theory, a parasite needs to exploit the host to increase its rate of transmission. if exploitation harms the host, the parasite must therefore trade current for future transmission and evolution should lead to the balance between virulence and the rate of transmission that maximizes the parasite's life-time reproductive success. where this balance lies may depend on genetic  <cit> , epidemiological  <cit>  or environmental factors  <cit> .

a general prediction concerning environmental factors is that increased extrinsic host mortality  selects for higher virulence . because shorter host life span reduces future opportunities of transmission, the constraint to keep the host alive is relaxed. rather, to compensate for the loss of future transmission, parasites should evolve to grow more rapidly within the host, start transmission earlier and, consequently, be more virulent. this prediction can be restated in terms of classical life-history theory: if future reproduction is compromised, we expect selection for earlier age at maturity and increased investment in early reproduction  <cit> . in this sense, the change in virulence reflects a shift in optimal latency time. a theoretical framework based on this life-history perspective has been developed for the evolution of lysis time in bacteriophages  <cit> . such a framework is relevant for medicine, as, from the parasite's point of view, shorter host life span is similar to shortening the infection by the application of a drug treatment. it is therefore important to understand how parasite life-history, such as latency time or fecundity, responds to selection imposed by such a treatment  <cit> .

few experimental studies have investigated the effects of shortened host life span  <cit> . in a serial passage experiment, cooper et al  <cit>  directly manipulated host life span and timing of transmission of an insect virus by killing infected hosts at two time points after infection. consistent with theory, early killing selected for higher virulence, possibly caused by more rapid within-host growth. in a similar type of experiment, infecting hamster cells in vitro with vesicular stomatitis virus, elena  <cit>  found that earlier transmission schedules selected for higher viral population growth rate and increased longevity of viral propagules in the medium, conferring a selective advantage during the early phase of an epidemic. a more complex picture was found in a serial transfer experiment on nematode parasite of rats  <cit> : with increasing numbers of nematode females inside the host, females from the early killing treatment became less fecund than those from the late killing treatment. although it was not measured in this study, lower fecundity may also lead to a reduction in virulence. finally, a clear-cut counterexample to theory was obtained in an experiment on the water flea, daphina magna, and a microsporidian gut parasite  <cit> . in the treatment where host death rate was increased, parasites evolved to produce fewer transmission stages and were less virulent than parasites from the control treatment, possibly because the high mortality treatment led to a concomitant increase in the frequency of multiple infections  <cit> . thus, these experiments show that parasites indeed respond to selection imposed by a shorter host life-span, but not always by increasing their virulence, as predicted by standard theory. in particular, it remains largely unclear how primary targets of selection, parasite latency time and age at maturity, evolved in these experiments .

we used experimental populations of the bacterial parasite holospora undulata and its protozoan host, paramecium caudatum, to investigate effects of early vs. late killing on different aspects of parasite life history. the life cycle of infection  <cit>  is similar to that of certain bacteria-phage systems in that it involves within-host replication with vertical transmission when its host divides and horizontal transmission. however, unlike, e.g., in lytic phages, horizontal transmission does not require host death. furthermore, this parasite produces two morphologically and functionally distinct forms: reproductive forms for within-host growth and infectious forms for horizontal transmission. reproductive forms cannot be transmitted horizontally and infectious forms cannot replicate. the conversion of reproductive into infectious forms seems to rely on a density-dependent switch  <cit> , similar to other parasites, such as legionella  <cit>  or trypanosomes  <cit> . these features give such parasites evolutionary options to respond to shortened host life span that do not necessarily lead to increased virulence. for example, earlier onset of horizontal transmission may be achieved by lowering the threshold density that triggers the production of infectious forms. this can be done without changing within-host growth rate; moreover, if conversion into infectious forms is irreversible, total parasite load will be lower and thus virulence will be lower .

we experimentally manipulated host life-span in a serial transfer experiment, by killing hosts at two time points. in the early-killing treatment, hosts were killed  <dig> days after infection and infectious forms of the parasite harvested to start a new infection cycle on previously unexposed hosts. initially, only a small fraction of the infected hosts produced infectious forms at this time point. in the late-killing treatment, hosts were killed after  <dig> days, when the majority of infected hosts had begun to produce infectious forms. after  <dig> infection cycles, we compared parasites from the two treatments for their infectivity, latency time , parasite load and virulence. we further examined correlations between these traits among parasite selection lines.

RESULTS
adaptation assays were performed on evolved parasite lines from the early- and late-killing treatments. ancestral parasite lines had been stored at -80°c, but their extremely low infection success after thawing precluded the reconstruction of the parasite founder population for the assay.

infectivity
in a dose-controlled inoculation experiment, mean infectivity of parasite selection lines ranged from 18–69%, except for one outlier from the late-killing treatment . on average, parasites from the late-killing treatment tended to be more infectious  than those from the early-killing treatment , although the difference was not statistically significant .

latency time
to follow the subsequent development of infection, we sampled infected assay populations at different time points over the course of two weeks. the first hosts producing infectious forms were observed on day  <dig> after inoculation . the proportion of such infectious hosts was significantly higher in populations infected with parasites from the early-killing treatment than in populations infected with parasites from the late-killing treatment . this effect was most pronounced on day  <dig>  and on day  <dig> , when there was a 20% difference in the proportion of infectious hosts . from logistic curve fits, we estimated the time until 50% of the hosts in a population were producing infectious forms. on average, parasites from the early-killing treatment had reached this point more than half a day earlier  than parasites from the late-killing treatment . thus, early parasites had a shorter latency time.

parasite within-host growth and production of transmission stages
first week after infection
parasite loads increased from  <dig>   reproductive forms on day  <dig> to  <dig>   on day  <dig>  given one division of the host, reproductive forms made 3– <dig> doublings during this period. one possibility for parasites from the early-killing treatment to shorten their latency time is through faster within-host replication . indeed, the mean reproductive parasite load on day  <dig> was positively correlated with the proportion of individuals producing infectious forms on day  <dig> ; thus, the accumulation of reproductive forms in the micronucleus was a good predictor of the onset of the production of infectious forms. this is consistent with the idea of a density-dependent switch from the reproductive to the infectious stage, and thus indicates that faster within-host replication reduces latency time . on day  <dig>  reproductive loads of parasites from the early-killing treatment were, on average, 5% larger than those of parasites from the late-killing treatment, but this difference was not significant . thus, there was no statistical support for faster within-host replication of parasites from the early-killing treatment.

correlations were based on the means per parasite selection line and calculated across selection lines within treatments  and for all selection lines pooled . within-treatment tests were complemented by analyses of covariance , with treatment as a cofactor, one parasite trait as covariate  and another  as response variable. for definition of traits, see methods. significant correlations marked in bold . note: ancova can reveal significant relationships, while correlation tests within treatments are non-significant.

 p <  <dig> ; * p <  <dig> ; ** p <  <dig> ; main effect of covariate in ancova:  p <  <dig> ; a p <  <dig> 

second week after infection
shorter latency can also be achieved by decreasing the within-host density threshold. in this case, our model predicts smaller reproductive loads once differentiation into infectious forms has set in . however, when comparing the fraction of hosts still in the exclusively reproductive state, we found no significant difference in reproductive loads between parasites from early- and late-killing treatments . if anything, early parasites produced more, rather than fewer, reproductive forms than did late parasites .

during the second week after infection, infectious forms accumulated in the infected micronculei . accumulation occurred more rapidly in the hosts infected with parasites from the early-killing treatment, resulting in an approx. 10% difference in parasite load between the two treatments on day  <dig> . overall, earlier onset of the production of infectious forms was associated with larger quantities of infectious forms at the end of the second week .

host density and virulence
assay populations 
overall, host population density in infected assay tubes was lower than that in the uninfected controls , with an average reduction of 20–25% during the last  <dig> assay dates . population density did not significantly differ between tubes infected with parasites from early- and late-killing treatments .

individual experiment 
in an additional experiment, we measured clonal growth and survival of infected individuals isolated from the assay populations. after  <dig> days of culture, we obtained a significant treatment effect on final host density . like in the assay populations, densities were higher in uninfected than infected lines. moreover, lines infected with parasites from the early-killing treatment had significantly lower densities than those infected with parasites from the early-killing treatment . this effect was mainly due to a strong difference in survival: the mortality of entire lines was  <dig>  ±  <dig> % for early parasites, but only  <dig>  ±  <dig> % for late parasites .

correlations
correlations between five characters were analyzed . when pooling the means of selection lines from the two treatments, we obtained statistically significant overall correlations between latency time and reproductive or infectious parasite loads, with relatively large effect sizes . selection lines with a higher reproductive load  had a shorter latency time  and larger infectious parasite loads. shorter latency was also associated with higher final loads. in contrast with the positive association between treatments means, reproductive load was negatively correlated with virulence: selection lines with a faster accumulation of reproductive loads during the first week after infection tended to be less virulent later on . these correlations also held across selection lines within treatments . the remaining overall correlations had small effect sizes , and in several cases, the within-treatment correlations differed in sign and magnitude .

discussion
life-history theory predicts that cutting off future reproduction selects for increased investment in early reproduction  <cit> . consistent with this prediction, parasites from the early-killing treatment  had a shorter latency and accumulated more transmission stages in the micronuclei of infected hosts than did parasites from the late-killing treatment . early parasites were also more virulent, in agreement with theoretical models predicting that higher virulence evolves under increased background mortality  <cit> .

what causes shorter latency time?
we had hypothesized that parasites, such as h. undulata, may reduce latency time by lowering the threshold within-host density that triggers the conversion of reproductive into infectious forms. however, we found no evidence for a lower conversion threshold. in contrast with the predictions under this hypothesis , parasites from the early-killing treatment did not have lower parasite loads, nor were they less virulent than late parasites.

alternatively, parasites could reduce their latency time by increasing the rate at which they replicate. if the conversion threshold does not change, the more rapid replication would imply earlier conversion . the negative relationship between the densities of reproductive forms after the first week and latency time indicates such a link in our experiment, but there was no clear-cut evidence for faster within-host replication of early parasites. first, the mean density of reproductive forms of early parasites was only marginally larger than that of late parasites after the first week, and this difference was not statistically significant. second, at later stages of infection, our measure of parasite load  does not distinguish between reproductive and infectious forms. therefore, the higher loads of early parasites during the second week may simply reflect their shorter latency time and the concomitant earlier accumulation of infectious forms, irrespective of the rates of replication of reproductive forms. a more conclusive analysis of the within-nucleus dynamics will require a finer temporal resolution of measurements of reproductive loads during the first week after infection and improved techniques allowing us to quantify reproductive forms at later stages of infection.

virulence: population versus individual assays
parasites from the early-killing treatment were more virulent in the assay of individual paramecium, whereas there was no significant treatment effect in the population assay. several explanations are possible for this discrepancy. first, host density is strongly reduced only when infectious forms massively accumulate in the infected host  <cit> . at the time of our final population measurements, although infection was beginning to reduce host population density, parasite loads were moderate. thus, it was perhaps too early to see a treatment effect, in particular as only a fraction of the populations was infected. indeed, the test of individuals was performed later on, when infections could even be recognized under the dissecting microscope. second, in our selection protocol, we killed the entire host population to prepare the inoculum for a new infection cycle. although this protocol selected for more rapid production of infectious forms, it may have relaxed the pressure for the parasite to kill its host to be transmitted horizontally. as selection for virulence is only relaxed at the time of harvest, an effect of treatment could still be observed at later stages of infection, in the assay of individuals, and thus represent a delayed cost of virulence  <cit> .

correlations between parasite life-history traits
life-history theory relies on evolutionary trade-offs between traits that influence fitness  <cit> . in host-parasite interactions, the most prominent trade-off is between transmissibility and virulence  <cit> . in our experiment, the relationships between the means of the early- and late-killing treatments suggested trade-offs between two components of transmissibility  and virulence. we may interpret our results as correlated sets of evolutionary responses to the different selection pressures imposed by the experimental treatments, leading to separate peaks in an adaptive landscape, possibly determined by a limited number of genes of large effect, as frequently observed in studies on experimental evolution  <cit> .

in part, however, this picture contrasts with the patterns of quasi-genetic correlations observed between the means of individual selection lines . thus, if the means of the selection lines rather than the means of the two treatments were analyzed, there was no evidence a for negative correlation between latency time and virulence among selection lines , reproductive load  was negatively correlated with virulence among selection lines within treatments  , and infectious load showed no clear relationship with virulence. these patterns are the opposite of the assumptions of basic theories  <cit>  and differ from results of other studies investigating the experimental evolution of these relationships  <cit> .

to some extent, the scatter around the treatment means may be non-genetic; we offer three pieces of support for this view. first, we measured parasite loads and virulence in different individuals and at different time points, possibly introducing experimental noise that blurred the underlying genetic correlations. second, our parasite is not an obligate killer, so that there may be a less straightforward  link between latency time and virulence than there is between lysis time and virulence in obligately killing bacteriophages  <cit> . third, as mentioned above, our experimental protocol may have uncoupled selection pressures on virulence and on latency, allowing the traits to evolve independently and genetically unlinked, at least within the boundaries of the local area around the adaptive peaks. however, the scatter may also represent residual genetic variation, possibly due to genes of minor effect. this variation may be transient. our results would thus show a snapshot of these lines on their evolutionary pathway towards the adaptive peaks. alternatively, our snapshot shows individual selection lines moving away from, rather than towards, the adaptive peak. this may reflect additional processes of selection, generating new relationships, such as the negative within-treatment correlations between reproductive load and virulence . in this case, parallel to the large-scale divergence of treatment means of parasite load and virulence towards different adaptive peaks, local-scale selection may be operating to compensate costs of virulence.

without more detailed genetic analysis of the evolved lines and the localization of the ancestral parasite population in the adaptive landscape, these interpretations remain speculative. nonetheless, our results illustrate that the sign of relationships within and among groups or treatments can be different and that interpretations based solely on treatment means can be incomplete or even misleading.

realism
the point of our study was to test an evolutionary idea, namely the role of background host mortality in parasite evolution, using a relatively controlled experimental setup. we acknowledge that scenarios of selection in natural populations may be more complex than those in this or related experiments. for example, depending on the source of mortality, selection may not exclusively act on the parasites that are culled from the population  <cit> , nor exclusively on those that remain in the population after culling  <cit> . moreover, the selective advantage of shorter-latency genotypes critically depends on epidemiological factors, namely the density of available hosts  <cit> . so far, however, experimental studies on extrinsic host mortality have not allowed entirely free action of epidemiological dynamics: in our case, we did not interfere with these dynamics prior to the mortality event, but after the event, parasites were provided with new, naïve hosts ad libitum ; ebert and mangin  <cit>  simply replaced infected hosts with uninfected hosts. relaxing these experimental constraints may substantially alter evolutionary outcomes. if the parasites from culled hosts remain in the population , the force of infection and levels of coinfection will change. furthermore, if dead hosts are not artificially replaced, mortality may be compensated by increased birth rates. in our system, for example, increased mortality would be coupled with increased levels of vertical transmission during population re-growth. thus, selection on the efficacy of vertical and horizontal transmission, as well as evolutionary responses in the host, may act simultaneously . in other words, under more realistic scenarios, it may be difficult to respect the all-else-being-equal rule, and manipulating one factor in question  may inevitably produce changes the epidemiology and population dynamics that are not necessarily anticipated by the standard models  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study demonstrated an adaptive shift in parasite age at maturity , consistent with basic life-history theory. as predicted by standard models of virulence evolution, experimentally shortened host life span lead to an evolutionary increase in virulence, confirming results from studies on viral pathogens  <cit> . faster within-host replication is the most likely explanation for the shorter latency time, although this needs to be confirmed by more detailed analysis. however, conclusions about the evolution of genetic correlations or trade-offs between parasite traits should be taken with caution. more generally, our results illustrate how variation in environmental conditions affecting host life-history can feed back on the evolution of parasite life-history. the remaining challenges are experiments testing more realistic scenarios, relaxing constraints on epidemiological and evolutionary processes.

