BACKGROUND
understanding the molecular basis of thermostability is essential for protein engineering applications where the thermal stability of a protein could potentially be enhanced. an important industrial application is to genetically engineer plants for increased biofuel production. for example, a thermostable endoglucanase from acidothermus cellulolyticus has been expressed in zea mays subsp. mays increasing the hydrolysis efficiency for conversion of plant cellulose to ethanol  <cit> . using this transgenic modification allows hydrolysis of cellulose fibers to begin a pre-processing step within the plant. transgenic corn feedstock expressing thermostable endoglucanases is an innovation that simplifies the hydrolysis of cellulose-derived ethanol, and hence lowers the cost of production. although the details of the exact mechanism through which cellulases act is far from complete, it is usually considered that endoglucanase generates cellulose chain ends, following an attack by cellobiohydrolase for subsequent hydrolysis  <cit> .

although thermophilic enzymes are industrially important, our understanding of the factors responsible for thermostability in these enzymes is still incomplete. many studies have addressed this question by comparing homologous protein structures from different families as an aggregate set  <cit>  or by focusing on differences for a single family  <cit> . these comparative studies typically analyze several factors such as the energy of unfolding, number of vdw contacts per residue, number of hydrogen bonds per residue, or number of residues involved in secondary structure at the protein level  <cit> . often, these studies have sought to identify any detectable relationship between amino acid composition and thermostability. one of the earlier comparative studies with  <dig> different families of proteins observed that arg and tyr are significantly higher in thermophiles, while cys and ser are significantly lower in thermophilic proteins  <cit> . in a study by sarai's group, the following factors were argued to impart thermostability: gibbs free energy change of hydration, long-range non-bonded energy, β-strand tendency and average long-range contacts  <cit> . however, rather than identifying the structural or sequence-based rules governing increased thermostability these comparisons have instead only suggested many physical or structural features that may impart thermostability, including preferences of certain amino acids  <cit> , increased hydrophobicity  <cit> , or even a single amino acid mutation  <cit> . by extending the comparison to many different pairs of proteins from two organisms  factors such as increase in compactness and sequence dependent strong interactions have been identified as two physical mechanisms underlying thermostability  <cit> .

previously reported studies  <cit>  involving comparison of thermophilic and mesophilic organism's proteome have led to the conclusion that positively charged residues play an important role in imparting thermophilicity. berezovsky and shakhnovich  <cit>  concluded that the strategy of organism's adaptation in a thermophilic environment depends on the "evolutionary history" and "sequence-based" mechanism.

in another approach to the proteome level study, the entire proteome of specific organisms were homology modelled from the pdb database and both sequential and structural comparisons were made between thermophiles and mesophiles. berezovsky et al  <cit>  used two independently different datasets . these authors considered a temperature cutoff of 50°c for classifying thermophiles or mesophiles and concluded that positively charged amino acids play a crucial role in thermophilic proteins by stabilizing the interface and overall protein structures. chakravarty and varadarajan  <cit>  used  <dig> mesophilic  and  <dig> thermophilic  organisms as the dataset and a temperature cutoff of 37°c to differentiate thermophiles from mesophiles. their results showed that val and glu are significantly higher in thermophiles and are also solvent exposed. at the same time, gln, asn, ser, thr, and his are significantly lower in thermophiles. comparison of intramolecular interactions showed that cation-π interactions are highly significant in imparting thermophilicity. similarly, glyakina et al  <cit>  showed that positively charged residues  on the solvent accessible surface are more significant in thermophiles than in mesophiles.

because the features that cause thermostability for one protein family are not significant for other families of thermophilic proteins, many studies have focused on thermostabilizing features within a single protein family  <cit> . in the case of the  <dig> fold in glycosyl hydrolases , for example, it was reported that a reduction in the number of gly residues in thermophilic proteins led to greater stability at higher temperatures  <cit> . however, this study had two shortcomings: the criteria to select a data set of  <dig> proteins was solely based on higher crystallographic resolution, but not on lower sequence identities, which can bias the results substantially. and among the  <dig> structures used, there were only three endoglucanase structures  in the thermophilic set whereas none from the same enzyme class in the mesophilic set. therefore, the study analyzed the lack of gly preference in thermophilic glycosyl hydrolase enzymes, rather than endoglucanases specifically. in contrast, here we focus specifically on endoglucanases  that share no more than 70% sequence identity.

from structural comparisons of proteins from a single fold, sandgren et al experimentally found that a single amino acid mutation of alanine to valine was responsible for thermal stability among the gh <dig> family of endoglucanases  <cit> . although cases where a single residue change imparts increased stability are quite rare, similar examples can be found in a cold shock protein where two residues confer thermostability  <cit> .

the overall inability to identify common trends for thermostability among many different protein families has caused some to speculate that no single rule defines protein thermostability and the factors determining thermostability for one fold or family of proteins may never be universally applicable  <cit> . more likely, these comparisons between homologous proteins are complicated by the underlying, unknown relationships between protein sequence, structure, and function. for example, several studies implicated intrinsic disorder as a factor in thermostability at low temperatures, where an increase in temperature induces partial, reversible folding of the protein  <cit> . with the recent hypothesis that psychrophilic  proteins are intrinsically disordered  <cit> , this complex relationship is far from resolved. another issue to consider is the evolution of folds. the emergence of folds within an enzyme family is likely due to convergent evolution of the different protein structures adapting to the same substrate  at different evolutionary periods. convergent evolution of distinct folds adapting to perform the same function and mechanism is well documented in pathogenic virulence factors  <cit> , lectins  <cit> , toxins  <cit> , receptors  <cit> , and kinases  <cit> . hence, the question of the fold effect on thermostability for a protein enzyme family addresses whether convergent evolution for that family adopted different or similar factors to impart thermostability.

here we investigate how the evolution-driven mechanisms imparting thermostability may vary for different folds. we look at the sequence- and structure-based factors that can contribute to thermostability for the family of endoglucanase proteins across and within three distinct folds, namely the  <dig> fold, β-jelly roll fold and the  <dig> fold. we specifically concentrate on  <dig> -β-d-glucanases or endoglucanases, which belong to the broader family of enzymes known as glycosyl hydrolases, extracted from bacterial and fungal sources. glycosyl hydrolases are enzymes that hydrolyze complex carbohydrate moieties and are comprised of cellulase, xylanase, pectinases, β-glucanase, exocellulase, mananase etc  <cit> . they are widely used in a wide range of industrial applications, such as juice and wine industries for clarification of beverages; feed industries for increasing the digestibility of the feed; paper and pulp industries for pulp bleaching process; textile industries for selective modification of cellulose fibers ; and in reproducing the stonewashing effect on jeans  <cit> .

in the last few years, cellulases have been used in the conversion of biomass to fermentable sugars for ethanol production. currently they are extracted from microbial sources leading to increased production costs  <cit> . considerable efforts are being undertaken towards improved yield and reduced costs of bioethanol production  <cit> . even though they share the same structural fold and catalytic mechanism, our knowledge is limited as to why certain endoglucanases are thermophilic. understanding this limitation is crucial for enhanced utilization of thermophilic endoglucanases for conversion of biomass to bioethanol. although both protein folds and protein functions play a role in contributing to thermostability, our hypothesis is that protein folds rather than protein families dominate in determining which specific factors are responsible for protein thermostability.

RESULTS
fold diversity in endoglucanases
endoglucanases  have three distinct structure folds: the  <dig> fold, β-jelly roll fold and the  <dig> fold .

 <dig> fold 
this fold has an alternating pattern of eight α and β subunits in a single domain, such that the eight parallel β strands on the inside are protected by eight α helices on the outside . often referred to as a tim barrel because it was first discovered in the triosephosphate isomerase  enzyme, this extremely common fold has been reported to display the highest diversity of enzymatic functions  <cit> . endoglucanases in glycosyl hydrolases families  <dig>  and  <dig>  share this fold.

β-jelly roll fold 
this fold consists of  <dig> β-strands in two twisted anti-parallel β-sheets, named a and b, that pack against each another . β-sheet a contains six anti-parallel β-strands forming the back, convex surface while β-sheet b contains nine anti-parallel β-strands arranged to form the front, concave binding surface  <cit> . additionally two α-helices pack against the back side of β-sheet b.

 <dig> fold 
the substrate binding cleft in this fold has a tunnel shape formed at the n-termini of six central, parallel α-helices . these six helices are surrounded by six external α-helices. unlike the  <dig> and β-jelly roll folds, the  <dig> fold utilizes the inverting mechanism for hydrolyzing glycosidic bonds   <cit> .

fold-dependent cellulose hydrolysis in endoglucanases
cellulose is a linear homo-polysaccharide made up of glucose units that are linked by β- <dig> -glycosidic bonds. there are two ends of the polymer: a reducing end, where the terminating anomeric carbon is not linked to another glucose unit, and a non-reducing end. upon synthesis, cellulose forms as microfibrils that are strengthened by hydrogen, hydrophobic and van der waals interactions, making it more resistant to hydrolysis than starch, which is made up of α- <dig> -glycosidic bonds. two main different catalytic mechanisms are employed by the glycosyl hydrolases for hydrolysis of glycosidic bonds: the retaining and the inverting mechanisms  <cit> .

retaining mechanism
in this mechanism , the stereometric configuration of the anomeric carbon is retained in the β-configuration after hydrolysis. a pair of glu amino acids, separated by  <dig>  Å, act as the catalytic residues: one as a nucleophile and the other an acid-base donor. the first step in this double displacement mechanism is glycosylation, where one of the catalytic residue's carboxylic group induces acid-catalyzed leaving group departure simultaneous to a nucleophilic attack on the anomeric carbon to form a glycosyl-enzyme intermediate by the second catalytic residue's carboxylic group. in the second step, a water molecule acts as a nucleophile and the first residue's carboxylic group acts as a base. once deprotonated, the water molecule is an activated nucleophile that then hydrolyzes the glycosyl-enzyme intermediate leading to a break in the polymer. the  <dig>  and β-jelly roll  folds use the retaining mechanism.

inverting mechanism
in this mechanism , the configuration of the anomeric carbon is inverted; i.e., hydrolysis of β-glycosidic bond leads to α-configuration of carbon and vice versa. the details of this enzymatic mechanism are still not completely known. glu-glu pairs usually act as acid-based donors, but recent studies also suggest that asp may act as the base donor in inverting cellulases  <cit> . alzari's work  <cit>  suggests specifically asp as the probable catalytic base in the family gh <dig>  therefore a pair of glu-glu or in some cases glu-asp amino acid pairs, separated by  <dig> Å to  <dig> Å, may act as acid-base donors and a water molecule acts as a nucleophile. utilizing the water molecule on the opposite side of the sugar ring to stabilize the transition, these residues catalyze the glycosylation or deglycosylation in one step. unlike the retaining mechanism, this mechanism does not involve the glycosyl-enzyme intermediate. the  <dig> fold  uses the inverting mechanism for cellulose hydrolysis.

amino acid composition and intramolecular interactions
it has long been suggested that in order to function at higher temperatures, thermophilic proteins contain amino acids that contribute to stronger interactions, which stabilize the structure as compared to mesophiles. such amino acids form salt-bridges  <cit> , disulfide bonds  <cit>  or cause greater core hydrophobicity  <cit> . in order to investigate whether this holds true for endoglucanases, we examined the statistical significance of different amino acid compositions and various intramolecular features between mesophilic and thermophilic proteins.

in order to identify the different roles that catalytic mechanism or overall structural fold might play in contributing to these differences, we performed the comparison between thermophilic and mesophilic proteins for each of the following datasets:  the dataset comprising all endoglucanases as a enzyme group;  two datasets representing each of the two catalytic mechanisms; and  three datasets representing the three distinct folds separately. in each of the datasets, the proteins were categorized as thermophilic or mesophilic. table  <dig> lists the thermophilic and mesophilic endoglucanases in the three distinct folds.

a subset of proteins with less than or equal to 70% sequence identity was created as described in the methods section. a protein is considered thermophilic if the source organism's optimum growth temperature is above 40°c. gh stands for glycosyl hydrolase.

as described in the methods section , to identify the significant amino acids  that make a contribution towards stabilizing the protein structure, intramolecular interactions were calculated. after normalizing with respect the protein length, t-test was performed to identify statistical significance .

in the larger dataset representing the entire endoglucanase enzyme group, we observed that amino acids arg and met are statistically significant among thermophiles, whereas gln and ser are statistically significant among mesophiles . it was previously reported that thermophilic glycosyl hydrolases are significantly missing gly residues compared to their mesophilic counterparts  <cit> , but we did not observe this negative preference in the case of endoglucanase thermophiles. this difference might be attributed to the fact that endoglucanases form only a small part of the glycosyl hydrolases data set used in the previous study.

we also compared significant intramolecular interactions in thermophiles and mesophiles. for the thermophiles, only ionic interactions were significant, whereas for mesophiles, no intramolecular interactions were significantly different from thermophiles.

we also analyzed the effect of catalytic mechanism on the amino acid distribution and intramolecular interactions. in the retaining mechanism  <dig> and β-jelly roll folds) amino acids leu, met, pro, and arg were significant among thermophiles, whereas ser and val were significant among mesophiles . for the same mechanism, the mc-sc hydrogen bond interactions were significant among thermophiles. in the inverting mechanism  <dig> fold) amino acids glu, val were significant among thermophiles, whereas only gln was significant among mesophiles . however, none of the intramolecular interactions were significant. strikingly, the significant amino acids and intramolecular interactions are different for the catalytic mechanisms than for endoglucanases as an enzyme group. another interesting observation is that the significant amino acids and intramolecular interactions for the retaining mechanism are different than those of the individual folds that make up that mechanism. this result strengthens the idea that the analyses of folds provide more informative and detailed understanding of thermostability than a larger set made of many folds.

it is noteworthy that overlaps of amino acid preferences exist if we compare different folds of the endoglucanases. for example, between  <dig> and β-jelly roll folds, arg and leu are significantly higher in thermophiles than in mesophiles . similarly, between β-jelly roll and  <dig> folds, glu is significantly higher in thermophiles than in mesophiles . similarities in amino acid preferences within an enzyme class are usually assumed in many protein analyses. these class-specific similarities are actually the basis of those analyses that involve protein properties averaged over many enzyme classes and families. we show here that although similarities exist among the proteins forming an enzyme class, strong fold-specific differences are also present that need to be considered to understand the origin of thermostability.

secondary structure and solvent exposure preference
after identifying a subset of amino acids as statistically significant, we investigated if these amino acids displayed a preference for secondary structure state or solvent exposure.

 <dig> fold
in the gh <dig> and gh <dig> families, arg, leu, and pro were statistically more significant in thermophiles than in mesophiles, while none of the amino acids were statistically significant among mesophiles . pro is significantly absent in the β-sheets of the mesophiles whereas prominently present in the β-sheets in thermophiles . similarly, pro in thermophiles is significant in the intermediate class of relative surface accessibility .

β-jelly roll fold
in gh <dig> and gh <dig> families, glu, arg, cys, leu, and his were statistically significant in thermophiles. the amino acids ser and thr were statistically significant in mesophiles . among the thermophiles glu was significant in helices but absent in mesophiles . also all the cys are significant in the buried class. his is extremely significant in the intermediate class in thermophiles than in mesophiles . leu is highly significant in the exposed class for thermophiles, as no leu is exposed in mesophiles.

 <dig> fold
similarly, in gh <dig>  gh <dig>  and gh <dig> families, glu and val were statistically significant in thermophiles and gln is statistically significant in mesophiles . glu and val were not located in secondary structure and surface accessibility classes in a statistically significant manner .

among the three folds of endoglucanases, it is interesting to note that the individual amino acid frequencies do not follow a similar pattern. each fold has specific groups of amino acids that are significant, which cannot be universally applied to other folds, highlighting the importance that sequence plays in determining structure. but also, and more importantly, this result indicates that amino acids responsible for thermophilicity may not rely on enzyme family but more specifically on the protein fold.

evolutionarily related thermophilic and mesophilic protein pairs in endoglucanases
multiple structural alignment of thermophilic and mesophilic proteins in each fold was performed to identify structurally and evolutionarily similar proteins. phylogenetic trees were constructed using the structure-based multiple sequence alignments of each fold . from these trees, the closest pair of thermophilic and mesophilic proteins for each fold was identified and selected for further analysis of possible thermostabilizing differences. table  <dig> lists these three pairs of thermophilic and mesophilic proteins: clostridium thermocellum  and clostridium acetobutylicum ; rhodotermus marinus  and streptomyces lividans ; and clostridium thermocellum  and clostridium cellulolyticum  from the  <dig>  β-jelly roll, and  <dig> folds respectively.

structural superimposition for each of the three pairs shows the rmsd is below  <dig> Å and z-score above  <dig> , indicating that the pairwise structural comparison is of a very good quality . according to ce algorithm, a z-score of above  <dig>  indicates a very high statistical significance of structural alignment, which can also be seen by the very low number of gaps in each of the alignment .

using pairwise structural alignments for each of these three sets, we were able to identify all the positions where the statistically significant amino acids differ and tally the nature of these substitutions. in particular, each substitution was counted as being polar, aromatic, hydrophobic, acidic, basic, proline, cysteine, or glycine. figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> plot the results for each significant amino acid from each fold. proline and glycine substitutions were separately counted because the presence of these two amino acids disrupts secondary structure by helix-breaking  and high flexibility . likewise, cys substitutions were counted separately because of their ability to form disulfide bonds.

for the  <dig> fold , arg and pro  are overwhelmingly replaced by polar amino acids whereas leu is primarily replaced with aromatic amino acids in the mesophilic counterpart. the replacement of arginines by non-basic polar amino acids in mesophiles supports the view that increased arginine content enhances thermostability. conversely, the absence of these arginine amino acids leads to a loss of ionic interactions in mesophiles, rendering them enzymatically inactive at higher temperatures.

in the β-jelly roll fold , the amino acids glu, arg, and his are substituted with polar, hydrophobic amino acids. substitution to pro is higher for arg indicating the potential for fewer salt-bridges in mesophiles. quantitatively, we observe only  <dig> to  <dig> salt bridges in the mesophiles versus  <dig> to  <dig> salt bridges in the thermophiles for this fold. it is unclear as to how the mesophilic protein benefits from substitution of positively charged amino acids with negatively charged amino acids. it is however possible that because some thermophiles lived in acidic environments during their evolutionary history , they might have a preference for positively charged amino acids that is carried over the generations that mesophiles do not have a need for. for the ser and thr positions  the thermophilic protein has hydrophobic, acidic, and basic amino acids substituted. interestingly, thr is substituted with gly in the thermophilic protein at some positions.

in the  <dig> fold , glu and val are replaced with polar amino acids and to a lesser extent with other amino acid groups. gln  is substituted to a large extent by hydrophobic, acidic and to a lesser extent with basic amino acid groups in thermophiles indicating that in the thermophilic protein these substitutions contribute towards more intramolecular interactions and extend stability to proteins at higher temperatures such as has been suggested previously as inducing better hydrophobic cores and packing  <cit> .

comparison to previous family-level and proteome-level studies
comparing our results to the previously reported thermophilic-mesophilic comparative studies, we find that observations made for analysis across diverse families of proteins do not necessarily correspond with our family-specific analysis.

for example, chakravarty and varadarajan had reported  <cit>  that val and glu were significantly higher in thermophiles, which matches only to  <dig> fold. also, we find that glu is significant only in β-jelly roll fold and not in the  <dig> fold. at the same time, we observe that gln, ser, and thr are significant in mesophiles which is in agreement to their results. however, when it comes to surface accessibility, we do not find any of the significant amino acids in thermophiles as exposed  in the three folds, whereas chakravarty and varadarajan found that the significant amino acids in thermophiles are significantly exposed to the surface.

kumar et al performed a detailed statistical analysis for non-redundant dataset of  <dig> families  <cit> . a pair of thermophilic and mesophilic with high structural similarity from each family was selected. among the amino acids, arg and tyr were found to be significantly higher in thermophiles. among the intramolecular interactions, salt bridges, sc-sc hydrogen bonds were significantly higher in thermophiles.

comparing our results to berezovsky et al  <cit>  we also find positively charged amino acids significantly higher in thermophiles, specifically arg and his. however, we did not find another positively charged amino acid, lys, significant in thermophiles. also, since our study involved single-domain proteins we did not calculate as to how the protein interface is stabilized in thermophilic proteins.

our results also agree with berezovsky and shakhnovich's  <cit>  observation about sequence dependent strong interactions for thermostability. however, we see that only the β-jelly roll fold has  significant interactions in thermophiles.

CONCLUSIONS
understanding the processes responsible for thermostability in endoglucanases is complicated by the large range of structural and sequence diversity these enzymes adopt. previous studies to derive trends explaining thermostability have focused on large number of protein families, but not necessarily on distinct folds of the same enzyme. in this study we have analyzed the known endoglucanase structures from the pdb and have shown that protein folds rather than protein families are more important when defining rules for thermophilicity. previous studies  <cit>  used the presence or absence of certain types of amino acids in secondary structures  as an indication of their role in thermostability. we observed a similar pattern for endoglucanases, as shown in figure  <dig>  but the types of amino acids contributing to thermostability for the three specific folds studied here differ from those obtained using a more diverse set of proteins. comparisons between evolutionarily close pairs of thermophilic and mesophilic endoglucanases in each of the fold, reinforces previous assertions that charged amino acids  are important for stabilizing the protein at higher temperatures. but one should note that the solvent accessibility of these amino acids also plays a role.

when it comes to thermostability, there is a caveat of applying general heuristic rules based on averaged properties to specific proteins: although thermostability in endoglucanases is usually conferred through altering amino acid composition, in some cases even a single-point mutation is sufficient to convert a mesophilic protein into a thermophilic protein  <cit> .

upon analyzing the amino acid compositions and intramolecular interactions for the three folds adopted by endoglucanases a paradoxical picture emerges. namely, although some amino acids are far more significant in thermophiles or mesophiles, they may not significantly alter the overall intramolecular interactions. for example, in the  <dig> fold, arg is statistically significant, but ionic interactions are not statistically significant within this fold. similarly in the β-jelly roll fold, cys is statistically significant, but the disulfide bridges are not significant. we see a similar pattern for the  <dig> fold where although glu is statistically significant, none of the intramolecular interactions are. these results suggest that subtle changes in interactions act as driving factors for thermostability.

for thermophilic proteins, distinct folds have distinct factors that contribute to thermostability, suggesting a fold-specific protein analysis requirement to understand thermostability. understanding the basis for thermostability aids in engineering enhanced protein activity, which can lead to more cost effective processes for many industrial applications. our study sheds light on endoglucanases, which could possibly be exploited to increase biofuels crop production by designing a more efficient endoglucanase enzyme. the enzymes currently used in converting biomass to bioethanol for biofuel production have been derived from microorganisms. unfortunately there are serious technological limitations on biofuel production due to low yield and high production costs for pre-processing enzymes like endoglucanases. thus the ability to insert a more efficiently designed thermophilic endoglucanase into maize would be very exciting  <cit> .

