BACKGROUND
understanding the genetic basis of how organisms adapt to extreme and novel environments remains as one of the major challenges facing evolutionary biologists. intraspecific differentiation of metallophytes is one of the most striking adaptive changes that result from natural outcrops of heavy metal-rich rock or mining activities  <cit> . metallophytes refer to plant species that have developed metabolic mechanisms to resist, tolerate, or even thrive on toxic metalliferous soils  <cit> . populations of metallophytes growing in metalliferous soils are often genetically distinct from those living in nearby non-metalliferous soils  <cit> . metalliferous habitats are always characterized by their patchy distribution and therefore have been considered as ecological islands, which provide ideal opportunities to investigate the population differentiation in plants under severe edaphic pressure  <cit> . in the course of evolution, plants have adapted to widely differing metal availabilities in soils and therefore represent an important source of natural variation of metal homeostasis networks  <cit> . in the past 50 years, genetic differentiation within and among populations of metallophytes has attracted uninterrupted interest. yet, the evolution of metallophytes remains heatedly debated  <cit> . previous studies on genetic divergence of metallophytes have mainly focused on the following two aspects:  the effects of heavy metal pollution on genetic diversity, and  the origin and evolutionary history of metallicolous populations. in general, substantial founder and bottle-neck effects have been presumed to occur during the colonization of metallophytes in a heavy metal contaminated area. therefore, a reduction in genetic diversity in metallicolous populations would be theoretically expected. this idea has been well-supported by several studies  <cit> . conflicting results, however, have also been obtained in some cases where recently established tolerant populations maintain a high level of genetic variation comparable to that in non-metallicolous populations  <cit> . on the other hand, schat et al.  <cit>  have suggested that geographically distant conspecific metallicolous populations could have evolved independently and therefore constitute a polyphyletic group. the hypothesis of multiple and independent origins has been validated in metallicolous populations of several metallophytes such as noccaea caerulescens  , silene paradoxa arabidopsis halleri  and a. lyrata  <cit> . beyond all doubt, both mosaic environments and edaphic conditions should contribute to the multiple origins of metallicolous populations. however, it is still not clear whether or not edaphic conditions played a more important role than geographical factors in this event. the conflicting results associated with such an issue might be due to:  differences in biological traits, ecological properties, population size, and history of individual populations of different species; and/or  various molecular markers  employed in different studies. moreover, it should also be noted that until now, most previous studies have focused on a single plant species only, which inevitably influences the comparability of results from different studies. therefore, choosing two or more sympatric metallophytes with similar geographic distributions and population history, and then comparing their characteristics of genetic divergence might shed light on the evolutionary processes of plants under heavy metal pressure.

the copper  belts distributing along the middle and lower reaches of the yangtze river are one of the largest areas of cu mining in china. in this area, there are considerable spoil heaps and mineral deposits, some of which are currently in practice. a national ruin of an ancient cu mine built over 1000 years ago  is located in this area, suggesting a long history of mining activities. extensive cu mining activities in this area have resulted in many waste heaps with elevated concentrations of cu in soils, and the plant species growing in this area have experienced long-term selection under cu toxicity derived from mining activities dating back to at least 1000 years. although these waste heaps are often far away from each other, they harbor similar assemblages of metallophytes, which are distinctly different from the surrounding communities in non-metalliferous soils  <cit> . both common sorrel rumex acetosa  l.  and asiatic dayflower commelina communis  l.  have consistently been documented as dominant plants on most of these cupriferous habitats and are also present in surrounding non-metalliferous sites  <cit> . besides, r. acetosa  is well-known metallophyte thriving on metalliferous soils of nw & sw europe. many edaphic ecotypes of r. acetosa  from a wide range of soil types have been reported, some of which exhibit high potential for phytoremediation of contaminated soils  <cit> .

rumex acetosa  is a perennial herb with an erect stem, about  <dig> to 120 cm high. its flowering season ranges from march to may and the fruiting season ranges from april to june. unisexual and dioecious flowers are arranged in acrogenous panicle inflorescences. plants are capable of producing large numbers of small achenes encircled with an aliform membrane and therefore can be easily dispersed by wind. the species is commonly found along roadsides, in forests, and in habitats along rice fields in most regions of china  <cit> . in contrast, c . communis  is an annual multi-branched herb with erect stems in the upper part and creeping stems in the lower part. it is able to grow clonally by elongation of the creeping stem, which bears a number of erect ascending shoots. it flowers from may to september and fructifies from june to november. bisexual flowers are arranged in a cyme. commelina communis  often occupies habitats similar to those of r. acetosa  and is mainly distributed in southeastern china  <cit> .

despite their similarities, the two pseudo-metallophtes r. acetosa  and c. communis  have different life histories  and reproductive systems , which result in them being in different functional groups. therefore, their metallicolous and non-metallicolous populations provide an ideal opportunity to study genetic divergence under selective pressure derived from cu toxicity between taxa of two distinct functional groups.

previous studies have shown that many factors such as life history and reproductive system may significantly influence population genetic divergence through their effects on genetic drift and gene flow  <cit> . we therefore hypothesized that the two sympatric pseudo-metallophytes r. acetosa  and c. communis  would differ greatly in population genetic divergence. to test our hypothesis,  <dig> r. acetosa  populations and  <dig> c. communis  populations collected from different sites along the yangtze river of eastern china were used to investigate comparative genetic differentiation patterns. aflp  and issr  were employed to assess genetic diversity and population structures. six r. acetosa  and 10 c. communis  populations were selected to determine cu tolerance of the metallicolous and non-metallicolous populations. in addition, two cpdna regions  were sequenced and analyzed to infer uniparental patterns of colonization.

RESULTS
cu concentrations in soils
sampling locations for  <dig> r. acetosa  and 13 c. communis  populations were investigated at areas along the yangtze river . the soil cu concentrations recorded at these different sampling sites are shown in table  <dig>  in general, contaminated sites contained high concentrations of total and dtpa-extractable cu, about  <dig> times greater than those in uncontaminated sites. large differences in cu concentrations were detected between cupriferous sites; the highest total and extractable cu concentrations were  <dig> and 2194 mg kg− <dig> at tls, whilst the lowest values were  <dig> and 359 mg kg− <dig> at fhs, respectively.

*: m, metallicolous; nm, non-metallicolous; ni est., approximative population size; n.a., data not available, the species is not present in the indicated site.

**: data with different letters in the same column indicate a significant difference .

cu tolerance
tolerance indices based upon growth quotients of relative root length under the four cu treatments for the different populations are shown in figure  <dig>  overall, cu tolerance indices for the  <dig> r. acetosa  populations and 10 c. communis  populations under four cu treatments were significantly different between the metallicolous  and non-metallicolous  populations; tolerance indices of m populations were significantly higher than those of nm populations for both species.  interestingly, tolerance indices of nm populations of both species were also similar. commelina communis  m populations exhibited higher tolerances than those of r. acetosa  in the 160 μm and 320 μm cu treatments. shoot elongation was, with few exceptions, considerably depressed in all nm populations investigated when seedlings were treated with 40 μm cu or above. moreover, the treatment with 320 μm cu which killed all nm plants revealed a higher tolerance in c. communis  m populations than r. acetosa  m populations .

genetic diversity of rumex acetosa  and commelina communis  populations
the  <dig> primer combinations used in the aflp analysis yielded  <dig> and  <dig> bands in total and the percentage of polymorphic loci was  <dig> % and  <dig> % for r. acetosa  and c. communis,  respectively. issr markers scored were  <dig> and  <dig> in total and the percentage of polymorphic loci was  <dig> % and 74% for r. acetosa  and c. communis,  respectively. nei’s gene diversity and shannon indices of each population based on aflp and issr data are given in tables  <dig> and  <dig> 

*: m, metallicolous populations; n, non-metallicolous populations; n.a., data not available. data followed by different letters in the same column indicate a significant difference .

*: m, metallicolous; n, non-metallicolous; n.a., data not available.

data followed by different letters in the same column indicate a significant difference .

for r. acetosa  no significant difference in nei’s gene diversity between m populations and nm populations was detected. further, there was no significant correlation between nei’s gene diversity and the dtpa-extractable cu concentrations in associated soils within each population . in contrast, for c. communis  significant  differences in genetic diversity were detected between the m and nm populations, the latter having higher values than the former. furthermore, significantly negative correlations between genetic diversity and dtpa-extractable cu concentrations were detected .

genetic structure analysis
the genetic structure of r. acetosa  and c. communis  populations was investigated by an analysis of molecular variance . relatively high genetic differentiation among populations of both c. communis ,  and r. acetosa   was detected from aflp data. conversely, for r. acetosa  issrs were not able to detect significant differentiation among populations , whilst a low differentiation was detected for c. communis  . mantel’s tests carried out to investigate the existence of any correlations between geographical and genetic distances  did not detect significant correlations for aflp data in either plant species. in contrast, differentiation at issr loci did show significant correlation with geographical distance especially for r. acetosa  .

genetic relationships among populations were then investigated by computing nj dendrograms from slatkin’s linearized pairwise f st  . results are reported in figures  <dig> and  <dig> for c. communis  and r. acetosa,  respectively. in general, only dendrograms based on aflp were supported by significant p-values for pairwise f st  for all pairwise comparisons. for c. communis  , in both aflp and issr data, m populations were more differentiated than nm populations, these latter being grouped in a single cluster . conversely, the rumex acetosa  populations were clustered into several groups which approximately reflected their geographic locations, supporting the results of the mantel’s test. for example, the four populations sampled from jiangsu province  were clustered in one main branch in both aflp and issr analyses .

hierarchical partition was then computed at three levels . groupings were related to both edaphic and geographic differences . edaphic differentiation was strongly supported for c. communis  , whereas lower levels were found for r. acetosa  . however, for c. communis,  a geographical structuring of populations was also strongly supported by the issr data .

chloroplast markers analysis
two cpdna non-coding regions  of each population investigated were sequenced . for c. communis , the aligned concatemers formed linearly combining the sequences of psbj-peta  and 3′rps16-5′trnk  regions resulted 1492 bp long. the number of variable sites was  <dig>   <dig> of which were parsimony-informative. for r. acetosa,  the alignment was 1688 bp long, with  <dig> variable sites, only  <dig> of which were parsimony-informative. however, due to the low sequence variability, haplotype network was not informative on r. acetosa , while for c. communis  populations some clustering of haplotypes was recognized . in particular for c. communis , four out of five metallicolous populations  were included in one single group, suggesting a common chloroplastic  origin.

discussion
divergence of metallophytes under heavy metal selection has been characterized by other researchers, with a focus on only a few species, notably n. caerulescens  <cit> , a. halleri  <cit> , cistus ladanifer  <cit>  and species in the genus silene  <cit> . to our knowledge, the present study is the first report on a comparison of the genetic divergence of two sympatric metallophytes.

heavy metal tolerance in higher plants is a well-documented example of micro-evolution and is a basic necessity for survival in metal-contaminated soils  <cit> . based on the assumption that genotypes with a sufficiently high level of metal tolerance are rare in non-metallicolous populations, the founder effect was hypothesized to be a result of strong selection occurred during the colonization of contaminated areas by metallophytes  <cit> . a comparison of heavy metal tolerance among populations from metalliferous and non-metalliferous sites would provide an estimation of the levels of stress occurred during the colonization of heavy metal-rich areas. differences in heavy metal tolerance among populations of metallophytes have been reported widely . in general, populations or ecotypes growing in contaminated soils exhibit higher levels of heavy metal tolerance than those from uncontaminated sites.

tolerance index is a measure that can be used to assess the relative degree of tolerance of various plant varieties  <cit> . in this sense, it is important to test the cu tolerance of non-tolerant species  as a control. on the other hand, in most of the relevant literature  <cit> , heavy metal tolerances of non-metallicolous species  have been compared to those of metallicolous ones. we therefore believe that this kind of comparison is suitable for a relative assessment within our two species. yet, it should be noted that we cannot establish the presence of any baseline  tolerance above that of other local species.

in the present study, significant differences in cu tolerance at the population level were detected. further, differences in cu tolerance between the two species under investigation were also detected. under the similar level of cu stress, c. communis  exhibited higher cu tolerance than r. acetosa , especially when cu concentration reached the maximum of 320 μmol l− <dig>  cu tolerances of the 4 c. communis  populations from cupriferous sites were significantly higher than those of the  <dig> r. acetosa  populations from the same sites . interestingly, there was no significant difference in cu tolerance of non-metallicolous populations between the two species, suggesting a possible similar level of selective pressure on the ancestral non-tolerant colonizers of metalliferous sites. although the concentrations of cu in the contaminated sites we sampled were extremely high when compared with those of the non-metalliferous sites, distinct differences in cu concentration were also observed among contaminated sites. therefore, heterogeneity in the metalliferous sites could partly explain the difference in cu tolerance among metallicolous populations. however, considering that the cu concentrations in contaminated sites were generally  <dig> times greater than those in uncontaminated sites, the significant differences in cu tolerance should be mostly attributed to the intense and long-term selection due to heavy metal stresses and to the differences in biological traits of the two metallophytes. because they were sympatric in most sampling sites, and so subjected to the similar edaphic conditions. on the other hand, it is possible that the heterogeneous nature of the metalliferous sites could also partly explain the difference of cu tolerance between the two species. because there were some significant differences in cu concentration among the metalliferous sites . however, it should also be noted that we cannot exclude the potential contribution of maternal environmental effects on cu tolerance of different populations of the two species, since field collected seeds were used and in the present study measurements were taken on young seedlings.

in order to determine more thoroughly whether the different phenotypes observed are linked to population histories and are reflected in the genetic diversity of populations, three different molecular techniques  were employed to analyze the genetic structures and genetic relationships among different populations of the two metallophytes. firstly, we found that levels of genetic diversity in the two co-occurring species were distinctly different. for r. acetosa , no significant difference in genetic diversity between metallicolous and non-metallicolous populations was found, whereas significantly lower levels of genetic diversity were detected in metallicolous populations than in non-metallicolous populations of c. communis . similarly, mengoni et al.  <cit>  reported a significant decrease in genetic diversity of populations in s. paradoxa  collected from cu deposits. however, contrasting results were obtained in studies on other species. for example, the metallicolous and non-metallicolous populations of a. halleri  <cit> , n. caerulescens  <cit>  and onosma echioides  <cit>  maintained similar levels of genetic diversity. in a more recent study on n. caerulescens , genetic differentiation linked to heavy metal concentrations in soil was detected, and the gene flow observed at some nuclear loci was shown to be significantly reduced between plants encountering different levels of heavy metal contamination in the soil, suggesting that natural selection limits gene flow between metalliferous and non- metalliferous locations  <cit> . in the present study, the reduction of genetic diversity in metallicolous populations of c. communis  might be due to a strong selective pressure during the colonization of cu-contaminated sites by this species, coupled with a limited gene flow from surrounding non-metallicolous populations . in contrast, the similar levels of genetic diversity in metallicolous and non-metallicolous populations of r. acetosa  might be due to substantial gene flow between populations, as indicated by the low values of pairwise f st .  high levels of gene flow between metallicolous and non-metallicolous populations of metallophytes have previously been reported in some other comparable studies  <cit> . in addition, non-metallicolous populations of r. acetosa  showed higher levels of background tolerance to cu  compared to those of c. communis.  considering that metallicolous populations are presumed to evolve from non-metallicolous populations, this evidence may imply that selection for cu tolerance in c. communis  has been greater than in r. acetosa , although present-day levels of cu tolerance in metallicolous populations are lower in r. acetosa .

concerning that the habitats of metallicolous populations of metallophytes are often fragmented and disjunct, it is unlikely that dispersal from a single tolerant ancestral population could have produced the wide ranges of geographic distribution today. hence, the hypothesis of polyphyletic origin is proposed and has been subsequently corroborated by considerable data  <cit> . in the case of r. acetosa , metallicolous populations branched in separate positions in the nj dendrograms obtained by aflp and issr data, supporting the hypothesis of independent origins from nearby normal populations. furthermore, we also found that there was a direct correlation between genetic differentiation and geographical distances between pairs of r. acetosa  populations . for c. communis , we also speculate that the metallicolous populations evolved independently, since the site-to-site distances of the metallicolous populations were too far to be overcome by natural dispersal. however, metallicolous and non-metallicolous populations of c. communis  had a distinct branching pattern in the nj dendrograms with aflp and issr data. the non-metallicolous populations were included in one group, whilst the metallicolous populations dispersed into single long branches. additionally, components of variance of differentiation between populations of c. communis  were also higher than those of r. acetosa . these results suggested a low gene flow in c. communis  not only between metallicolous and non-metallicolous populations, but also among metallicolous populations, supporting higher levels  of genetic differentiation.

the contrasting pattern of genetic differentiation between c. communis  and r. acetosa  was also confirmed by the analysis of chloroplast markers. though this analysis was performed on only one individual per population, results for c. communis  were similar with those obtained with aflp, suggesting the presence of one main cluster of metallicolous populations. on this basis, it could be reasonable to hypothesize that metallicolous populations of c. communis  may derive from seeds of one single ancestral population. interestingly, we observed a very low variability of chloroplast sequences of r. acetosa , which seemed to be consistent with the idea of a recent spread and low differentiation between metallicolous and non-metallicolous populations.

the contrasting results of the two metallophytes also implied that populations of c. communis  were more remarkably influenced by heavy metal stress than those of r. acetosa , although the genetic structures of the two species were influenced by geographic isolation and heavy metal contamination.

although ecogeographic isolation has long been viewed as the most important reproductive barrier in plants  <cit> , barriers to gene flow were also demonstrated between non-metallicolous and closely adjacent metallicolous populations of some species such as the grass anthoxanthum odoratum  <cit> . additionally, it has been reported that heavy metal contamination could have a greater impact on the population structure of the hyperaccumulator sedum alfredii  than geographic distance  <cit> . based on our results, we can therefore speculate that both heavy metals and geographic distance play a significant role in determining the population structure of r. acetosa . in contrast, cu contamination seemed to play a more important role in determining the population structure of c. communis  than geographic distance.

in previous studies, it has been shown that the genetic divergence and evolutionary processes of plants could be affected by various factors, such as edaphic conditions, stress intensity and duration, geographic isolation, bottleneck and founder effects, life history, reproductive system, and so on  <cit> . considering that r. acetosa  and c. communis  populations in the present study almost share the same edaphic conditions  and geographic distribution pattern, the different characteristics of genetic divergence might result largely from their different life history and reproductive system. on the one hand, as a perennial, unisexual, and dioecious species, r. acetosa  may have more opportunities to experience gene exchange among individuals and gene flow between populations than the bisexual annual plant c. communis . in addition, the winged seeds of r. acetosa  are presumed to have higher dispersal capacity than those of c. communis , which might enhance the success of colonization by r. acetosa  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
contrasting patterns of genetic divergence in two pseudo-metallophytes that experience similar selective pressures provides insight into evolutionary processes under heavy metal stress. our findings indicate that genetic divergence of metallophytes is the result of the interactions between biological properties of a species  and geographical patterns of colonization. yet, no simplistic conclusions  can be drawn concerning the microevolutionary dynamics of all metallophytes.

