BACKGROUND
the structure of plant-pollinator networks and other ecosystems has been described through features reflecting their topology and complex organization  <cit> . also, aspects of the network dynamics have been studied, mainly from the perspective of understanding the principles that rule the number and choice of connections made by species in the network. one prominent example is the model of preferential attachment  <cit> , where new species entering the network tend to link to species already well-connected. such models have been fitted to empirical pollination networks, see e.g.  <cit> .

one key aspect of plant-pollinator networks remains little explored, namely the temporal dynamics. the temporal dynamics describes how a network is formed and modified over time, its sustainability and robustness and the mutual activities of plants and pollinators over time. plant-pollinator networks are susceptible to environmental changes such as global warming  <cit> ; hence insight into the temporal dynamics might provide valuable information about the impact of environmental changes. this is, in particular, of relevance in the arctic where global warming is expected to have the most severe effects  <cit> . in the present study, we define temporal dynamics as the development of the number of species and links in the network for a given period of time, typically a season. here we use season in the sense of the network's activity period, i.e. the time when both flowering plants and pollinators are present. a season begins with the observation of a first link between an animal and a plant. from this starting point the network typically experiences a phase of growth where many species enter the network and with an increase in the number of connections until a slackening of the expansion appears. a collapse of the network follows with a reduction in the numbers of the links and species previously involved in the structure. in regions where climate conditions are favourable, the network can exist all year round  <cit>  with fluctuations in its size throughout the year and without a complete cessation of the activity. in regions with stringent climate conditions the length of the season can be reduced to a few weeks or months because of the presence of snow and low temperatures.

a few studies explore the temporal dynamics of pollination networks  <cit> . common to most of these studies is that they highlight the strong temporal dynamics of several variables, e.g. species number, species linkage level , total number of links in the network, network connectance and nestedness. however, these studies are based on bi-weekly, monthly or annual collection of data and comparisons, and do not propose models to describe and explain the observations, let alone the dynamics, but mainly base analysis on descriptive statistics.

only  <cit>  discusses the day-to-day dynamics and compares the fit of a  power-law and an exponential distribution to the plant and pollinator linkage levels. they use arctic plant-pollinator data collected over two consecutive seasons near zackenberg meteorological station  in greenland. however, neither distribution is able to explain the daily development  of links and species in the network. here we develop a mathematical model to account for the day-to-day dynamics of the network data in  <cit> . the completeness of the data enables us to follow and describe the network development using simple mathematical tools and to provide a model that reproduces aspects of the dynamics. by comparing the two seasons we assess the stability of the model parameters over the years, the influence of weather on the development of the network and draw biological consequences of the model.

RESULTS
the start and end of the season
in the arctic the start of the flowering season correlates strongly with snow melt and a corresponding rapid large change in net and outgoing radiation  <cit> . this is also the case for our data sets, see figure  <dig>  in contrast, the end of the season is not as strongly correlated with changes in net and outgoing radiation, or other climatic parameters  <cit> . however, the wind direction does show some correlation with both the start and the end of the season, see figure  <dig>  further, in our case, we note that weather parameters generally differ between years .

shown are mean values with standard deviations in parenthesis of air temperature , net radiation  and wind velocity  for the three summer months in  <dig> and  <dig> 

the collapse of the network
in contrast, we found that the disappearance of pollinators from the network is highly correlated with the disappearance of plants from the network . since we only know the time span a plant is visited and not for how long it is flowering, we cannot say whether links disappear a) because plants stop flowering or b) because insects disappear for other reasons. some of the plants that stay in the network longest also enter the network very early in the season . based on the available data, it is therefore difficult to distinguish between a and b. however, we note that the collapse of the network follows immediately after the temperature has peaked: in  <dig>  the temperature rises above 15°c for several days and in  <dig>  the temperature rises above 20°c in a single day . it is plausible that flowering of plants adapted to cold climate could be affected by high temperatures  <cit> .

when interpreting the results it should be kept in mind that weather conditions to some extent could be local and heterogeneous; e.g. variations in the orientation of the ground level towards the sun could impose restrictions on the hours of sun, wind and the snow coverage of plants compared to zms. heterogeneous snow distribution has previsouly been reported to influence e.g. alpine ecosystems  <cit> .

simple distributions describe the temporal development
our main focus is to describe the temporal dynamics of the network with simple probability distributions and compare the results between the two years. the composition of the plant community is the same for the two years; in total  <dig> flowering plants comprising the same species each year; see  <cit>  and additional file  <dig>  therefore we consider the plants as fixed and study the network from the view of the pollinators. in particular, we are interested in the following features:

• how many pollinators enter the network daily?

• how many pollinators leave the network daily?

• how many links do pollinators get when they first enter the network?

• how many links do pollinators gain daily while they are in the network?

• how many links do pollinators loose daily while they are in the network?

we use the answers to the above questions as a scaffold to develop a model of network assembly and disassembly. the daily arrival of pollinators can be described by a poisson distribution . the empirical graph of pollinators leaving the network shows a drastic change a few days before the end of both seasons . to accommodate this we fitted a binomial distribution to the number of leaving pollinators assuming a gradual sigmoid change in the parameter . since the climatic parameters did not explain species disappearance we did not use these parameters for modelling.

shown are the fitted parameters for the two years; estimated for each year separately and jointly  with standard deviations in parenthesis. the p-values in the 3rd, 4th and 5th columns are goodness-of-fit probabilities based on the chi-square test; the p-values in the 6th column are test probabilities for the lrt . even when the lrt is not accepted the parameters are of similar magnitude in the two years. the distributions are explained in methods, analysis and modelling. standard deviations marked with * could not be estimated reliably.

when pollinators first enter the network, many have few links while fewer have many links; 57%  of the pollinators enter the network with one or two links and 12%  have six or more links in  <dig> . we used a modified geometric distribution that allows the ratio of insects with one link to insects with two or more links to be higher compared to a pure geometric distribution .

once in the network, pollinators can keep the same number of links - which is the most frequent situation; 65%  of the cases in  <dig>  - get one or more additional links or loose one or more links each day. for the addition of links we fit a geometric distribution and for the loss of links a binomial distribution. the loss of links is more pronounced at the end of the season and we allowed a sigmoid form of the parameter again. all the computed parameters, and results of the tests for the chosen distributions are gathered in table  <dig>  figure  <dig>  and additional file  <dig> .

for the arrival of new pollinators and new links the fit is not improved significantly if a seasonal change in the parameters are allowed  and there is not a visual indication of seasonal change. for the death of insects and removal of links the change in parameter happens around the same time  and a model assuming t = t fits the data . we also note that the change in parameter values over the season is very sharp and appears to happen within a day or two .

stability in the parameters over the two years
an important observation is that the estimated model parameters are similar for the two years, which indicates stability in the network dynamics. this hypothesis was validated for the arrival and leave of pollinators and for the number of links when they enter the network . however the evolution of the number of links  cannot be described by joined parameters. despite of this, the parameters are still of the same order of magnitude. 

while the plant community is the same for the two years, one fifth of the pollinator species and two thirds of all links are only observed in one of the two years; see  <cit>  and additional file  <dig>  it is therefore interesting to see that the fitted distributions for the evolution of the number of pollinators and links through the season are identical for the two years with similar parameters. for other networks it has already been reported that overall network properties such as connectance or nestedness are conserved over the years despite the turnover in pollinator species and links  <cit> . our findings reinforce this observation at the more detailed level, the level of the dynamical assembly and disassembly.

simulations
based on the above results we implemented a computer program reproducing the arrival/leaving of pollinators and the evolution of their number of links with plants during their stay in the network . addition of links is assumed to be independent of the pollinator's present linkage level. also each link is removed with a probability independent of the linkage level. when pollinators are removed from the network they are chosen with probability inversely proportional to their linkage level. this provides a better fit to the observed networks than removing pollinators randomly and might reflect sampling properties; i.e. a pollinator with many links might have higher chance of being observed over consequetive days than a pollinator with few links.

we simulated  <dig> networks using the estimated parameters and compared the results to the observed data. table  <dig> shows the simulated results and the comparisons; the observed data fits nicely to the model in that the observed data are within the 95%-confidence limits  obtained by simulation .

for each year and summary statistic, the mean and standard deviation  are shown, based on  <dig> simulations. for each summary statistic, the second row shows the observed value. we used the parameters of the joined model. connectance is defined as the number of observed links divided by the total number of potential links between all species of plants and animals. bottom three rows: for each simulation it is tested whether the simulated distribution is similar to the observed distribution using kolmogorov-smirnov's test. shown is the number of times  the test gives a p-value larger than  <dig> .

consequences of the model
the model assumes a poisson number of arriving insects per day. this is compatible with a scenario where there are n available species and each insect has the same probability to visit and be observed at the study site; λ = npi/gi where pi is the probability in year i and gi the number of good days . under this scenario we expect n1n2/n = n <dig> insects to be observed both years. here ni is the number of insects in year i and n <dig> the number of insects observed in both years. we find that n = n1n2/n <dig> = 61·64/ <dig> =  <dig>  pollinators , hence p <dig> = n1/n =  <dig> % of the available pollinator species are observed in  <dig>  while p <dig> =  <dig> % are observed in  <dig>  solving λ = npi/gi, gives p <dig> =  <dig> % and p <dig> =  <dig> % which are close to  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, but derived through the poisson model. the per day probability is independent of the year , pi/gi = λ/n =  <dig> .

if we assume that the parameters are fixed at the values they attain in the beginning of the season and that the season in principle goes on for ever, the network will eventually reach an equilibrium where the average pollinator phenophase approaches a constant level. using  <dig> parameters, the equilibrium phenophase is approximately  <dig>  days, because a pollinator stays a geometric  number of days. however the equilibrium level is not reached for season lengths observed in the arctic . also the average number of pollinators in the network eventually reaches a constant level which is balanced by the arrival of new insects and the departure of insects already in the network. our simulation shows that the real network is far from equilibrium and in the process of being built up when the collapse of the network appears .

shown are mean values with standard deviations in parenthesis based on  <dig> simulated networks. we used  <dig> joined parameters . the length of the season is the number of good days only and the first row shows the observed data for the  <dig> network. the 6th column shows the maximum number of insects present in a single day.

the model stipulates randomness in the development of the network. the linkage level of a pollinator is described by a sum of geometric  and binomial  variables. as shown in  <cit>  the linkage level is far from a power-law and closer to an exponential  distribution. also a truncated power-law distribution  is fitted to the data in  <cit> , but the cut-off is here difficult to reconcile with biological interpretation .

CONCLUSIONS
general remarks
our study highlights various interesting points. based on our model, we have demonstrated that the plant-pollinator network shows strong dynamic stability over the two years; i.e. the dynamic features of the network are highly conserved from one year to the next. the length of the season, temperature and other weather parameters differ  and also the visiting pollinators are not the same. despite this we find that the development of the network could be described by very similar parameters in  <dig> and  <dig>  we described the number of links attached to a new insect by a modified geometric distribution. this distribution does not have the characteristic power-law shape that has been reported for other types of network and is in concordance with a previous analysis of the same data  <cit> . in addition, our model has distinctive random features; e.g. the number of new species per day is independent of the number already present and the number of insects being removed from the network daily is binomial such that each insect has the same probability of being removed.

studies about the impact of habitat loss on pollination networks highlight the existence of a habitat destruction threshold at which both plants and pollinators disappear suddenly, leading to the collapse of the network  <cit> . the transition from maintenance to destruction of the network is very sharp leading to the conclusion that the network's fate might change by a slight modification of the parameter controlling the transition - almost like a phase transition. we observe a similar collapse of the network with parameters changing many folds within a few days. in our case, it could be that a sudden short rise in temperature causes plants to stop flowering  <cit> . alternatively, it could be that night frost towards the end of the season creates north-facing snow patches that persist during day time, thereby reducing the resources available for the insects and making it more difficult for them to recover and regain activity. however, to test this hypothesis we need data on frost  in the study site, which are not available. finally, we demonstrated by simulation that the arrival and departure of insects in network has not reached equilibrium when the collapse of the network appears at the end of the season and we estimated that the number of available species in the area is about  <dig>  of which 75%-80% are observed.

climate change might have an impact on plant-pollinator networks  <cit> . for example an increase in the average temperature is likely to increase the length of the season and change the conditions for the existence and maintenance of the network. the effect of temperature rise is not well-understood, though some evidence is available. in  <cit> , it is argued that experimental warming does not alter the length of the flowering season, whereas  <cit>  and  <cit>   provide evidence that the adult life cycle of insects is unchanged with increasing temperature. however, the availability of pollinator species or plant species might change as the length of the season changes, as well as when the species are present  <cit> . to study consequences of climate changes, observations over several years would help us to relate the parameters to climatic variables; however we might still need to impose more assumptions on the model, e.g. for how long are plants flowering, to what extent do pollinators overlap with their plants etc.

remarks on and limitations of the model
we consider our model a first step in modelling the temporal dynamics of plant-pollinator networks, a complex process of network formation. as discussed in the sections above, species-specific information about plant and pollinators is not included in the model. this information includes species identity, species abundance, known species-specific interactions and weather-related parameters, such as temperature thresholds for when species are active and when they rest. in our case, species identity  and the specific plant-pollinator interactions  <cit>  are available. all this information potentially influence the dynamics of the network, e.g. when and which connections are made in the network  <cit> . however, it is not straightforward how to include such elaborate information in the model and the analysis we have proposed. our model is based on network data gathered over two years and we have demonstrated that many aspects of the dynamics can be accounted for using simple mathematical tools. with detailed observations over several years we might be able to provide models that can account for further aspects of the temporal dynamics and include more detailed describtions of plants, pollinators and their characteristics.

