BACKGROUND
the advent of high-throughput sequencing has ushered in a new chapter in transcriptome studies, allowing sequencing and mapping of all transcripts present in a given sample, independent of the existing genome annotation. the application of high-throughput sequencing to the characterization of human transcriptomes in different tissues and developmental stages has already revealed thousands of novel transcripts and novel transcript isoforms  <cit> , and resulted in the recognition of long non-coding rnas  as a permanent feature of the human and mammalian transcriptome, as well as the identification of novel transcript types, such as piwi-interacting rna and circular rna . transcript annotation has been further aided by the introduction of strand-specific rna-sequencing  protocols allowing identification of sense and antisense transcripts  <cit> , as well as specific protocols designed to identify the 5′-end and 3′-end of transcripts: deepcage and 3p-seq  <cit> .

despite considerable efforts, human transcriptome annotation remains incomplete. this is largely due to the nature of the novel transcriptome elements: most of lncrnas and other non-canonical transcripts are expressed in a highly spatial- and temporally- specific manner, i.e. their repertoires differ greatly among tissues, cell types and ontogenetic stages  <cit> . furthermore, canonical protein-coding genes have been shown to undergo alternative splicing, and use alternative transcription start and termination sites across tissues, cell types and ontogenetic stages, further contributing to transcriptome heterogeneity  <cit> . among human tissues, both protein-coding and lncrna transcripts are reported to show the greatest heterogeneity in testis and brain  <cit> .

correct and comprehensive identification of the transcripts expressed in a given tissue is a critical step towards reconstruction of regulatory and functional interactions. for instance, regulatory network reconstruction relies on identification of transcription factor and microrna binding sites, which in turn require knowledge of the transcription start site position and 3′ untranslated region  boundaries in a given sample. growing recognition of the regulatory roles played by lncrnas, which may act as cis- or trans- regulators of other transcripts, further highlights the need for complete characterization of the transcriptome as a prerequisite for regulatory and functional network reconstruction. many lncrnas are located in the proximity of protein-coding genes, and are transcribed from certain types of regulatory regions, further indicating their regulatory potential. lncrnas transcribed from enhancer regions upon cellular membrane depolarization  have been linked to the elevated expression of neighboring genes in murine neural cells  <cit> . similarly, diverse populations of lncrnas have been shown to originate from known promoter regions  <cit> . in human and murine embryonic stem cells , more than half of all expressed lncrnas represented divergent transcription from bidirectional promoters of known protein-coding genes  <cit> . while in escs, these divergent lncrnas were associated with elevated expression of the corresponding protein-coding genes, other studies have reported negative regulation of protein-coding genes by divergent lncrna expression  <cit> .

in this study we took advantage of a large strand-specific rna-seq dataset to characterize the transcriptome of one of the most heterogeneous and complex human tissues – human prefrontal cortex . our results demonstrate that systematic transcriptome characterization not only reveals thousands of yet unannotated transcripts, but also allowed us to discover a novel type of bidirectional promoters comprised of canonical protein-coding gene and tissue-specific novel non-coding transcript pairs. most remarkably, these bidirectional promoters represent a specific promoter category, characterized by its own sequence and epigenetic signature and specifically associated with expression of neuronal genes.

RESULTS
more than 40% of transcripts expressed in the human brain are novel
to explore the dynamics of the human prefrontal cortex polya-plus transcriptome, we took advantage of strand-specific high-throughput sequencing data collected in the prefrontal cortex  of  <dig> human individuals with an age range from 2 days to 98 years  <cit>  . these data contained an average of  <dig> million 100-nt-long reads per sample, with a total of  <dig> million reads . to avoid limitations imposed by transcriptome read mapping to the genome, we first assembled transcripts de novo using the trinity algorithm  <cit> . of the raw sequence reads, 96% were retained after quality control and subsequently used in the transcript assembly. the assembly resulted in  <dig>  transcript contigs with an average length of  <dig>  nt and minimum length set to 300 nt. of them,  <dig>   could be unambiguously and uniquely aligned to the human reference genome using gmap  <cit> . merging contigs that overlapped with each other on the human genome resulted in  <dig>  contig clusters. the total length of these assembled transcripts was  <dig> ,683 nt. of them,  <dig> ,777 nt  overlapped with human annotated transcripts  covering 61% of all annotated exons, while the remaining  <dig> ,906 nt  represented as yet unannotated portions of the human brain transcriptome. among the unannotated transcripts  <dig> ,023 nt  originated from novel elements of annotated genes, such as novel exons and novel exon extensions;  <dig> ,147 nt  from the antisense strand of annotated genes; and  <dig> ,736 nt  from novel intergenic transcripts . accordingly, of the  <dig>  assembled contig clusters,  <dig>   overlapped with at least one annotated transcript, while the remaining  <dig>   originated from gene antisense and intergenic regions . in terms of transcriptome read counts, and reflecting the expression level of the transcripts, annotated transcripts accounted for 81% of all transcriptome reads, novel elements of annotated genes and intergenic transcripts – for 9% each, and antisense transcripts – for the remaining 1% .figure  <dig> 
annotated and novel portions of the human pfc transcriptome. , ,  the proportion of four transcript types – annotated transcripts , novel elements of annotated transcripts , antisense transcripts , and novel intergenic transcripts  – with respect to the total transcriptome length, transcript count and expression level, respectively.  categories of novel elements of annotated transcripts detected in the human pfc transcriptome. black and grey boxes indicate annotated exons and utrs, white boxes represent novel transcript elements. the “support” column shows the percentage of novel transcript isoforms confirmed by oases and cufflinks transcriptome assembly algorithms, and additionally supported by h3k4me <dig> modification peaks and transcript polya tails .



notably, our analysis also revealed potential gaps, not only in the human genome annotation, but also in the human genome itself. we found  <dig> human transcript contigs that could not be mapped to the reference human genome , but could be aligned unambiguously to at least one of the following non-human reference genomes: chimpanzee, orangutan, macaque or mouse genomes. cumulatively these contigs cover  <dig>  bases and include  <dig> putative protein-coding genes and  <dig> putative novel exons from another  <dig> annotated protein-coding genes.

annotated human transcripts contain numerous novel elements
among the  <dig>  assembled contig clusters that were located within annotated transcripts,  <dig>  clusters, composed of  <dig>  contigs, contained transcript elements not covered by the existing annotation. these elements included:  <dig> novel internal exons located in  <dig> protein-coding genes;  <dig> and  <dig>  novel donor and acceptor splice sites containing canonical splicing signals located in  <dig>  protein-coding genes; as well as  <dig>  and  <dig>  novel 5′utr and 3′utr extensions with a length of at least 100 nt and located in  <dig>  protein-coding genes.  <dig> % of these novel transcript elements were highly expressed , while  <dig> % were moderately expressed . besides protein-coding genes,  <dig> novel exons,  <dig> splice boundaries and  <dig>  5′/3′utr extensions were found in annotated pseudogenes, lncrnas and processed transcripts from  <dig>  contig clusters .  <dig> % of these novel elements could be validated by the other transcript assembly algorithms, oases  <cit>  or cufflinks  <cit> , as well as by the presence of h3k4me <dig> modification peaks, commonly associated with active promoters, or sequence reads corresponding to transcripts’ polya tails .

novel transcripts show properties of long non-coding rna
among the  <dig>  contig clusters identified in our data,  <dig>  had no overlap with genome annotation  . some of these transcripts showed a moderate expression: using expression of protein-coding genes as a reference,  <dig> % of contig clusters were highly expressed  and  <dig> % - moderately expressed . based on a coding potential estimation using the cpc algorithm  <cit> , 99% of these transcripts have negative coding potential score and, therefore, may represent novel long non-coding rnas  or novel lncrna fragments . besides negative coding potential scores, novel contigs clusters displayed other features characteristic of annotated lncrnas. specifically, contig clusters containing multiple exons displayed canonical donor  and acceptor  splice sites . further, 30% of the novel contigs clusters featured h3k4me <dig> modification peaks within 2 kb region from their 5′end . consistent with the polya enrichment procedure used during sequencing library preparation, 35% of all novel contigs clusters contained detectable polya tails within a 2 kb region from their 3′end . the novel contig clusters identified in our study were significantly more conserved at the dna sequence level among  <dig> vertebrate species when compared to randomly selected intergenic regions or annotated human lncrnas  . in agreement with previous studies reporting a high tissue-specificity for lncrna expression  <cit> , among the  <dig>  novel contig clusters that could be quantified in the human body map data , 89% were expressed in a tissue-specific  or tissue-selective manner  . furthermore, similar to known lncrnas, novel transcripts were preferentially localized in the nucleus . taken together, these features indicate that identified contig clusters may, in many cases, represent as yet unannotated human lncrnas or lncrna fragments.figure  <dig> 
properties of novel transcripts.  distributions of coding potential scores estimated for novel transcripts  and annotated protein-coding genes  using cpc . negative scores indicate low coding potential.  cumulative distribution of exon sequence conservation levels estimated using phastcons scores based on  <dig> vertebrate species’ genomes. the colors indicate novel transcripts , random intergenic regions , annotated lncrnas , pseudogenes , utr exons  and protein-coding exons .  nucleotide composition at and around the splice sites  of annotated protein-coding genes  and novel transcripts .  h3k4me <dig> modification profiles at the promoter region of annotated protein-coding genes  and novel transcripts . transcription start site  position of novel transcripts was estimated using deepcage data from brain tissues.  nucleotide composition around the transcript termination sites  of annotated protein-coding genes  and novel transcripts .  tissue specificity of expression for annotated protein-coding genes , annotated lncrna  and novel transcripts , calculated using body map data.  cellular localization  of annotated protein-coding genes , annotated lncrna  and novel transcripts .



the rna-seq data we used to identify novel transcripts represents a human pfc developmental time-series. accordingly, 20% of the transcript clusters representing novel lncrnas showed significant expression level change with age . notably, the majority of these transcripts were highly expressed in early development .

properties of antisense transcripts
use of a strand-specific sequencing protocol allowed us to evaluate the expression of transcripts originating from the antisense strand of annotated protein-coding gene regions. among the  <dig>  contig clusters assembled in this study,  <dig>  were located on the antisense strand relative to annotated protein-coding gene regions. of these,  <dig>  were completely unannotated and  <dig>  overlapped partially with annotated genes located on the same strand. taken together, these antisense contig clusters resulted in  <dig> annotated and  <dig> novel sense/antisense overlapping coding gene pairs .figure  <dig> 
relationship between sense and antisense transcript expression. ,  schematic representations of tail-to-tail and head-to-head overlapping gene pairs. black and gray boxes represent annotated protein-coding and untranslated exons, red and blue boxes indicates novel antisense transcript elements. ,  distribution of pearson correlation coefficients calculated based on expression of sense and antisense transcripts in tail-to-tail  or head-to-head  gene pairs , and control non-overlapping gene pairs , during postnatal pfc development. ,  difference between the kernel density distribution of the overlapping tail-to-tail  or head-to-head  gene pairs’ correlation and the control ones. red line indicates the overlapping pairs, while the gray lines represent  <dig> simulation results, generated by randomly subsampling the same number of control pairs as overlapping pairs.



one notable feature of the novel antisense contig clusters was their distributions within antisense regions: while annotated antisense transcripts tend to cluster in the 5′ and 3′ region of the sense gene, the novel antisense contig clusters were distributed much more uniformly . to test whether the novel antisense contig clusters may represent long extensions of annotated transcripts located nearby, we searched for reads corresponding to splicing junctions connecting antisense contig clusters and neighboring genes in our rna-seq data . indeed, we identified  <dig> such connections,  <dig> of them representing 3′ extensions  and  <dig> representing 5′ extension , while only  <dig> would be expected by chance . notably, 3′ extensions verified by splice junctions were also distributed broadly within antisense regions, with the longest reaching the 5′-end of the sense gene.

what is the influence of these antisense transcripts on gene expression of sense/antisense gene pairs? previous studies have indicated that the majority of identified sense/antisense gene pairs are positively correlated, while inversely correlated pairs also exist . to test the effect of antisense transcription on expression of the sense genes we took advantage of the age-related changes in expression of sense and antisense transcripts during human brain development, which could be documented in our dataset. in agreement with previous studies, we observed a significant excess of both positive and negative correlation for  <dig>  tail-to-tail annotated and novel sense/antisense gene pairs compared to equidistant non-overlapping gene pairs . for  <dig>  sense/antisense gene pairs with overlapping 5′ regions , only an excess of positive correlations was observed . positively correlated expression of head-to-head gene pairs may reflect shared open chromatin structure and regulation. more interestingly, the observations of positively and inversely correlated expression patterns from tail-to-tail pairs appears to represent a more complicated regulatory phenomenon that includes agonistic interactions between sense and antisense transcription, such as the previously proposed spatial collision of transcription and splicing machineries .

novel upstream antisense lncrnas expressed in the pfc originate from a new class of bidirectional promoters
previous studies have shown that the majority of the novel transcripts located outside of annotated gene regions, both sense and antisense, may represent as yet unannotated extensions of known genes  <cit> . indeed, among  <dig>  novel contig clusters with expression greater than  <dig>  rpkm,  <dig>   were located within 4 kb from annotated transcript boundaries . based on the dna strand, and relative position with respect to the nearest annotated transcript region, these  <dig>  novel transcripts could be further classified into four categories: upstream-sense , downstream-sense , upstream-antisense , and downstream-antisense . we found a significant excess of positive correlations between the expression of transcripts represented by novel contig clusters and the expression of nearby protein-coding genes for the upstream-sense, downstream-sense and upstream-antisense categories . no significant correlation signal was found for the downstream-antisense category .figure  <dig> 
properties of genes associated with novel upstream-antisense
lncrnas.
, , ,  distribution of pearson correlation coefficients calculated based on the expression of protein-coding genes and nearest novel lncrnas . the gray curves show the average correlation coefficient distribution based on  <dig> permutations of neighboring novel lncrnas and protein-coding gene relationships. the gray shaded areas show standard error of the curve estimates. the distributions are shown for four possible genomic configurations of lncrna relative to protein-protein-coding genes: upstream-sense, downstream sense, upstream-antisense and downstream-antisense.  go terms enriched in  <dig> protein-coding genes associated with upstream-antisense novel lncrnas. the node color indicates the go term’s enrichment p-value, the node size is proportional to the go term’s annotated gene number. dashed rectangle indicates go terms associated with neuronal functions.  expression specificity of  <dig> protein-coding genes associated with upstream-antisense novel lncrnas, calculated based on h3k4me <dig> modification from neurons and non-neural cells of human pfc. the red bar shows neuron/non-neuron cells ratio for the  <dig> genes, the gray bars represent the ratio distribution calculated by  <dig>  permutations of  <dig> randomly selected expressed genes.  expression specificity of  <dig> protein-coding genes associated with upstream-antisense novel lncrnas calculated based on cell type specific expression data from mouse neocortex. the bars show fisher’s test odds ratio with 95% confidence interval for enrichment of the  <dig> genes among mouse orthologs preferentially expressed in oligodentrocytes , astrocytes  and neurons . the numbers show fisher’s test p-values. ,  the tfbs density profiles of two enriched tfs, etf  and zf <dig> , within nbips. the red and blue curves show observed tfbs density distributions at sense and antisense strands. the pink and the light blue curves represent tfbs density distributions calculated by  <dig>  permutations of tfbs prediction across dinucleotide shuffled nbip sequences.



while novel contig clusters located on the sense strand may represent 5′ and 3′ extensions of known genes, transcripts originating from the antisense strand must have an independent origin. indeed, there is no correlation between the expression of annotated genes and nearby antisense transcripts located downstream. by contrast, a significant excess of positive correlations between annotated genes and upstream-antisense transcripts may indicate shared regulation, presumably at as yet unannotated bidirectional promoters. indeed, a signature of divergent transcription characteristic of bidirectional promotes can be observed for the upstream-antisense transcripts and the corresponding annotated genes, using public human brain deepcage tag data from fantom <dig>  <cit> . the divergent transcription was strong for all upstream-antisense novel transcript/gene pairs, and particularly pronounced for the  <dig> upstream-antisense novel transcript/gene pairs that showed a significant positive correlation in the pfc time-series data , compared to other promoters annotated as unidirectional .

novel upstream antisense lncrnas expressed in pfc are linked to neural function
functional analysis of the protein-coding genes associated with the  <dig> novel upstream-antisense transcripts revealed a strong and significant enrichment in  <dig> gene ontology  functional terms after redundancy reduction  <cit> , including neuronal functions such as “memory”, “generation of neurons” and “regulation of synaptic transmission” . consistently, the  <dig> genes are preferentially expressed in neurons, as gauged from h3k4me <dig> modification data collected in neurons and non-neuronal cells in the human pfc  <cit>  , and neuron-specific gene expression data collected in the mouse brain  <cit>  . by contrast, protein-coding genes associated with novel transcripts from the other three categories did not show any significant functional enrichment. more surprisingly, known bidirectional promoters , either consisting of two protein-coding genes, or protein-coding gene and known lncrna pairs, expressed in the human pfc showed no significant enrichment in neural functions. instead, these genes were significantly underrepresented in neuronal functions, but overrepresented in biological processes related to rna processing, dna repair, dna metabolic process, and ribonucleoprotein complex biogenesis . similarly, annotated genes transcribed from annotated unidirectional promoters , and showing no evidence of upstream antisense expression in our data, were not enriched in neuronal functions, but instead in biological processes related to signal transducer activity and receptor activity . thus, the bidirectional promoters identified in our study  may represent a separate promoter category that differs from both unips and kbips and particular to genes expressed in neurons and/or associated with neuronal functions.

novel bidirectional promoters are enriched in transcription factors associated with neurons
the unique functional features of nbips prompted us to explore transcription factors that may regulate this promoter type. several transcription factors that are preferentially associated with bidirectional promoters have been identified by previous studies  <cit> . comparing transcription factor binding site  density within 2 kb of nbips and kbips revealed  <dig> tfbss that correspond to  <dig> transcription factors  enriched in nbips, and  <dig> tfbss corresponding to  <dig> tfs enriched in kbips . the association between enriched tfs and nbips was further confirmed for five tfs by the significant correlation of their expression profiles and the expression profiles of the predicted target transcripts originating from the nbips . furthermore, for two of the five enriched and correlated tfs, significant peaks of tfbs density profiles were detected in the center of the nbip regions . notably, with respect to function, tfs enriched in nbips were significantly co-cited with the terms “neural” or “neuron” . by contrast, tfs enriched in kbips showed no such association . thus, nbips may represent an integral part of a regulatory mechanism specific to a set of neuronal genes and involving specific neuron-related tfs.

novel bidirectional promoters show unique dna sequence and epigenetic features
the unique functional and regulatory features of nbips might suggest a specific sequence and epigenetic signature for this promoter type. indeed, compared with unips and kbips, nbips show significant differences with respect to all common sequence and epigenetic features: gc content, regulatory potential, sequence conservation, h3k4me <dig> modification profile, and dna methylation status. specifically, nbips have a higher gc content and higher regulatory potential, measured as a regulatory potential  score  <cit> , than both unips and kbips . further, nbips are more conserved at the dna sequence level than kbips , while both types of bidirectional promoters are more conserved than unips . h3k4me <dig> modification density, measured in the human pfc neurons  <cit> , is higher at nbips than kbips indicating promoter activity . further, h3k4me <dig> modification density was greater at both types of bidirectional promoters compared to unips . notably, besides the overall h3k4me <dig> modification density differences, the shape of h3k4me <dig> modification profiles differs among the three promoter types . specifically, unips show starkly asymmetric h3k4me <dig> modification profiles with much of the modification density located downstream of the protein-coding gene transcriptional start site . by contrast, the shape of h3k4me <dig> modification profile is more symmetric relative to the tss for both nbips and kbips, with the most symmetric signatures observed at kbips. this difference in h3k4me <dig> modification signature could be reproduced using other h3k4me <dig> modification datasets obtained from human and rhesus macaque pfc samples, as well as hela cells  . by contrast, the input control showed no significant differences in shape and density for h3k4me <dig> modification profiles among the three promoter types . lastly, dna methylation levels measured in the human pfc  <cit>  also differed among the three promoter types: dna methylation levels are high at unips, intermediate at kbips and the lowest at nbips . kbips are comprised of two types of bidirectional promoters: one formed by two protein-coding genes , and the other – by a protein-coding gene and known lncrna pair . do the aforementioned sequence and epigenetic features characteristic of nbips also distinguish them from bidirectional promoters containing known lncrnas ? to answer this, we directly compared the dna sequence composition and epigenetic features of nbips and lnckbips. except for the shape of h3k4me <dig> modification profile, there are significant differences between other features for these two promoter types. furthermore, the sequence and epigenetic properties of lnckbips closely resembled those of known bidirectional promoters formed by pairs of protein-coding genes . besides promoter features, the effect of pabpn <dig> knockdown on lncrna that are associated with nbips differed from the effect seen for known lncrna and protein-coding genes associated with lnckbips and pckbips . thus, in the brain, nbips formed by lncrna represent a distinct type of bidirectional promoter with characteristic structural and regulatory properties when compared to known bidirectional promoters, including those containing known lncrna.figure  <dig> 
sequence and epigenetic features of different promoter types. ,  and  the cumulative distributions of gc content, regulatory potential and sequence conservation for the three promoter types: unips , kbips  and nbips . all measurements are based on a 2 kb region surrounding the tss. promoter sequence conservation was calculated using phastcons scores, based on  <dig> vertebrate species’ genomes. promoter regulatory potential was calculated using regulatory potential  scores . ,  the density  and the shape  of h3k4me <dig> modification profiles at each of the three promoter types.  dna methylation profile at each of the three promoter types.  pabpn <dig> expression across human tissues calculated using body map data. ,  the expression change distribution for different transcript types in a pabpn <dig> knockdown experiment. the positive values indicate expression upregulation following pabpn <dig> knockdown.



discussion
knowledge of the composition of the human prefrontal cortex transcriptome is critical for studying the complexity of rna transcription and regulation, as well as its impact on neuronal functions. here, by applying a strand-specific rna sequencing procedure to different stages of postnatal development, we have obtained one of the most complete and dynamic pictures of the human prefrontal cortex transcriptome. several interesting observations have emerged.

first, despite the substantial efforts made towards human brain transcriptome characterization in previous decades, more than 50% of pfc transcripts reconstructed in our study represent novel transcriptome elements. these elements include novel exons and exon extensions of annotated protein-coding and lncrna genes, antisense transcripts and novel lncrnas. one potentially interesting feature of antisense transcripts highlighted by our study is their length. while many of the antisense transcripts found in our study represent as yet unannotated extensions of the neighboring genes, these extensions frequently stretch for hundreds of base pairs, traversing the entire length of the sense genes. in agreement with previous studies, these antisense transcripts can display both negative and positive correlation with expression of the sense genes  <cit> .

second, while most of the lncrnas expressed in the prefrontal cortex  localize in close proximity ) to known protein-coding genes, one fraction of these transcripts, the lncrnas located upstream of the protein-coding genes on the antisense strand, particularly stands out. specifically, these transcripts:  show a significantly positive correlation with the expression of the upstream protein-coding genes;  originate from a specific class of bidirectional promoters showing unique sequence and epigenetic features;  are highly enriched upstream of genes that are expressed in neurons and involved in neuronal functions; and  are enriched in tfs shown to be linked to neurons.

bidirectional promoters are a common feature of the human genome, and have also been described in the mouse and other species  <cit> . in humans, 10% of protein-coding genes were annotated to originate from bidirectional promoters  <cit> . remarkably, genes preferentially expressed in brain and involved in neural functions were depleted at these known bidirectional promoters  <cit> . this result was further confirmed in this present study. by contrast, novel bidirectional promoters showing divergent transcription of novel and potentially brain-specific lncrnas, are highly enriched in neuronal genes. the novel bidirectional promoters identified in our study are also distinct from both known bidirectional promoters and unidirectional promoters with respect to many aspects of sequence composition and epigenetic features, including h3k4me <dig> chromatin modifications and dna methylation. thus, they may represent a novel promoter type specifically associated with the expression of neuronal genes and regulated by a specific set of tfs. intriguingly, tfs showing significant association with this promoter type, include all three methylation resistant tfs  representing three of the top four discriminatory features used to predict methylation status of cpg islands in the human brain  <cit> . this fact may explain the unique dna methylation signature of the nbips observed in our study.

expression of lncrnas from bidirectional promoters has been previously shown in many human cell types, including human embryonic stem cells  where >60% promoters might be bidirectional and associated with divergent lncrnas  <cit> . notably, even though we find no significant overlap between bidirectional promoters described in hescs and nbips identified in this study, in both cases expression of protein-coding genes correlated positively with expression of divergent lncrnas. it is, however, unclear whether this positive correlation represents a regulatory effect of lncrnas, or a passive consequence of the transcriptional activation of the divergent protein-coding genes. most human promoters bind polymerase complexes in a bidirectional manner and are therefore capable of initiating transcription in both directions  <cit> . thus, we cannot exclude that the presence of lncrnas at the novel type of bidirectional promoters identified in our study may represent a passive byproduct of neuronal gene transcription from this specific promoter type.

transcripts expressed in the pfc, and more generally in the brain, are characterized by extended 3′utr regions  <cit> . this phenomenon may in part be explained by the low expression of pabpn <dig>  a gene recently shown to play a role in transcript processing  <cit>  in brain tissue . intriguingly, by reanalyzing data from  <cit> , we found that the expression of novel lncrnas originating from nbips was starkly increased in a pabpn <dig> knockdown experiment. furthermore, this expression increase was significantly greater than for other lncrna types . this indicates that the strong expression of lncrnas originating from nbips in the human pfc could be due to this general transcript processing mechanism.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our results demonstrate that large portions of the human transcriptome remain uncharacterized and even unknown. we further show that more detailed transcriptome characterization may lead to the identification of new types of regulatory elements, such as a novel class of bidirectional promoters associated with the expression of neuronal genes. finally, our study confirms pervasive transcription of lncrnas in the human pfc, again raising the question of their functionality.

