BACKGROUND
introduction
in the eukaryotic cells, many essential biological processes take place in the nucleus. nuclear localization is a complicated set of processes that play a crucial role in the dynamical self-regulation of the cell  <cit> . to participate in the cell regulation processes, proteins are translocated in and out of nucleus. this import and export are mediated by short binding sites on the protein sequence, called nuclear localization signals  and nuclear export signals . both nlss and ness have been used as important features to detect nuclear proteins. however, due to a tremendous amount of protein sequences generated from the post-genomic era, nlss and ness are not yet well understood from existing experiments by the biologists, and so the set of currently known nlss and ness may be incomplete. therefore, developing computational methods to identify potential nlss and ness has become highly desirable to predict nuclear localization.

previous works
at present, only a few predictors are designed specifically to identify proteins imported into the nucleus. predictnls  <cit>  predicts nuclear proteins based on the presence of known or putative nlss derived from the contents of nlsdb. nucpred  <cit>  uses regular expression matching and multiple program classifiers induced by genetic programming to detect putative nlss. nucleo  <cit>  incorporates sequence motifs from known nlss in a support vector machine  classifier for predicting nuclear localization. nppred  <cit>  applies svm classifiers and hidden markov models  using k-peptide composition and achieves high accuracy based on a data set, in which proteins are filtered at 90% sequence identity  <cit> . although general localization prediction methods provide comprehensive information, they do not consider compartment-specific features to optimize for a particular localization site  <cit> . besides the above predictors designed to predict nuclear localization proteins, several methods, such as nlstradamus, netnes, and nod, have been proposed to detect nlss and ness. nlstradamus  <cit>  uses hmms to predict nlss in proteins, and netnes  <cit>  predicts ness using neural network and hmms. in addition, nod  <cit>  applies artificial neural network algorithm to detect nucleolar localization sequences in eukaryotic and viral proteins. moreover, several methods  <cit>  have been developed to further classify nuclear proteins according to their subnuclear localizations. in this study, we will propose a method to improve nuclear localization prediction based on potential nlss and ness generated from our analysis of gapped-dipeptide signatures.

challenges
prediction of nuclear proteins presents several challenges. first, methods that integrate biological features only from known or putative nlss could suffer from the problem of low coverage in high-throughput proteomic analyses due to the lack of information to characterize ness from nuclear exported proteins. second, several predictors are implemented on redundant training sets, which might lead to overestimation of the predictive performance. thus, the performance would be significantly lower if redundant sequences were meticulously removed   <cit> . meanwhile, the performance of amino acid composition-based and sequence homology-based methods might be significantly degraded if homologous sequences are not detected  <cit> . in addition, the k-peptide feature representation from amino acid composition-based methods can result in a very large feature dimension during the machine learning procedure, in which an effective feature reduction is highly desirable to reduce dimension. finally, results of these two types of methods are generally difficult to interpret; therefore, it is difficult to determine which biological features should be used to identify nuclear or non-nuclear proteins and why they work well for prediction. if the features were biologically interpretable, the resultant knowledge could help in designing artificial proteins with the desired properties.

our contributions
in this study, we first present a method, pslnuc , for predicting nuclear localization in proteins. for feature representation, sequence homology information from a smoothed position-specific scoring matrix  is incorporated to calculate the weights of gapped-dipeptides. after that, probabilistic latent semantic indexing  is used for feature reduction. finally, the reduced features are applied as input vectors for an svm classifier. in addition to pslnuc, we further generate gapped-dipeptide signatures for potential nlss and ness, and develop another prediction method, pslnts . to propose candidate sequence patterns of putative nlss and ness, we apply plsi to generate gapped-dipeptide signatures from both nuclear and non-nuclear proteins. then, we further incorporate only the proposed gapped-dipeptide signatures in an svm classifier to mimic biological properties of nlss and ness in pslnts.

experiment results show that pslnuc achieves high prediction accuracy, which demonstrates that homology information of gapped-dipeptides reduced by plsi can significantly enhance the performance. our analysis suggests that, in addition to nlss, which have been shown important for nuclear proteins, ness could also be an effective indicator to detect non-nuclear proteins. most notably, the overall accuracy of pslnts is further improved to  <dig>  using only the proposed gapped-dipeptide signatures. this implies that gapped-dipeptide signatures can better discriminate nuclear and non-nuclear localization. in addition, since sequence redundancy tends to overestimate the predictive performance, we incorporate non-redundant data sets and show the general accuracy of nuclear prediction should be approximately  <dig> . finally, since the proposed gapped-dipeptide signatures are biologically interpretable, they can be easily applied to advanced analyses and experimental designs of nuclear translocation signals.

RESULTS
data sets
to compare the predictive performance with other approaches, we utilize two benchmark data sets of proteins from swiss-prot that have been constructed in previous works  <cit> . the training and testing sets are comprised of proteins whose localization sites are experimentally determined. in addition, both the nuclear and non-nuclear proteins are redundancy-reduced using blastclust with a 10% identity threshold, so that the remaining sequences have no more than 10% identical residues in the aligned regions covering at least 90% of the sequences. table  <dig> lists the number of nuclear and non-nuclear proteins in the training and testing data sets. the training and testing sets are available in the supplementary material .

numbers of nuclear and non-nuclear proteins for training and testing.

predictive performance on benchmark data sets
performance comparison of different nuclear localization predictors.

proposed gapped-dipeptide signatures correspond well with known nuclear translocation signals
to generate gapped-dipeptides for nuclear and non-nuclear localization, we choose ten preferred topics for nuclear and non-nuclear proteins based on localization-preference confidence, respectively. the confidence is calculated by the absolute value of nuclear localization-preference minus non-nuclear localization-preference. for every preferred topic, we select up to twenty most abundant gapped-dipeptides. finally, the resultant gapped-dipeptide signatures for nuclear and non-nuclear proteins are listed in table  <dig> and table  <dig>  respectively. we compare the generated gapped-dipeptide signatures with known experimentally determined nlss and ness in the biological literature and databases. the signatures that have been reported as motifs for nlss and ness are shown in bold face in table  <dig> and table  <dig>  respectively. it is observed that many gapped-dipeptide signatures are motifs critical for predicting nuclear localization, especially for nlss. our experiment results show that the proposed method can capture biological features of nuclear and non-nuclear proteins.

our method propose  <dig> gapped-dipeptide signatures for nuclear proteins. signatures that have been reported as motifs for nuclear localization signals  are shown in bold face.

our method propose  <dig> gapped-dipeptide signatures for non-nuclear proteins. signatures that have been reported as motifs for nuclear export signals  are shown in bold face.

gapped-dipeptide signatures better discriminate nuclear and non-nuclear proteins
to demonstrate that our method can capture biological properties of putative nlss and ness, we further examine the predictive performance using only the proposed gapped-dipeptide signatures. in pslnts, we incorporate  <dig> selected gapped-dipeptide signatures in an svm classifier to see whether gapped-dipeptide signatures can better discriminate nuclear and non-nuclear proteins. table  <dig> compares the performance of pslnts, pslnuc, and nucleo. using only the  <dig> gapped-dipeptide signatures, pslnts performs slightly better than pslnuc by nearly  <dig>   and  <dig>  for overall accuracy and mcc, respectively. experiment results demonstrate that the selected signatures can capture biological properties of nlss and ness, and thus, can resolve the ambiguity to discriminate nuclear and non-nuclear proteins.

performance comparison of pslnuc, pslnts, and nucleo.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we first incorporate gapped-dipeptides weighted by a smoothpssm encoding and reduced by plsi to predict nuclear localization in pslnuc. our results show that pslnuc significantly improves the predictive performance compared to the state-of-the-art system. experiment results also suggest that, in addition to nlss, which have been shown important for nuclear proteins, ness can also be an effective indicator to detect non-nuclear proteins. secondly, we apply only a few proposed gapped-dipeptide signatures in pslnts and further enhance the accuracy and mcc to  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. this demonstrates that gapped-dipeptide signatures can better discriminate nuclear and non-nuclear localization. most notably, the proposed gapped-dipeptide signatures could be biologically interpreted and used in further experiment studies of nuclear translocation sequences, including nlss and ness.

