BACKGROUND
membrane proteins are encoded by over 25% of all sequenced open reading frames and constitute the majority of known drug targets  <cit> . therefore, tools providing a greater understanding of membrane proteins may benefit cell biology research and pharmacological development  <cit> . the advance of methods for labeling proteins by genetic fusion is expanding the understanding of protein function in complex intracellular environments   <cit> . current reporter proteins such as carrier proteins , tetracysteine tags , o6-alkylguanine-dna alkyltransferase , photoactivatable proteins and others  allow more flexibility than originally available with gfp  <cit> . however, visualization of multiple pools of the same protein through space and time can still be technically challenging and new options could only benefit this expanding field.

the multifunctional halotag® technology complements existing methods and provides new options to study spatial and temporal changes in different pools of a single membrane protein. in addition, it can be used to study protein topology and post-translational modification and to capture cells. the halotag technology is based on the formation of a covalent bond between the halotag reporter protein and synthetic ligands  <cit> . the halotag reporter protein is an engineered catalytically inactive derivative of a bacterial hydrolase . the synthetic ligands contain two crucial components: 1) a common reactive linker that forms a covalent bond with the halotag protein, and 2) a functional reporter such as a fluorescent dye or an affinity handle such as biotin . halotag ligands have the same chloroalkane reactive linker, but differences in the functional reporter and distance of the reporter from the linker create an interchangeable labeling technology. for instance, the halotag® tmr ligand is a cell permeable red-emitting ligand, but unlike some red fluorescent proteins like dsred, it does not require tetramerization   <cit> . the green-emitting halotag® alexa fluor®  <dig> and peg-biotin are cell impermeable ligands. the interchangeability of a broad range of ligands permits a variety of functional studies of fusion proteins generated from a single genetic construct .

we used an integrin model to assess the applicability of the halotag technology for observing the dynamics of membrane protein processing and trafficking. integrins are membrane proteins that are central to cellular adhesion and migration, thereby involving them in development, inflammation, and disease  <cit> . integrins are heterodimers of α- and β-subunits, which typically have a large extracellular domain, a single transmembrane segment and a short cytoplasmic tail  <cit> . integrins have been studied in living cells by fusing gfp to the intracellular cytoplasmic tail or to the transmembrane domain  <cit> . we fused the halotag reporter protein to the extracellular domain of a truncated human β <dig> integrin . by expressing the halotag reporter protein on the cell surface, we were able to use the multifunctional halotag technology to study a membrane protein in living cells and to capture cells.

RESULTS
the β1int-halotag fusion protein was well tolerated by multiple cell types, including mammalian cell lines and human neural stem cells  <cit> . immunocytochemistry with β <dig> integrin and halotag antibodies showed that the β1int-halotag fusion protein was expressed at the cell membrane in a similar pattern to endogenous β <dig> integrin . fixed cells were non-permeabilized to show that the halotag reporter protein was localized on the cell surface.

to study membrane proteins in live cells with the halotag technology, we developed a fluorescent ligand which should not cross the cell membrane. to make this ligand cell impermeable, we added a negatively charged dye to the standard activated linker. to confirm that this novel ligand, halotag® alexa fluor®  <dig> , was cell impermeable, we labeled cells expressing halotag on the surface or only inside. live cell imaging showed that the halotag  <dig> ligand specifically labeled the cell-surface halotag protein in cells stably expressing β1int-halotag, but did not label the intracellular protein in cells stably expressing halotag fused to a nuclear localization sequence  <cit>  . this confirms that the novel ligand is cell impermeable and that the surface halotag protein fused to integrin can functionally bind ligands.

to reveal the β1int-halotag protein topology and subcellular distribution, we used halotag ligands with a modified fluorescence protease protection  assay  <cit> . the fpp assay, described by lorenz , determines the topology and localization of proteins in living cells by monitoring trypsin-induced destruction of gfp attached to a protein of interest. we separately labeled surface and internal protein pools of β1int-halotag in live cells with the cell impermeable fluorescent ligand, halotag  <dig>  followed by the cell permeable fluorescent ligand, halotag tmr . spatial separation of protein pools is depicted by a green rim around a red interior . trypsin exposure to live cells stripped the external halotag  <dig> ligand over time, but preserved the internal halotag tmr ligand . this result shows that the halotag protein fused to integrin was orientated on the surface of the cell membrane, and that the multi-functional halotag technology can be used to determine topology of membrane proteins. in some instances, β1int-halotag labeled on the surface with the halotag  <dig> ligand was internalized before trypsin addition. unlike the surface exposed protein removed by trypsin, this recycled protein showed fluorescence protease protection .

to reveal the β1int-halotag protein subcellular localization, we combined the halotag technology and the permeabilization agent digitonin  <cit> . cells were co-transfected with β1int-halotag and gfp, and then labeled with the halotag tmr ligand . co-expression of the proteins is shown by the yellow overlay . digitonin treatment permeabilized the membrane, which allowed freely floating gfp to diffuse out of the cell over time while internally bound β1int-halotag was retained in the cell, presumably by cellular transport and recycling machinery . this result shows that the halotag fusion did not affect normal processing of a membrane bound protein, and that the halotag technology can be used to distinguish free floating and membrane bound proteins.

membrane proteins, such as integrins, are typically trafficked through secretory and endocytic pathways  <cit> . permeabilization experiments showed β1int-halotag was retained in the cell, but to confirm that the β1int-halotag fusion protein was associated with intracellular transport and recycling organelles, we combined fluorescent halotag ligands to label live cells with fixed cell immunocytochemistry. to assess protein delivery to the membrane, live cells expressing β1int-halotag were labeled with the halotag tmr ligand, and then processed for immunocytochemistry to visualize the endoplasmic reticulum , er-intermediate golgi complex , or golgi . to assess protein recycling from the membrane, live cells expressing β1int-halotag were labeled with the halotag  <dig> ligand, and then processed for immunocytochemistry to visualize the early and late endosomes . co-localization of the β1int-halotag protein with cellular transport machinery is shown by the yellow overlay, and suggests that fusing halotag to the truncated integrin does not alter normal protein flow through secretory and endocytic pathways.

we used the halotag technology and immunocytochemistry to also show that the β1int-halotag protein co-localized with expected membrane proteins, such as cadherin and transferrin receptors  <cit> . to assess protein co-localization at the membrane, live cells expressing β1int-halotag were labeled with the halotag  <dig> ligand, and then processed for immunocytochemistry . co-localization of the β1int-halotag protein with cadherin is shown by the yellow overlay, and suggests that β1int-halotag fusion not only traffics properly to the membrane but also co-localizes with other expected membrane proteins. to assesses protein co-internalization from the membrane, live cells expressing β1int-halotag were labeled with the halotag  <dig> ligand and a transferrin alexa fluor®  <dig> conjugate . co-localization of the β1int-halotag protein with the transferrin receptor is shown by the yellow overlay, and suggests that the β1int-halotag fusion not only internalizes through the proper cellular machinery, but also co-internalizes with expected membrane proteins.

mature integrins at the cell membrane are glycosylated, and the internal pool is partially glycosylated as it traffics through the secretory pathway  <cit> . to confirm that the β1int-halotag protein not only traffics normally through the secretory pathway but also undergoes proper post-translational modification, we used fluorescent halotag ligands followed by sds-page analysis. live cells expressing β1int-halotag were sequentially labeled with halotag  <dig> and tmr ligands to separately label surface and internal proteins, respectively . lysate from labeled cells showed two distinct protein pools on sds-page in lane  <dig> . this band pattern could be because the higher molecular weight green surface pool of β1int-halotag is heavily glycosylated compared to the red intracellular pool. to confirm whether the distinct protein pools were due to differential protein glycosylation, we glycanase treated cells lysates. deglycosylation by either o- or n-glycanase treatment caused a significant shift in the green surface pool of β1int-halotag . conversely, o-glycanase treatment caused no visible shift in the red internal pool of β1int-halotag , and n-glycanase treatment caused only a minor shift . glycanase treatment of the halotag reporter protein produced no band shift on sds-page , suggesting that the shift in β1int-halotag is due to glycosylation of the integrin protein. our results show that the surface pool of β1int-halotag is glycosylated, which is expected for integrins and suggests that fusing halotag to a truncated integrin does not alter proper post-translational glycosylation.

we also used the halotag technology to follow protein modification over time. cells expressing β1int-halotag were labeled sequentially with halotag  <dig> and tmr ligands, and lysate was then collected immediately or up to  <dig> hours after labeling . as expected, lysate from cells labeled with the halotag tmr ligand alone showed two protein pools  and lysate from cells labeled with the halotag  <dig> ligand alone showed only the higher molecular weight protein pool . substantiating figure 5a, lysate from cells sequentially labeled with both ligands showed separation of the two protein pools at early time points . however, over time the lower band for the red internal pool shifted up, presumably as this protein arrived at the membrane in a glycosylated form   <cit> . additionally, the upper band for the green surface pool disappeared, presumably as this protein was endocytosed and degraded. the overlaid sds-page shows that the halotag technology can be used to track different protein pools and monitor post-translational modifications over time.

finally, we used the halotag technology and live cell imaging to visualize spatial separation and real-time translocation of β1int-halotag. cells expressing β1int-halotag were labeled sequentially with halotag  <dig> and tmr ligands. live cell imaging showed two distinct protein pools, with the surface protein labeled specifically with the halotag  <dig> ligand and the intracellular protein labeled with the halotag tmr ligand . re-imaging  <dig> hours after labeling shows that the initial red cytoplasmic pool has moved to the membrane and the initial green surface pool has internalized . timelapse imaging shows real-time translocation after labeling, which begins with the green surface pool internalizing at  <dig> hour, continues with the red internal pool trafficking to the surface, and ends with the red surface pool internalizing . the halotag technology can show clear translocation of two separate protein pools in live cells, and these results of β1int-halotag movement corroborate the immunocytochemistry and sds-page results.

with the halotag technology, functional reporters such as fluorescent ligands can be used to image live cells, and affinity handles such as biotin can be used to capture cells expressing halotag on the surface. we co-expressed β1int-halotag, or halotag as a control, with luciferase. live cells were labeled with halotag peg-biotin ligand and then captured on streptavidin coated plates. luciferase assay results show the specific capture of β1int-halotag-expressing cells compared to halotag-expressing control cells . specific capture of β1int-halotag-expressing cells was blocked when streptavidin coated plates were pre-coated with halotag peg-biotin. in addition to the in vitro luciferase assay, live cell imaging confirms that β1int-halotag-expressing cells can be specifically captured using the halotag technology and that captured cells survive. live cells were labeled with halotag peg-biotin ligand, captured on streptavidin coated plates, and then replated for live cell imaging. labeling plated cells with the halotag tmr ligand shows the survival of specifically captured β1int-halotag-expressing cells compared to control cells .

discussion
the ability to analyze proteins in their native environment is critical to developing a detailed understanding of protein processing and trafficking. the study of protein trafficking is particularly timely and valuable considering the recently reported link between disrupted protein trafficking and certain disease states  <cit> . the study of protein glycosylation patterns is also relevant to disease states, as recently reported by lyly et al for palmitoyl protein thioesterase i related to childhood encephalopathies  <cit> .

we showed that the halotag technology can be used to study the expression, topology, glyscosylation, distribution, and translocation of a vital cellular protein. this was possible in multiple cell types, including mammalian cell lines like cho, hela, hek <dig> and u2os and also in human neural stem cells   <cit> . the need for antibodies is eliminated since the fixation-resistant fluorescent halotag ligand directly detects the halotag reporter protein fused to the protein of interest. efficient and flexible labeling of fusion proteins in live cells enables a fuller understanding of the protein's function.

by fusing the halotag gene to the extracelluar domain of a truncated β <dig> integrin, we provided proof of concept that the halotag reporter protein can be expressed on the cell surface and can be used to study various aspects of membrane protein biology. in addition to integrin, we have successfully used the halotag technology to study the biology of other membrane proteins, including glycosylphosphatidylinositol  and the gabaa receptor . while we can not rule out subtle effects of the halotag reporter protein on β <dig> integrin, we provide strong evidence that integrin function was not affected. results showing that β1int-halotag localized in a similar pattern to endogenous integrin, trafficked and internalized through expected intracellular machinery and followed proper post-translational glycosylation suggest that the integrin-halotag fusion protein maintained cellular dynamics consistent with native integrins.

to specifically study surface-displayed halotag fused to membrane proteins, we developed a novel halotag alexa  <dig> ligand that we showed is cell impermeable and functional. a previous report made an extracellular gfp-integrin fusion and showed impressive focal adhesion motility in live fibroblasts  <cit> . however, gfp was used primarily as a fluorescent marker of the fusion protein rather than the multifunctional halotag-integrin fusion we used to spatially and temporally visualize integrin, to determine integrin topology and post-translational modification and to capture live cells. in addition, gfp was fused directly to the transmembrane domain with complete removal of the extracellular domain. while we truncated the integrin in our β1int-halotag construct, we intentionally retained portions of the extracellular and cytoplasmic sequences and the specificity determining loop  to ensure integrin traffics to the membrane  <cit> .

in addition to using the halotag technology to study membrane protein biology, we have applied the halotag technology to sort cells by fluorescent activated cell sorting facs  <cit> . we were able to successfully separate β1intht2-expressing cells labeled with halotag tmr or alexa <dig> ligands from non-expressing cells . as an alternative method for cells sensitive to facs, the halotag technology can also be used to sort cells by panning  <cit> . we showed that the technology can be used to select cells by labeling surface-expressed halotag with the peg-biotin ligand. labeled cells can then be captured on a streptavidin plate for in vitro assays or live cell imaging.

los and wood  previously described the halotag technology simply for imaging intracellular proteins and only using cell permeable ligands. by expressing halotag on the cell surface and developing a fluorescent cell impermeable ligand, we have greatly expanded this multifunctional technology to include visualizing different pools of a membrane protein over space and time, assessing post-translational modification, and capturing cells. in addition, we combined the halotag technology with fpp and digitonin permeabilization to study protein topology and distribution.

the multifunctional halotag technology supports many experimental procedures including immunocytochemistry, fixed and live cell imaging, sds page, fpp and capture. we successfully used this technology to determine protein topology and subcellular localization, to capture and sort cells, and to assess protein modification. in addition, we used different colored cell impermeable and permeable halotag ligands to show spatial separation of membrane and internal protein pools, and real-time translocation of these protein pools in live cells.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that the multifunctional halotag technology provides the ability to separate protein pools in space and time, and could be a powerful tool to examine the trafficking and cellular biology of membrane proteins such as integrins or other proteins of interest.

