BACKGROUND
even in the post-genomic era, genome information is often difficult to obtain. this is especially true for organisms that are difficult to collect due to the extremes of their living environment. radiolaria are protozoa used in the study of geology and environmental and ecological sciences because they leave a fossil of hard skeletal material that can provide a record of more than  <dig> million years. studies on radiolaria have progressed since the early work by haeckel  <cit> , which was based on phenotypic analysis. the diverse shapes of their skeletons have been useful characteristics for the identification of species. however, there is a need to obtain genomic information about these organisms in order to more fully understand their diversity and phylogeny. recently, the gene encoding a small subunit of ribosomal rna  has been used for classifying species of radiolaria, which are taxonomically controversial  <cit> . this is by no means an easy task not only because of the difficulty in collecting samples, but also the additional complication that each organism is composed of only a single cell, and methods for culturing radiolaria in the laboratory are not available. this means that only a single set of genomic dna molecules can be obtained for experiments such as pcr. species identification and/or classification from a single cell has an ultimate value for various purposes: genome analysis of precious specimens using only a minute fraction of the available sample or tracing alterations in the genome of somatic cells . it will be also useful for settling controversial classification problems regarding radiolarian  <cit> . the sequence information obtained from  <dig> s rdna is often insufficient to identify and classify species in detail, wanting a method which can provide a more amount of information. this challenge is addressed in this paper: the authors developed a general way to obtain genome information from a single cell. for this purpose, a triple-session of random pcr was successfully employed. the experimental results obtained by genome profiling   <cit>  of a group of radiolaria gave consistent data from a taxonomical viewpoint. the authenticity of the results, including sequence analysis data, is extensively discussed.

RESULTS
experimental materials and genome profiling
three sessions of random pcr  enabled us to obtain dna fragments from single-celled organisms. the dna fragments were subjected to micro-tgge  <cit> , providing genome profiles as shown in fig. 1b. in this series of experiments, currently unculturable and difficult-to-collect species of haeckel's radiolaria and related organisms  were collected in the field and examined . the genome profiles of these organisms were processed to generate species identification dots  as shown in fig. 1c. since these dots were obtained after standardization and normalization by utilizing the internal reference , the coordinates of these spiddos can be regarded as sufficiently reproducible, intrinsic properties of each genome without the influence of environmental factors  <cit> . the visual pattern of spiddos of an organism on the plane tells us roughly which type of family it belongs to. on the other hand, phenotypes of organisms such as those shown in fig. 1a provide abundant information about the environment that must have affected the formation of the detailed shape and size. therefore, spiddos can be used to assign the species and measure the difference  between two organisms at the genome level.

pass and clustering analyses
quantitative analysis of spiddos has been established as pass  analysis  <cit> . in preceding studies, the reproducibility of this method has been thoroughly examined and established to be within 1% of errors as pass values for a moderately trained person of this technology, which were obtained by measuring the self-pass, i.e., the pass value for the same genome  or with the same tissue of an organism). in other words, the same sample usually provides the pass value of  <dig>  ±  <dig> , if compared with each other  <cit> . as shown in fig.  <dig>  pass values for each pair of polycystinea are significantly larger  in comparison to those of the other pairs. in contrast, pairs composed of a radiolarian and a bacterium or a bacterium and a fungus gave significantly lower pass values, which is clearly shown in the lower left triangle of fig.  <dig>  to evaluate the pass values obtained here, we can refer to a list of pass made for all organisms so far examined . although these values were statistically obtained based on gp data of more than  <dig> species and they may change depending on the number and the species of organisms analyzed, they can be used with a finite reliability as a reference to estimate the difference between two genomes at a particular level of taxon. according to table  <dig>  the values presented in fig.  <dig>  seem relatively high , and this result may indicate the degree of similarity of genomes in haeckel's radiolaria.

phenotype tree is drawn in fig. 3a. on the other hand, we employed a clustering analysis  <cit>  to the pass scores and obtained the results shown in fig. 3b. a reasonable result was obtained at a distance for clustering of  <dig>  where all of the members of polycystinea  were integrated in the same cluster though it includes foraminiferida  as a unique stringer, and there are some rearrangements in branches among the species of polycystinea. at the same time, mutually distant species such as diatom, bacteria, and fungus  were separate. at the distance of  <dig> , all of the rhizaria  were combined into a cluster while the other mutually-distant species  were still isolated, conforming to the concept of traditional taxonomy. if we consider that the classification of polycystinea is under construction and there is generally an experimental error in the pass values of approximately  <dig> %  <cit>  and that some radiolaria, such as the groups polycystinea a <dig> and a <dig> are well known to have symbiotic algae within the cell  <cit> , while other polycystinea  do not, the apparent minor differences may be insignificant  and as a whole, the entire clustering seems rational. therefore, these results strongly indicate that the method applied here, i.e., random pcr-based genome profiling, could provide the sufficient amount of genomic information from a single cell. the gp method supported the classical haeckel's view of radiolaria as monophyletic group, and remained in opposition to the polyphyly of radiolaria suggested by rrna and actin phylogenies  <cit>  although the results obtained here are provisional.

reliability tested by sequencing
since there are no published genome sequences for any radiolarians or related organisms, the results obtained here must be critically evaluated based on other available information. currently, the most common approach is to sequence the 18s rdna; however, it is very difficult to carry out both gp and 18s rdna sequencing experiments with single-celled and unculturable organisms . however, anyhow, we tried to amplify the 18s rdna genes with specific pcr primers  using the template dna used for gp as the template . we were not always able to amplify the target molecule . this may be due to a stochastic or inevitable loss of the template dna when dealing with a single copy. though we can expect least to obtain 18s rdna from the mixture of dnas obtains after genome profiling, dna molecules amplified using the primers designed for 18s rdna from the genome of one sample  happened to have around the expected molecular size  and were sequenced. after searching the database  with fasta, the sequence obtained was found not to be the same as any of those reported to date . sequences currently in the database included didymocyrtis tetrathalamus, dictyocoryne profunda, and dictyocoryne truncatum. in addition to these, acantharea , phaeodarea , polycystinea  have been reported. the results of our analysis are as follows: i) the sequence obtained was so novel that it had not been reported previously, ii) it had the highest similarity  with partial 18s rdna of a protozoan, euglena spathirhyncha, iii) none of the small subunit ribosomal dna sequences of organisms that might be expected as contaminants, such as algae, planktonic organisms, fungi or bacteria were highly ranked within the top  <dig> sequences. therefore, although the result could not be reproducibly tested, as the same genome cannot be obtained again, it is very plausible that the dna sequence we obtained and used for gp analysis was that of a radiolarian 18s rdna that had never been sequenced. at the same time, we also sequenced the random pcr products of samples a <dig>  a3- <dig>   <dig>  b, d- <dig> and others  and found that: i) the sequences obtained were quite novel with no registered sequences having more than  <dig> % similarity except one e. coli sequence  and two algae sequences , and ii) according to the fasta search, sequences with the highest similarity with the query sequences were not those of probable contaminants but those of protozoa, which are related to radiolaria. according to the first finding, an accidental contamination of e. coli dna must have happened during the experiment. it may also mean that some of our samples were contaminated with algae. however, since they are not major representatives in the sequencing results for  <dig> clones, they must not have contributed significantly to the spiddos generated in the gp experiments. it is already known that a minor population of dnas can not be represented in gp unless they have exceptionally strong binding sites for a primer or highly repetitive sequences that can be amplified by random pcr. therefore, these findings provide supporting evidence that the random pcr products were derived from the genomes of radiolaria.

in conclusion, the results presented here, including the data indicating that gps of radiolarians provided a taxonomically-consistent clustering result , indicate that genome profiles for radiolarians can be obtained from a single cell. here, we need to recall the fact that gps obtained here may consist of composite genomes, e.g., those of host and parasitic/symbiotic organisms which can not be observed by the conventional microscopic techniques . in other words, some of gps reported here may represent a metagenome, or 'an ensemble of genomes' . if so, it is reasonable to register such gps as being representative of radiolaria since we cannot separate the symbiotic genomes effectively, and this type of partnership is often permanent. we think this fact dose not devaluate the methodology established here.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we developed a potent method to obtain genome information from unculturable and single-celled organisms. this was demonstrated by the experiments applied to radiolarians sampled in the field. final confirmation can only be obtained by the repeating similar experiments using other fresh experimental materials. therefore, the classification reported here should be considered to be rather tentative, but the gp method shows promise for solving controversial classification problems. we believe this is the first success in which the genomes of unculturable, single-celled organisms were treated quantitatively and systematically to extract genomic information for comparison.

