BACKGROUND
circulating leukocytes are a rich and readily accessible source of information about the health and physiological state of an individual. a procedure as simple as light microscopy-based quantitation of morphologically distinguishable blood cell types is so broadly useful that it has been a mainstay of clinical diagnosis for decades. methods that might resolve more subtle variations in leukocytes could have correspondingly greater diagnostic power  <cit> . to explore and develop this potential, gene expression profiling of peripheral blood cells has become an increasingly popular means of addressing a wide variety of questions about health and disease. this approach has been used to study numerous states of health including multiple sclerosis, renal cell carcinoma, stroke, smallpox, neurofibromatosis type  <dig>  and responses to various stresses  <cit>  in the hopes of developing easily assayable prognostic or diagnostic markers, and gaining insight into disease mechanisms, as well as to the study of natural variation and individuality in gene expression  <cit> . while many of these studies have been successful in identifying gene expression patterns that differentiate control and disease groups, their interpretation is often confounded by variation in relative proportions of the cell populations that make up whole blood.

blood is a complex tissue, containing a variety of cell types – including t-cells, b-cells, monocytes, nk cells, and granulocytes, each of which can be further subdivided. the relative proportion of each of these cell types can vary greatly between individuals and with states of health and disease, and in response to stimuli. in whole blood, neutrophils are usually the most abundant cell type, normally varying in abundance from 30–70% of white blood cells in healthy adults  <cit>  and even more  in disease. neutrophils are often excluded from analyses of gene expression in human blood, but the remaining mixture of peripheral blood mononuclear cells , can also vary greatly in its composition. in healthy adults, monocytes can vary from  <dig> to 10% of pbmcs  <cit> , and within the lymphocyte subset, the relative proportion of t-lymphocytes and b-lymphocytes can range from 61–85% and 7–23% respectively  <cit> ; furthermore, the ratio of cd4+ t-cells to cd8+ t-cells can vary from < <dig>  to  <dig>   <cit> . the relative proportions of the contributing cell types inevitably affect the composite gene expression profiles of whole blood or unfractionated pbmcs. variation in the relative proportions of distinct cell types provides valuable clinical information in its own right. the ability to distinguish the effects of variation in cellular "demographics" from the signatures of physiological responses, in global gene expression profiles of peripheral blood samples, would thus undoubtedly improve our ability to extract physiological and clinical insights from these signatures.

by comparing gene expression profiles of homogeneous cell populations, it is possible to identify genes with cell-type-specific gene expression patterns. these sets of genes can serve as "biomarkers" for estimating the abundance of specific cell types, and can provide insights into cellular functioning. by sorting peripheral blood from healthy donors based on cell surface markers, we obtained purified populations of cd4+ t-cells, cd8+ t-cells, and b-cells. we then compared the global gene expression profiles of these purified populations, pbmcs and whole blood samples, and attempted to identify cell-type-specific signatures for b-cells, t-cells, cd4+ t-cells, cd8+ t-cells, lymphocytes, and granulocytes.

RESULTS
overview
we used dna microarrays containing  <dig>  elements representing ~ <dig>  genes to characterize the global gene expression profiles for  <dig> b-cell,  <dig> cd8+ t-cell,  <dig> cd4+ t-cell,  <dig> pbmc and  <dig> whole blood samples, representing  <dig> female and  <dig> male healthy adults. in order to obtain an overview of the major sources of variation in this data set, we selected a set of variably expressed genes  and clustered the samples and genes using these genes.

as shown in figure  <dig>  hierarchical clustering separated the samples into four main groups: b-cells, t-cells, whole blood, and pbmcs; notably, the two purified t-cell subsets  were intermingled. this analysis revealed sets of genes whose transcripts are characteristically expressed by specific cell types. the set of genes preferentially expressed in b-cells included many genes encoding immunoglobulins and proteins involved in mhc class ii antigen processing and presentation, while the set of genes most highly expressed in t-cells was rich in genes encoding the t-cell receptor complex and associated signaling molecules. both the b and t-cell enriched gene clusters also included cytokine receptors and cell adhesion receptors known to have cell-type-specific expression. the transcripts enriched in the whole blood samples appeared to reflect the transcriptional program of neutrophils, which are abundant in whole blood yet virtually absent from the lymphocyte and pbmc samples. this gene cluster included transcripts encoding several fc receptors and granulocyte-specific cytokine receptors. the cluster of genes with the lowest relative expression in whole blood revealed genes more highly expressed in lymphoid than in myeloid cells. this cluster was almost entirely composed of ribosomal genes and other genes involved in translation. there were three distinct gene clusters that were not associated with a specific cell type. the first was a small gender-associated cluster, with the expected elevated expression of y-linked genes in males, and of xist in females. the second was a "stress response" associated cluster, which contained a set of genes known to be easily activated in response to ex-vivo handling and a variety of other stresses  <cit> . this set of genes was most highly activated in samples from female  <dig>  all of which were obtained during the first  isolation experiment, and expressed at the lowest levels in the whole blood samples, which were subject to the least manipulation. a final small but prominent cluster was the hemoglobins – alpha, beta, and zeta. these were highly expressed in the whole blood samples and in a subset of the b-cell samples, corresponding to those b-cell samples that were purified by negative selection  rather than positive selection and presumably represented the relative proportion of rbcs in these samples. there were no other consistent differences between the positively and negatively selected b-cells, although the latter were less pure than the positively selected b-cells and had noticeably more red blood cell contamination. all t-cell samples were obtained by negative selection in order to minimize cell stimulation  <cit> . see additional file  <dig> for the complete data set.

for each cell population of interest , we also performed a supervised search for genes that are characteristically expressed by that cell type. specifically, for each cell type, we searched for genes whose expression was significantly positively correlated with the estimated relative abundance of the cell type across the set of  <dig> samples of varying cell type composition . we refined these gene lists by also requiring that a signature gene discriminate between the target cell and a closely related cell population , using a two-class significance analysis of microarrays   <cit>  . we analyzed the final cell type specific gene lists for functional and structural themes using ease  <cit> , a program for calculating the statistical enrichment of gene ontology   <cit>  annotations in a query list relative to a background list .

b-lymphocytes
b-lymphocytes function primarily in humoral  immunity, and comprise approximately 15% of lymphocytes in healthy adults. we derived a b-cell signature by searching for genes that met the following criteria: i) their expression was significantly positively correlated with relative abundance of b-cells across all samples ii) their expression was significantly different in b-cells than t-cells  and iii) they were at least 2-fold more highly expressed in b-cells than in t-cells. using these criteria, we identified  <dig> "b-cell signature" genes  . this signature set included numerous genes encoding classical b-cell associated genes including b-cell co-receptor molecules   <cit> , other b-cell surface markers   <cit> , immunoglobulins , mhc class ii receptors , signal transduction molecules  and transcriptional regulators   <cit> . we analyzed the b-cell signature with ease, and confirmed that the most enriched go annotations were those relating to classical b-cell functions such as "antigen binding", "antigen processing", "antigen presentation", and "mhc class ii receptor activity". the only significantly enriched go annotations relating to cellular component were "integral to membrane" and "membrane", which is consistent with the importance of interactions with the external environment in defining the unique characteristics of the b-cell. the complete list of b-cell specific genes, and results from ease analysis are available as supplemental data .

t-lymphocytes
t-lymphocytes function primarily in cell-mediated immunity, and comprise approximately 70% of lymphocytes. we derived a t-cell signature by searching for genes that met the following criteria: i) their expression was significantly positively correlated with the relative abundance of t-cells  across all samples ii) their expression was significantly different between t-cells and b-cells  and iii) they were at least 2-fold more highly expressed in t-cells than in b-cells. using these criteria, we identified  <dig> "t-cell signature" genes  . this gene set encompassed many of the t-cell receptor and associated signal transduction genes   <cit>  and also included genes encoding important t-cell transcriptional regulators   <cit>  and cell adhesion molecules . the most enriched go annotations  included the cellular component "t-cell receptor complex", the biological process "signal transduction", and the molecular function "receptor activity", suggesting that t-cells are best distinguished from other cell types based on their cell surface receptors and associated signal transduction genes.

we compared our list of  <dig> t-cell enriched genes with a recently published list of  <dig> "t-cell enriched" genes  <cit> , and found that  <dig> of the  <dig> genes on this list that were also measured in our study, were also identified as t-cell enriched in this study . the genes identified in common by the two studies tended to be classical t-cell associated genes with high discrimination rankings in both studies. this overlap is especially striking in view of the fact that the two studies used different microarray platforms  and, more importantly, the different selection criteria for t-cell specificity – we required discrimination of t-cells from b-cells as well as a significantly positive correlation between a gene's expression and t-cell abundance across all mixed and purified samples, whereas cobb et al. required only discrimination between of t-cells and mixed blood cells. the complete list of t-cell specific genes and the results of ease analysis are available as supplemental data .

cd8+ t-cells
cd8+ t-lymphocytes, or cytotoxic t-lymphocytes  are involved in cell-mediated cytotoxic reactions, and comprise approximately 35% of t-lymphocytes. we derived a list of cd8+ t-cell specific genes by searching for genes that met the following criteria: i) their expression was significantly positively correlated with relative abundance of cd8+ t-cells across all samples ii) their expression was significantly different between cd8+ t-cells and cd4+ t-cells  and iii) they were at least  <dig> fold more highly expressed in cd8+ t-cells than in cd4+ t-cells. using these criteria, we identified  <dig> "cd8+ signature" genes  . the cd8+ t-cell signature included genes encoding plasma membrane receptors , cytotoxicity-associated genes , and other genes  known to be expressed by cd8+ t-cells  <cit> . the most enriched go annotations  included the cellular component "t-cell receptor complex" and the molecular function "mhc class <dig> protein binding". cd8+ t-cells appear to be best distinguished from cd4+ t-cells and other cell types based on their cell surface profile and expression of genes encoding proteins with cytolytic functions. while many of the cd8+ t-cell signature genes are also expressed by nk cells  <cit> , this signature remains a useful description of the transcriptional activities of resting cd8+ t-cells. the complete list of cd8+ t-cell specific genes and the results of ease analysis are available as supplemental data 

cd4+ t-cells
the majority of t-lymphocytes are cd4+ "helper" t-cells   <cit> , and function primarily in the activation of b-cells and macrophages. we attempted to define cd4+ t-cell specific genes by searching for genes that met the following criteria: i) their expression was significantly positively correlated with relative abundance of cd4+ t-cells across all samples ii) their expression was significantly different between cd4+ t-cells and cd8+ t-cells  and iii) they were at least  <dig> fold more highly expressed in cd4+ t-cells than in cd8+ t-cells. there were no genes that met all three criteria. notably, sam analysis  alone only yielded  <dig> genes: cd <dig>  ank <dig>  mxi <dig>  and ctsb. all four genes were more than  <dig> fold enriched in cd4+ t-cells relative to cd8+ t-cells but only two of these genes  were also significantly positively correlated with the relative abundance of cd4+ t-cells across all samples. however, since the majority of clones representing cd <dig> and ank <dig>  did not meet all of the above criteria, these genes did not meet our final criterion of clone consistency , and thus did not qualify as cd4+ t-cell "signature" genes . the failure of most cd <dig> clones to meet our selection criteria may be explained by the fact that cd <dig> itself is not exclusively expressed by cd4+ t-cells – it is also expressed by monocytes   <cit>  and by some neutrophils  <cit> . the one-sidedness of the cd8+ t-cell: cd4+ t-cell comparison suggests that cd8+ and cd4+ t-cells share much of their cellular machinery, and that cd4+ t-cells begin transcription of their effector molecules only upon stimulation while cd8+ t-cells appear to prepare some of their cytotoxic artillery in advance. this result is in contrast to a study of the gene expression profiles of cd4+ and cd8+ t-cells in response to activation, in which as many as  <dig> genes were found to be preferentially expressed by either cd8+ t-cells or cd4+ t-cells  <cit> .

granulocytes
granulocytes, specifically neutrophils, are the most abundant cells in whole blood, but are virtually absent in pbmc samples. they are short-lived, terminally differentiated phagocytic cells involved in innate immunity and acute inflammatory responses. we obtained a granulocyte signature gene list by searching for genes that met the following criteria: i) their expression was significantly positively correlated with relative abundance of granulocytes across all  samples ii) their expression was significantly different between whole blood samples and pbmc samples  and iii) they were at least  <dig> fold more highly expressed in whole blood than in pbmcs. we assumed that transcripts more abundant in whole blood than in pbmc samples are most likely to be derived from neutrophils, the most abundant granulocyte, but they could also could also be derived from eosinophils, basophils, platelets, or reticulocytes, because these cell types are also significantly depleted in pbmc relative to whole blood. using these criteria, we identified  <dig> putative granulocyte signature genes  . the granulocyte signature contained numerous genes encoding cell surface proteins including: cytokine receptors , fc and complement receptors , chemotactic receptors , and emr <dig>  a recently characterized class b seven-span transmembrane  receptor, reported to have myeloid specific gene expression  <cit> . many of the remaining granulocytes-enriched genes were involved in intracellular pathogen destruction  or inflammatory mediation . a number of the genes on this list have been previously shown to be expressed in unstimulated circulating neutrophils   <cit> . the only go annotations that we identified as statistically enriched with ease were general biological processes including "inflammatory response" and "innate immune response".

we compared our results to those of a previously published study that also compared whole blood and pbmc samples, and found significant overlap between the two studies. whitney et al.  <cit>  found  <dig> "granulocyte enriched" genes with mean differences of greater than  <dig> fold in expression between whole blood and pbmc samples from the same individual. of the  <dig> genes in this set that were measured in our study,  <dig> were also classified as granulocyte signature genes in this study . the concordant genes tended to be those with higher discrimination scores in both studies. the imperfect overlap of the two gene lists is not unexpected because different filtering criteria were used – the  <dig> fold change required by whitney et al. was one of three criteria in our study. we tested the applicability of our "granulocyte enriched" gene list in an independent data set of  <dig> whole blood samples from  <dig> subjects for which the relative abundance of neutrophils was known  <cit> . for each of the  <dig> well-measured clones in this independent data set, we calculated the pearson correlation of gene expression to neutrophils relative abundance, and converted these correlations to percentile rank correlations. we found that the genes in our granulocyte signature had a median pearson correlation of  <dig>  and a median percentile rank of  <dig>  in the other data set, suggesting that the genes in our granulocyte signature are among the most highly correlated with the true neutrophil abundance. the complete granulocyte signature gene list and corresponding ease analysis results are available as supplemental data .

lymphocytes
we derived a lymphocyte signature by searching for genes that met the following criteria: i) their expression was significantly positively correlated with relative abundance of lymphocytes across all samples ii) their expression was significantly different in pbmc samples than whole blood samples  and iii) they were at least 2-fold more highly expressed in pbmc than in whole blood. we assumed that genes more highly expressed in pbmc samples than in whole blood were expressed by lymphocytes, because their relative abundance is approximately  <dig>  fold higher in pbmc than in whole blood. using these criteria, we obtained a lymphocyte signature, consisting of  <dig> genes  expressed more highly in b-cells, cd <dig> t-cells, and cd8+ t-cells than in granulocytes . in contrast to the other cell type signature gene lists, this set of genes appeared to contain many universally expressed genes, whose transcripts comprised a particularly large fraction of the total transcripts in these cells, rather than genes known to be specific to a subset of leukocytes. genes encoding proteins involved in macromolecule biosynthesis, and ribosomal proteins in particular, were strikingly dominant in this signature  and were the most statistically significantly over-represented by ease analysis . the dramatic difference in levels of expression of ribosomal proteins between lymphocytes and granulocytes has been previously reported in both sage  <cit> and microarray-based studies  <cit> . three components of the mitochondrial electron transport chain  were also more highly expressed in lymphocytes than granulocytes, a finding that is also consistent with a previous microarray study comparing whole blood and pbmc  <cit> . these findings could reflect either elevated levels of these transcripts in lymphocytes or unusually low levels in granulocytes. results from a survey of gene expression in  <dig> human tissue types support the conclusion that lymphocytes have elevated levels of transcripts of genes involved in translation  <cit> . perhaps lymphocytes maintain high levels of transcripts encoding the translational apparatus in order to be ready to rapidly ramp up the capacity for protein synthesis when activated. the complete lymphocyte signature gene set and the corresponding ease analysis results are available as supplemental data .

individual specific gene expression
despite the small number of individuals sampled in this study, we carried out a low power search for genes that vary more in expression between individuals than between cell types within an individual. the methods and results of this analysis are available as supplemental data .

CONCLUSIONS
by performing cdna microarray analysis of purified subpopulations of peripheral blood cells, we were able to obtain global gene expression profiles of peripheral b-cells, t-cells, cd4+ t-cells, cd8+ t-cells, and granulocytes from normal healthy donors. both unsupervised clustering and supervised statistical analysis yielded sets of genes highly preferentially expressed by each of these cell types. some characteristics of the genes comprising the signatures we identified for of each of these cell types are summarized in table  <dig> 

we found that, not surprisingly, the best gene expression based surrogates for the abundance of a particular cell subset were the expression of the genes associated with the characteristic cell surface phenotype , or other genes known to be associated with cell-type specific functions . while genes previously known to be cell-type specific dominated the cell-type signatures, they also contained numerous unannotated genes, and genes not previously associated with the known functional characteristics of the cells. it is interesting to speculate on the significance of the finding that the lymphocyte subset signatures  were all dominated by genes encoding plasma- membrane associated proteins. this may indicate that, in their resting state, lymphocytes are specialized primarily in the way they sense and monitor their environment. this finding, together with the observation that lymphocytes have elevated levels of transcripts encoding translational machinery, paints a picture of peripheral blood lymphocytes spending the majority of their lives in watchful waiting, while upon activation they respond rapidly are distinguished by their diverse effector roles.

while classical, direct methods of enumerating cell populations remain the simplest, and most accurate method of characterizing the components of mixed cell populations, the cell-type specific gene lists presented here provide an alternative means of characterizing mixed cell populations that could be useful for profiling of archived rnas and heterogeneous clinical samples for which direct counting is not possible. furthermore, these cell type signatures contribute significantly to functional annotations of a substantial group of uncharacterized genes. further studies of the gene expression profiles of other purified leukocyte populations such as nk cells and monocytes will help establish the specialized gene expression programs that enable each cell type to perform its unique function, and will further improve our ability to reconstruct the cellular composition of heterogeneous samples.

