BACKGROUND
microbial disease is the major cause of human death and morbidity and for many infectious diseases, no preventive vaccines are available  <cit> . where therapies do exist, escalation of resistance to antimicrobials hinders treatment of common bacterial infections and accentuates the need for new approaches  <cit> . therefore, it is imperative to identify appropriate targets for medical countermeasures such as antimicrobial drugs or cross-protective vaccines active against several pathogenic strains or species. an alternative to "killing" bacteria, which exacerbates the selection of antimicrobial resistance, is to "disarm" bacteria by interfering with their capacity to be virulent, thus enabling the bacterium to survive and evoke an appropriate immune protection  <cit> . targeting such virulence factors through the development of antivirulence  compounds has indicated that it is possible to target common virulence genes  <cit> .

virulence is typically described as the damage a pathogen causes to the host during infection  <cit> . gene products that contribute to virulence can therefore be described as virulence factors. traditionally a gene has been classified to encode a virulence factor by experimentally introducing a mutation into the protein of interest and determining whether virulence of the resultant mutant is reduced. genome-wide screens for identifying novel virulence factors have traditionally employed transposon mutagenesis to inactivate genes in a selected bacterial strain and then screening the resulting insertion mutants for attenuation in an appropriate animal infection model. an adaptation of this method has been the incorporation of unique dna tags in signature-tagged mutagenesis  which enables mutants to be screened en masse in animal infection models  <cit> . however, this approach is limited to a single strain of a particular bacterial species and a particular infection model. therefore the approach typically identifies highly specific virulence factors with limited extrapolation to generic virulence determinants of other pathogens. another approach is to identify genes up-regulated in vivo, such as in vivo expression technology   <cit> . however, this approach also identifies genes other than those required for virulence and both stm and ivet identify genes in a pathogen that are also present in non-pathogens.

computational approaches to identifying virulence factors have often been made through whole-genome comparisons of two or more bacteria, where the presence or absence of genes between closely related pathogenic and non-pathogenic strains can suggest genes that potentially play a role in virulence  <cit> . for example, garbom et al.  <cit>  identified novel virulence-associated genes in yersinia pseudotuberculosis by looking at the hypothetical genes  conserved in six human microbial pathogens. expanding on this work, we have used whole proteome searches to identify virulence-associated proteins common to diverse pathogenic bacteria that are absent in non-pathogenic species. the identified factors can then be exploited for the development of medical countermeasures such as antimicrobials, vaccines or diagnostics.

in contrast to computational approaches based on similarity, genomic context methods involve several non-similarity based approaches to predict protein functions and interactions  <cit> . phylogenetic profiles particularly suit our objective of identifying conserved virulence factors across multiple human pathogenic species. the method was originally designed to identify functionally-related proteins that evolve in a correlated fashion by characterizing proteins by a binary string that encodes the presence or absence of the protein in every known genome  <cit> . the method has been improved and expanded in numerous ways, including new approaches to characterize profile patterns by domains  <cit>  and protein families  <cit>  and by integrating phylogenetic information to compute probabilities of observing different profile strings  <cit> . phylogenetic profiles have been used to identify virulence factors related to bacterial food poisoning  <cit>  and intracellular pathogenesis  <cit> . in this work, we have utilized a similar approach to identify potential virulence factors present in a group of extreme human pathogens, bacteria from the centers for disease control category a and b pathogen lists (). we impose two primary criteria: first, the putative target genes must be broadly present in the diverse pathogens within these two groups. second, the putative target genes should be absent or highly divergent in non-pathogens. this enhances the likelihood that candidates are implicated in virulence and minimizes the potential activity of future countermeasures against the host commensal flora.

RESULTS
clustering of proteins
our targets of interest are proteins that are present in diverse pathogens but absent from non-pathogens, and therefore we had to decide which proteins in different organisms should be treated as the same protein. we began by doing an all against all blast comparison of a collection of  <dig>  proteins from all  <dig> completely sequenced microbial genomes available at the time. the resulting  <dig> million blast hits were grouped into clusters using single-linkage clustering at eight different percent identity and query coverage cut-offs. finally, phylogenetic profile tables were created to summarize the presence or absence of proteins within a cluster across all genomes.

searching for virulence-associated proteins
we searched for virulence-associated proteins in the phylogenetic profile tables using the blast clusters link on the toxin and virulence factor website  at los alamos national laboratory (). we assigned representative strains taken from the cdc category a and b pathogen lists to the target group . fifty-two non-pathogenic strains were included in the background group . these were selected from the  <dig> genomes as having no association with human pathogenesis, or in fact no pathogenesis in animal and plants. bacteria that have been identified as opportunistic pathogens were excluded from both lists as their mode of action may be as much to do with an immunocompromised host as the possession of traditional virulence factors by the bacteria. next, we selected a minimum of five hits to the category a and b pathogens and maximum of three hits to non-pathogens and identified  <dig> potential generic virulence factor candidates using the 50% identity and 90% coverage cutoffs . other combinations were exhaustively tested but more stringent cutoffs resulted in too few candidates whilst less stringent ones gave too many for our purposes.

strains of select agents  assigned to the target group in profile searches. genomes sequences from some select agents were unavailable at the time  and the toxin-producing strains of staphylococcus aureus and clostridium perfringens were excluded from the searches. where multiple strains had been sequenced , a single representative strain was selected so that results were not skewed to favor species with multiple entries.

a total of  <dig> potential virulence factor clusters were identified in the phylogenetic profile tables. at least five hits to pathogens of interest were required and no more than three hits to non-pathogens were allowed.

selecting candidates for experimental screening
since it was impractical to experimentally test all  <dig> candidates, additional down-selection was performed to narrow the number of candidates to a more manageable number. the final proteins used in experimental testing were selected based on a number of different criteria. the selected protein is required to have an ortholog in y. pseudotuberculosis since this was our experimental pathogen to investigate virulence and  <dig> candidates were found to have no y. pseudotuberculosis homolog in the cluster. since it is possible that one closely-related protein could compensate for the loss in function of the other  <cit> , a further  <dig> clusters with multiple hits to y. pseudotuberculosis were also removed. since only completely sequenced microbial genomes were included in the database, each target protein was also compared against protein sequences from eukaryotes and other organisms by following links on tvfac to pre-computed blast results available at ncbi . those targets with an identity of 50% or more to eukaryotes, and/or 50% or greater identity to  <dig> or more non-pathogens, were also removed from the list. by these considerations the number of candidates was narrowed down to  <dig> potential targets for experimental testing, of which thirteen of these were successfully constructed as mutants .

virulence-associated genes identified by computational methods and selected for experimental screening. these targets have been ranked by their competitive index  value in y. pseudotuberculosis. the ci value shown is the mean of the ci calculated from  <dig> spleens individually plated in triplicate. the top six candidates are deemed virulence-related by our experimental criteria. hits to pathogens include all five members of the enterobacteriaceae  plus the additional strains listed using abbreviations from table  <dig> 

the top hit from the cluster search was a superoxide dismutase c  with hits to nine category a and b pathogens and none from the non-pathogen group. although several forms of this enzyme are found in both pathogenic and non-pathogenic bacteria as well as most other organisms including eukaryotes, this particular cluster included only pathogenic bacteria. this suggests that sodc from pathogens is distinct from non-pathogens at the amino acid sequence level when compared at the described cut-offs . similarly, where targets are given as absent in a certain bacterium, this does not mean that no homolog can be found in that organism, but rather no homolog can be found at the cut-off levels used for this search.

testing virulence in y. pseudotuberculosis
the growth rate of each mutant was compared to that of the wild-type . no statistically significant differences between growth curves were observed . it is therefore unlikely that any of the genetic mutations in this study have affected the ability for them to grow in media. mice were inoculated as described with doses ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> cfu of wild type y. pseudotuberculosis strain ip <dig> . the median lethal dose  via the i.v. route was calculated to be  <dig> cfu, consistent with that previously reported  <cit> . thirteen of the  <dig> target genes were inactivated by allelic replacement in y. pseudotuberculosis and tested for reduced competitiveness with the wild type strain after i.v. challenge of mice. four genes could not be constructed despite repeated attempts. for this study, a mutant was considered to be attenuated if it had a competitive index  value of  <dig>  or less. based on this, six genes were identified that reduced virulence of y. pseudotuberculosis . none of the encoded proteins have been previously reported to play a role in virulence of y. pseudotuberculosis, although three have been reported as playing a role in the virulence of other bacteria. it is possible however, that the genes themselves are not directly involved in virulence but have an effect on other genes that are.

discussion
the lifestyles of all of the pathogens selected for this study are known to involve survival in phagocytes and of the genes down-selected, several are implicated in the survival of bacteria within phagocytic cells. sodc is known to be a virulence factor in several pathogenic bacteria including neisseria meningitides  <cit> , burkholderia cenocepacia  <cit> , salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium and salmonella choleraesuis  <cit>  and brucella abortus  <cit> , and disruption of the sodc gene in these bacteria have generated attenuated mutants. further work has characterized the role of superoxide dismutase c in the virulence in y. pseudotuberculosis  <cit> . sodc is known to protect bacteria in phagosomes from the bactericidal action of superoxide anion, and sodc orthologs were found in most of the pathogens targeted for this study  <cit> . burkholderia mallei, burkholderia pseudomallei and bacillus anthracis are also known to have sodc, but these enzymes do not show significant sequence homology with the cluster of sodc orthologs in this study at the 50% identity and 90% coverage cut-offs used.

both mg2+ and mn2+ are believed to be limiting in the phagosome, and transport systems for these ions are common to many of the pathogens targeted for this study  <cit> . bacterial mnth proteins are homologous to the eukaryotic nramp  family of proteins that transport either mn2+ or fe2+. mutants of the mnth gene  have been shown to be attenuated in salmonella typhimurium  <cit> . in s. typhimurium, the magnesium transport atpase gene, mgtb, is found on a pathogenicity island, spi- <dig>  and its expression is controlled by the phop/q signal transduction system which is an essential system in salmonella virulence  <cit> .

hemy is a putative protoporphyrinogen ix oxidase that is found as part of the haem biosynthetic pathway in bacteria. haem is a tetrapyrrole derivative commonly used as a prosthetic group in proteins such as cytochromes, catalases and peroxidases and is essential for respiration and defence against oxygen intermediates. this later function suggests a possible involvement as a host defense mechanism. although no hemy gene has been associated with virulence to date, staphylococcus aureus mutants of hemb have been shown to reduce virulence in the caenorhabditis elegans infection model  <cit> .

yptb <dig> is an uncharacterized protein which contains the cog domain cog <dig>  involved in outer membrane biogenesis . the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria is made up of four major components: lipopolysaccharide, phospholipids, beta-barrel proteins, and lipoproteins  <cit> . together they play a number of roles including maintaining the integrity of the cell, uptake and secretion of solutes and interaction with the host cell. yptb <dig> has not previously been associated with virulence. however, it is possible that disruption of this protein may affect virulence though interactions with the host cell, or through secretion of certain proteins. further work on this protein will be required to further characterize its role and to elucidate its role in virulence.

of the  <dig> targets, four could not be constructed as mutants suggesting that their function may be essential to the virulence of the cell. each of these were compared to the database of essential genes  and two, yptb <dig> and yptb <dig>  showed over 50% identity to proteins described as essential in this database  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
of the  <dig> mutants constructed, six were identified as having potential association with the virulence of y. pseudotuberculosis , suggesting that this selection process - guided primarily by the comparative presence or absence of potential targets in pathogens versus non-pathogens - is a promising tool for the identification of potential virulence-associated proteins. however, further work is needed to confirm whether these targets are important to y. pseudotuberculosis outside the laboratory and whether these targets are also associated with virulence in other pathogens. work is currently underway to characterize each of the targets and to demonstrate their roles in virulence. this work has already been completed for superoxide dismutase where it has been shown to be essential for the virulence of y. pseudotuberculosis in both insect and mammalian hosts  <cit> . similarly, to confirm the identified targets as generic, we are now carrying out studies in a range of bacterial pathogens.

an advantage of our approach is that commensal flora, which often play important roles in the well-being of humans, should be minimally affected. this is dramatically illustrated in the development of clostridium difficile-associated colitis where the administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics significantly impacts the commensal gut flora producing an environment where the pathogenic c. difficile can proliferate  <cit> . additional grounds for targeting virulence per se is furnished by recent metagenomic studies in humans, which suggest that the human metagenome contains several orders of magnitude more microbial genes than homo sapiens genes and that our bodies themselves contain perhaps ten times as many microbial cells as "human" ones  <cit> . avoiding potential disruption to this vast microbial community is thus highly desirable as commensals are now known to contribute to gut immunity and the synthesis of vital nutrients  <cit> .

since this work was started, the number of whole genome sequences has increased greatly and new protein family and cluster databases are readily available for searching. the tvfac website now includes phylogenetic profile tables created from  <dig> database cross-references and three uniref clusters in uniprot  <cit> . as of july  <dig>  over  <dig> microbial and nearly  <dig> eukaryotic genomes are currently represented in these tables. further studies could be carried out with these extended datasets with the possibility of identifying more potential candidates. the success rate we observed in spite of these limitations suggests that improved methods along the lines suggested should further enhance the discovery of virulence-associated proteins that are conserved within a number of human pathogenic bacteria.

