BACKGROUND
acanthamoeba are opportunistic protozoans that are widely distributed in the environment. given the opportunity and the host immune status, pathogenic acanthamoeba can invade the human central nervous system  and produce fatal granulomatous encephalitis  <cit> . acanthamoeba granulomatous encephalitis  is characterized by headache, fever, behavioural changes, hemiparesis, lethargy, stiff neck, aphasia, ataxia, vomiting, nausea, cranial nerve palsies, increased intracranial pressure, seizures and ultimately death. death is due to haemorrhaging necrotic lesions with severe meningeal irritation and encephalitis. the lesions due to age are most numerous in the basal ganglia, midbrain, brainstem, and cerebral hemispheres with characteristic lesions in the cns parenchyma resulting in chronic granulomatous encephalitis.

the mechanisms associated with the pathogenesis of age remain incompletely understood, however the pathophysiological complications involving the cns most likely include induction of the pro-inflammatory responses, invasion of the blood-brain barrier and the connective tissue and neuronal damage leading to the brain dysfunction  <cit> . the routes of entry include lower respiratory tract leading to amoebae invasion of the intravascular space, followed by the haematogenous spread. skin lesions may provide direct amoebae entry into the bloodstream, thus bypassing the lower respiratory tract. amoebae entry into the cns most likely occurs at the sites of the blood-brain barrier  <cit> . in addition, olfactory neuroepithelium provides another route of entry into the cns and has been studied in experimental models  <cit> . following cns invasion, amoebae penetrate the brain tissue to produce disease. previous studies have shown that proteases play important roles in microbial pathogenesis including host cell and tissue invasion, migration, catabolism of host proteins, cytoadherence, and both stimulation and evasion of host responses . the present study examines acanthamoeba proteases released extracellularly by an age isolate to begin to ask if these proteases could be involved in this amoeba's ability to invade the cns. our studies are feasible with the availability of the in vitro cultures of the human brain microvascular endothelial cells, which constitute the blood-brain barrier. here, we report that proteases from an age isolate of acanthamoeba digest ecm and produce blood-brain barrier disruptions and thus may play crucial role in invasion of the brain tissue by amoebae.

RESULTS
acanthamoeba keratitis isolate  exhibited two serine proteases while age isolate  exhibited one serine and one metalloprotease
to determine the extracellular proteases of acanthamoeba, conditioned medium  was used for zymographic assays. acanthamoeba keratitis isolate  exhibited two protease bands observed at approximate molecular weights  of  <dig> kd and  <dig> kd . however, both protease bands were sensitive to pmsf indicating that acanthamoeba secrete serine proteases, a finding that is consistent with previous studies . thus, the remaining studies have been focused on the age isolate. in contrast, age isolate  exhibited a  <dig> kd metalloprotease  and a  <dig> kd serine protease  . of interest, cm produced from co-cultures of acanthamoeba and hbmec exhibited similar protease profiles .

conditioned medium of the age isolate exhibited hbmec monolayer disruptions but not cytotoxicity
to determine the cytopathic effects of extracellular proteases of age isolate , cytotoxicity assays were performed. hematoxylin staining of hbmec monolayers revealed that the age isolate as well as its cm produced total hbmec monolayer disruptions . the cm-mediated hbmec monolayer disruptions were completely abolished after pre-incubating the cm with pmsf . pre-incubations with broad spectrum matrix metalloprotease  inhibitors, i.e., gm  <dig> or gm  <dig>  had no effect on cm-mediated hbmec monolayer disruptions . the age isolate produced more than 70% hbmec cytotoxicity, while its cm exhibited minimal hbmec cytotoxicity . furthermore, neither broad spectrum mmp inhibitors had an effect on age isolate-mediated hbmec cytotoxicity . similar findings were observed with ak isolate belonging to t <dig> genotype . taken together, these data demonstrate that  <dig> kd serine protease  produced hbmec monolayer disruptions but not hbmec cytotoxicity.

the effect of various temperatures and ph on the extracellular proteases of age isolate
to determine the physiological properties of extracellular proteases of age isolate , zymographic assays were performed using gelatin as substrate and gels incubated at various temperatures and ph. the results revealed that both serine and metalloproteases exhibited optimal activities at neutral ph . the influence of various temperatures on the proteolytic activities was tested in the temperature intervals from 4°c – 65°c. the optimal activity was observed at temperatures varying from 37°c – 50°c , indicating that proteases are also active at physiologically relevant conditions. of interest, the metalloprotease  visually appeared to have lost significant activity in zymography during incubation at 65°c .

both serine  and metalloproteases  of age isolate exhibited collagenase and elastinolytic activities
the fibrillary collagens and elastin are structural proteins that are the major components of the ecm. to determine the ability of serine and metalloproteases to exhibit collagenase activities, zymographic assays were performed using collagen i and iii as substrates. both serine and metalloproteases degraded collagen i and iii substrates  confirming their collagenase activities. additionally, both proteases degraded elastin  in the zymographic assays, indicating that proteases from age isolate exhibit elastinolytic activities . among other substrates, these proteases exhibited degradation of casein and haemoglobin .

both serine  and metalloproteases  of age isolate degrade plasminogen
other modes of ecm degradation are tissue-type and urokinase-type plasminogen activators. the former pathway is mostly involved in fibrinolysis, while the latter is an important modulator in the pathophysiology of neuronal damage  <cit> . the activated urokinase converts pro-enzyme, plasminogen into plasmin, a serine protease involved in the ecm destruction by degrading fibrin. in this study, the zymographic assays revealed that both serine and metalloproteases from age isolate degraded plasminogen at neutral ph .

the metalloprotease activity can be separated from the serine protease activity by ion exchange chromatography
in an attempt to obtain purified metalloprotease, fplc ion-exchange chromatography was employed. the chromatograms in fig.  <dig> show at least two major peaks and the corresponding column fractions exhibited protease activity. the eluted protein in the first peak  contained metalloprotease activity  , separated apparently from the serine protease and sensitive to  <dig>  10-phenanthroline on gelatin gel zymography . of interest, the serine protease was observed in later fractions .

discussion
acanthamoeba granulomatous encephalitis is a serious cns infection that almost always results in death. the pathophysiological complications involving the cns most likely include invasion of the connective tissue, induction of extensive pro-inflammatory responses and neuronal damage leading to brain dysfunction. thus it is reasonable to predict that acanthamoeba proteases play important roles in age pathogenesis. our previous studies have shown that acanthamoeba proteases may play important roles in modulating blood-brain barrier permeability  <cit> . in this study, we further characterized acanthamoeba proteases from an age isolate and developed methods to separate an extracellular metalloprotease from the extracellular serine protease.

the fact that a  <dig> kd extracellular metalloprotease is associated with an age isolate  suggests its possible involvement in the cns pathology. to this end, we studied the properties of age isolate proteases on ecm degradation. in healthy brains, ecm comprises a major percent of the normal brain volume  <cit> , which forms the basal lamina around the blood vessels. the ecm is constantly remodelled and provides critical structural and functional support to the neuronal tissue. these properties of ecm are tightly regulated by a family of mostly ca2+-dependent zn2+-containing endopeptidases   <cit> . the ecm plays important roles under normal physiological conditions in the development and maintenance of homeostasis in neuronal tissue. however in neurological disease states, ecm may undergo substantial modifications resulting in neuroinflammatory responses. excessive ecm degradation affects neurovascular structural/functional properties that are highly destructive to the cns functions. ecm is composed of both collagenous and non-collagenous glycoproteins and proteoglycans  <cit> . here we showed that both the serine and metalloproteases of the age isolate exhibits collagen i and collagen iii degradation suggesting that these proteases may facilitate amoebic migration into deeper tissues by degrading the ecm. these findings support previous findings which showed that acanthamoeba exhibit collagenolytic activities  <cit> . furthermore, both proteases exhibited elastinolytic activities. elastin is the principal structural element that constitutes elastic fibres and is an important component of connective tissue. previous findings have shown that elastase destroys ecm, which increases blood-brain barrier permeability resulting in the brain injury  <cit> . for example, injection of elastase into the cerebrospinal fluid  opened the blood-brain barrier in newborn piglets  <cit> . our findings suggest that proteases of age isolate may play a similar role.

in addition to the aforementioned, the urokinase plasminogen activator system plays an important role in various neuronal diseases involving the cns inflammation and/or pathology. for example, in bacterial meningitis, the upa  or tpa  are known to convert plasminogen, that is abundant in brain  <cit>  into plasmin, which destroys ecm directly by degrading fibrin or by activating mmps. we observed that both serine and metalloproteases directly degraded pro-enzyme, plasminogen suggesting that pathogenesis of age may involve the upa/tpa system. injections of plasmin results in increased capillary permeability  <cit> . at present, the precise role of the  <dig> kd metalloproteases remains unclear.

our findings that cm-mediated hbmec monolayer disruptions can be inhibited in the presence of pmsf suggest that the metalloprotease may not be responsible for hbmec monolayer disruptions and may play a role in post-cns invasion by amoebae. to this end, we have successfully developed methods for the separation of the metalloprotease from the serine protease of the age isolate, which should prove useful for subsequent purification and biochemical characterizations of this novel protease as well as to determine its role in vivo.

it is important to note that we only observed two proteases in our zymographic assays. however, the experimental conditions involved sds detergent and there may be other proteases that are sds-sensitive. also, the identification of  <dig> kd serine protease is not novel. previous studies have characterized a similar protease from an ak isolates  <cit>  and again in the present study we observed  <dig> kd serine protease from an ak isolate belonging to t <dig> genotype. thus it is reasonable to presume that the  <dig> kd serine protease is similar in both t <dig> and t <dig> isolates. taken together, these studies have characterized the properties of a novel metalloprotease that only is produced by the age isolate. future studies will precise determine its role in the virulence of age. of interest, metalloproteases have been identified as important virulence factors in various opportunistic pathogens including vibrio vulnificus  <cit> , pseudomonas aeruginosa  <cit> , and aspergillus fumigatus  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, these data show that both serine and metalloproteases secreted by age isolate , exhibit properties to degrade ecm, which may facilitate amoebic invasion of the deeper lying tissues of the cns. if future studies confirm that these proteases are indeed important in the pathology of age then they could be potential targets for the rationale development of therapeutic interventions.

